The application of Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) in the field of environmental and water resources modelling has become increasingly popular since early 1990s. Despite the recognition of the need for a consistent approach to the development of ANN models and the importance of providing adequate details of the model development process, there is no systematic protocol for the development and documentation of ANN models. In order to address this shortcoming, such a protocol is introduced in this paper. In addition, the protocol is used to critically review the quality of the ANN model development and reporting processes employed in 81 journal papers since 2000 in which ANNs have been used for drinking water quality modelling. The results show that model architecture selection is the best implemented step, while greater focus should be given to input selection considering input independence and model validation considering replicative and structural validity.Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) are computing systems containing parallel non-linear units. The ability of ANNs to learn underlying data generating processes, given sufficient data samples, has led to their wide application in prediction, forecasting, function approximation, classification, data processing, and robotics, among others. The application of ANNs for prediction and forecasting in the field of environmental and water resources modelling became popular in the early 1990s and has increased significantly over the last decade, which has led to a number of reviews on the application of ANNs ( Previous studies have recognized the need for a consistent approach to the development of ANN models. Apart from a rigorous model development process, the thorough reporting and documentation of modelling exercises is also extremely important. While this has been acknowledged in a wider modelling context [e.g. Consequently, despite the recognition of the importance of the adoption and articulation of rational ANN model development procedures, there is no comprehensive protocol for the development of ANN models that: (i) identifies the steps in the ANN model development process that should be considered; and (ii) articulates what information should be documented at each of these steps. Hence, the first objective of this paper is to present a generic protocol for the development of ANN predictive models that includes: (i) the steps that should be followed in the development of ANN models; (ii) the information that should be documented in relation to the methods used at each of these steps, including the implications of the provision of different levels of detail of this information; and (iii) the justification of the adoption of the selected methods, including a categorization of different levels of justification. The second objective of this paper is to use the proposed protocol to critically assess the The application area selected for the review is the modelling of water quality variables in water supply systems, including water source, water treatment and water distribution. The reason for this is that previous reviews have generally focused on river systems ( The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In the following section, the proposed protocol for the development and reporting of ANN models is introduced. The proposed protocol is applied to assessing the application of ANNs to water quality modelling in drinking water systems in Section In order to assess the predictive performance of ANNs with some degree of confidence, it is important to critically examine the quality of the ANN model development and reporting processes. If a rigorous development process is adopted and adequate details of this process are provided, there is a greater degree of confidence in the results presented in a paper. In contrast, if the adopted model development process is not rigorous or not described adequately, it is not possible to draw any definite conclusions about how well the ANN models performed for the problem(s) presented in a paper. In order to make the adoption of a rigorous ANN model development and reporting process easier in practice, a comprehensive ANN model development protocol is proposed in this paper, as illustrated in As part of the proposed ANN model development protocol, the steps and options in the ANN model development process given by Apart from providing guidance on the techniques used in each of the ANN model development steps, as has been done in previous papers ( The second additional aspect is the Details of each of the steps in the proposed ANN model development protocol are given in the subsequent sections. For the development of ANN models, inputs need to be determined based on both the significance and independence of inputs ( Methods that can be used to account for input independence can also be divided into two categories: methods based on dimensionality reduction and filtering ( Data splitting methods can be divided into unsupervised methods and supervised methods ( The ANN model architecture determines the overall structure and information flow of the model ( In recent years, recurrent neural networks are receiving more attention from ANN modellers ( Determination of ANN model structure generally involves determining the number of layers, the number of nodes in each layer and how they are connected ( The calibration or training of a model refers to the process of finding a set of model parameter values (e.g. weights) that enable the model to map the relationship between the inputs and outputs of a given dataset and often requires the use of optimization algorithms. The majority of training methods is deterministic, which search for a set of model parameter values to minimize an error measure between the observed and predicted outputs. These deterministic methods can be divided into local optimization algorithms, such as the classic back-propagation method developed by While deterministic calibration methods are most commonly used, they ignore uncertainties in model inputs and outputs, model structure and model parameters, which has been addressed in a number of studies ( The overall aim of model validation is to make sure a trained ANN model does not contain known or detectable flaws so that it can be used for its intended purpose with confidence. However, the generally complex error surface of environmental and water systems ANN models makes this a difficult task, as there are often multiple combinations of ANN structures and/or weights that lead to similar model performance (i.e. non-uniqueness of ANN models) ( Effective model validation can be achieved by considering three aspects of model validity, namely replicative validity, predictive validity and structural validity ( A model is considered predicatively valid if it can represent the input–output relationship in the data that will be acquired from the real system in the future ( Structural validity is used to ensure the model is plausible when compared with The purpose of conducting research is to make a contribution in the designated research field ( As part of the ANN model development protocol introduced in this paper, four categories are proposed to assess the quality of the implementation of the six ANN model development steps in regard to the level of detail recorded ( Category 3 represents the case where detailed information on the implementation of the model development step is provided, so that it can be repeated for the same/similar studies by other researchers. For example, in relation to the input selection step, this would entail rationalization of the selected inputs if an ad-hoc input selection approach was used or, if an analytical input selection methods was used, a detailed description of the selected approach. In relation to data splitting, in order for the requirements of Category 3 to be satisfied, details about the data splitting method used, how it was implemented and the percentage of data allocated to each subset would need to be provided. As far as model architecture selection is concerned, details on the type of model architecture used, the way different layers/nodes are connected, any functions (e.g. transfer functions or membership functions) used in each layer and any weights/parameter that need to be calibrated would need to be provided. With regard to model calibration, details on the calibration algorithm used, the values (or ranges of values) of any parameter involved, the procedures used to prevent over-fitting or under-fitting, and any other stopping criteria used would need to be given. For ANN models that do not have a fixed structure, the procedures used to determine the optimal model structure would need to be reported. For example, for MLPs, upper and lower bounds on the number of hidden layers and the number of hidden layer nodes would need to be provided, as well as the procedure for determining their optimal number (e.g. trial-and-error, constructive etc.). In relation to model validation, Category 3 requirements would include provision of the details of the model predictive performance criteria ( As can be seen from The level of justification provided for the use of a particular method at a particular model development step affects the credibility of the research conducted and the confidence in the results reported in the paper. A higher level of justification reduces uncertainties in the selection of a method and the chance the reported results are obtained by accident. Justification can be provided either by theoretical discussion or numerical comparison. Discussion-based justification ensures the reported research is built upon findings from previous studies or established domain knowledge. Numerical justification can be obtained by conducting comparative studies, which also drives methodological progress in the research field directly by providing numerical evidence for future research. Similar to the proposed four categories for assessing the level of detail included for an ANN model development step described above, four categories are also proposed to assess the justification provided for the use of a particular method in a model development step, as shown in It should be noted that Category 3 does not apply to the model validation step, as, in contrast to the other steps, where model predictive ability can be used to assess the relative performance of different methods (e.g. calibration methods, methods for selecting the number of hidden nodes etc.), there is no quantitative measure for measuring validation performance. It should also be noted that Category 4 only applies to the model structure selection step. This is because the structure of certain types of ANNs, such as GRNNs or PNNs, is fixed, so no method is needed to select an appropriate structure and therefore, no justification is required. Alternatively, a fixed model structure selection method is required for some ANN model architectures (e.g. a stepwise method has to be used for CFNs) and therefore, no justification is required. As mentioned in the Introduction, the focus of this review is on the application of ANNs to the modelling of water quality variables in water supply systems, including water source, water treatment and water distribution. In order to identify relevant papers, a keyword search of the ISI Web of Science was conducted in January 2013 for the period 2000–2012 using the key words “neural network” and “water quality” for the field “topic”, within the research areas of “engineering” and “water resources” for articles in English, which resulted in 618 papers from 307 journals, of which 190 journals only had one article selected. Then, the sources of the papers were refined based on their impact factors, relevance to water resources engineering and standing in the field. Thereafter, the papers were refined manually to exclude review papers and papers focussing on wastewater treatment, coastal water, non-water-quality variable estimation, data visualization, remote sensing, food processing and agricultural applications, which resulted in 81 remaining articles from 44 international refereed journals focussing on the forecasting and prediction of water quality variables in drinking water systems using ANNs. The 44 journals and their 2012 impact factors are summarized in The 81 papers are firstly analysed based on their year of publication, the component of the drinking water system considered (i.e. source, treatment and distribution) and the type of water quality variables modelled. The number of papers published in each year from 2000 to 2012 is plotted in In drinking water systems, water can be obtained from a variety of sources, including surface water from reservoirs, lakes and rivers, groundwater from aquifers, stormwater and seawater through desalination. The source water is generally treated using filtration and disinfection (e.g. chlorination) before being delivered to end water users' taps via distribution systems. The number of papers focussing on different components of the drinking water system is plotted in Different water quality variables are often modelled for different aspects of drinking water systems. For example, for reservoirs, lakes and rivers, algae, nutrients or nutrient related chemical indicators, such as dissolved oxygen (DO) and biological oxygen demand (BOD), and physical water quality variables, such as temperature, turbidity, salinity and colour, are often of concern. For groundwater and stormwater, pollutants, such as pesticides and heavy metals, are often monitored. In drinking water treatment plants and distribution systems, disinfectant residuals and disinfection by-products (DBP), such as trihalomethanes (THM), need to be modelled. Therefore, the water quality variables modelled in the papers are divided into three categories, i.e. chemical, biological and physical. Chemical water quality variables include DO, nitrate, nitrite, chemical oxygen demand (COD), BOD, disinfection by-products (DBP), pesticides and metal irons. Physical variables include pH, temperature, total suspended solids (TSS), total dissolved solids (TDS), conductivity, turbidity, salinity, hardness and colour. Biological variables include protozoan parasites, such as cryptosporidium and giardia lamblia, faecal coliforms and algae. The number of times each type of water quality variable was modelled in the 81 papers is given in In this section, the 81 papers are assessed in accordance with the ANN model development protocol introduced in Section In many of the papers reviewed, a number of different types of ANN models were developed in a single paper. In this case, the model development processes for different types of ANNs were evaluated separately to account for all different model development processes. On the other hand, in some of the papers reviewed, multiple ANN models of the same type were developed. If this was the case, the ANN model development process adopted for a particular model type was often the same. Consequently, in order to avoid biasing the results towards the ANN model development process adopted in papers in which multiple models were developed, a development process that was applied to more than one model in a particular paper was only counted once. This resulted in a total of 99 different ANN model development processes, which were assessed based on the protocol proposed in Section As mentioned previously, some input selection methods considering input independence also take into account input significance. In order to minimize repeated information in the results and clearly identify the methods considering input independence, the input selection methods used are assessed in two different categories: a) methods based on input significance only and (b) methods also considering input independence. The level of detail provided for the input selection methods used in the 99 ANN model development processes reported is presented in As can be seen from As can be seen from As mentioned previously, in a number of papers reviewed, more than one method was used to select appropriate inputs. This is considered good practice, as it provides multiple lines of evidence in determining the most appropriate inputs, which is likely to provide greater confidence in the selected inputs. However, as can be seen in The level of detail provided for the data splitting step is summarized in As can be seen from The large number of cases where sufficient information was provided in relation to the data splitting method used is at least in part due to the fact that unsupervised ad-hoc or random methods were used for data splitting. As can be seen from Another inadequacy of the implementation of the data splitting step in the 81 papers reviewed is shown in The level of detail provided for the ANN model architectures selected in the 99 ANN model development processes is summarized in Model architecture selection is one of the ANN model development steps that have traditionally received more attention from ANN modellers for modelling river systems ( As can be seen from The level of detail provided for the model structure selection step included for the 99 cases is summarized in As can be seen from The level of detail provided for the model calibration step for the 99 ANN model development processes is summarized in As can be seen from The level of detail provided for the model validation step in the 99 ANN model development processes is summarized in The number of times various model predictive and structural performance criteria were used to validate the models developed in the 99 model development processes assessed is given in The results presented in The ANN model development protocol introduced in this paper and its use to critically assess the In this paper, the proposed protocol is used to critically assess the quality of 99 independent ANN model development and reporting processes used in 81 journal papers on the prediction and forecasting of water quality variables in drinking water system published from 2000 to 2012. This application area is selected as it is an area that has received little attention in previous reviews of ANNs in environmental/water resources modelling; while it is an area where ANNs are being used increasingly. Although there has been a significant increase in the number of papers published on the application of ANNs on the prediction of water quality variables in drinking water systems in recent years compared to a decade ago, the majority of the studies focused on the sources of drinking water, mainly reservoirs, lakes and rivers, while the application to drinking water treatment or distribution is still limited. This could be due to limited long term data of good quality for drinking water treatment and distribution systems, as pointed out by A summary of the results of the assessment of the As can be seen from When considering input significance, model free methods were used most of the time and in the rare cases where model based methods were used, they were often implemented in an ad-hoc fashion. When considering input independence, dimensionality reduction was the most commonly used approach; while methods based on filtering were also used in a few studies investigated. In relation to data splitting, unsupervised methods were used in preference to supervised methods and implemented in a random or ad-hoc fashion in the vast majority of cases. A number of different model architectures, including hybrid models, were used to predict water quality variables in drinking water systems. However, feedforward MLPs were by far the most popular model architecture and were often used as a benchmark for evaluating the performance of alternative ANN architectures. Although the importance of the ability of ANNs to adapt to new/unseen data was pointed out previously ( Ad-hoc methods based on trial-and-error dominated the model structure selection step in the 81 papers reviewed; while there was only limited application of optimization based methods. It was found that local optimization algorithms were by far the most widely used methods for model calibration (training), while the application of stochastic methods was very limited. Model validation was the only ANN model development step in which a variety of methods was used. Also, in most of the studies reviewed, multiple criteria were used to validate the models developed, which increases confidence in the performance of the model, as different performance characteristics have been tested. However, in most cases, only the predictive performance of the models was examined. Model replicative validity was only considered in one study, where the normality of the calibration residuals was examined. In terms of assessing structural validity, sensitivity analysis was the most commonly used method; while weight-based approaches were only used once. The summary in As can be seen from Based on the “traffic light” assessment provided in Based on the review of 99 ANN model development processes employed for the prediction of water quality variables in drinking water systems recorded in 81 journal papers published between 2000 and 2012, the following recommendations for future research are made: Greater focus should be given to input independence in the input selection step to take into account input redundancy using methods such as partial mutual information ( Data splitting is one step in the development of ANN water quality models that requires more attention from ANN modellers in all three aspects covered by the protocol: the implementation of the step should be better documented so that the procedure can be repeated by other researchers; a variety of methods that suit the modelling objectives should be applied [e.g. Model architecture selection is better documented and implemented in the 81 papers reviewed compared with the other ANN model development steps. However, research on alternative model architectures, such as hybrid models or recurrent models, should continue, as suggested by The implementation of model structure selection should be better documented. A variety of methods, rather than just ad-hoc methods based on trial-and-error, should be used in order to find near-optimal model structures. A rigorous model structure selection method, such as those based on optimization or Bayesian model selection, will increase confidence in model structure selection, which can also provide justification for the selection of certain model structures in future studies ( The model calibration process should be better documented so that it can be repeated by other researchers. Global optimization methods, which may increase the chance of finding global optima in complex error surfaces, should be investigated further; and uncertainty related to calibration should also be considered in future studies, as has been done in the application of ANNs in related areas ( Although model validation is by far the best documented ANN model development step with a variety of methods for estimating model predictive performance employed, greater focus should be given to the other two aspects of model validity, namely replicative and structural validity; especially structurally validity, which can be used for knowledge extraction and to legitimize the developed model ( The uncertainty of ANN outputs, especially those resulting from limited data, is another area that needs more attention from ANN water quality modellers. This issue can be addressed through implementing calibration methods incorporating uncertainty and assessing the structural validity of developed ANN models, as discussed above. The applicability of ANNs to water quality modelling in water supply systems needs to be investigated by comparing ANNs with other modelling techniques that are traditionally used in the area. This could be an interesting topic of a future review paper. The authors would like to thank  