The Chalkidiki block in Northern Greece represents the southwesternmost piece of the ultrahigh-pressure Rhodope and has played an important role in the evolution of the North Aegean. The eastern part of the Chalkidiki block is a basement complex (Vertiskos Unit) that is made largely of Palaeozoic granitoids and clastic sediments that metamorphosed during the Mesozoic. This basement is traditionally considered as part of the Rhodopean hanging-wall, an assignment mainly supported by the absence of high-pressure mineral indicators and the presence of a regional medium-pressure/medium-temperature amphibolite-facies Barrovian metamorphic imprint. Toward the west, the basement is juxtaposed with meta-sedimentary (Circum-Rhodope belt) and arc units (Chortiatis Magmatic Suite) that carry evidence of a Mesozoic high-pressure/low-temperature event. In this study, garnet–staurolite-mica schists from the eastern part of the basement were examined by means of micro-textures, mineral chemistry and isochemical phase-diagram sections in the system NCKFMASHMn(Ti) [Na2O–CaO–K2O–FeO–MgO–Al2O3–SiO2–H2O–MnO–(TiO2)]. The schists represent former Mesozoic sedimentary sequences deposited on the Palaeozoic basement. We document the presence of a relict eclogite-facies mineral assemblage (garnet+chloritoid+phengite+rutile) in an amphibolite-facies matrix composed of garnet+staurolite+phengite±kyanite. Model results suggest the existence of a high-pressure/medium-temperature metamorphic event (1.9GPa/520°C) that preceded regional re-equilibration at medium-pressure/medium-temperature conditions (1.2GPa/620°C). Clearly, the eastern part of the Chalkidiki block (basement complex) retains memory of an as yet unidentified Mesozoic eclogitic metamorphic event that was largely erased by the later Barrovian overprint. In light of our findings, the basement complex of the Chalkidiki block shares a common tectono-metamorphic evolution with both the high-pressure units to the west, and the high-grade Rhodopean gneisses further to the northeast. Our results are consequential for the geodynamic reconstruction of the Rhodope since they require participation of the Chalkidiki block to the well-established Mesozoic subduction system.High-pressure (HP) metamorphic assemblages are commonly overprinted under medium- (MT) or high-temperature (HT) conditions at different stages of the thermal evolution of an orogen. At regional scale, the process responsible for such overprint can be linked to radiogenic heating of a thickened crust, heat produced by viscous dissipation or thermal pulses related to upwelling mantle (e.g., The Rhodope Metamorphic Province (northern Greece–southern Bulgaria) is a recently established ultrahigh pressure (UHP) metamorphic province ( In this contribution we study key metapelitic samples from Chalkidiki by means of micro-textures and mineral chemistry. We then compare selected samples (chloritoid-bearing garnet–staurolite-mica schists) to modelled mineral assemblages in the NCKFMASHTiMn (Na The Hellenides constitute an integral part of the Alpine-Himalayan mountain chain and are the product of convergence between the stable South European margin and northward-driven Gondwana-derived continental fragments (e.g., The To the northeast, within the NRD, typical rocktypes are orthogneisses, mafic eclogites and amphibolites, paragneisses, ultramafics and scarce marble horizons (e.g., The southwestern part of the Rhodope is the so-called Serbo-Macedonian Massif of The The Evidence of a HP event from the Circum-Rhodope belt and the Chortiatis Magmatic Suite is found in Selected key samples were first crushed in a steel jaw crusher and then ground in an agate mortar. The powders were digested using standard lithium metaborate (LiBO Mineral analyses and garnet elemental maps were obtained at ETH Zurich, Switzerland and at Ifremer (Institut français de recherche pour l’expoitation de la mer), Brest, France using a JEOL JXA 8200 and a Cameca SX 100 electron probe, respectively. Both probes were equipped with 5 wavelength dispersive spectrometers operating at an accelerating voltage of 15 Isochemical phase-diagram sections were calculated using Gibbs free-energy minimisation ( We have selected three key samples for thermodynamic modelling and P–T estimates ( Sample CR4 is a fine-grained quartz-mica phyllite. In the field it has a dominant foliation and a prominent NW-trending crenulation lineation. The main mineral phases are, in decreasing modal amount, quartz, white mica, chlorite, garnet and opaque minerals. A typical crenulation cleavage is developed by differentiation at the limps of the microlithon domains ( Sample SM54 is a representative garnet–staurolite schist. Major phases are white mica, quartz, chlorite, garnet, staurolite, biotite, and sub-ordinate kyanite. Chloritoid also occurs in small amounts but only as inclusion in garnet. Accessory minerals are rutile (commonly rimmed by ilmenite), apatite, zircon and opaques. Garnet appears with exceptionally large grains measuring up to 1 Sample SM40 is similar to SM54 in terms of texture, mineralogy and deformation pattern. Major phases are white mica, quartz, garnet, chlorite, staurolite and rutile. Accessory minerals are monazite, zircon, and rarely ilmenite and allanite. The matrix is made of phengite, paragonite, rutile and quartz. Garnet appears as euhedral to subhedral grains measuring up to 1.5 A mineralogical assemblage table as well as the bulk composition of each studied sample are given in The foliation is made of locally chloritised phengite/paragonite intergrowths. The Si content of the K-rich mica from the matrix ranges from 3.1 to 3.25 White micas show a range of compositions. Potassium-rich white mica is dominant in the matrix and along with paragonite form the main foliation of the rock. The Si content of the K-rich mica ranges from 3.08 to 3.25 Potassium-rich white mica is dominant in the matrix and its composition has up to 3.25 An isochemical phase-diagram section for the sample CR4 has been calculated for the range 0.4–1.6 The only evidence for HP metamorphism in the sample can be considered the Si content of the white micas that reaches up to 3.25 Isochemical phase-diagram sections have been calculated in the range of 0.4–2.4 The topology of the phase-diagram section for sample SM54 is shown in Based on textural observations, a first mineral assemblage is characterised by the co-existence of garnet, chloritoid, white mica and rutile ( The basement complex of the Chalkidiki block has long been considered as showing exclusively a Barrovian MP amphibolite-facies peak metamorphic conditions and as such it has been traditionally considered as part of the Mesozoic Rhodopean hanging-wall. This is supported by i) the predominance of garnet–staurolite schists (typical of amphibolite-facies conditions) that are quite often intercalated within orthogneisses and ii) the lack of any, reliable, evidence for a Mesozoic HP event. In addition, detrital garnet and staurolite are commonly found in recent sedimentary basins sourced from the basement ( We have chosen here to study key garnet–staurolite schists ( Since the early petrogenetic grids that incorporated thermodynamic data in the simple system KFMASH (K Based on micro-textures, we show that the eclogite-facies garnet The Chalkidiki block of northern Greece is the southwestern part of the Rhodope Metamorphic Province and thus, an important element of the latter ( At the scale of the whole Chalkidiki block there is a gradient in the metamorphic conditions: from east to west, they decrease from eclogite-facies (and subsequent amphibolite-facies overprint) to blueschist-facies (and greenschist/lower amphibolite-facies overprint). In detail, according to The discovery of an early HP Alpine event from the MP/MT basement imposes a model that involves common early metamorphic history for both the basement and the HP cover/arc units further to the west. Despite the late variable degree of overprint of the basement and its cover, we argue that their NW–SE-trending contact should not be considered as an important geological discontinuity ( As briefly described in the In We therefore argue that the NRD and the Chalkidiki block participated into the same Mesozoic convergence as part of the same down-going plate along a northward subduction. Both domains recorded early, possibly (pre-)Upper Jurassic, eclogite-facies metamorphic conditions and subsequent Cretaceous re-equilibration at amphibolite-facies conditions. The prevailed metamorphic conditions were different between the domains, during both the peak pressure and peak temperature stages, implying the existence of a metamorphic gradient that coincides with increasing metamorphic grade toward the northeast. In this contribution we studied key chloritoid-bearing garnet–staurolite-mica schists ( In light of this finding we are able to incorporate the Chalkidiki block into the Mesozoic convergence setting of the Rhodope. The Chalkidiki block and the high-grade Rhodopean gneisses, exposed further to the northeast, participated into the same Mesozoic convergence as part of a northward down-going plate prior to their exhumation and incorporation into the upper plate. Both domains experienced similar metamorphic conditions – yet of varying intensity – that include an early eclogite-facies metamorphic event and subsequent retrogression at MP/MT (or MP/HT) conditions during the Cretaceous. The recorded metamorphic conditions increase northward, i.e., from the Chalkidiki block to the Northern Rhodope Domain, compatible with the well-established northward-dipping Jurassic–Cretaceous subduction. This work was funded by the     