Cellular composites are of significant interest to the materials research community as they often possess multifunctional physical properties. To meet the application requirements, various design and fabrication methods are adopted to produce highly porous composites. In this work, the one-step and two-step approaches for efficient design and prediction of cellular structure's performance were presented for developing ultra-lightweight and high-strength cellular composites reinforced by discontinuous fibers. The topology designs of a 2D honeycomb hexagon model, a 2D cuttlefish model, and a 3D octahedron model, inspired by biomimetics, were presented. Computer modeling based on finite element analysis was conducted on the periodic representative volume elements identified from the cellular structural models to characterize the designed cellular composites' performance and properties. Additive manufacturing technique (3D printing) was used for prototyping the design, and experimental tests were carried out for validating the design methodology.Cellular materials are of significant interest to the materials research community as they often possess multifunctional physical properties. Cellular materials offer high strength-to-weight ratio, high stiffness, high permeability, excellent impact-absorption, and thermal and acoustic insulation To meet the application requirements, various design methods are adopted to generate topology of the highly porous composites, such as continuing improved material bounds approach for multi-phase, multi-dimensional, isotropic/anisotropic and periodic/nonperiodic composites with different physical properties, topology optimization approach to material design which is frequently performed within a finite element framework and typically involves large number s of design variables, homogenization or inverse homogenization approach in the design of microstructural materials which has permitted an increased level of design capability and understanding of underlying material mechanisms, just name a few Cellular composites reinforced by discontinuous fibers (DiFs) are of particular interest as they offer great flexibility in tailoring specific physical properties by controlling the compositions, and/or microstructures of the constituent phases, and the fiber orientations. Periodic cellular composites consist of many identical base cells or representative volume elements (RVEs); manipulating the phase distributions and fiber orientation in these base cells provide an effective approach to the design of multifunctional composites. However, conventional design methods based on trial-and-error have been found cumbersome and time consuming. An effective approach to design cellular periodic composites reinforced by DiFs is to adopt the ideas behind biomimetics, which can encompass the essential aspects in materials design, system engineering, and even business models Characterization of such materials is an important process, permitting examination of their physical and mechanical properties. While mechanical tests provide insights into material properties, they are not cost-effective and time-consuming. Alternatively, mathematical and numerical models can assist mechanical characterization of such natural materials. This approach is more versatile, allowing refinement of the loading and environmental conditions to better appreciate both the ideal workings of the materials and to assess how the beneficial features of the material can be adopted to different engineering applications. Besides, introduction of the material property measurements taking into account the material's density, such as specific modulus or specific strength, will help understand and assess the performance of the cellular structural composites. In this context, computational topology design and characterization has become a prevalent tool in the fields of structural and material design Material design barely works without a prototyping technique. Due to the complex internal geometry, manufacturing a component with cellular meso-structure is impossible with traditional subtractive machining. Processing technologies are rapidly advancing and manufacturers now have the ability to control material architecture, or topology, at unprecedented length scales. This expands the design space and provides exciting opportunities for tailoring material properties through design of the material's topology. Using a 3D additive manufacturing (AM) technology to fabricate test samples to verify computational model is a new idea, especially for printing composite materials with stiff fillers (e.g. continuous or discontinuous carbon fibers, tiny silicon carbide “whiskers”, carbon nanotubes, or graphene) within a soft matrix (polymer) In this work, an approach involving homogenization, optimization, and validation of an efficient design of macro-/micro-cellular structural composites for additive manufacturing (3D printing) will be presented for developing ultra-lightweight and high-strength cellular composites reinforced by DiFs. The topologies of the cellular composites will be designed based on the periodic RVEs and inspired by biomimetics. Computer modeling will be conducted to characterize the performance and properties of the designed cellular structural composites, taking into account the materials' density/porosity. 3D printing techniques will be adopted for prototyping the testing specimens, and experimental tests will be carried out for validating the design and for seeking the desired performance and properties of the cellular structural composites. The flow chart of the idea about the approach is shown in Topological design of isotropic materials is a well-developed topic in the structural design and optimization community. Extensive mathematical models have been developed and successfully applied to design structures such as trusses, beams, and plates As cellular structural composite material design could be inspired from nature, a closer observation of the microstructures of human bone, bamboo, wood, cuttlefish bone, silk, and honeycomb, just name a few, will be helpful in understanding the material hierarchical structures and distribution Cellular structure governs the entire volume space. Hence cellular structure is used for the design of light weight composites. In cellular structure design, a small element is chosen, duplicated, stacked, and grouped with each other, so that an entire structure is formed. The smallest element chosen is known as representative volume element (RVE). Due to the directional fiber reinforcement and micro/macro nonhomogeneous structure in nature, the cellular structure is of anisotropy. Examples of topology design of two-dimensional cellular structural composites inspired from biomimetics are shown in For characterizing DiF reinforced bulk composites, two different approaches have been developed. One of the approaches is so called two-step approach. In the first step, unidirectional (1D) random fibers were generated in a composite solid model, as shown in The predicted bulk material properties of PLA base resin reinforced with 15 vol% discontinuous carbon fibers (DiCFs) Fiber length to diameter ratio, i.e., fiber aspect ratio, and the volume fraction occupied have influence on its properties and performance. The effects of the fiber aspect ratio (up to 100) and the volume occupied (5%, 10%, 15%, and 18%) on mechanical properties have been numerically investigated and the results are shown in For further investigation of the properties of the bulk composite specimens prepared by 3D printing, compression and tension tests in printing direction and transverse to the printing direction have been conducted for PLA polymer and carbon fiber reinforced PLA (CFRPLA) composites based on the relevant ASTM standards As the DiF composite filament used in 3D printing, the DiFs were aligned primarily along the printing path, as shown in It was found that the printing directions also refer to the fiber direction for DiF reinforced composites, and load types (tensile or compressive load) have great effects on the bulk composites' stiffness. Tensile stiffness (Young's modulus), either for the case of PLA or CFRPLA, are much higher than that of the compressive stiffness, and material stiffness in printing direction has higher stiffness than that in transverse to the printing direction. However, there is no significant difference in tensile stiffness between printing direction and transverse to the printing direction for PLA specimens. RVEs are useful in identifying and estimating the properties of the larger cellular structural composites. The RVEs from the above 2D topology designs ( For evaluating the structural performance and material properties of the RVEs of the cellular structural composites, the material properties of the bulk composites must be first characterized and input into the characterization procedures of the RVEs of the cellular structural composites by modeling. Based on the characterization results of the bulk composites, the material properties of the RVEs of the cellular composites can be predicted in the similar way, taking into account the fiber volume fraction, fiber aspect ratio, and fiber orientation formed in the 3D printing fabrication of the product. The modeling results of 2D hexagon model, 2D cuttlefish bone model, and 3D octahedron model with CFRPLA composites and under the assumption of random fiber distribution in the matrix are shown in For validating the modeling approach adopted for cellular structure design, 3D printing was used to fabricate 2D hexagon specimens with PLA and CFRPLA materials, and microscope images of the specimens are shown in In-plane compression tests were conducted for the 2D hexagon specimens with PLA and CFRPLA materials, as shown in The experimental and modeling data, and the data of some popular materials are summarized in Cellular structural composite product design can be inspired by biomimetics. Bulk composites can be evaluated based on homogeneity combined with Monte Carlo method. Cellular structural composites can be characterized based on representative volume elements (RVEs). The material properties can be predicted by conducting tensile/compression and shearing tests on the RVE of the cellular composites based on the bulk composite material properties predicted from the above steps. The cuttlefish bone 2D model has higher planar stiffnesses than that of the hexagon 2D model, especially in the vertical direction which is the result of evolution for cuttlefishes to take high pressure in deep sea. 3D cellular composite product can be realized and fabricated by 3D printing. Fillets in the structure design can improve the stiffness and lower the von Mises stress of the cellular structures. Further work could be done by developing algorithm for 2D and 3D cellular structural composites; optimizing the design by sensitivity analysis of the topologies; refining the modeling techniques by considering tension-compression asymmetry material model, material nonlinearity, large strain and large deformation, and buckling and failures; and improving the 3D printing quality, just name a few. The authors gratefully acknowledge generous support from the