The need for improved herbage yield and forage quality, on intensively managed grassland, in dairy farming systems, often results in land being brought into tillage, either by grassland reseeding or conversion to arable cropping (particularly maize (Zea mays L.) for silage). However, both options are likely to increase the greenhouse gas emissions (GHG) after grassland cultivation, particularly when this involves ploughing, although there is limited information about the level of emissions. In order to estimate whether the time of ploughing and type of forage crop would affect the annual emissions of the important GHG nitrous oxide (N2O) in the year after soil disturbance of grassland, a field experiment was established on a Eutric Luvisol in northern Germany. The three factorial experiment comprised the effect of land use management (four treatments: ploughing and reseeding in autumn; ploughing and reseeding in spring, ploughing and conversion to maize in spring; control treatment of intact permanent grassland); the effect of nitrogen (N) fertilizer input (two treatments: 0 and 240kgNha−1
                     year−1 applied as cattle slurry); and the experimental year (two years). Treatments were arranged with three replicates in a randomized block design. N2O emissions were measured on a weekly basis with the static chamber method and N drainage during winter was estimated using suction cups. Thus, direct and indirect N2O emissions (viaN leaching) were calculated per ha as well as per unit of forage yield. Results showed that ground-frost and freeze-thaw cycles were major drivers of enhanced N2O fluxes during the winter following ploughing and reseeding of grassland in autumn, resulting in the highest direct emissions of 21.31kgN2O-Nha−1
                     year−1. Emissions following grassland ploughing in spring were mainly driven by high soil mineral N-concentrations but with maximum figures of 3.90 and 6.32kgN2O-Nha−1
                     year−1 after reseeding and conversion to maize respectively. Emissions in the intact permanent grassland were lowest in both years. Forage yield related emissions were also highest for grassland ploughing and reseeding in autumn and lowest for intact permanent grassland, but with no significant differences for reseeding and maize cultivation after grassland ploughing in spring. Application of slurry increased annual N2O emissions, particularly when applied in the year of reseeding, but with a lower calculated emission factor as advised by the IPCC guidelines for N fertilizers. We conclude that sustaining highly productive permanent grass-clover swards with moderate N fertilization and without tillage is the best option for ‘climate-smart forage production’ followed, when unavoidable, by tillage operations only in early spring for direct grassland reseeding, or delayed reseeding using a high yielding forage crop like maize.Greenhouse gas (GHG) inventories identify nitrous oxide (N From the perspective of agricultural land use in northwest Europe there is a need for good estimations of N In the intensively managed grassland systems in northwest Europe, where high inputs of mineral and organic fertilizers typically supply 240–400 There are few sources of data regarding the eco-efficiency parameters of short-term effects following the ploughing of permanent grassland for grassland renovation or conversion to arable crops. Against this background the aim of this study was to determine the effect of different management options regarding grassland renovation on the total N The field experiment was conducted at the experimental farm “Lindhof” (54°27′N, 9°57′E; elevation 27 The experiment started in autumn 2010 and was repeated in 2011. To estimate N 1. Land use management Intact permanent grassland (PG) Grassland renovation in spring (SR) Grassland renovation in autumn (AR) Grassland conversion to maize (CM) 2. N-fertilization 0 240 3. Year first year second year Air temperature and precipitation were measured at a weather station close (< Soil sampling was conducted every second week to a depth of 25 N To estimate indirect N For calculation of N leaching losses, a climate water balance model was used (DIN 4049-3). This equation is based on weather and soil data gathered from the experimental site, actual evapotranspiration ( Grass was cut was using a forage plot harvester (Haldrup, Logstor, Denmark), to a residual sward height of 5 The global warming potential for each land-use management system was calculated using the total measured N-losses, grouped in terms of annual N For statistical analyses, the software Over the two experimental years, for the PG control the nitrate concentration in the 0–25 Ploughing increased N Considering the first 6 months following ploughing, when the greatest amounts of high N Slurry application was found to increase annual accumulated N The tested land use systems factor showed a significant effect on measured N-losses. On average for the first and second experimental years, AR had the highest total N-losses but with no significant difference compared with CM due to interannual variation of the sources for N losses. While in the first year leaching losses had a strong impact on N losses in CM and N Yields for DM, GJ of ME and nitrogen are summarized in Similar to the estimated global warming potential of each system, yield-related emissions were likewise affected by a two-fold interaction of land use system x experimental year. CO In the present study we showed that grassland ploughing resulted in increased soil nitrate concentrations in the upper soil layer within 4–12 weeks after ploughing, compared with the intact grass-clover swards. Concentrations of soil nitrate were in the range of 50 − 100 In the light of our results a higher risk for increased N Slurry application to recently ploughed grassland showed elevated N Despite the presence of a higher proportion of sown cultivars of highly productive grass species (e.g. The measured depression in yield in the year of spring reseeding (SR) was caused predominately by the shorter period of effective vegetation cover, which allowed only three rather than four silage cuts and a more competitive establishment of weeds. For farmers, these are two reasons why it is often preferable to conduct grassland renovation in autumn ( Studies that have presented evidence for enhanced herbage DM yields following reseeding are often biased towards short-term responses, as this positive effect occurs mainly in the first year after grassland re-establishment but is not necessarily maintained in subsequent years ( In terms of changes in soil C stocks the current “Good Practice Guidance for Land use and Land use Change” ( Regarding our five introduced hypotheses: (i) the ploughing up of permanent grassland led to considerably increased N The present work was supported by the