High-energy pilon fractures are difficult injuries to treat. They often involve displaced posterior malleolar fragments. With the advent of staged management for treatment of these injuries, the posterior fragment(s) are difficult to address in a delayed fashion through standard anterior incisions. The goal of the current study is to evaluate the role for staged fixation of the posterior aspect of the tibia, and fibula if fractured, through a posterolateral approach with later reconstruction of the anterior fragments through traditional anterior exposures. Eighteen patients with high energy pilon fractures (16 OTA 43C.3 and 2 OTA 43C.2) were treated with this approach. Patients were evaluated at a minimum of 24 months following surgery. The average arc of motion at the ankle joint was 34.3±7.4o. The quality of reduction was determined by post-operative computed tomography. Eleven patients had <1mm of articular incongruity, 6 had 1–2mm of incongruity and 1 had >2mm of incongruity at the level of the joint. Functional outcomes were assessed using the AOFAS ankle and hindfoot score and the MFS. The average AOFAS score was 83.8 and the average MFS score was 84.7. This technique allows for improved articular reduction with encouraging clinical and functional outcome results.Tibial pilon fractures are complex injury patterns are associated with significant articular cartilage and soft tissue damage. Initially, immediate open reduction and internal fixation of these injuries were performed with good results As described, staged reconstruction involves fixation of the fibula fracture, if necessary, with use of an external fixator, until the soft tissues are amenable for open reduction internal fixation. Typically, anterior based incisions (anterior, anterolateral or anteromedial) are used for reconstruction of the articular surface. High–energy pilon fractures (OTA 43C2 &C3) often have associated displaced posterior malleolar fragment(s) which can be posterior, posteromedial or posterolateral. The fragments typically shorten and are rotated which cannot be reduced appropriately with external fixation alone. Obtaining an accurate reduction of this posterior fragment can be difficult through standard anterior incisions because alignment must be obtained indirectly. Indirect reduction using closed or percutaneous methods is often difficult to perform due to impaction and three dimensional rotation of the fracture fragments. If the posterior column of the distal tibia is intact, there is a stable buttress which can be used to repair the anterior articular fragments. This study describes the initial results of a staged protocol to treat high-energy pilon fractures with initial application of an external fixator followed by a limited posterior open reduction internal fixation (ORIF) through a posterolateral approach. Using this incision, the fibula as well as the posterior malleolar fragment can be directly visualized and reduced initially. The soft tissues are then allowed to heal until an anterior approach can be used to reduce the anterior and medial fragments to a stable posterior fragment, thus allowing for improved articular reductions. Between January 1, 2006 and December 31, 2008, there were 18 patients that met the criteria and were treated with our staged posterior protocol for their high-energy tibial pilon fractures. All fractures involved displaced, posterior malleolar fragments. Sixteen fractures were classified as OTA 43C.3 and 2 were OTA 43C.2. There were 15 males and 3 females. An associated fibula fracture was involved in 14 cases and was treated at the same time as the posterior malleolar fracture. There were 3 open fracture patterns (2 Gustillo type II and 1 Gustillo type IIIA). Prior to initial fixation a computed tomography (CT) was obtained to evaluate the posterior distal tibial fractures. Patients were then taken for initial stabilization with an external fixator and limited posterior fixation of the distal tibia with open reduction internal fixation of the fibula. A postoperative CT scan was then obtained to evaluate the quality of reduction of the posterior segment and planning for later reconstruction of the anterior articular fragments. The timing between initial stabilization and final open reduction internal fixation was 17.4 days (range 11-25 days). A post-operative CT scan was obtained to evaluate the quality of reduction. The maximal displacement at the level of the articular segment measured on the axial, sagittal and coronal reconstructive was used and graded as <1 Patients were then followed clinically for evaluation of any complications, range of motion, radiographs and clinical outcomes at standard intervals for a minimum of 24 months. Functional results were assessed using Maryland Foot and Ankle (MFS) and American Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle (AOFAS) scoring. The results at latest followup were used for analysis. The patient is initially evaluated in the emergency room, and the limb is stabilized and placed into a well-padded splint. If radiographs reveal a pilon fracture with an associated fracture of the posterior malleolus, the patient is cleared for surgical stabilization, and taken to the operating room. There are two options for the treating surgeon at this time. The first option is to place the patient supine, and apply an external fixator. If this initial treatment is employed, and there is an associated fibula fracture, the fibula should NOT be fixed, as the fracture pattern (and hence the required CT scan based incisions) is not completely known. In this case, the procedure to be described below can be performed in three to five (3-5) days. The second option was our protocol method of managing OTA 43C.3 fractures. The patient is brought into the operating room and placed in the prone position ( Through the same incision another fascial plane is created medial to the peroneal tendons. The flexor hallucis longus and associated soft tissue is retracted medially, exposing the entire distal, posterior aspect of the tibia. The posterior malleolar fragment typically has a metaphyseal-diaphyseal spike that can be reduced to the posterior aspect of the tibial shaft, but many times this “key” is fractured and care must be taken to reposition the malleolar fragment anatomically. This reduction is critical to the success of the procedure, as subsequent anterior reconstruction will be based on the proper position of the posterior malleolus. Anatomic reduction of the posterior malleolar fragment also restores the integrity of the ankle syndesmosis. A small or mini fragment compression plate is then applied spanning the fracture in a buttress (anti-glide) mode, and secured proximally with cortical screws ( Following closure of the wound, the lower leg is flexed to 90 Post-operatively, radiographs and a CT scan with reconstruction images are obtained, to evaluate the reduction of the posterior fragment and the fibula, as well as for planning of anterior fragment reduction maneuvers, choice of incisions and implants. Patients with isolated injuries may be discharged home within forty-eight (48) hours of surgery. They are then followed on an out-patient basis until the soft tissues have healed to the point where anterior surgery can be performed, approximately after two to three (2-3) weeks. The patient is then brought back to the operating room for definitive fixation. The patient is placed supine with a bolster under the operative leg. The frame is disassembled and the pins are left in place and prepped into the sterile field. The limb is exsanguinated and the tourniquet inflated to 350 Once the fragments are identified, sequential articular reduction is performed in a back to front manner, since the posterior aspect of the tibia has been stabilized ( Once the anterior tibia and it corresponding articular surface has been properly reduced, independent 2.7/3.5/4.0 All patients were followed for a minimum of 24 months with an average of 33 months (range 26-54 months). Range of motion was assessed using a goniometer at each visit. The average dorsiflexion for patients was 8.3 The quality of the final reduction was determined by post-operative CT scans. The maximum displacement seen on the sagittal cuts of the CT scan was used. They were graded as <1 Functional outcomes were analyzed using the American Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle Surgey (AOFAS) ankle and hindfoot score as well as, the Maryland Foot Score (MFS). Scores were obtained at 12 months and at each 6 month interval. The final score obtained was reported. The average AOFAS score was 83.8 (range 71-92). The average MFS score was 84.7 (range 74-91). There were three complications noted in our group. One patient had superficial wound dehiscence of the anterior incision that was treated with local wound care and healed without further intervention. No patients experienced issues from the posterolateral incision. One patient had symptomatic medial hardware that was removed with resolution of symptoms. One patient developed a deep infection secondary to his Gustilo IIIA open fracture. The patient was treated with irrigation and debridement and intravenous antibiotics. There were no malunions, nonunions and at latest followup no patients underwent salvage procedures for post-traumatic arthrosis (ankle arthroplasty or arthrodesis). The treatment of pilon fractures has evolved over time from immediate open reduction internal fixation to limited fixation and hybrid external fixation Despite having adequate access to the articular surface through traditional anterior based approaches, there are some problems with using this technique for fractures involving the posterior distal tibia. The posterior malleolar fragments typically have to be indirectly reduced when using an anterior approach. Also, there is limited ability to anatomically reduce the anterior fragments to an unstable posterior fragment. Some have advocated for fixation through posterior approaches in an attempt to minimize anterior wound problems In our experience, it is difficult to adequately address the articular surface through a posterior approach. However, the purpose of using the posterolateral approach is that it allows the surgeon access to adequately reduce the fibula and stabilize the posterior tibial fragments. This creates a stable, posterior buttress to allow for anterior fragments to be stabilized at the time o final fixation. In essence, a complete articular fracture (OTA 43C) is converted into a partial articular fracture (OTA 43B). Both the posterior tibia and posterolateral fibula are well visualized through this approach with large surgical flaps. We have not experienced any surgical complications with this incision despite performing it in the “acute” phase. Compared to previous studies and experience, our series has comparable or improved outcome in terms of ankle range of motion and functional outcomes. Articular reductions are also acceptable as 11 of 18 patients had < 1 J. Ketz states that there is no potential conflict of interest. R. Sanders is a designing surgeon and receives royalties on the ALPS plates from Depuy, a Johnson and Johnson company.