The use of thermal energy storage (TES) systems for solar heating and cooling applications has received considerable attention in recent decades because it has a high potential in energy savings. Phase change materials (PCMs) can store large amount of energy per mass unit compared with other TES materials. Nevertheless, the selection of the suitable PCM for each application is a key issue in any TES system design. The most important properties to take into account to select a PCM are the melting and solidification temperature, the phase change enthalpy and the stability after several thermal cycles. In this paper, d-mannitol was a candidate material to be tested as PCM in a solar cooling application due to its melting point (167°C) and a relatively high enthalpy (316.0kJ/kg). The experiments performed by DSC have shown that the d-mannitol presents polymorphic structural changes and, therefore, its thermal properties are not always the same. Depending on the polymorphic phase obtained, d-mannitol has different melting temperature. This behaviour was corroborated in a storage tank, where it may be seen that the cooling rate of the d-mannitol is a key parameter in the formation of the different polymorphic phases.Thermal energy storage (TES) is a widely studied topic due to its potential for load reduction and energy savings. Recently, a study about TES potential in buildings and industrial sector was presented by Arce et al. Energy savings are directly related with CO Thermal energy storage can take the form of sensible heat storage (SHS) or latent heat storage (LHS). To store the same amount of energy, significantly larger quantities of a storage medium are required for SHS in comparison to LHS TES is one of the most appropriate methods of correcting the mismatch between supply and demand of energy. In solar vapour absorption systems, the energy received from the solar collector is given as a heat input to the generator. The availability of solar energy is intermittent and also of non-uniform intensity, hence the energy has to be stored for a uniform heat supply to the generator. Thermal storage therefore plays a vital role in solar based systems. There are different ways through which heat energy can be stored The use of thermal energy storage in solar cooling systems has been studied with several configurations. Chidambaram et al. Helm et al. Diaconu A 175 This material presents structural changes due to polymorphic transformations The main objective of this study is to analyse the behaviour of The high temperature pilot plant at University of Lleida was constructed to test accurately different TES systems working with latent or sensible heat storage materials. The main equipment of the installation are an electrical boiler of 24 To test the For an accurate analysis of the thermal behaviour of the PCM, fifteen temperature sensors were installed (T.PCM 1 to T.PCM 15 in  According to the literature, In a previous study Analyzing the DSC and FT-IR results obtained in this previous study  Two experiments (with at least three repetitions to ensure repetitively and adequate conclusions) were performed to evaluate the thermal properties of Consequently, the experiments performed consisted on PCM solidification at different cooling rates. Initially, all the PCM was melted in the storage tank and it was solidified applying the appropriated cooling rate. Then, the PCM was melted again in order to measure the melting temperature range and the melting enthalpy. In both experiments, the HTF flow rate used was 3 m In this study the sensors located at the middle zone ( The DSC used for the analyses was a DSC-822e from Mettler Toledo. The DSC method used to analyse the thermal properties of X-ray diffraction (XRD) was performed in a Bragg–Brentano Siemens D-500 powder diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation in order to determine the crystalline phases of The cooling rate for both experiments was calculated as the ratio between the PCM temperature gradient defined in   After each experiment a sample of the material was collected. The samples were analyzed with DSC in order to compare the obtained thermal behaviour between laboratory scale and storage tank. Since the The results of DSC analysis are shown in  A XRD analysis was performed to discern between The initial sample analyzed was identified as β-phase. This identification was done comparing the obtained results with the 0-22-1797 XRD pattern from the X’PERT HIGHSCORE PLUS (Panalyatical). In The material analyzed in this paper changes its crystalline structure depending on the cooling rate used with its correspondent effect in the thermal behaviour, as explained before. This material was thermally cycled in a TES unit at pilot plant scale using two different cooling rates (0.17 and 0.36 The experiments performed in the storage tank showed that the After each experiment, a sample was gathered to be analyzed by DSC and XRD. The melting temperature range achieved by DSC is from 163 to 169 XRD results demonstrate a structural change of the material: after experiment A, After identifying the polymorphic phases of the   The results obtained with the thermal analysis behaviour in a pilot plant storage tank using 160 Therefore, it may be concluded that applying different cooling conditions produces Moreover, it has been shown that the working range (between 135 Finally, the enthalpy measured with DSC is similar to that found in the literature The work is partially funded by the Spanish government (ENE2011-22722). The authors would like to thank the Catalan Government for the quality accreditation given to their research group GREA (2009 SGR 534) and research group DIOPMA (2009 SGR 645). A. Gil would like to thank the Col·legi d’Enginyers Industrials de Catalunya for his research appointment.