The recovery of copper from reverberatory furnace slag utilizing flotation has been studied. The effective factors such as particle size, pH, the amount and type of collector and additives, and flotation time were examined. The effect of cooling rate on flotation behavior of the slag was also studied. For an air-cooled slag at optimized conditions, 72% of copper was recovered in one stage flotation and a 12.6% copper concentrate was achieved. The best recovery efficiency was obtained when 30 g/t R407 was used as collector. It was found that recovery was also affected by the cooling rate of molten slag, and increased up to 84% when the slag was cooled slowly.Generally, copper losses in reverberatory slags are either chemical or mechanical. Most of the copper loss is mechanical, mainly in the form of matte drops ( Much research has been carried out on the recovery of copper from slags. Suggested methods for cleaning the slag are flotation, leaching, electric furnace etc. ( Reveberatory slag obtained from Sarcheshmeh Copper Complex was used in the present study. Analysis of the slag is shown in In this research direct one stage flotation (rougher) has been used. The experimental results were evaluated either by separation efficiency or metallurgical recovery according to Eqs. The reverberatory slag was subjected to comminution in a ball mill and then was used for flotation experiments. Lime was used as pH regulator; Z11, Z200, and R407 as collectors; MIBC and A65 as frothers; sodium sulfide as activator; and Dextrin as depressant. A series of experiments was carried out to assess the effect of various parameters such as comminution time, pulp pH, types of frother and their concentrations, the time of flotation and finally the solid content of the pulp. The summary of the results are shown in Further experiments were carried out to study the effect of combinations of Z11–R407 and Z200–R407 and Z11–Z200 collectors and also the combination of MIBC and A65 frothers, to determine the best flotation conditions. It was observed that the application of R407 as collector and MIBC as frother with no other chemicals gave the best operating condition. An important parameter investigated in this research was the effect of the cooling rate of slag on its flotation behavior. Slow cooling of slag from its molten state to its solidification increases the size of the particles of the copper containing minerals, due to diffusion and coagulation of the small particles. For this purpose, the slag was first heated to 1300 °C for 60 min and then was slowly cooled to about 900 °C, with a cooling rate of 1.5 °C/min, in an electric furnace. Flotation experiments were then carried out on this slow-cooled slag. It is necessary to mention that the backgrounds of the photographs are the fayalite phase in which the copper mineral particles (Chalcocite, Chalcopyrite, and Bornite) are dispersed. Higher copper recovery and seperation efficiency of the slow cooled slag, together with improved grindability, is due to the valuable effect of slow cooling rate. For separating copper from reverberatory slag with a copper content of about 1%, flotation was used, and in one stage flotation a recovery of 72% to a concentrate containing 12.6% copper was achieved. Application of R407 at a concentration of 30 g/t gave the highest separation efficiency. MIBC at a concentration of 35 g/t produced better results than its combination with A65. The optimum condition for flotation of the reverberatory furnace slag at Sarcheshmeh Copper Complex is as follows : pH=11.5; R407=30 g/t; solid in pulp=30%; flotation time=12.5 min; MIBC=35 g/t. Slow cooling of the molten slag (in the range of 1300–900 °C) increases the copper recovery considerably (about 85%), and can also reduce the comminution time to less than 30 min.