Many criteria have been developed to describe the yielding condition, plastic potential, and failure strength of engineering materials. In this paper, the authors first review the characteristics of a few of the more common criteria used for porous materials. It is then shown that the main features of many criteria can be represented by a unique set of recently developed equations. The ensuing multiaxial criterion becomes applicable to a variety of materials and loading states. One of the advantages of the proposed criterion, named MSDPu, is that it is explicitly porosity-dependent. The validity of this general inelastic criterion is demonstrated using experimental results obtained from various types of materials. A brief discussion follows on the advantages and limitations of the proposed equations.In numerous applications requiring analysis of the mechanical behavior of materials such as metal, ceramic, plastic, concrete, soil, and rock, engineers need to define conditions associated with specific transitional states including the elastic limit, the threshold for microcrack propagation, and the peak strength. These particular conditions are typically defined by mathematical functions, called criteria, expressed in stress space. Over the past several years, many inelastic criteria have been proposed to represent the size of the elastic domain (plasticity criterion), the inelastic potential (to define plastic/visco-plastic strains), and the failure (peak) or residual/post-peak strength. Some of these criteria have been reviewed, analyzed, and compared in monographs (e.g. For general applications involving different materials and inelastic states, it would be useful to have a unified formulation, in which a single set of equations is used with the same parameters defined to represent distinct inelastic phenomena. This constitutes the main goal for the work presented here. In this paper, the function The inelastic criterion The equations of a three-dimensional criterion The specific expressions developed for Inelastic behavior occurs when a body response does not depend exclusively on the current stress and temperature. Material behavior beyond the elastic domain may be related to several deformation mechanisms. For crystalline materials showing a ductile response (i.e. most metals, ice and certain rocks at high homologous temperature), inelastic straining is generally controlled by dislocations motion, which causes hardening and sometimes damage due to the creation of voids ( The condition that defines the passage from one phase to another (i.e. elastic to plastic, pre-peak to post-peak, etc.) can be included in the constitutive laws used to describe (and predict) the material response under mechanical load. Such conditions are expressed by mathematical functions associated with the inelastic criterion. In most cases, criteria are formulated in stress space where they take the form of a three-dimensional surface. An early impetus behind the development of three-dimensional criteria was the need to generalize the representation of the plastic (yielding) threshold observed under uniaxial testing. Experience has shown that for most isotropic and homogeneous materials, the elastic domain (initial and actual) is convex ( In elastoplastic models, a plastic potential is introduced in the multiaxial flow law to define the manner in which plastic strain evolves. This potential is often closely related to the yield criterion (e.g. Inelastic criteria commonly used in engineering generally involve a small number of parameters that are easily obtained from standard laboratory testing, and which have a clear physical meaning. Criteria with relatively more elaborate formulations should be reducible to basic criteria (such as von Mises or Coulomb) for particular cases. The expression should also be capable of reproducing the behavior of more complex functions that have been based on fundamental experimental observations. Among existing multiaxial criteria, a few consider a dependency on porosity, including the Over the last few years, several generalized functions have been developed with the common goal of reproducing the characteristics of other existing criteria (e.g. The proposed criterion was first developed to describe the behavior of hard rocks and other brittle materials with a low porosity ( Recent additional work has also led to the development of a relationship between the uniaxial strength parameters (in compression The general multiaxial MSDP For most engineering materials having a non-linear inelastic surface at low mean stress, The authors have investigated the relationship between porosity and uniaxial strength of various materials (in compression and tension). This lead to the development of a general non-linear relationship, which is used here to define the uniaxial strength as a function of porosity ( In Eq. The surface in the octahedral (π) plane, perpendicular to the Eqs.   When the frictional component is considered negligible (as in the case of ductile materials), This version of the criterion resembles a Gurson–Tvergaard type of surface, as seen in  A generalized three-dimensional view in the three dimensional stress space ( The figures referenced above indicate that the proposed criterion can take various shapes, depending on the parameter values. It can also be shown that the MSDP Considering its ability to encompass a wide range of existing formulations, the proposed criterion may constitute a generalized inelastic criterion applicable to ductile and brittle materials, with variable porosity. Some specific applications of the proposed criterion are presented in the following sections. Like other criteria, the MSDP For high porosity materials, the MSDP The value of parameter The influence of porosity The following sample comparisons illustrate how the MSDP For hard and soft rocks having rather low porosity (     The next two figures illustrate how the MSDP These few applications demonstrate the ability of the MSDP The MSDP The main physical justifications behind the MSDP At low mean stress, the criterion becomes similar (in the At high mean stress, the criterion approaches the linear Drucker–Prager (or Coulomb) criterion, which is often used for defining inelastic conditions (yielding, plastic potential, etc.) for metals (e.g. In the case of materials with a relatively porous matrix, an inelastic behavior may be induced by a large mean stress, even at a low deviatoric stress. In this case, the Cap component of MSDP For ductile (fully plastic, isovolumetric) materials, the criterion can be made pressure insensitive by using In the octahedral plane, the surface shape changes from a circle to a triangle, hence encompassing the inelastic characteristics of most isotropic materials. The non-negligible effect of the Lode angle has often been emphasized over the years, for metals ( The criterion presented here is applicable to a wide variety of isotropic materials. When required, it can also include some form of anisotropy. For instance, inherent planar anisotropy has been introduced in the criterion by making the uniaxial parameters-dependent upon orientation (e.g. Another distinctive feature of the MSDP On the other hand, the MSDP A classical application of MSDP As with other criteria, there are limits to the applicability of MSDP It should be recalled that for some geological materials, the value of A few generalized functions have recently been developed to reproduce the transitional state characteristics of various porous materials. In this paper, a number of criteria which represent the yield condition, plastic potential, and failure strength of engineering materials have been reviewed, including the multiaxial inelastic criterion MSDP The authors acknowledge the financial support from the Institut de Recherche Robert-Sauvé en Santé et en Sécurité du Travail du Québec (IRSST) and the participants of the Industrial NSERC Polytechnique-UQAT Chair (