A selective two-step leaching for nickel and rhenium from PWA 1484 nickel-based superalloy scrap in hydrochloric acid solutions was investigated. The scrap was easily comminuted under 150 μm by a pyro-metallurgical pretreatment at 1500 °C, viz. the formation of Al3Ni intermetallic compound with aluminum. At the first leaching step at 90 °C and 40 g/L solid-to-liquid(S/L) ratio in 4.0 mol/L hydrochloric acid solution, over 95% of nickel was dissolved in 60 min with aluminum, cobalt, and chromium, whereas 97.6% of rhenium was remained with tantalum in the residue. The leaching percentage of rhenium was increased with the S/L ratio from 2.4% at 40 g/L S/L ratio to 25% at 200 g/L S/L ratio. The second leaching step for rhenium from the residue was carried out using the electrogenerated chlorine as an oxidant at 80 °C, 0.43 mmol/min chlorine supply, and 10 g/L S/L ratio in 4.0 mol/L HCl solution. Over 99% of rhenium was leached in 20 min, leaving tantalum in the residue.Nickel-based superalloys have been commonly used for high temperature applications, e.g., turbine blade material for aircraft jet engines and gas turbines of stationary power plant, because of their excellent mechanical strength and oxidation resistance at high temperature ( The tough chemical and physical properties of superalloys make recycling difficult and complex. Numerous processes have been proposed to recycle valuable metals in the superalloy scrap ( In this study, we propose a multistep leaching process for the selective leaching of metals of interest from PWA 1484 nickel-based superalloy scrap. In particular, the target metals are nickel (Ni) and rhenium; nickel is the most abundant metal of PWA 1484, whereas rhenium is the most expensive element. For the selective leaching of valuable metals from the PWA 1484 superalloy scrap, the intermetallic compound formation with Al was adopted as a pretreatment for easy comminution, and then a hydrometallurgical step was followed to selectively leach the metals. Without the pretreatment for easy grinding under micrometer size, the superalloy scrap over millimeter size practically did not react with hydrochloric acid because of its tough chemical resistive property. The selective leaching consists of two steps: an acid leaching, followed by an electrogenerated chlorine leaching. The first acid leaching can effectively dissolve base metals, such as nickel, aluminum, cobalt, and chromium, while rhenium is remained in the residue. The subsequent electrogenerated chlorine leaching of the residue can dissolve Re, and generates the final residue that contains totally insoluble metal. It is necessary to use Cl The effects of experimental variables, such as acid concentration, solution temperature, S/L ratio, and Cl   The superalloy scrap was cut into pieces, and mixed with Al granule (Junsei, 8–10 mm, chemical pure) in a 1:1 weight ratio, and then melted at 1250 °C in an electric induction furnace. The air-cooled melt was crushed and ground into powder for leaching experiment by mortar. The powder sample was analyzed by X-ray diffractometry (XRD, Rigaku D/Max 2200). The leaching of the powder sample (<150 μm) was carried out in the reactor with hydrochloric acid solution by agitation at 300 rpm. After a filtration of the first leaching solution, the obtained leaching residue was dried at 90 °C for 24 h and used as a feeding sample at the second leaching step. At the second leaching step, the electrogenerated chlorine was sparged into the newly prepared HCl solution contained in the leaching reactor. The amount of Cl Reagent grade hydrochloric acid (Junsei Chemical Co., Ltd.) was used for the Cl    The effect of acid concentration on the leaching was examined at the condition of 40 g/L S/L ratio and 90 °C in 120 min. Increasing the solution temperature from 50 to 90 °C at 40 g/L S/L ratio during 120 min in 4.0 mol/L HCl solution did not give distinguishable effects for the leaching of constituent metals, as shown in The leaching tendency of constituent metals falls into two categories ( In the case of Al, even though this was the most active metal among the metals present, the leaching percentage was totally low, compared with those of Ni, Co, and Cr: 96.2% at 40 g/L to 93.7% at 120 g/L. To verify the effectiveness of chlorine as oxidant, the leaching of Re metal powder was examined in HCl solutions with electrogenerated Cl    The first leaching step for obtaining the residue was performed for 4 h at 90 °C and 40 g/L S/L ratio in 4.0 mol/L HCl solution. The concept of selective multistep leaching consists of three steps, as follows: Pretreatment of PWA 1484 superalloy scrap via intermetallic compound formation with Al; Hydrochloric acid leaching for Ni dissolution from the pretreated material; and Electrogenerated chlorine leaching for Re dissolution from the residue of step ii). The pretreatment of PWA 1484 superalloy scrap aims to comminute the scrap easily for leaching reaction as reported ( Even though the dissolution reaction of Al increased the consumption of acid, the high negative value of standard Gibbs free energy change of Al dissolution with hydrochloric acid (ΔG In HCl solution, hydrogen ion acts as an oxidant for oxidative dissolution reaction of metal and possible oxidative reactions of Ni, Al, Co, Cr, Re, and Ta can be shown as The standard Gibbs free energy changes of the reactions at 90 °C (the temperature condition of The increase of leaching percentage of Ni, Co, and Al with HCl concentration up to 3 mol/L HCl solution in On the other hand, the low leaching percentage of Re over 3.0 mol/L HCl solution can be explained by the resistive property of Re to hydrochloric acid as shown the above thermodynamical calculation. However, a clarifying explanation of the relatively high leaching percentage of Re up to 20% in low HCl concentration needs further study. Because the aim of the first leaching step is an enrichment of Re in the residue while maintaining the highest Ni leaching percentage, the hydrochloric acid concentration of 4.0 mol/L in As long as a higher S/L ratio condition provides a larger process capability of leaching step, the higher S/L ratio is preferred. In The solubility of chlorine in HCl solution is proportional to the HCl concentration over 1.0 mol/L, and decreases with solution temperature; the calculated saturation values at 40 °C in 4.0 and 8.0 mol/L HCl solutions are 43 and 57 mmol/L, respectively ( The standard Gibbs free energy changes at 40 °C of the Electrochemical oxidation of Re to ReO Based on the above discussion, we chose the condition of 80 °C and 4.0 mol/L HCl solution for the second leaching of the Re-enriched residue. The electrogenerated chlorine leaching of the residue successfully dissolves over 99% Re in 10 min as shown in  From the investigation of the element distribution, it is concluded that the proposed multistep leaching process works effectively for the selective leaching of Ni, the most abundant element, and Re, the highest value element in PWA 1484 scrap. Since nickel-based superalloy contains many useful and expensive metals, such as Ni, Co, Cr, Re, and Ta, recovery of the metals from the superalloy scrap is important and meaningful from the aspect of resource recycling. As the first stage of hydrometallurgical recycling of the scrap, a multistep leaching process was proposed, and tried for selective leaching of (Ni, Co, Cr) and Re from PWA 1484 scrap. Hydrochloric acid was used for the selective dissolution of Ni at the first leaching step, and the electrogenerated chlorine leaching in HCl solution was adopted for Re dissolution from the first leaching residue at the second leaching step. The proposed multistep leaching process worked well, and resulted in (Ni, Co, Cr) and Re concentrated leaching solutions, respectively. Considering the purpose of the first leaching step, viz. higher Ni and lower Re dissolution, the leaching at 90 °C and 40 g/L S/L ratio in 4.0 mol/L HCl solution can be suggested as one of the optimum conditions, while the second leaching step for over 99.9% Re dissolution can be operated well at 80 °C in 4 mol/L HCl solution. Especially, rhenium dissolution by electrogenerated chlorine in HCl solution seems to be affected by Cl On the other hand, while the use of aluminum for intermetallic compound formation during pretreatment makes easy comminution of superalloy scrap possible, it considerably increases the consumption of acid at the first leaching step. Moreover, aluminum combined with Ta as Al This work was supported by the