The presence of ions in plant water is believed to be having an effect on the flotation process as ions are able to modify the chemistry of the system. This study investigated the interactive effects of ionic strength, depressant dosage and depressant type on the recovery of copper and nickel sulphides, water, floatable and entrained gangue as well as grade of the valuable sulphides in the flotation of a Pt bearing ore from the Merensky reef. Batch flotation results showed no change in Cu recovery, but Ni recovery decreased dramatically when a polysaccharide depressant was charged at 500g/t. Water recovery increased with increasing ionic strength, indicating that there exist ions in the water system which have a froth stabilising effect.Restrictions on water usage have become so stringent that many mining operations are required to recycle water within their operations. Water recycling and recirculation within mineral processing plants causes an increase in the amount of dissolved ions, which increases the ionic strength of the plant water, and this may affect plant performance. It is therefore of vital importance to understand the impact that water quality may have on flotation performance. Previous studies have been done to understand the behaviour of flotation reagents on selected Merensky ores, and to develop a reagent suite that would yield maximum valuable mineral recovery and grade ( However all these studies did not address the interaction of depressants and ionic strength, therefore research is needed in this area to develop a fundamental understanding of the interaction between the ions and the reagents/mineral at extremely high ionic strengths. The objective of this study was to investigate the effect that an increase in the ionic strength of plant water, up to 10 times that of the normal synthetic plant water, will have on the recovery of valuable minerals and gangue in the flotation of a Merensky ore. Further ionic strength conditions with reduced ions or species were investigated. The overall aim was to better understand the effects that the individual ions present in plant water may have on the flotation performance of a Merensky reef. This was made possible by analysing the % grade and recovery of the elements copper, nickel, and sulphur and determining the amount of gangue recovered by entrainment and true flotation. A sample typical of the Merensky reef was obtained. The bulk sample was crushed, blended, riffled and split using a rotary splitter into 1 Standard plant water ( The milled slurry was transferred to a 3 The collector, SIBX, was supplied by Senmin. Stypres 504 was supplied by Chemquest and Depramin 267 by AKZO Nobel Functional Chemicals. The frother, DOW 200, was supplied by Betachem. All the chemical salts used to make up the synthetic plant water solutions were supplied by Merck. Copper and total nickel analysis of all samples was conducted using a Bruker S4 Explorer XRF Spectrometer. Sulphur analysis was carried out using a LECO DR423 sulphur analyser. Assuming the stoichiometries for chalcopyrite and pentlandite to be CuFeS For 2-phase batch flotation, the standard procedure was used however, only the various synthetic plant waters (i.e. no milled ore) and DOW 200 at 40     From the results it is evident that the grade of copper decreased with increasing ionic strength, the major reason for this finding is that more gangue reported to the concentrates via entrainment as the ionic strength played a primary role in stabilising and mobilising the froth as seen by the increase in the amount of water recovered. The steep increase in copper grades as depressant dosage increased can be attributed to the fact that the amount of floatable gangue was decreased dramatically at a depressant dosage of 500 The final nickel recoveries and grades for all conditions are shown in   The results of the impact of ionic strength of plant water on nickel recovery and grade were expected because other authors have found similar findings (  The method developed at UCT using high depressant dosages (500 It is also shown in The use of polysaccharides at 100 The increase in ionic strength caused a significant drop in NFG flotation and entrainability which indicates that an interaction occurs between the ions and the surface of NFG such as talc. It is known that talc has a highly negative zeta potential at a pH of 9 ( A series of 2-phase (i.e. no solids) flotation tests were carried out at a fixed DOW200 concentration of 40 In summary an increase in ionic strength; increased the final mass and water recovery, showed no effect on final Cu and Ni recovery, decreased the Cu and Ni grades, decreased the entrainability factor. And the presence of a depressant; decreased the amount of solids reporting to concentrate, decreased NFG at high depressant dosages, increased Cu and Ni grade. A higher degree of entrainment was obtained for CMC than Guar. Based on the decrease in NFG recovery and BMS grade increase, CMC resulted in superior results than guar. Results showed that the ionic strength had no apparent detrimental effect on the recovery; however there was a decrease in the grades of the sulphide minerals as measured by Cu and Ni. The enhanced frothability which increased gangue recovery can be counteracted by the use of a suitable depressant. Although this study has not considered the PGM recoveries and grades, if the performance measured by BMS recovery and grades be a good proxy for PGM behaviour, water recycling should not present any negative effects to the flotation of Merensky ore. Thanks to Anglo American Platinum and the National Research Foundation fund for their financial support, and to Senmin for the reagents supply.