Red mud, or bauxite residue, is the largest environmental concern of alumina refineries, mainly because of the size of this waste stream and its caustic characteristics. This paper reports part of a research effort aimed at developing an economically feasible zero waste process for the treatment of red mud. Soda-lime roasting was carried out on fine red mud, which was separated from raw red mud physically with particle size below 75μm, under reductive atmosphere prior to leaching and magnetic separation. The aim was to recover valuable components such as Al, Na and Fe from the fine red mud. This study found that, the recovery of Al and Na after the water leaching was about 75.7% and 80.7%, respectively. The recovery of iron depended on the type of reduction products. Under the roasting conditions applied in this study, spinel, sodium aluminosilicate, and larnite are dominant mineral phases in the roasted samples, with calcium aluminoferrite, melilite and wustite being minor phases. The effect of Ca content and of reaction atmosphere on the equilibrium phases was studied by experiments and thermodynamic modeling, and the dependence of the recovery of Al and Na on these factors was demonstrated.Each year more than 70 Red mud has been researched for use in remediation of sandy soils ( The recovery of a significant quantity of valuable components from the red mud is difficult, as they are locked up in complex mineral phases which are very fine grained and quite alkaline. Numerous attempts have been made to treat and to recover compounds from red mud. This paper reports part of a research effort aimed at development of an economically feasible, zero waste process for the treatment of red mud. In the proposal, soda-lime roasting was carried out on fine red mud, which was separated from raw red mud physically with particle size below 75 Red mud samples were supplied by Shandong Aluminum Company, CHALCO. The red mud sample was obtained from the storage yards without any pretreatment. Then the sample was separated by wet screening at 75 About 120 Ten samples were prepared with different ratios of Ca/Si (molar ratio) while keeping the ratio of Na/Al (molar ratio) constant (around 1.0). The samples were roasted at 1000 In addition to those listed in The leaching conditions were optimized by trials using the roasted products of sample 5. Leaching tests were carried out in a flat bottom flask fitted with a thermocouple and a condenser. Agitation was provided by an electric magnetic stirrer. A programmable temperature controller was used to gradually heat the solution from ambient to the set temperatures (18 The magnetic separation was carried out with Davis magnetic tube tester (XCGS-99, 50 For X-ray fluorescence (XRF) analysis, a sub-sample was melted with 1222 flux to produce a flat 40 The mixed solutions of filtrate and mannitol solution were diluted in 5 The X-ray diffraction (XRD) analyses were made on powdered samples in a PANalytical multipurpose diffractometer using Co Kα radiation. Phases were identified using XPLOT for Windows and the ICDD database. For examination in an FEI Quanta 400F environmental scanning electron microscope (ESEM), sub-samples were mounted in epoxy resin that was ground and polished. The polished sections of the dip samples were coated with a carbon film and examined. Qualitative chemical analyses were performed using an EDAX energy dispersive X-ray spectrometer (EDS). Roasted samples were ground and leached in water at different temperatures for varying periods. Details of the results obtained for sample no. 5 are listed and discussed in the following, as an example. The results showed that the leaching efficiencies of the elements depend on the temperature and the leaching period ( Sample 5 was leached for 8 The recoveries of Al and Na from samples 1 to 10 are shown in The compositions of the phases observed in the roasted samples were analyzed by ESEM/EDX. Phases were identified by comparing the EDX analysis to a list of expected phases from XRD and matching the elemental composition to the mineral phase that most closely matched the EDX composition. It was found that the compositions of the sodium aluminosilicate in samples change with the Ca/Si ratio ( The dependence of Al solubility and Si content in sodium aluminosilicate phase on the value of Ca/Si in roasted samples is shown in As the concentration of CaO increases in the roast, the thermodynamic activity of silica is decreased, and less SiO Sample 11 (chemically identical to sample 6) was roasted in air, while sample 6 was roasted in the reductive atmosphere formed by the char and protected with N The effect of reaction atmosphere was also modeled by using the MPE software. The product phases and their amount of the roasting process can be calculated under equilibrium conditions. As shown in A series of experiments were carried out to optimize the roasting and leaching conditions. Within the range covered, the best roasting conditions were: the molar ratio of Ca/Si around 2.0, Na/Al around 1.0, 0.5 From XRD and SEM results, there are spinel phases in samples which are solid solution of magnetite (Fe High degree of recovery of Al (75.7%) and Na (80.7%) from red mud was obtained through soda-lime roasting followed by leaching of the roasted material. Spinel, sodium aluminosilicate, larnite, calcium aluminoferrite, melilite and wustite were observed in the roasted samples at 1000 The dissolution of the Al and Na from the roasted samples was shown to be mainly due to the leaching of a sodium aluminosilicate phase. The addition of CaO within a certain limit promotes the degree of leaching percentages of Al and Na from the roasted solids by reducing the Si content of sodium aluminosilicate phase. The reaction atmosphere can affect the ferrous phases in equilibrium system, and further affect the activity of Si in the system. The work may be used in designing strategies to achieve zero waste from the Bayer red mud. This work was supported by the CSIRO-MOE PhD Research Fellowship Program and CSIRO Minerals Down Under National Flagship. The authors thank the assistances from Mr. S. Wright and Mr. T. Austin for the experimental work. The authors gratefully acknowledge the assistance of the analytical group of CSIRO Process Science and Engineering.