Fabrication of mineralized structures is a widespread phenomenon among living organisms (e.g., shells, carapaces, spines, spicules, bones and teeth). These ceramic biocomposites consist of layered assemblies of minute amounts of macromolecules with well-ordered calcium-rich inorganic phases, resulting in the formation of products of unique morphologies and properties. The characterization of the mechanisms controlling the processes of biomineralization is crucial for the development of novel materials with desirable shape and texture properties. In previous reports on eggshells and mollusk and crustacean shells, we have studied the cell–shell interactions, the crystalline microstructure of the inorganic component, the localization of particular macromolecules and the capacity of various biomolecules to affect crystallization. Based on these comparative data, we propose that biomineralization can be described as a four-step process: (1) substrate fabrication, (2) crystal nucleation on the substrate or framework, (3) crystal growth in a gel and (4) mineralization arrest. These four steps open a new field for designing synthetic processes in order to fabricate new bioinspired composites with desirable properties.Modern technologies require innovative approaches for controlled fabrication of crystalline materials with complex forms and novel properties Eggshells are natural composite bioceramics containing organic (5%) and inorganic (calcite) components (95%) and composed of a two-layered membrane and calcified extracellular matrix, which are sequentially assembled during the 22 h that the egg moves along the oviduct Seashells are microlaminate composite bioceramics of mineral and biopolymers, which show exceptional regularity and a strength far exceeding that of the mineral itself. As in eggshells, the calcium carbonate phase of the seashell highly contributes to its mass (98%), while it is the integral organic matrix moiety (2% of the shell mass) that determines the precise structural formation, organization and properties of the mineralized composite Mollusk shells are mainly composed of layers of prismatic calcite crystals, brick-wall aragonite crystals or both types of construction Barnacle shell is also composed by a layered structure of calcite crystals A commonly used strategy in shell biomineralization is the elaboration of a well-organized extracellular organic matrix, which regulates where, when and in what form mineralization will occur The geometric shape (habit) of a crystal is determined by the external expression of a selected set of symmetry-related faces From the comparative studies of the structure and formation of shells, it is possible to propose a four-step mechanism of biomineralization consisting of a precise spatiotemporal arrangement of sequentially deposited macromolecules Substantial progress has been made in using basic principles of biomineralization to accomplish controlled processing of engineering materials. Inorganic and organic substrates have been chemically modified to have charged surface groups, which successfully induce growth of specific ceramic films. Despite the successes, no processing system has yet been devised that approaches the exquisite molecular control evident in nature. Mimicking biological processes is not only a matter of fabricating films or soluble macromolecules with specific affinities or molecular recognition in the form of charge, stereochemical and structural matching but equally important is the spatiotemporal sequence, concentration and ionic strength, in which such molecules must be present during the assembly line process of crystal formation. The process of biological remodeling is still a principle that remains to be developed into a practical engineering process. Contrary to materials science, biomineralization has evolved over eons. As such, there is still much to learn from the assembly of biocomposite ceramics. This work was supported by FONDAP 11980002 granted by the Chilean Council for Science and Technology (CONICYT). We thank Dr. G. Solorzano for the invitation to the Meeting of the Brazilian Society for Materials Research. We also thank the students (I. Vergara, R. Rodriguez, P. Spencer and M. Bustamante) for sharing some of their thesis or research unit micrographs.