The paper reports the results of slurry-phase accelerated carbonation experiments using basic oxygen surface steel slag as the source of alkalinity for CO2 sequestration. In particular, the effect of particle size distribution on the carbon sequestration performance was investigated in detail. To this aim, different size classes of the slag were separately subjected to accelerated carbonation, and the CO2 uptake, the mineralogical changes, the final particle size distribution and the chemical equilibria in the liquid phase were studied. While the total content of potentially reactive elements in the different size fractions of the slag exerted only a minor influence on the carbonation performance, particle size was found to have a dramatic role during the process, in particular during the dissolution stage. Changes by up to two orders of magnitude in CO2 sequestration (which varied in the range 4.7–465g of CO2 sequestered per kg of slag) were observed for the different size classes investigated. Geochemical modeling of the liquid phase after the carbonation treatment showed that the system was dominated by carbonate minerals of several elements including Ca, Mn, Mg, Fe and Zn, indicating the involvement of several components in the carbonation reactions. The presence of carbonate minerals containing not only Ca, but also Mn, Mg and Fe was also detected through XRD analyses. The analysis of the pore size distribution of the slag before and after carbonation revealed the competing effects of particle erosion/dissolution and pore clogging as a result of carbonate precipitation, the relative contribution of which was found to be related to the carbonation degree attained.Mineral dissolution kinetics Solubility of minerals (including carbonates) CO CO Viscosity of the liquid phase Nature of carbonate minerals formed CO Formation and growth of carbonate crystals Mineral dissolution Mineral precipitation Morphology of precipitated solid phases Hydration and dissolution of minerals CO Degree of mixing Mineral dissolution/precipitation equilibria Mineral dissolution/precipitation equilibria Nature of carbonate minerals formed The increase in carbon dioxide concentrations in the atmosphere is strongly related to anthropogenic activities including energy production from fossil fuels and manufacturing industry. The major proposed options for CO Among the above mentioned industrial residues proposed for CO In spite of the fact that accelerated carbonation of industrial residues has been the subject of numerous studies mainly over the past decade, a systematic assessment of the influence of the relevant operating parameters is still missing in the scientific literature. Several factors are recognized to play a role in one or more of the carbonation reactions (see e.g. Slag samples were collected at the outlet of the BOF of a steel plant employing the integrated steelmaking process. To investigate the influence of particle size on the carbonation degree and the final characteristics of the carbonated slag, the material was oven-dried at 60 Detailed characterization of the eight slag classes also included measurements of the elemental composition, carbonate content and mineralogy. The elemental composition was determined by alkaline digestion of triplicate samples with Li Direct slurry-phase accelerated carbonation tests were performed in duplicate in a pressurized stainless steel reactor equipped with an external magnetic stirring device and a heating jacket. The experimental conditions, selected on the basis of previous investigations Geochemical modeling of the liquid solutions at the end of the carbonation experiments was conducted using Visual Minteq The relative proportions of the eight size classes in the original BOF slag and the associated elemental compositions are reported in The grain size distribution of the slag and the related statistical parameters (10 From The CO The conversion yield of reactive elements into carbonate forms, As shown in  The particle size distribution curves for the untreated and carbonated slag classes (see In the case of class C5, an increase in the relative amount of >95 The particle size increase caused by the formation of precipitates may be counterbalanced by dissolution. Dissolution is essential to promote the leaching of reactive metals from the solid matrix and is highly dependent on the specific surface area Surprisingly, the large dissolution effect observed for class C8 (also confirmed by the liquid phase analyses discussed below) was not mirrored by a gain in CO The effects of carbonation on grain size distribution are summarized in A more detailed analytical investigation of the pore size characteristics and mineralogical composition was conducted on classes C6 and C8. Although with some differences between the two samples, the pore size analyses (see The XRD analyses (see In spite of the different carbonation yields for samples C6 and C8, the newly formed phases were of the same nature, likely due to the similarities observed in the initial mineralogical composition. The new carbonate phases detected included calcite, aragonite, Mg–calcite, ankerite ((CaMg The characteristics of the liquid phase at the end of the carbonation experiments were investigated through dedicate analyses. The pH of the liquid phase was inversely related to particle size and varied from 6.8 (C1) to 7.9 (C6), indicating that higher CO The solution concentration of Si, which was indicative of silicates dissolution, was independent from particle size. This can be explained by incongruent dissolution, a phenomenon widely documented for natural weathering of silicate minerals (see e.g. For the other metals of concern, an attempt was made at separating the effects of dissolution and precipitation. Assuming that an element such as Na did not likely form secondary precipitates and that the various mineral phases dissolved at the same relative rate for all size classes, the concentration ratio between the generic metal Me and Na was calculated (see The results of geochemical modeling are reported in Apart from Si, all the potential candidates for solubility control of the investigated elements were carbonate minerals, indicating that dissolution/precipitation equilibria of carbonate species largely dominated the carbonated slurries. The most probable solubility-controlling phases included calcium carbonate monohydrate (CaCO The CO Geochemical modeling of the carbonated slurry solutions suggested that carbonate minerals involving the main potentially reactive elements were likely to form. These included CaCO The findings of the study suggest that the extent of dissolution of the original phases in the slag, which increases as surface area increases, largely determines the carbonation performance. This suggests the need to promote the dissolution of the original matrix through either intensive size reduction pre-treatments or the use of chemical agents to selectively extract the reactive elements from the solid matrix. However, the influence of side phenomena, including massive precipitation of amorphous silica resulting from intensive dissolution of silicate minerals, can also affect the actual carbon sequestration capacity of the material. Of course, an energetic assessment of the process overall, including the required treatment units (solids comminution, slurry mixing, slurry pumping, CO