In the literature, comminution in the roller press and subsequent ball milling has been observed to produce significant energy savings in comparison to ball milling alone. This has been partially—if not totally—attributed to the weakening resulting from compression of the bed of particles in the roller press (also called high-pressure grinding rolls—HPGR). In order to assess, in a more direct way, the ability of high-pressure roll grinding in particle weakening, copper and gold ores crushed in the HPGR and conventional crushing equipment (such as a roll crusher and a hammer mill) have been screened in narrow size fractions and tested singly in the impact load cell. The influences of particle size, specific energy input and position within the bed in the particle breakage characteristics in the HPGR product have been studied. It is found that coarse particles are damaged preferentially and weakening is more significant at higher pressures (and specific energy inputs) in the HPGR if compared to the products of conventional crushing equipment. Particle weakening was found to occur irrespective of the position of the particle within the bed. The greater weakening experienced by coarser particles in the HPGR results in decreasing energy savings with finer size reduction of the product in a subsequent grinding stage.High-pressure roll grinding has achieved considerable popularity over the last several years given its potential of improving capacity and reducing energy consumption in a grinding circuit ( A particularly attractive use of the HPGR (also called roller press) in the minerals and cement industries is as a pre-grinding stage prior to conventional ball milling. In this hybrid mode, the energy efficiency of high-pressure grinding is combined to the ability of the ball mill in achieving high reduction ratios. The quantitative assessment of the ability of high-pressure roll grinding in weakening particles, and its impact on subsequent grinding behavior is not straightforward, particularly due to the inherently different size distributions in the HPGR product if compared to those generated by other comminution machines. An empirical correction factor, for example, must be used to account for such effect in Bond’s standard grindability test ( This paper describes results of single-particle breakage experiments aimed at assessing the ability of high-pressure roll grinding of weakening particles in comparison to conventional crushing of copper and gold ores. A copper ore sample from the secondary crushing circuit from Cyprus Sierrita’s concentrator (located at Green Valley, Arizona) was collected. It is a copper/molybdenite ore with a granitic host rock showing various degrees of weathering. This material, with a top size of about 40 Representative samples of the feed were also crushed so as to approximately match the 70–80% passing size of the roller press product (corresponding to a reduction ratio of about 4.5:1). This required a single pass of one of the samples in a pilot-scale hammer mill (Jeffreys) with 38 The flakes from the roller press were later deagglomerated in the laboratory by stirring in water for a few minutes, and size distributions of the feed and the various products were then determined by wet-dry sieving. Size distributions are given in Narrow-size fractions from each sample were then prepared for single-particle testing in the impact load cell—also called ultrafast load cell (UFLC). The impact load cell is a drop weight apparatus, which allows the measurement of the force experienced by a particle sitting on the top of a rod impacted by a falling steel ball. It is used to determine the particle fracture energy, which is the minimum amount of energy required to fracture a particle. It is also used to determine the particle stiffness, which is a measure of the deformability of the particle that is used to estimate the amount of internal damage ( Additional experiments were also conducted using a gold ore sample from Asia. The rock is a phillite, composed mainly of quartz (over 50%), feldspar, sericite, chlorite and minor amounts of biotite and graphite. Representative samples of the ore were subjected either to crushing in a pilot-scale roller press at Krupp Polysius or to crushing in a laboratory smooth-roll crusher. Breakage characteristics of narrow-size fractions of the products were also determined using the UFLC. The effect of crushing method on the fracture energy of copper ore particles is illustrated in The effect of particle size and crushing method is illustrated in The greater effect of weakening at coarser sizes in the roller press may be explained by the fact that a coarse particle, before being stabilized by neighboring particles as the result of the unfavorable stress field in its surroundings which can prevent its fracture, suffers a long history of stresses in multiple directions as it moves down toward the gap between the rolls. This longer exposure to the stress fields makes a coarse particle more amenable to damage than finer ones during comminution in the high-pressure grinding rolls. Particle stiffness distributions of the various materials were also compared (  The effect of position within the bed and the resulting flakes in the product on the weakening ability of the roller press has been investigated. Copper ore flakes from the HPGR product, with an average thickness of about 35 The effect of energy input (or pressure in the HPGR) on the fracture characteristics of particles produced has also been studied. A gold ore sample has been subject to comminution in a pilot-scale roller press at variable input energies, and results are shown in These observations agree with studies on hybrid grinding of dolomite by It is commonly observed in particle bed compression that, as energy input is increased beyond a critical level, the breakage rates of the material decrease markedly, until breakage comes to a halt ( Energy savings in downstream comminution due to high-pressure roll grinding are typically attributed to the weakening produced in the particles in the HPGR product, combined to the greater proportion of fines generated in comparison to conventional comminution equipment ( The procedure simulates multiple stage crushing with each stage in closed circuit with classification. The crushing step consists of impacting individual particles contained in a narrow size fraction and is described using data from controlled single-particle breakage experiments, while the classification is carried out ideally. The calculation thus starts with the first step, continues with the second and so on until all material is broken to a product with a maximum size equal to the lower limit of the last step. The procedure allows to mimic the tedious experiment of impacting particles in the top size fraction of a sample one by one, until none are left, collecting the fragments and repeating the process with the following size fraction and so on until the desired 80% passing size of the product is met. The size distribution resulting from each step of the simulation procedure is given by Parameters in Eqs. In order to first investigate the influence of the weakening produced in high-pressure roll grinding, the feed to the multistage simulation procedure was considered to be constant and equal to the hammer mill product ( In order now to investigate the effect of the greater proportion of fines in the HPGR product in comparison to other crushing equipment in the energy savings due to this process, another simulation was conducted. By disregarding the influence of the weakening produced in the HPGR—considering that both materials would have the same fracture characteristics of the HPGR product (Eqs. Finally, in addition to energy savings, the weakening of the coarser material can also have other positive effects in ball milling. The fact that coarser particles were the ones most significantly damaged in the HPGR ( Crushing in the high-pressure grinding roll has been observed to produce a weakened product, as measured from their single-particle breakage characteristics. Although position within the bed was found to be irrelevant, the extent of the weakening induced was found to depend on specific energy input (grinding pressure) and is greater for coarser particle sizes and becomes insignificant below 1.5 A procedure, based on the simulation of an ideal size reduction process, has demonstrated that the energy savings in downstream comminution are the combined result of the weakening of the particles in high-pressure roll grinding and of the fact that a greater proportion of fines is generated in the product of the HPGR in comparison to other crushing methods. Both of these effects, however, tend to decrease as particle sizes decrease. The author would like to thank the financial support from the US Bureau of Mines through the Generic Mineral Center for Comminution and from the Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico from Brazil. The author also thanks Cyprus Sierrita Corporation and Newmont Gold Corporation for providing the copper ore and gold ore samples, respectively. The valuable suggestions from Prof. R.P. King during the course of this work are also deeply acknowledged.