This paper shows that one-dimensional (1-D) [and three-dimensional (3-D) computational fluid dynamics (CFD)] simulations can replace the state-of-the-art usage of pseudo-homogeneous dispersion or back mixing models. This is based on standardized lab-scale cell experiments for the determination of droplet rise, breakage, coalescence and mass transfer parameters in addition to a limited number of additional mini-plant experiments with original fluids. Alternatively, the hydrodynamic parameters can also be derived using more sophisticated 3-D CFD simulations. Computational 1-D modeling served as a basis to replace pilot-plant experiments in any column geometry. The combination of 3-D CFD simulations with droplet population balance models (DPBM) increased the accuracy of the hydrodynamic simulations and gave information about the local droplet size. The high computational costs can be reduced by open source CFD codes when using a flexible mesh generation. First combined simulations using a three way coupled CFD/DPBM/mass-transfer solver pave the way for a safer design of industrial-sized columns, where no correlations are available.Solvent extraction columns are widely used in chemical, petrochemical, hydrometallurgical and nuclear processes. The main apparatus used for solvent extraction is still the mixer–settler or mixer–settler cascades because of easy design, reliability and high capacity. The main disadvantages are the large footprint of the mixer–settler, which is mainly determined by the settling zone and multiple pumps and piping requirements. By comparison, solvent extraction columns provide a high number of theoretical stages at high throughputs, requiring only a small footprint and low capital costs. Despite their advantages, solvent extraction columns are not widely applied due to their sophisticated layout and scale-up. Uncertainties mainly arise from the complex interactions of the liquid phases as for example back- and forward mixing and a changing droplet size distribution by coalescence and breakage. These phenomena finally have an impact on the operation limits ( For improved and reliable design of solvent extraction columns, standardized lab-scale cells were developed that allow monitoring of single droplet behavior. Mini-plant column experiments could capture pilot-scale effects, especially during long duration runs. The hydrodynamic gap (droplet behavior, such as movement and size) between mini-plant experiments and pilot-plant scale could be partially closed by droplet population balance modeling (DPBM), based on geometrical identical column designs An enhancement of the axial dispersion or back mixing models was achieved by taking into account the changes in droplet size along the column height by DPBM for a differential height, ∂ The left hand side of Eq. In the linear driving force model, the overall mass transfer coefficient is defined by 3-D CFD simulations allow a description of column hydrodynamics without any geometrical constraints, where the geometrical possibilities are mainly limited by computational resources. The investigations of stirred solvent extraction columns started in 1993 with a publication of Weiss & Bart The continuity equation for the continuous phase is represented by: In addition, the volume fraction must satisfy the following constraint for the given two phase flow: As previously stated in the works of Drumm In the smaller sized columns with small sized rising droplets (< Agitator movement is accounted for by the moving reference frame (MRF), where the rotation of the agitator is accounted for by source terms to the surrounding fluid. Turbulence is accounted by the mixture The density, viscosity and velocity are replaced by the mixture density, viscosity and velocity to account for the influences of the dispersed phase. The transport equation for the turbulent energy dissipation instead is derived from physical reasons The generation of turbulent kinetic energy is derived from the mean rate-of-strain tensor: The model constants, which also have been applied in this work, are given as: The mesh generation was optimized for the two Kühni and a RDC column from a single mesh generation for each column design to an automated mesh generation allowing a flexible design of the internals which is shown in In Eq. Both approaches, the 1-D and 3-D, have advantages and disadvantages concerning the computational effort, the accuracy and simulation time. The computational time for a mass transfer simulation heavily relies on the throughput. A simulation of the final steady state of a solvent extraction columns requires a simulation of 5–7 times of the residence time of the liquids inside the column. In contrast to this 3-D-CFD simulations are still based in literature on the simulation of time scales in the range of seconds and minutes due to the high computational load. As an example, the required time to reach steady state for a transient full mini-plant column simulation taking into account the mass transfer is approximated by one month on a modern cluster. The benefit is the full resolution of the local hydrodynamics, droplet size and mass transfer. The 1-D simulation instead, is able to simulate the transient behavior of the solute concentration within a few minutes including the simulation setup, but is based on experimentally derived correlations (droplet velocity, slowing factor, axial dispersion coefficient, energy dissipation, mass transfer coefficient, droplet coalescence and breakup). Therefore, a combination of 3-D-CFD and 1-D-CFD seems to be straight forward to reduce experimental effort for the 1-D simulation and on the other hand to reduce the computational time for mass transfer simulation. The main hydrodynamic correlations as the presented axial dispersion coefficient can be gained by 3-D-CFD simulations, where in addition, different geometrical modifications can be investigated. The geometry dependent correlations for the slowing factor, axial dispersion coefficient and energy dissipation can then be used as an input for the 1-D simulation. The concept can be readily extended to droplet resolved 3-D-CFD simulations, to obtain further information about the mass transfer coefficients of single droplets and droplet swarms. As a proof of concept, The experimentally based design of solvent extraction columns can be supported by numerical modeling using 1-D and 3-D approaches. The 1-D simulation of solvent extraction columns was facilitated by modern tools using graphical user interfaces. The tools allow a description of the hydrodynamics ( Despite the promising results using DPBM for extraction column design and the prediction of mass transfer, the numerical codes still do not cover all the effects observed in solvent extraction columns. Among them are wetting properties, the enrichment of impurities, crud formation and entrainment. In addition, these numerical tools were mainly tested for standard test systems and a common available column geometry. It will not reflect changes in column design and system properties, such as viscosity, interfacial tension and mass transfer rates, occurring in industrial applications. A further task is also the extension of the models to account for reactive extraction, which is essential for efficient recovery of ionic species (metal ions, organic acids, intermediates) in hydrometallurgy, urban mining, fine chemicals, bio and pharmaceutical fields. solute concentration in the continuous phase, kg·m solute concentration in the droplets, kg·m drag coefficient dispersed phase axial dispersion coefficient, m continuous phase axial dispersion coefficient, m inlet droplet volume distribution acceleration of gravity, m·s compartment height, m agitator height, m overall mass transfer coefficient, m·s distribution coefficient Pressure, kg·m droplet volume distribution Reynolds number net droplet volume production due to coalescence and breakage, s surface area of droplet with volume time, s continuous phase velocity, m·s disperse phase velocity, m·s average velocity, m·s particle velocity, m·s droplet volume, m column height, m phase fraction turbulent energy dissipation, m Viscosity, m density, kg·m diffusion term, kg·m phase fraction