The HLB (hydrophilic–lipophilic balance) number has been widely used in quantifying the behavior of polar molecules in emulsions. It has also been used in attempting to explain the behavior of surfactants in flotation systems. The origin of the HLB concept lies in defining the behavior of molecules in terms of the contributions of various groups in their molecular structure. This paper proposes that modern thermodynamics provides a much more robust method of defining such behavior through the concept of excess Gibbs free energy which in turn is obtained from the activity coefficients of such molecules. It not only presents a more fundamental basis for the calculation but also there exists a vast number of species for which the key parameters are known or are currently being determined through global initiatives.In recent years considerable use has been made in the flotation literature of the HLB (hydrophilic–lipophilic balance) number to characterize reagents such as surfactants or frothers (e.g. Extensive use is made of HLB numbers to prepare emulsifiers or blends of emulsifiers (  The overall molar Gibbs energy for the mixture is given by Eq. In order to illustrate the use of activity coefficients and to investigate their relationship with HLB numbers the following surfactants were studied. Their basic molecular structures are also shown. Linear alcohols ( MIBC Pine oil (assumed to be terpene alcohol) Dowfroth type structures ( Polypropylene Glycol ( As indicated above the method described by In order to test whether excess Gibbs energy of species in a mixture correlate with HLB numbers the three systems referred to above have been investigated, viz. a series of linear primary alcohols (HLB range 1–8), polypropylene glycols (HLB range 7–9) and molecules typified by the Dowfroth structure (tripropylene glycol methyl ether) (HLB range 5–11).  These results show clearly that for these three cases the excess Gibbs energy correlates very well with the HLB number. It is also interesting to note that the linear relationship between excess Gibbs energy and HLB for the alcohols is sustained at different concentrations, although these concentrations are very dilute. It is also interesting to note that even though the quoted HLB numbers for Dowfroth ( The question then arises as to why excess Gibbs energy may be a better approach to take when quantifying the behavior of surfactants in a liquid mixture. It is proposed that the excess Gibbs energy is a better approach for a number of reasons. In the first instance, as has been shown, it correlates well with HLB numbers and so does not represent a dramatic deviation from the remarkably good approach developed by   The results shown in This paper proposes that using the concept of excess Gibbs free energy and by implication activity coefficient, provides the ability to predict the behavior of frothers/surfactants in multi-component mixtures of different concentrations and is thus arguably a more robust method of characterizing the hydrophilic–lipophilic behavior of frothers than the HLB number. The excess Gibbs energy has been shown to relate well to the HLB number but has the added advantage of showing the effects of different concentrations of the surfactant in water and other multi-component systems as well as, if necessary, temperature effects. This approach presents interesting opportunities for studying, for example, the effects of mixtures of frothers at different concentrations. The database available for determining activity coefficients is extensive and is continually being enlarged. The paper has shown that the HLB number of a particular species relates linearly to the