The concentration of phosphate rock is strongly affected by the presence of ionic species dissolved in flotation pulp due to the interaction of ions with the surface of apatite particle. Process water containing large amounts of calcium, magnesium, fluoride and phosphate (phosphorus) directly influences the performance of apatite flotation (recovery and grade). This study quantified and analyzed the effect of these ions in bench scale flotation tests. The experiments were aimed at evaluating the effect of individual calcium, magnesium, fluoride and phosphate ions on the apatite recovery and P2O5 content. Interactions between the ionic species at low contaminant concentrations were also evaluated using a central composite design (CCD). The results were compared with the standard test (without ionic contamination). The results indicate that the presence of calcium and phosphate ions substantially reduced the apatite recovery, reaching values below 10%. Magnesium was also found to have a harmful effect not only on the recovery rate, but most notably on the P2O5 content, affecting the selectivity of the process. The effects of concentration of each ionic species were quantified. The interactions between variables also significantly affected the recovery and grade, probably due to the formation of insoluble compounds among the ions of this study, causing their removal from the system.The phosphate rock is a vital nonrenewable resource which is the only economically feasible source of phosphorus for phosphatic fertilizers and chemicals A wide assortment of variables can affect the performance of flotation systems, such as their operating variables (highly correlated), particle size, reagents, ore composition and also the presence of ionic species in the water Many authors have studied the effects of dissolved species on flotation performance of several minerals Espinosa-Gomez et al. Flotation of pyrochlore and silicate minerals with distilled water, tap water and plant recycle water was investigated by Rao et al. Under certain solution conditions, dissolved species may cause significant activation or depression of flotation Guimarães and Peres Due to the lack of information on the influence of the main contaminant ions on the apatite flotation, the aim of this work was to evaluate the effect of calcium, magnesium, fluoride and phosphate ions on the apatite flotation. The experiments were carried out in a batch flotation column and the flotation performance was assessed in terms of recovery, grade, reagent consumption and foam quality. A statistical method was used to quantify the main effects, as well as the effects of the interactions among these ionic species on apatite recovery and on the P The sample of phosphate ore used in this study was provided by Bunge Brazil SA, a phosphate deposit which is part of the Barreiro carbonatite complex located in Araxá, state of Minas Gerais in mid-southern Brazil. The phosphate ore sample was taken from the feed of coarse apatite into a flotation column located after the barite flotation (during operation). The sample was collected from the industrial circuit where it was crushed, ground, classified, and deslimed. The chemical composition of the feed sample was analyzed by X-ray fluorescence spectrometry (XRF), using a Philips spectrometer. The chemical analysis indicated that the ore contained mostly 17.5% P Local tap water was used throughout the experiments. Samples of this water were also analyzed to quantify the contaminants under study and check the feasibility of using this water without direct interference in the results. It can be observed that the total concentration of the elements (F, Ca, Mg, P) examined in the tap water used in the flotation tests was negligible (less than 1.5 The reagents used in the conditioning step, which involved 60% of solids, were corn starch as depressant and soybean oil as collector. The collector was obtained by a saponification reaction of soybean oil and the depressant was prepared by a gelatinization reaction of corn starch mixed with 10% sodium hydroxide. The final concentrations of collector and depressant were 2.5% and 3%, respectively. The pH was controlled with 10% NaOH. The contaminants used were NaF, CaCl The flotation tests were carried out in an acrylic batch flotation column 1.48 The preconditioned pulp was fed into the top of the column at 14% solids. Air was supplied by a compressed air delivery system at a flow rate of 80 The quality of concentrates and productivity were evaluated based on the P A set of experiments was proposed as a first step to evaluate the individual effect of each ion (F Considering the results obtained on the first step, tests were carried out using a central composite design (CCD) The mean values of apatite recovery and P  The atypical behavior of apatite recovery and P It is known that calcium, fluoride and phosphate are potential-determining ions for fluorapatite It can be observed that the detrimental influence of anions on apatite recovery differs. Phosphate showed a stronger effect than fluoride, reaching a maximum reduction of 85% in apatite recovery while that of fluoride was around 47%. The situation became critical at a phosphate concentration of 50 However, the considerable decrease in apatite recovery in the presence of high fluoride concentrations is remarkable. This decrease may be attributed to the formation of insoluble precipitate (CaF The strong influence of calcium ions on apatite recovery is illustrated in A critical situation also occurred with the magnesium ion, which, albeit not a potential-determining ion for apatite, is considered an unwanted impurity because it consumes the reagents in the apatite flotation system, including the collector. The drop in the recovery was 43%. It was observed that, starting from 30 The effect of these ionic species (F The presence of ions in the pulp, especially cations (e.g., Ca  In the case of calcium, an increase in P The increase in P  The experimental data was subjected to a multiple regression analysis to quantify the main effects of the variables at low contaminant concentrations, as well as the interactions and the quadratic contributions to the responses of apatite recovery and P The fitted equations obtained by multiple regression to represent the apatite recovery ( According to the multiple regression coefficient fitted for apatite recovery, 98% of the data variability was explained by Eq. At low contaminant concentrations, an analysis of the parameters estimated for apatite recovery (Eq. In the case of P To facilitate visualization of the effects of the variables at low ion concentrations,   The effect of formation of magnesium fluoride which removes F The main conclusions of this investigation are as follows: All the contaminants studied here (F High fluoride concentrations noticeably affected the apatite recovery, probably due to the formation of CaF Magnesium significantly influenced the performance of apatite flotation. Similar to calcium, magnesium ions also react with soybean oil soap, impairing the collection mechanism. Moreover, magnesium was responsible for considerably increasing NaOH consumption, forming excessive foam and resulting in the lowest values of P The effects of concentration of each ionic species were quantified at low contaminant concentrations. The CCD clearly showed the effect of magnesium-phosphate and calcium-phosphate interactions in the apatite recovery rate and the effect of the interaction between magnesium and fluoride ions on the P The authors would like to thank the Brazilian research funding agencies