The recovery of vanadium from the precipitate formed from the wash water in the removing vanadium process from crude TiCl4 with copper wire was investigated by NaOH leaching, followed by ion exchange and precipitation of V2O5. The results indicated that this technology was an effective method for the recovery of vanadium from the precipitate. Under the optimum leaching conditions (10% NaOH leaching for 3h at 98°C with a pulp density of 29%), the vanadium leaching could reach 81.5%. The vanadium in the leach liquor was adsorbed by weak base resin D314, and the loaded resin was eluted by 2mol/L NaOH. The adsorption and desorption of vanadium was 98.3% and 99.2%, respectively. NH4Cl was used to precipitate vanadium from the desorption liquor, then the ammonium metavanadate was calcined at 550°C for 1h to produce the high purity V2O5 powder. The overall vanadium recovery was 79.5%.TiCl In China, copper wire is widely used to remove VOCl The present work focuses on the design of an integrated process for vanadium recovery from the precipitate. The process consists of a leaching step with NaOH solution, a purification step using ion exchange and metal recovery step by precipitation. The precipitate used in this study was obtained from Zunyi Titanium Industry Co. Ltd and was crushed and ball milled to 80% The macroporous weak-base anion exchange resin D314 with a function group of [–N(CH The leaching procedure was performed in a 500 The pH of the mixed leach liquor was adjusted by adding 2 In the metal recovery step, ammonium metavanadate was crystallized from the desorption liquor from the ion exchange step by the addition of NH In the leaching tests, the effects of leaching temperature, leaching time, NaOH addition, and pulp density on the vanadium leaching were studied. NaOH addition by percentage is calculated using the NaOH mass divided by the precipitate mass. The effect of temperature on vanadium leaching was studied at a fixed leaching time of 3  The effect of NaOH addition on vanadium leaching was studied while the leaching temperature, the leaching time and the pulp density were kept constant as 98 The effect of pulp density was studied in the range of 15–40% using 10% NaOH addition, leaching temperature 98 During the leaching, Cu(OH) The dissolution of Based on the preceding experimental results, the optimum operating conditions for leaching would be: leaching temperature 98 The XRF analysis (X-Ray Fluorescence) of the precipitate and the leach residue is shown in To further understand the leaching of vanadium by NaOH, XRD analysis of the precipitate and the leach residue was conducted. The concentration of vanadium in the mixed leach liquor (6.82 At the breakthrough point of 0.05 Before precipitation of V After calcination of the ammonium metavanadate at 550 The recovery of vanadium from the precipitate formed from the wash water in removing vanadium from crude TiCl