In this study, a novel method that allows selective extraction of lithium and production of battery grade Li2CO3 is introduced, which includes nitration, selective roasting, water leaching and Li2CO3 preparation. By this method, metallic components in Li-ion battery waste are firstly transformed into corresponding nitrates, and then decomposed into insoluble oxides during roasting except for lithium nitrate, which is ready to be extracted by water leaching. Under the optimum conditions of nitration (70 °C, 5 h, acid-to-scrap ratio of 30 mmol/g), selective roasting (250 °C, 1 h) and 4-stage cross-current water leaching (25 °C, liquid-to-solid ratio of 2:1), lithium extraction up to 93% is achieved, whereas extraction of other metals like cobalt, nickel, copper etc. are <0.1%. The obtained lithium-rich solution (34.1 g/L lithium) is then subjected to a carbonation step at 95 °C for 30 min to form the desired Li2CO3. The purity of Li2CO3 produced is up to 99.95%, a level above the minimum standards required for battery grade Li2CO3. Application of this new process could significantly improve lithium recovery from waste Li-ion batteries, as the overall recovery of 90% for lithium achieved is much higher than previously reported lithium recovery of 60–80% from waste Li-ion batteries.Lithium - a key element in the modern energy revolution - has attracted ever-growing levels of research interest with the increasing demands for Li-ion batteries (LIBs) in everyday consumer electronics, electric vehicles and energy storage materials. This is exemplified by the Li-ion battery industry, which has expand rapidly in recent years and is still driving Li consumption - from 9760 t (2015) to predicted levels of 12,160 t by 2020 and 21,520 t by 2025 [ As a result, in order to increase Li recovery, some novel methods have been designed to simplify the Li recovery process by preferentially separating Li from other metals (e.g. Co, Ni, Mn), Considering the abovementioned shortcomings of hydrometallurgical methods, researchers start to seek for combined methods to selectively extract Li from LIBs by e.g. roasting [ Nevertheless, this behavior of Li containing active materials with carbon has been exploited in reduction roasting [ Therefore, it is meaningful to develop a process to selectively extract Li from spent LIBs with high recovery at lower temperatures. It is well known that most nitrates readily decompose at low temperatures, for example, Al(NO A company working in the recycling business of batteries and accumulators provided the input materials (<2 mm) used in this research. The collected spent LIBs were pretreated by a large-scale patented mechanical process route that included two-step crushing, magnetic separation and sieving process, which has been outlined previously [ Characterization of the waste LIBs by SEM/EDS (SEM: A LEO 1450, Carl Zeiss Microscopy GmbH, Jena, Germany; EDS: Link Inca X-sight 7366, Oxfordshire, UK) in     The chemical reactions between nitric acid and the various components present with waste LIBs are by definition relatively complex. In order to define the amount of acid to achieve the desired nitration process, reactions between waste LIBs components and nitric acid were simplified as outlined in reaction 3–8, where Co, Ni, Mn were assumed to exist as LiCoO In order to accelerate the nitration process, acid-scrap mixture were placed in a shaking bath (200 rpm) at 70 °C for 5 h before the resultant mixture was dissolved with distilled water (L/S = 25:1) for 30 min at ambient temperature. From the XRD patterns of the residue displayed in The roasting of acid-scrap mixture with respect to acid dosage i.e. acid-to-scrap ratios, roasting time, and roasting temperatures were investigated and the results are presented in As comparison, results after acid mixing in the absence of the roasting step are also included in As roasting temperatures increase from 100 to 150 °C in SEM morphologies of the samples roasted at 250 °C ( To sum up, the selective extraction of Li from waste LIBs can be achieved through the combination of nitration (acid-to-scraps of 30 mmol/g, 75 °C, 5 h), selective roasting (roasting time of 1 h, roasting temperature of 250 °C) and water leaching (L/S = 25:1, room temperature, 20 min). The different trends seen for Li, Co, Ni, Mn with respect to those of Fe, Al and Cu at temperature range from 100 to 150 °C ( In order to prove the above hypothesis, Thermal Gravimetric Analysis (TGA) and Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC) analysis were conducted in air atmosphere at a heating speed of 5 °C/min with the mixture of pure LiCoO The XRD patterns of roasts produced at 150 and 250 °C with mixture of 80% Al(NO Extraction of Li from the roasts (acid-to-scrap = 30 mmol/g, roasting time = 1 h, roasting temperature = 250 °C) by water leaching was investigated at 25 °C with different L/S ratios of water to roasts (1:1 to 20:1 mL/g) and reaction times (between 5 and 480 min). Li concentration in the water leaching solution was measured by ICP-OES and from these results the Li extraction was calculated based on the assumption that the solution volume remained constant throughout the water leaching process. The results in Previous research by Zhu et al. [ As outlined in The concentration of metals in PLS4 obtained from the 4-stage circular leaching process – outlined in It is clear from It can be observed from It is noteworthy that the residual solution produced from the Li Due to the high content of valuable metals in the leaching residue after water leaching, acid leaching of this material with 2 M H This research proposes an efficient method to selectively extract Li and produce battery grade Li Li could be selectively extracted from waste LIBs scrap by nitration, roasting and water leaching as nitrates of Al, Fe, Co, Ni, Mn, Cu etc. readily decompose into their insoluble oxides during roasting, while lithium remains as lithium nitrate throughout the proposed roasting process. Extraction of Li could be increased by ca. 10% at roasting process (>100 °C) when compared to process in the absence of roasting. This can be explained by the further nitration of active materials (e.g. LiCo A 4-stage cross current water leaching process (instead of vaporization) was proved to be effective to enrich lithium concentration in PLS to 34.2 g/L at ambient temperature with L/S = 2:1. 4. Battery grade Li This paper has been supported by the The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at