Lanthanum and cerium metals were prepared by electrolytic synthesis of amalgams in aqueous solutions followed by the thermal decomposition. The amalgamation yields were almost quantitative. The preparation yield of lanthanide metals, however, deteriorated during thermal decomposition due to a density difference between lanthanide and mercury. The gaseous impurities in the prepared metals were found to be comparable with those in commercially available ones.Metal ions belonging to groups 6–16 are amalgamated in aqueous solutions The standard potentials The amalgamation cell of 300 ml capacity consisted of cathode and anode compartments divided by a cation-exchange membrane of the H The stock solutions of La(III), Ce(III) and U(VI) were prepared by dissolving the oxides in hydrochloric acid solutions. Prior to the amalgamation, the hexavalent uranium was electrochemically reduced to the trivalent state, which was confirmed by the spectrophotometry. The amalgamations of La(III), Ce(III) and U(III) were carried out at the mercury cathode in acetate buffer solutions of pH 3.4–3.7 containing 1.0 M acetic acid and 0.4 M sodium acetate by the controlled current electrolysis at the density of 220 mA The resulting amalgam was rinsed by water and ethyl alcohol and then transferred to a magnesia crucible, degassed at 1000 The mercury, nitrogen, oxygen and carbon in the prepared metals were analyzed, because these four elements were apt to contaminate the products except the impurities in lanthanide oxides used as the source materials. It is necessary to mention the potential applied to the working mercury electrode. The amalgamation is accompanied by reduction of hydrogen ions and the current–voltage characteristics depends on the pH as illustrated in  The resultant amalgams were decomposed in the magnesia crucible below 1×10 The preparation of lanthanide metals is summarized in Since the amount of mercury in the prepared metal can be reduced at high temperatures as shown in Although lanthanum and cerium metal have been traditionally produced by electrolysis in fused salts or metallothermic reduction We are indebted to Dr T. Ogawa and A. Itoh, Research Group on Actinide Science, Department of Materials Research, Japan Atomic Energy Research Institute, for analysis of nitrogen, oxygen and carbon in the prepared metals. This work is supported by JSPS Research Fellowship for Young Scientists and also by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research by the Ministry of Education, Science and Culture of Japan.