Breakage of particulate materials by repeated low-energy stressing events is an important subject in areas such as particle transport – both mechanical and pneumatic – and comminution. Recently, a mathematical model, based on continuum damage mechanics, has been proposed to describe fracture of particles subjected to repeated loading and has been applied to model breakage of single particles by repeated impacts in a drop weight apparatus. The present paper analyzes the model in greater detail by investigating how its only parameter varies with particle size and shape, demonstrating also its validity to describe repeated impacts of particles against an anvil, such as in drop and air-gun tests. In addition, a model is proposed to describe the size distribution of the progeny under low-energy stressing events.Breakage of particulate materials by repeated low-energy stressing events is an important subject in areas that range from materials handling to comminution. Undesirable breakage or degradation can take place in process equipment such as cyclones, fluidized beds, centrifuges, stirred vessels; and in transport equipment, such as pneumatic, screw and hydraulic conveyors and chutes. For instance, degradation is of relevance from materials such as coal and iron ore lumps used in steelmaking Evidence also exists in the literature that particles are often loaded using insufficient energy to cause breakage inside comminution equipment, being fractured only after repeated low-energy stressing. This has been particularly well-known for autogenous and semi-autogenous mills, where rock lumps are broken by a combination of attrition and self-induced impact-fracture When stresses are applied in the normal direction, breakage of particles by low-energy stresses can be classified as attrition or fracture A number of investigators have studied the response of materials to low-energy stresses under different loading modes and in controlled laboratory conditions. While several of them have studied single impact loading using either air-gun or drop tests Modeling fracture by low-energy stressing is relevant for the simulation of a number of unit operations in particulate materials processing and handling, where particles are often subject to complex series of loading events. However, in order to be usable, models should be able to describe, with acceptable accuracy and using only a limited amount of experimental data, the probability of fracture and the distribution of progeny fragments from breakage of particles of different sizes and shapes that are subject to stresses of variable magnitudes. Although a number of mathematical models have been proposed to describe this mode of breakage over the last couple of decades Recognizing that the same mechanism that is responsible for the nonlinear response during loading of a single particle until fracture The model that describes fracture by repeated loading has been presented in detail by Tavares and King The load-deformation profile during compression of a sphere by flat surfaces can be described by a combination of continuum damage mechanics It has been suggested Damage is irreversible, so that, if during compression the particle does not fracture, then during restitution This model assumes, for simplicity, perfectly flat loading surfaces, sphericity of the particle, and also that the stiffness of the particle is significantly lower than that of the tools. This latter assumption has been generally found to be valid for geological materials compressed between hard steel (tools) surfaces  Force-deformation profiles for a number of additional materials were measured under impact-loading and were found to be well described using Eqs. Eqs. Assuming that the particle orientation and that the model parameters Application of the model requires simultaneous solution of Eqs. The model requires fitting only one parameter, the damage accumulation coefficient In order to apply the model and also to estimate the damage accumulation coefficient Typical results from measurement of the distribution of particle fracture energies are presented in A fairly simple scheme for the application of the present model consists of discretizing the fracture energy distribution of the initial sample, given, for example, by Eq. Let Estimation of the only parameter in the model, the damage accumulation coefficient An alternative method has been proposed by Austin A precise estimation of the coefficient When a particle is impacted by a falling weight, the specific impact energy is established by selecting the appropriate combination of weight and height from which the falling weight is dropped by gravity, being given by  The model does not require either that the distribution of particle fracture energies of the original material follows the lognormal distribution given by Eq. One important assumption in the model is that the stiffness of the particle progressively degrades with repeated impacting. This has been experimentally demonstrated to be true for marble particles Tavares and King Although the damage accumulation coefficient Additional experiments have been conducted to assess the influence of particle shape on the damage accumulation coefficient Data characterizing the response of over 70 samples analyzed in the author's laboratory in repeated double impact have been collected and the corresponding values of So far in the present work, the characteristics of the original material were always determined from direct measurements of the distribution of particle fracture energies. In this case, the model takes advantage of the equivalence between the fracture probability and the distribution of fracture energies. This is generally the case, as shown in Although the rigorous application of the present model requires data from measurements of particle fracture energies (or breakage probability distributions) and at least one additional test where the proportion broken at multiple impacts is measured, it is also possible to use other type of data in fitting the model parameter In single impact, that is, when particles are propelled against a hard target or are simply dropped due to the action of gravity, the specific impact energy may be calculated simply by In drop tests, since air resistance can be normally disregarded, Eq. The model has been initially validated using data from Kalman et al. One important piece of information in simulating breakage by repeated impacts is the fracture energy or the breakage probability distribution of the original material. In the case of single impact this distribution can only be determined from measurements of breakage probabilities at different specific impact energies. In the case of drop tests these may be difficult to measure accurately for higher specific impact energies, given the exceedingly high drop heights necessary. Therefore, it is relevant to investigate the relationship between the breakage probability distribution in single impact and the breakage probability and fracture energy distributions for double impact. These are compared in Different states of stresses: From Hertz contact theory and considering only elastic deformations At a given stressing level, the probability of finding a flaw of critical size in two-point loading is expected to be higher when compared to a loading at a single point, given that the distribution of flaws in the particle is not uniform and two-point loading presents twice the number of contact points. This would lead to increased breakage probabilities for double impact in comparison to single impact. When loading particles of irregular shapes, an additional influence appears. In two-point loading tests particles are placed in their most stable position, so that their smallest dimension is in the direction of the application of stresses. From the known effect of particle shape on breakage characteristics The combination of these three effects is the likely reason for the differences in breakage probabilities that have been reported in the literature for the different modes of application of stresses. Still, the good agreement between single impact and double impact observed in Particles of bauxite A were subjected to repeated drops against a thick metal plate, the damage accumulation coefficient was estimated and results are summarized in In addition to the probability of fracture, it is also necessary to describe quantitatively the size distribution of the progeny in order to simulate breakage due to repeated stressing. Impact breakage experiments were conducted by selecting an appropriate combination of drop weight and height, which resulted in a given specific impact energy (Eq. A convenient description of the fineness of the progeny from breakage of single narrow-sized particles is given by the parameter A summary of experimental results is shown in It has been suggested However, the median fracture energy of the broken particles may change from the first to the additional impacts. This is illustrated in Data from In the case of a number of materials, such as for the coal sample analyzed, some deviation still appears in the relationship shown in In order to make it usable for simulation, the model must also provide the complete size distribution of the progeny fragments. For the case of impact energies where all particles break at the first impact it has been well described using the procedure proposed by Narayanan and Whiten Even more limited work exists in the literature which shows the effect of each impact in the size distribution of the progeny. Krogh A fundamental distinction must be made between the present model of fracture by repeated stressing and previous models that have been presented in the literature. Unlike a number of models that merely fit empirical functions to data, the present model describes the weakening that results from stressing individual particles and is able to explicitly account for the amenability of the material to accumulate damage, its toughness before impacting and the magnitude of the stressing energy that is applied. Vervoorn and Austin The present model should also be distinguished from the one proposed by Vogel and Peukert The description presented in the present work of both fracture and progeny size distribution from damage accumulation by repeated impacts is essentially a Markovian problem, that is, the outcome is only influenced by the current characteristic of the system (particles), not its previous history The approach used in the present investigation allows dealing with highly heterogeneous materials, such as most ores encountered in practice. As long as their different components present the same fragmentation pattern ( Extensive testing of particles by double impact allowed to validate the continuum damage model of particle fracture by repeated stressing proposed, by demonstrating that it is capable of describing the probability of fracture from complex distributions of fracture strengths, after sequences of stressing events of variable magnitude and at widely variable impact energy levels. Evidence is presented that demonstrates that the only parameter in the model, the damage accumulation coefficient Data from air-gun tests demonstrated that the model is capable of accurately describing the fracture probability in single impacts as well. Drop shatter experiments for bauxite particles also showed that the damage accumulation coefficient is not significantly influenced by stressing mode, since approximately the same value of A model has been proposed to describe the progeny size distribution in repeated impacts and has been validated using data from drop weight testing. It considers that a parameter in the size distribution of the progeny depends on the ratio between the impact energy used in each stressing event and the median fracture energy of the broken particles. This later one is estimated on the basis of the model of fracture by repeated impacts. The model and its parameters that describe the progeny size distribution under repeated low-energy impacts are the same as those used to describe the progeny size distribution from a single high-energy impact.  parameter of the relationship between parameters of the relationship between damage variable (–) damage accumulated at the particle size (m) kinetic energy of the striker at the mass-specific fracture energy of the particle after the initial mass-specific fracture energy of the particle (J/kg) parameter of the lognormal distribution of particle fracture energies (J/kg) median particle fracture energy of the particles broken at repeated impacts (J/kg) truncation constant of the upper-truncated lognormal distribution, which corresponds the specific impact energy above which all particles would break in a single impact (J/kg) total specific impact energy consumed to break all particles (J/kg) force (N) stiffness of the particle prior to impact (GPa) stiffness of the damaged particle (GPa) steel ball mass (kg) particle mass (kg) number of particles tested in a sample (–) number of impacts (–) cumulative fracture energy distribution of particles in a sample (–) proportion passing in 1/10th of the original particle size in a sample (%) impact velocity (m/s) modulus of elasticity (GPa) compression (m) compression at fracture (m) damage accumulation coefficient (–) Poisson's ratio (–) variance of the upper-truncated lognormal distribution of particle fracture energies (–) The author would like to acknowledge the financial support from the Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico (CNPq) and of FAPERJ of Brazil. The author also thanks Professor Leonard G. Austin for the interesting discussions and suggestions during the course of the work. The specific strain energy absorbed by a particle during loading can be calculated from direct integration of the load displacement profile and dividing the result by the particle mass If we assume that all the energy that has been input to a spherical particle, which corresponds to the kinetic energy of the striker, is effectively converted into strain energy (no energy loss to the plates), then by substituting Eqs. The energy (per unit mass of the particle) required to completely disintegrate the particle, which is called specific particle fracture energy, can be calculated by substituting If it is now assumed that the constitutive equation remains valid throughout the several impacts, then substitution of Eq. Rearranging Eqs. Treating damage accumulation in this way avoids dealing with the distributions of