A two-stage classification circuit using 150mm diameter gMax cyclones was installed and evaluated in a coal preparation plant in an effort to achieve a clean coal product without the use of froth flotation. Particle size separations of around 37μm were achieved while limiting ultrafine bypass to less than 10% in the circuit underflow stream. As a result, approximately 81% of the ash-bearing material in the circuit feed was rejected to the circuit overflow stream. The feed ash content was reduced from around 50% to values in the range of 22–30% in the circuit underflow stream with a mass recovery of about 30%. Further reductions in the coarse product ash content were limited due to the particle density effect and the remaining presence of a significant quantity of high-ash slime material in the coarse product. The typical D
                     50 for the coal particles was 40μm while the estimated value for mineral matter was 17μm. Based on the findings of the study, the use of classification to recover a low-ash, coarse fraction in the feed of a fine coal circuit is limited by the density effect regardless of the ability to eliminate ultrafine bypass.The interest in achieving ultrafine particle size separations within the range of 25–50 The most direct means of achieving particle size separations is through the use of screening. Low-capacity and blinding issues have generally prohibited the use of screening below 300 Industrial practice typically uses hydraulic classification processes, such as classifying cyclones, for ultrafine particle size separations. Classification principles are based on differences in the settling rates of the particles in the system, i.e., coarse particles settle at a higher rate than fine particles. Classifying cyclones with a 150 Both the entrainment and density effects hinder the ability of using cyclones to produce a final clean coal product in the underflow stream. A recent in-plant investigation has evaluated the use of a relatively new classifying cyclone commercially known as the gMax cyclone and the associated operating parameters in an effort to reduce the aforementioned effects on performance. The results from the study are presented and discussed herein. In addition, based on previously reported data indicating significant performance improvements ( Studies conducted in the minerals industry have shown that the performance of classifying cyclones can be improved using multi-stage circuits. The capabilities of these circuits can be mathematically simulated using an empirical partition model. The model is used to calculate the probability ( The first series of simulations were conducted for the two- and three-stage classifying cyclone circuits shown in The simulation results show that the multi-stage circuits not only have an impact on bypass, but also on the particle cutsize for the overall circuit. For the two- and three-stage circuits given in Simulations can also be used to show that an improved level of partitioning performance can be obtained in multi-stage circuits by recycling the overflow products back to the primary cyclone feed. Based on the circuit analysis results, it is clear that the application of multi-stage classifying cyclone units with recycle provides the potential to reduce ultrafine bypass and maximize efficiency while minimizing the shift in the cutsize. However, pumping requirements limit the number of classification stages that can be practically employed in coal preparation plants. Based on practical limitations, the in-plant experimental program concentrated on an evaluation of an open circuit with two classification stages and a closed circuit using two sizing stages and secondary overflow recycle. The most practical circuit for use in a coal preparation plant is a two-stage, rougher–cleaner type arrangement. The application of three-stage circuit designs is limited due to excessive particle breakage concerns and overall cost. A two-stage classifying cyclone circuit comprised of 150 The objective of the investigation was to produce a clean coal product by achieving an efficient 37 As shown in After ensuring steady-state conditions, representative samples were collected from all process streams in the circuit. Pulp density and solid concentrations were determined for each sample. Subsequently, the samples were wet screened and the material in each size fraction analyzed for ash content. Mineral matter content was estimated using the Parr formula. Due to the high-solid concentrations in the primary underflow stream, dilution water was added prior to being fed to the secondary cyclone. However, the amount of water could not be measured which resulted in the inability to quantify a circuit water flow balance. Classification efficiency evaluations were achieved by quantifying the The classification performances of the two-stage cyclone circuit with and without recycling the secondary cyclone overflow stream to the circuit feed are compared with the primary cyclone performance in Recycling the secondary overflow stream to the circuit feed provided little improvement to the two-stage circuit performance under these conditions, which appears to contradict the fundamental predictions in The circuit classification performance provided a significant reduction in the coal ash content from the feed to the secondary underflow streams. As shown in The overall reduction in ash content did not meet the targeted goal despite the achievement of a particle cutsize of 37 To provide a clearer understanding of the particle density effect, the data in The particle cutsize ( The recovery of mineral matter to the underflow stream is significantly greater than coal for all particle size fractions below 75 Ultrafine bypass to the underflow stream appears to be greater for mineral matter (12%) than coal (2%). However, the apparent ultrafine bypass is not all due to hydraulic entrainment but also associated with classification inefficiencies. In an effort to reduce ultrafine bypass from the overall circuit, the apex size on the primary cyclone unit was reduced from 12.7 The particle cutsize and the classification efficiency provided by using the smaller apex in the primary cyclone were nearly equal to those obtained by the larger apex and the amount of ultrafine was significantly reduced. The expectation from the performance improvement was a decrease in the circuit ash content reporting from the secondary cyclone underflow stream. However, the circuit ash content increased to 29.3% as shown in Several tests were performed under varying conditions to evaluate the potential to improve the classification performance with the focus being a reduction in the ultrafine bypass that is associated with hydraulic entrainment. The amount of dilution to the secondary feed stream was investigated with simultaneous changes in the primary apex diameter and the elimination of recycle. As shown in The classification performances achieved on the coal particles in the tests associated with An in-plant test program was performed on a two-stage classifying cyclone circuit using 150 The two-stage circuit provided a particle cutsize ( Despite the excellent classification efficiency, a significant portion of the coal particles reported to the cyclone overflow stream. This finding is important for current coal preparation plants that use single-stage classifying cyclones to deslime flotation feed. Based on the classification performances obtained in this study, the amount of high-quality coal reporting to the overflow stream could amount to 5 The ability to achieve an acceptable product grade in the circuit coarse particle stream was hindered mostly by a density affect that resulted in a coal cutsize of 40 A relatively large amount (80–90%) of ash-forming material was rejected using the two-stage cyclone circuit which resulted in ash content reductions from feed values of 40–50% to values in the secondary underflow between 20% and 30%. The mass yield to the secondary underflow stream ranged from 15% to 35%. Interestingly, if the density effect was eliminated and the secondary underflow ash contents in each size fraction were equal to those in the secondary underflow stream, the ash content of the circuit coarse product would be around 15%. However, based on the findings of the investigation, the particle density effects that occur during classification significantly hinders the ability of hydrocyclones to selectively recover the high-grade, coarse coal particles that often are present in the fine circuit of coal preparation plants. The work presented in this publication was funded in part by the Center for Advanced Separation Technologies (CAST) through the US Department of Energy (DE-FC26-01NT41091). The authors greatly appreciate the support provided by the International Coal Group, Joan Meece and Robert Hollis during the in-plant testing program.