The solid-state X-ray diffraction, FT-IR, and FT-Raman measurements have been performed on bis(benzoxazole-2-ylthio)methane. Molecular structures and normal vibrations of bis(benzoxazole-2-ylthio)methane have been compared with those of its fragments in thiolic (2-mercaptobenzoxazole and 2-methylthiobenzoxazole) and thionic (benzoxazoline-2-thione and 3-methyl-benzoxazoline-2-thione) forms to elucidate substitutional effects. The observed IR and Raman bands of these molecules have been assigned in the frameworks of calculated mode frequencies as well as the calculated IR and Raman intensities at the B3LYP/6-311++G** level in gas phase. The assignments of all fundamental bands have been expressed in terms of internal coordinates and their percent potential energy distributions. The thionic tautomers are significantly more stable than the thiolic tautomers (by more than 5kcal/mol) with a keto-enol transition state that lies more than 40kcal/mol above the most stable thionic tautomers. Therefore, the thionic tautomers are the main species at room temperature. Despite the huge transition barrier, the thiolic tautomers can also exist according to the detailed vibrational spectral analyses. Potential energy surface scans find that the thiolic tautomers have two stable conformations due to the orientation of their SH and SCH3 moieties.Benzoxazole and benzoxazoline are composed of benzene-fused deprotonated and protonated oxazole ring at the ring nitrogen, respectively. They are found not only in several natural products but also in pharmaceutical drugs such as priaxim In this study, we first synthesized bis(benzoxazole-2-ylthio)methane with the chemical formula of C All chemicals and solvents used for the synthesis of BO-NSMe/BO-NMeS and bis(BO-NS)Me were reagent grade and processed as purchased without further purification. For synthesizing BO-NSMe/BO-NMeS, a solution of iodomethane (2.84 Following the method described in literature Analytical data were acquired with a Thermo Finnigan Flash EA 1112 analyzer. Melting point was obtained with an Electro-thermal 9100 melting-point apparatus. Routine The FT-IR spectra of all the samples were recorded by inserting them directly into the Nicolet 6700 FT-IR spectrometer with attenuated total reflectance (ATR) method. FT-Raman spectra of all the samples were recorded on a Bruker RFS 100/S spectrometer by putting them directly in a Pyrex tube. The 1064 Single crystal X-ray diffraction data of bis(BO-NS)Me were collected on a Bruker SMART-APEX CCD diffractometer at 130 All quantum mechanical calculations were performed on isolated (single) molecules by using Gaussian03 program package and utilizing its fine numerical grid and tight SCF convergence criteria B3LYP obtains systematically overestimated vibrational frequencies due to the neglect of the effects of crystal packing and anharmonicity, and the incompleteness of basis set and dynamic correlation. Therefore, the calculated frequencies are generally scaled for ease in relating the theoretical and experimental frequencies IR and Raman spectra were simulated using the scaled computational frequency ( BO-NSH and BO-NSMe both have two stable conformers (Rot1 and Rot2; To obtain energetic preference between thiolic and thionic forms of the molecules, the thiolic hydrogen and methyl group of the Rot1 conformers were moved to the ring nitrogen progressively by an increment of 0.2 The present computational energetic data about the conformational stabilities and keto-enol transition states of the benzoxazole and benzoxazoline derivatives are quite similar to those obtained on the benzothiazole and benzothiazoline derivatives The key computational geometry parameters of the compounds together with the present X-ray data for bis(BO-NS)Me are listed in Since the hydrogen atom has very small scattering for X-rays, the C The bond lengths obtained in the previous X-ray measurement for BO-NHS with bound bis(diiodine) When the substituent of the S atom (H or CH The experimental and simulated vibrational spectra (both IR and Raman) of BO-NSH, BO-NHS, BO-NSMe, BO-NMeS, and bis(BO-NS)Me are given in The The monoclinic phase of bis(BO-NS)Me crystallizes in the C2/c (C Vibrational spectra of BO-NSH and BO-NHS were already analyzed with DFT but with small basis sets The experimental frequencies of some modes, such as, 6–8, 10, and 11, have large deviations (about ±20 The calculated vibrational spectra for Rot1 and Rot2 of thiolic species (BO-NSH and BO-NSMe) are indistinguishable from each other ( The frequencies of CH When the modes involve purely the vibrations of SH/NH and NCH The vibrations of SH/NH and SCH We have carried out B3LYP calculations on the structure and vibrational spectra of thiolic (BO-NSH and BO-NSMe) and thionic (BO-NHS and BO-NMeS) benzoxazole and benzoxazoline derivatives together with the thiolic bis(BO-NS)Me by using the triple-zeta quality split-valance 6-311++G** basis set. Although the thionic forms of the molecules are more stable than the thiolic forms with huge transition states, the experimental vibrational spectra of these molecules are composed of the overlap of the spectra of thionic and thiolic species. Therefore, thiolic forms should also exist at room temperature with minor amounts. Thiolic forms are found in two stable conformations (Rot1 and Rot2) arising from the orientation of their SH and SCH We assigned each normal mode in the experimental vibrational spectra of these molecules by using the present computational results. All fundamental bands have been assigned in terms of internal coordinates with their percent potential energy contributions. The effects of substitution at the nitrogen and sulfur atoms have been analyzed. This work is supported by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are Supplementary data to this article: