During material wear test, a measurable tribo-electrification potential was found, which shows that the change of this tribo-electrification potential is closely related to the material structure, abrasive grain size and speed of friction. By this way, a new method for wear study has been found dynamically.The survey method of material wear is very important for the study of properties of material abrasion. Usually abrasion resistance of a material is determined by surveying the length change, weight change or volume change of the sample before and after abrasion test. All of these methods have the same characteristic, which expresses the material abrasion level through the change between initial state and final state of the test sample. These methods, however, do not produce almost any information from abrasion process. Tribo-electrification is a well-known physics phenomenon and this effect has some thing to do with the friction process The basic experimental idea is to survey the electric potential changing of the test specimen in the process of the abrasion. The specimen was located in an abrasive test apparatus and isolated from the apparatus. A copper conducting wire linked the specimen with a millivoltmeter (the schematic diagram of the test apparatus is shown in In this experiment the SiC abrasive cloth was used. In order to investigate the influence of abrasive particle size of the materials abrasion, different SiC abrasive cloths were used in which the abrasive particle sizes were 20, 150 and 300 μm, respectively. A weight of 500 g was loaded onto the specimen during the experiment. The specimens with a diameter of 10 mm and 20 cm long were made of medium_carbon steel and Hadfield steel, respectively, the condition of each specimen is shown in  The fact that triboelectric potential changed with friction speed showed that the electric potential information had arisen in specimens, which could be surveyed during the abrasion process. The level of electric potential and its change in style are related to the abrasion condition. When a stable friction process took place between the abrasive cloth and a specimen, a triboelectric potential would appear in the specimen and growth in friction speed increased, just as glass was rubbed with silk. During a strong abrasion process, the wear chips were big enough, which were formed by micro cutting, grooving or brittle micro fracture, and then an oscillatory potential curve could be obtained. A comparison of It is shown in Worn with abrasive particles of 150 μm, all the specimens except C show a vibration triboelectric potential curve. In specimen A the potential change may indicate that the micro cutting process began in the worn surface, when micro chips (which carried some electric charge) were cut off from the worn surface, the triboelectric potential would drop. The triboelectric potential of specimen B showed a rise and then fall curve, at lower wear speed, while the potential increased with the rise of tribo speed. But at high wear speed the potential obviously fell . This might be corresponding to the beginning the brittle micro fractures. Relatively, specimen C maintained a smoothly increased triboelectric potential in this case. This was corresponding to the outstanding characteristics of work hardening of Hadfield steel. Specimen D had cast structure, and the rise and fall curve of triboelectric potential may be related to the coarse grain and precipitated phase in this structure. When worn with abrasive particles of 300 μm, all the specimens showed a vibration triboelectric potential curve, this indicates that many microchips had formed in all specimens in this wear condition. When steel specimen is worn with SiC abrasive cloth, a tribo-electrification potential can be measured from the specimen. This potential varies with the wear condition. Be can be associated with different specimen states, the potential varying pattern is different. From this effect, the abrasion process can be surveyed dynamically.