Laboratory investigation on vermicomposting efficacy of Perionyx excavatus for recycling of distillation waste biomass of java citronella (Cymbopogon winterianus Jowitt) was carried out in two seasonal trials i.e. summer and winter periods. The experiment was conducted in earthen pots using a mixture of citronella waste material and cowdung in the proportion of 5:1. A control treatment without earthworms was setup for comparison of the results. The vermicompost had shown 5.8 folds reduction in C/N ratio and 5.6 folds enhancement in ash content. The nutrient contents (N, P, K, Ca and Mg) in the vermicompost had increase in the range of 1.2 – 4.1 fold than the initial level. The FT-IR spectra of the vermicompost confirmed increase in nitrogen rich compounds and decrease in aliphatic/aromatic compounds as compared to the initial level of the biowaste materials. The vermicomposting process is influenced by seasonal variation and summer was more productive than winter. In global scale, the anthropogenic methane emission has been accounted as 3–19% and which has been sourced from waste dumping site ( Vermitechnology is one of the suitable agro-techniques that have long been in use for the management of biowaste in many countries round the globe. This technique is primarily based on the activity of earthworms as the biological agent and it provides dual benefit, firstly, management of biowaste and secondly, production of organic manure known as vermicompost. The entire technique is a controlled non-thermophilic decomposition of organic waste by mutual interaction between earthworms and microbes ( The distillation waste of Java citronella has certain agronomic benefit as it has been used as an organic mulching agent in agricultural crop production ( The individuals of The citronella waste material (CWM) were dried in air, cut into small pieces and mixed with cowdung (CD)on dry weight basis in a ratio of 5:1 for the experiment ( The vermicompost generated in the two seasonal trials were mixed properly for analysis of pH, conductivity, ash content, total organic carbon (TOC), total kjeldhal nitrogen (TKN), available phosphorus (P), total potassium (K), total calcium (Ca), total magnesium (Mg) and heavy metals (Mn, Cu, Fe and Zn). For chemical analysis all the samples i.e. the compost, vermicompost, waste material and cowdung were separately dried in air at room temperature and powdered in stainless steel blender. The pH and conductivity value were measured in 1:5 (w/v) water suspensions using digital pH (Elico Li 127) and conductivity meter (Elico CM 180) respectively. The ash content was measured following the method of Paired sample The vermicast (i.e. so called vermicompost) production efficiency of The end product (i.e. vermicompost) significantly differs from compost and CWM The ash content is an important indicative parameter for decomposition and mineralization of any composting materials including vermicompost ( Total organic carbon (TOC) was lower in the final product than the initial level of the CWM The macronutrients composition of the initial feed mixture (CWM Concentrations of different heavy metal were significantly increased both in compost and vermicompost in relation to the initial value of the CWM The C/N values of the CWM Earthworm production is an integrated and important aspect of any vermicomposting operation ( The type of chemical compound of a material can be obtained by confirming the presence of functional group through FT-IR analysis. The presence or absence of peaks for functional groups of metabolites indicates the degradation or stabilization of the biowaste during bioconversion process. The FT-IR spectra of the CWM, CD, compost and vermicompost as revealed in the present study are interpreted based on references of A broad peak at around 3386 The peak for aldehydic or ester C The peaks for N–H stretching and bending of tertiary amine salt at 2670 and 1556 Bioconversion of citronella biowaste material is possible through vermitechnology employing indigenous earthworm species The authors are grateful to the Director and other staff members of Zoological Survey of India, Solan, Himachal Pradesh, India for identification of experimental earthworm. The authors offer their thanks to the Director, Institute of Advanced Study in Science and Technology, Guwahati, India for providing laboratory facilities to carry out the research work and Diganta Borgohain for reading the first draft of the manuscript. The authors are also thankful to the reviewers for useful comments.