The aim of the present work is to develop a novel electrode material for micro-supercapacitor (μ-SC) application, which must be compatible with the fabrication of Si microelectronic. A simple, cost-effective and scalable approach has been proposed to enhance the electrochemical capacitance of silicon nanowires (SiNWs). SiNWs grown using hot wire chemical vapor process (HWCVP) at low temperature were encapsulated with manganese dioxide (MnO2) nanoparticles film. The prepared hybrid nanostructure of SiNW@MnO2 core-shell showed stable electrochemical performance in an aqueous electrolyte of 1 M Na2SO4. The MnO2 shell was deposited on SiNWs by electrophoretic process (EPD) at room temperature. The synthesized SiNW@MnO2 core-shell structure exhibited a specific capacitance of 2.1 mF/cm2, which is larger than to other Si-based materials reported in literature. The scalability and simplicity of the process make it useful to fabricate SiNW@MnO2 electrodes based on-chip μ-SC with enhanced electrochemical performance.The development of micro-supercapacitor (μ-SC) has drawn the attention of researchers globally due to its various advantages over the existing battery system [ A great deal of efforts has been made in exploring suitable electrode materials in supercapacitor which in turn increase the capacitance and energy density [ These issues could be avoided by developing new electrode materials which must be compatible with standard Si fabrication technology. Therefore, over the last few years, silicon nanowires (SiNWs) base μ-SCs have been developed in the literature [ Conducting polymers have also been deposited on SiNWs for μ-SCs application [ MnOx has been deposited on pre carbon sheet coated SiNWs for asymmetric supercapacitor application [ SiNWs coated with a thin film of SiC have been investigated as electrode material in aqueous electrolyte, which showed a specific capacitance of 1.7 mF/cm In the present work, we have used electrophoretic deposition (EPD) approach to deposit MnO MnO The MnO  The morphology of as grown SiNWs using Sn as a catalyst layer is shown in Moreover, SiNWs have some open space between the wires through which the electrolyte can penetrates deeper to the substrate. The morphology of the as-prepared SiNW@MnO A detailed microstructures study of the prepared hybrid core-shell structure was further investigated by TEM as shown in The above results show an intimate electrical contact between SiNWs and MnO The electrochemical performance of the prepared nanostructure of SiNW@MnO  The loading amount of MnO The specific capacitance was decreased to ∼ 1 mF/cm For the SiNW@MnO To study the effect of scan rate on the specific capacitance of the SiNW@MnO For better evaluation of the electrochemical performance of SiNW@MnO  The thickness of MnO The different performance of SiNW@MnO SiNW@MnO Crompton Greaves, Mumbai is gratefully acknowledged for providing financial support. The author also thanks SAIF, IIT Bombay to provide the TEM and SEM characterization facilities. FIST facility (Dual beam FIB, Carl Zeiss Microscopy) in ME & MS was also used for this work. I would also like to thank Prof. V. S. Raja, Dept. of ME & MS, IIT Bombay for providing the electrochemical characterization facility. The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at