Microalgae biofuels are a promising renewable fuel that can be produced whilst mitigating industrial CO2. However, their production is still not economically comparable to fossil fuels, with microalgae harvesting recognized as an area requiring development. Flotation is emerging as a promising harvesting method, but typically requires addition of flocculating chemicals to allow a foam concentrate to be formed and collected. In addition to adding to process costs, these additives contaminate the biomass and limit applications, such as for animal feed, for the non-biofuel component. An alternative method to achieve efficient harvesting is proposed that could use waste industrial heat to aid the flotation process and avoids the need for chemical additives. The best separation was achieved at 85°C, when the Scenedesmus sp. culture was concentrated to 2.78g/L from an initial density of 0.13g/L. This result gives a concentration factor of 25.8 and a recovery of 83%.Microalgae with high lipid content have the potential to produce biofuel whilst also producing food supplements and other value-added products However, despite these advantages process development is required to improve production economics The difficulty in harvesting arises from the nature of microalgae cells, namely; low concentrations The primary harvesting techniques currently available for microalgae separation are centrifugation, filtration, flocculation, sedimentation and flotation Flotation has received significant attention due relatively low capital and operating costs, and the possibility for 90–99% recovery In this study, heat-aided flotation without the use of any chemical additives that was originally developed for bacteria recovery  Microalgae strains were collected and screened as described in Eibl et al. Prior to separation, the temperature of each sample was raised in a water bath, taking 30 A laboratory scale dispersed air flotation column ( Biomass concentration was measured with an Ahlstrom 151 glass microfiber filter according to Eq. where C The volume and the biomass concentration of concentrate was measured, along with the initial biomass of the culture, in order to calculate the concentration factor and collected (%), as shown in Eqs. The concentration factor is the ratio of concentrate biomass concentration (g/L) to initial medium biomass concentration (g/L). The recovery (%) is the comparison of mass in the concentrate (g) to the mass initially in the column (g). These masses are calculated as concentration (g/L) multiplied by their respective volumes (L). A modification of the lipid extraction described by Folch et al. Direct transesterification of the extracted lipid was performed as described by Velasquez-Orta et al. The fatty acid methyl ester (FAME) composition was analyzed via gas chromatography using a Thermo Trace 1300 (Thermo Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada) that was equipped with a flame-ionization detector (FID) and a SGE SolGel-Wax capillary column (30 It has been demonstrated that the capture of industrial waste heat, such as from ore smelters, to support microalgae cultivation in climates otherwise considered too cold for year-round production has significant potential Whilst the heating of cultures for bulk harvesting algae is not likely to be economical if the required energy has to be purchased, the ability to couple with an existing industry can avoid this hurdle. Industries that are commonly considered an option to couple with for CO A significant change in the percentage collected and concentration factor when It is important to note that the initial algae concentrations used in these studies (around 0.13 The concentrated microalgae recovered at 85 The decrease in collection above 85 After heating, the subsequent cooling stage prior to flotation was also found to have an effect on collection efficiency. Using the same Whilst cooling was done in the laboratory for these experiments, there is the possibility that the culture could be cooled without the addition of energy. Ambient cooling would bring the algae back to low temperature, but long periods of elevated temperature may run a higher risk of damaging components of the residual biomass. These residues are commonly cited as having the potential for the feed industry, among other products, in order to contribute to economic viability Another important consideration for any harvesting technique is its ability to harvest a number of different microalgae species. The use of heat was initially successfully demonstrated with As seen in The bubbles formed in the column and the resulting foam were observed to vary. For example, WS3 ( These strain-based experiments were done as a proof of concept, showing that the effect is not specific to For biodiesel production, microalgal lipids are the target and, therefore, any separation method must not adversely impact on lipid quantity and quality. To test the applicability of heat-induced flotation for harvesting of microalgae for biofuel, the lipid profile of The lipid content of the microalgae prior to heating was 21.1 The mechanism behind this lipid enhancement is largely unknown, although increased lipid content has been seen in other flotation harvesting methods. For example, Coward et al. The lipid quality, in terms of the distribution of carbon chain lengths was found to remain unaffected by the heating process ( Heating microalgae cultures prior to flotation can create noticeable cell clumping, which aids recovery. This harvesting method could, therefore, be significant by the avoiding costs and contamination associated with adding chemical flocculants. Furthermore, lipid analysis showed that the applied elevated temperatures had no adverse effect on the biodiesel potential of the microalgae. The microalgae strain used is, however, shown to influence overall biomass recovery, which suggests that strain specific optimization, such as the applied temperature may be required. The best separation was achieved at after heating to 85 This method as a standalone separation may not be economical due to energy purchase costs. However, the repurposing of otherwise waste heat from industrial operations could make this a very feasible approach, especially if microalgae production is linked to CO The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of the