With the purpose of reducing the waste generated by end-of-life vehicles (ELVs) by enhancing the recovery and recycling of nonferrous metals, an experimental study was conducted with the finest size fraction of nonferrous stream produced at an ELV shredder plant. The aim of this work was to characterize the nonferrous stream and to evaluate the efficiency of a gravity concentration process in separating light and heavy nonferrous metal particles that could be easily integrated in a ELV shredder plant (in this case study the separation explicitly addressed copper and aluminum separation). The characterization of a sample of the 0–10mm particle size fraction showed a mixture of nonferrous metals with a certain degree of impurity due to the present of contaminants such as plastics. The majority of the particles exhibited a wire shape, preventing an efficient separation of materials without prior fragmentation. The gravity concentration process selected for this study was the wet shaking table and three operating parameters of the equipment were manipulated. A full factorial design in combination with a central composite design was employed to model metals recovery. Two second order polynomial equations were successfully fitted to describe the process and predict the recovery of copper and aluminum in Cu concentrate under the conditions of the present study. The optimum conditions were determined to be 11.1° of inclination, 2.8L/min of feed water flow and 4.9L/min of wash water flow. All three final products of the wet shaking table had a content higher than 90% in relation to one of the metals, wherein a Cu concentrate product was obtained with a Cu content of 96%, and 78% of Cu recovery and 2% of Al recovery.Every year, end-of-life vehicles (ELVs) constitute between 7 and 8 million tonnes of waste in the European Union that, if integrated in a correct waste management system, would represent an important source of secondary raw materials, especially metals (  The remaining output of magnetic separation is a mixture of nonferrous metals such as aluminum, copper, brass/bronze and zinc as well as nonmetals (e.g. glass, stone, plastics, rubber). This mixture is heterogeneous in material composition, particle size and shape. It is commonly classified into 3 particle size intervals that are processed independently to improve efficiency. The coarse fraction is hand sorted to separate nonferrous metals by type (e.g. aluminum, copper) and to remove steel, iron and middling particles (that may have dragged along with this fraction). The latter are usually returned to the shredder for further liberation of materials. The intermediate and fine fractions are sent to electromagnetic separation, each size fraction creating two streams: non-conducting and conducting materials. The non-conducting materials are classified as ASR. The conducting materials of the intermediate size fraction proceed to a heavy media process in two stages, to separate magnesium, aluminum and heavy metals (zinc, brass/bronze and copper). Aluminum and magnesium are typically sold to smelters; whereas the mixture of heavy metals is sold to post-shred sorting companies that further separate this product. The fine size fraction (the focus product of this work) is either exported or sent to landfill ( In the last few years, in order to improve waste management of ELVs, numerous studies concerning the optimization of ELVs recycling were reported. The works presented by The primary purpose of this work was to characterize the nonferrous 0–10 In the present work, the separation of the light metal (aluminum) from the heavier metals by gravity concentration explicitly addresses the separation of aluminum and copper. The separation of heavy metals (copper, zinc and brass/bronze) was not considered. The wet shaking table was chosen to separate the materials. This is a process commonly used in mineral processing to concentrate ore with particle size range between 0.6 The sample was provided by a Portuguese shredding plant in operation. It was the product referred to in Sample characterization included analysis of composition by hand sorting and particle size distribution analysis determined by sieving (the sample was classified into six particle size fractions:+10; 8–10; 6–8; 4–6; 2–4; -2  In the compositional analysis ( The analysis of composition by particle size fraction showed that the aluminum content was found to be the highest for all size fractions. The copper and aluminum content increased and the brass/bronze content decreased with the reduction in particle size. The middling particles were not identified in the three smallest size fractions. The pre-processing phase consisted in a reduction in particle size to less than 8 In metal recycling, different gravity methods are employed to separate heavier materials from lighter ones. Examples include the works presented by The laboratory Wilfley table used in this work is a typical one, commonly used in mineral processing studies (Sepor, Inc Modelo 15S). It is made of fiberglass, with adjustable transversal inclination and a rectangular shape (1000 The separation on shaking table, as mentioned, is controlled by many operating parameters. Each experiment, performed in open loop without refeeding of the products, consisted in: setting the levels of the operating parameters; introduction of the dry sample in the feeder; operation of the shaking table; collection and drying of the separation products after the steady state was attained; separation of aluminum and copper by hand sorting, weighting and calculation of the recovery of each material in all three products. The statistical design experimental program was conducted in four steps, as can be observed in From the three separation products of the wet shaking table, taking into account the economic value, the heavy product was the one selected for modeling, and will be referred to, from now on, as Cu concentrate. The Cu concentrate results were subjected to a statistical analysis (step 3) and two models (copper and aluminum recovery on the Cu concentrate) were further used to determine the operating parameter levels to achieve the optimal point. Finally, four experiments using the optimal levels were conducted for validation purposes (step 4). All experiments were performed in random order to ensure the independence of the observations and errors. The two-level FFD is the most simple and robust design where each parameter is set at a higher and lower level. The experimental runs include all combinations of these parameter levels (factorial points), allowing for the estimation of the main effects and two-factor interactions ( The response surface methodology (RSM) is an experimental technique capable of fitting second-order prediction equations for the response. CCD is one type of RSM and consists of a full or fractional factorial design with center points, augmented with a group of axial points that allow for an estimation of curvature. The axial points represent new extreme values (low and high) for each parameter in the design ( A second-order response surface model relating the response with parameters is expressed as follows: All statistical analyses were carried out using Design-Expert 9.0.3 (Stat-Ease Inc.). The fitness of the models was tested using an analysis of variance (ANOVA). The The empirical models were fitted and used to optimize the separation performance by determining the optimal settings for the three operating parameters. The optimal point was set as the maximum copper recovery in the Cu concentrate combined with an aluminum recovery, in the same product, of less than 5%. As referred, the optimum solution was verified by performing four tests under predicted settings.  The results of the experiments provided a wide range of copper and aluminum recovery values. A maximum of 99.2% and a minimum of 29.6% for copper recovery were obtained while a maximum of 47.7% and a minimum of 0.1% were achieved for aluminum recovery. In ANOVA, the center point information (curvature) was separated from the regression model. The curvature was determined by comparing the average recovery value from the actual center to the estimated value of the center point calculated from averaging all the factorial points (for each model). Curvature was detected, with a The fitness of the quadratic models was tested using ANOVA ( With a Response surface models were derived after backward elimination of non-significant parameters and interactions (Eqs. The adequacy of the models was further verified by checking adjusted Based on all statistical analysis, the models presented were considered adequate to the prediction of copper and aluminum recovery in the Cu concentrate of wet shaking table. For a better understanding of the results, the predicted models are presented in three dimensional response surface plots. The parameters not shown in the plots were set at their intermediate levels. As can be observed in   The interaction effect between inclination and wash water flow rate is depicted in The optimal levels of the three operating parameters were found to be 11.1° of inclination, 2.8 All three products reached contents higher than 90% in one of the metals. The Cu concentrate presented a 77.8% copper recovery and 1.5% aluminum recovery (95.6% in copper and 4.4% in aluminum). The middling product had the higher aluminum recovery (85%) creating a product with 90.1% in aluminum and 9.9% in copper. The light product exhibited the lowest values of recovery for both metals, 13.5 for aluminum and 0.4% for copper, but was a product with 99% in aluminum and 1.3% in copper. A study was undertaken with the finer fraction of the nonferrous metal stream of an ELV shredder plant. The characterization of a sample of the 0–10 The wet shaking table is a simple equipment with a robust design requiring minimal maintenance, which can be integrated with relative ease in a processing diagram of an ELV shredder plant. Separating copper from aluminum in the particle size range tested was found to be efficient. The recovery of copper and aluminum in the Cu concentrate was researched using the design of experiments approach, which led to a better understanding of the effects of the three operating parameters: inclination, feed water flow rate and wash water flow rate. The optimal settings were observed at the edges of the experimental design, which can indicate that an optimum point may be may fall outside the design area. Quadratic models were found to explain copper and aluminum recovery and it was demonstrated that inclination is the parameter with the most influence on the separation performance. Tests performed under optimal settings created a Cu concentrate product with an average of 77.8% copper recovery and 1.5% aluminum recovery. The results clearly indicated that the separation is easy, resulting undoubtedly from the large density difference between the two metals. In the mining industry, this process is normally carried out in series. In this study, with a single run through the device, a product rich in copper with a content in Cu of 96% and 78% of Cu recovery, and two products rich in aluminum with 90% and 99% in Al content and 85% and 14% of Al recovery, respectively, could be obtained. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of “