The paper presents a new leaching-solvent extraction hydrometallurgical process for the recovery of a pure and marketable form of cobalt sulfate solution from waste cathodic active material generated during manufacturing of lithium ion batteries (LIBs). Leaching of the waste was carried out as a function of the leachant H2SO4 concentration, temperature, pulp density and reductant H2O2 concentration. The 93% of cobalt and 94% of lithium were leached at suitable optimum conditions of pulp density: 100gL−1, 2M H2SO4, 5vol.% of H2O2, with a leaching time 30min and a temperature 75°C. In subsequent the solvent extraction study, 85.42% of the cobalt was recovered using 1.5M Cyanex 272 as an extractant at an O/A ratio of 1.6 from the leach liquor at pH 5.00. The rest of the cobalt was totally recovered from the raffinate using 0.5M of Cyanex 272 and an O/A ratio of 1, and a feed pH of 5.35. Then the co-extracted lithium was scrubbed from the cobalt-loaded organic using 0.1M Na2CO3. Finally, the cobalt sulfate solution with a purity 99.99% was obtained from the cobalt-loaded organic by stripping with H2SO4.distribution coefficient of cobalt distribution coefficient of lithium separation factor aqueous organic Lithium ion batteries (LIBs) are extensively used as electrochemical power sources in modern electronic equipment due to their favorable characteristics such as high energy density, high cell voltage, long storage life, low self discharge rate and wide temperature range of use. In Korea, about 67 million cells and 122 million cells were used in 2000 and 2003, respectively Several studies have been carried out to recover valuable metals from the waste cathodic active material (LiCoO Solvent extraction has been widely used for the recovery and separation of metals from the leach liquor, effluents, and the waste. Recovery of metal from waste LiCoO The objective of the present work is to develop an effective hydrometallurgical process for recovery of a pure and marketable form of cobalt sulfate solution/salt from the waste of the LIB industry. This process consists of mainly acid leaching, solvent extraction, scrubbing and stripping. The waste LiCoO LIB industry waste LiCoO All batch-leaching experiments were carried out in a 0.5 The extractant Cyanex 272 was partially saponified up to 65% by adding a stochiometric amount of concentrated NaOH solution to the extractant in kerosene under constant stirring of the mixture Analyses of the samples were carried out by a conventional titration method using murexide and instrumental analysis using atomic absorption spectrometer (Varian SpectrAA-400). The cobalt concentration in the feed, raffinate and stripped solution were determined by titration with 0.05 Theoretically, the leaching efficiency of LiCoO From chemical equation In the leaching reaction cobalt and lithium were leached as CoSO The effect of reductant H The chemical equations The effect of temperature on the leaching efficiency was studied using 2 The effect of H The effect of pulp density on the leaching efficiencies of cobalt and lithium was studied in range of 10–125 From the above-studied parameters, considering the lower energy consumption, lower chemical consumption and relatively better leaching efficiency the best suitable condition for leaching of cobalt and lithium from the waste LiCoO A sufficient amount of leach liquor was generated in the optimized conditions using a 2 The pH–extraction isotherm of cobalt and lithium was studied using 1 The optimization of the extraction conditions was essentially carried out in terms of the extractant concentration at an initial pH of 5.00. The leach liquor at an initial pH of 5, containing 44.72 The studies of the effect of the O/A ratio on the extraction of cobalt and lithium from leach solution at an initial pH of 5 have been carried out using the 1.5 The higher loading of lithium at a higher phase O/A ratio and higher concentration is due to the more available sites or surface area of extractant for the metal extraction. As verified and explained in our earlier work at the lower O/A ratio and at the lower Cyanex 272 concentration, where there is competition between cobalt and lithium ions, the efficiency of cobalt extraction is dominant over lithium which leads the least extractability of lithium in organic phase. In contrast, when there are enough available sites in extractant, the lithium gets extracted to organic phase comparatively higher than earlier The obtained data was correlated with the separation factor shown in The studies for the scrubbing of small amount of co-extracted lithium from the cobalt-loaded organic were carried out using Na The purified cobalt-loaded organic obtained after the scrubbing of lithium has been used for the stripping experimental purpose. In all sets of stripping study, the O/A ratio was maintained at 1. The percentage of stripping and purity at different strip acid concentration was determined. The results presented in Due to several problems like higher rate of contamination of lithium, purity concern, high content of cobalt and lithium in leach liquor and phase disengagement difficulties the total cobalt could not extracted from the leach liquor of waste LiCoO The co-extracted lithium from the loaded organic was scrubbed using 0.1 For industrial interest, to enrich the strip solution generated from raffinate stream as same as the strip solution generated from fresh leach liquor stream was calculated. The calculation shows that the 0.5 Based on the above studies, following conclusions have been drawn. The best condition for leaching of cobalt from the waste LiCoO The quantitative recovery of cobalt with a minimum lithium co-extraction was achieved using a Cyanex 272 concentration of 1.5 Solvent extraction was followed by a three-stage lithium scrubbing using 0.1 The selective and efficient separation/recovery of metal values from waste cathodic active material is feasible using Cyanex 272. This process is effective for recycling of waste, conservation of the natural resources and curtailing environmental pollution. This work was supported by the basic research programme of Korea Institute of Geoscience and Mineral Resources (KIGAM). The first author expresses his warmest thanks to (KIGAM) and Korea Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF) for awarding a research fellowship during the course of investigation.