This paper presents the results of research of the influence of potato pulp content (10, 20, 30%) in a mixture with buckwheat hulls on power consumption of the pellet mill and on the quality of the produced pellets (density and kinetic durability of obtained pellets, as well as their heat of combustion and calorific value), and their elemental composition (dry mass, chlorine, sodium, potassium, phosphorus, and nitrogen). The paper also presents the influence of the pelleting process on changes in water activity of the densified mixture and the obtained pellets. The results of the research show that an addition of potato pulp to pelleted buckwheat hulls caused power consumption of the pellet mill, whereas a reduction of the addition of potato pulp of up to 20% allows to obtain high quality pellets (high density and kinetic durability). The tested mixtures of buckwheat hulls and potato pulp are a material of high energy qualities.Due to the requirement addressing the reduction of carbon dioxide emission into the atmosphere, universally respected in recent years, the use of biomass (including waste biomass from the agriculture and food industry) as a raw material in electric energy and heat production has become more and more common. The most common method for managing different forms of plant waste or their combinations (mixtures) is their pelleting or briquetting into the form of a solid fuel (pellets, briquette) However, in the opinion of many researchers According to numerous research studies Chou et al. One of the types of post-production waste produced in agricultural and food industry processing plants are buckwheat hulls. They have multiple uses: as pillow filler material for therapeutic pillows, quilts or mattresses Earlier author's own research showed that buckwheat hulls have a low moisture content of approx. 8.4% and a low bulk density of approx. 186 kg/m Potato pulp can serve as such an additive, as shown in the author's previous research Tests of such kind were and still are conducted by the author and his colleagues and have been presented in successive publications, e.g. Ref. Pulp is also characterized by a low content of chlorine as well as other elements that play a significant role in the process of combustion, which allows to conclude that pulp may become a very attractive raw material or additive in the process of production of heating pellets from plant materials with a considerably higher chlorine content (e.g. straw, bran), which is highly undesirable in combustion processes. This prompts the use of as large as possible mass fractions of potato pulp in mixtures with plant materials characterized by a considerably higher chlorine content. In other to assure a high quality of pellets at higher pulp contents in the mixture, its moisture content should be reduced mechanically in the future. One method to reduce pulp moisture content could be spin-drying it, e.g. in a decantation centrifuge or with the use of a mangle, down to a moisture content of 45–40%, and then adding pulp of the same moisture content to buckwheat hulls. Pelleting mixtures with a high potato pulp content can also be an effective solution to reduce undesirable post-production plant waste (i.e. potato pulp). The purpose of the research was to determine the influence of potato pulp content in a mixture with buckwheat hulls on power consumption of the pelleting process and on the quality of the produced pellets (density and kinetic durability of the obtained pellets, their heat of combustion, calorific value, and ash content). In the research, influence of the pelleting process on changes in water activity of the densified mixture and the obtained pellets, in the aspect of their use as fodder or heating fuel, was also determined. This paper presents the results of a research study on the process of pelleting of post-production waste in the form of buckwheat hulls (produced in Podlaskie Zakłady Zbożowe S.A. in Białystok) in a mixture with potato pulp that remained after washing out starch from potatoes (produced in PEPEES S.A in Łomża). Moisture content of the raw materials (buckwheat hulls, potato pulp and the prepared mixtures of buckwheat hulls and pulp) before the densification process was determined pursuant to PN-EN 14774-1:2010 Tests of the pelleting process of the mixture of buckwheat hulls and potato pulp were carried out on a SS-4 test stand ( Pellet mill (1) is driven by electric motor 2, whose torque was transmitted through a bevel gear to the shaft on which a flat rotating matrix was mounted; the matrix worked with a stationary system of two bearing-supported densification rolls that force the densified material through the matrix openings. Feeding the densified material evenly to the working system of pellet mill 1 was realized through vibrating feeder 5, conveying the material to the working system of the pellet mill through inlet 3. Pellets left the working system through outlet 4. The SS-4 stand was equipped with universal metre 6 measuring electric power demand of the device, and Spider 8 recorder 7 connected to computer 8. Signals from universal metre 6 were transmitted to Spider 8 recorder 7 in the form of binary files which were further processed using the Microsoft Excel and Statistica 10.0PL software. Tests of densification of the mixture of buckwheat hulls and potato pulp in the working system of the pellet mill were conducted for the working gap between the densification roll and the matrix of 0.4 mm, at a mass velocity of the mixtures of approx. 50 kg h In the course of the tests carried out on the SS-4 stand, determined were the influence of potato pulp content (10%, 20% and 30%) in a mixture with buckwheat hulls on electric power consumption of the engine driving the pellet mill, and on kinetic durability of the obtained pellets. Kinetic durability of the obtained pellets was determined pursuant to PN-R-64834:1998 Density of pellets was determined 24 h after the process. In the course of measurements, length and diameter of 15 randomly chosen pellets were measured by means of a calliope with an accuracy of ±0.02 mm, while their mass was determined by means of a WPS 360 laboratory balance with an accuracy of ±0.001 g. Before measuring pellets length, their surfaces were smoothed by means of abrasive paper. Pellets density was calculated as the ratio between the mass of pellets to their volume. Determination of heat of combustion and calorific value was performed pursuant to PN-ISO 1928: 2002 Ash content was determined after fuel combustion (buckwheat hulls or pellets from a mixture of potato pulp and buckwheat hulls) in a bomb calorimeter. After the combustion, the contents of the crucible were dried and weighed. Ash content in the fuel was defined as the ratio (the percentage) of the mass of crucible contents after combustion to the mass of fuel before the combustion. Water activity of the densified mixture and the obtained pellets were determined using the AquaLab apparatus, ensuring an accuracy of up to +/−0.003 a Dry matter in pellets samples was determined pursuant to the methodology described in PN-88/R-04013  The obtained test results ( The performed one-way analysis of variance ANOVA (one-dimensional significance test) at a level of significance of P = 0.05 allowed to observe a significant influence of potato pulp content in the densified mixture with buckwheat hulls on power consumption of the pellet mill. Reduction of power consumption of the pellet mill observed during the research is caused by a significant increase of moisture content of the mixture resulting from the increased potato pulp content ( Moisture content of the mixture increased from 16.90% (at a pulp content of 10%) to 33.93% (at a pulp content of 30%). Increased pulp content resulted in obtaining increasingly high amounts of binder (in the form of a liquid produced from starch and moisture) during the pelleting process. The produced binder had the effect of “lubrication” of the surface of the openings in the pellet mill matrix, thus causing a reduction of resistance to forcing through openings. This, in turn, caused a reduction of power consumption of the pellet mill ( Influence of pulp content  A favourable impact of binder addition to biomass on reduction of power consumption of the pellet mill in the pelleting process is also confirmed by other authors On the basis of the performed tests ( The performed one-way analysis of variance ANOVA (one-dimensional significance test) at a level of significance of P = 0.05 allowed to observe a significant influence of potato pulp content in the densified mixture with buckwheat hulls on density and kinetic durability of pellets. Increasing pulp content in a mixture with buckwheat hulls from 10 to 30% caused a reduction of density of the obtained pellets by approx. 32% (from 1234.86 to 841.71 kg m An addition of potato pulp to buckwheat hulls allowed to obtain pellets of a high quality (high density and high kinetic durability), higher than in the case of hulls alone. Even those pellets obtained at a potato pulp content of 30%, after drying, did not fall apart to the same degree as pellets obtained at a similar moisture content from buckwheat hulls alone. This was caused by the action of a sticky gel produced from moisture and starch contained in the pulp in the course of pelleting, as a result of the influence of high temperatures. After cooling, the gel led to creation of strong bindings between the particles of the densified mixture. According to Kaliyan and Morey A favourable effect of binder addition to biomass on pellets quality is confirmed by numerous research studies. Sokhansanja et al. It should be remembered, however, that the values of kinetic durability of pellets obtained during the tests were obtained in laboratory conditions and cannot be compared directly with other values of kinetic durability determined pursuant to EN 15210-1 Pellets obtained from a mixture of buckwheat hulls and potato pulp at different pulp contents (10, 20 and 30%) are shown in The tests showed that pellets obtained at a pulp content of 10% were characterized by high density and durability and their surface was even and smooth ( Influence of pulp content  The obtained values of density and kinetic durability of pellets from a mixture of buckwheat hulls and potato pulp allowed to conclude that at a pulp content of 20% it is possible to obtain, at moderate power consumption, high quality pellets, which can be treated as full value solid biomass fuel. In relation to the values of kinetic durability (mechanical durability), pellets obtained from buckwheat hulls with a potato pulp content of up to 20% meet the requirements of norms pertaining to wood pellets in European countries The research results made it possible to preliminarily determine parameters of densification in the working system of the pellet mill at the technological scale as well as to design a detailed technology for the production of heating pellets from buckwheat hulls with a potato pulp content, which resulted in a patent application  The performed one-way analysis of variance ANOVA (one-dimensional significance test) at a level of significance of P = 0.05 allowed to observe a significant influence of potato pulp content in the densified mixture with buckwheat hulls on water activity of the mixture and the pellets obtained from it. ater activity of the obtained pellets decreased to 0.746 (at a pulp content of 10%), to 0.980 (at a pulp content of 30%), whereas moisture content of pellets decreased from 16.90% to 14.13% (at a pulp content of 10%), from 25.90 to 24.63% (at a pulp content of 20%), and from 33.93 to 32.53% (at a pulp content of 30%). Szlachta and Podawca In the case of pellets, especially fodder pellets, knowing water activity during production and storage is very important and may be adopted as a critical quality control parameter. Knowledge of water activity is especially important in the case of densified mixtures whose ingredients at the time of manufacturing differ considerably in the area water activity. Buckwheat hulls and potato pulp are this kind of mixture. In this case, the product is not in a state of thermodynamic equilibrium, and there occurs an exchange of mass between its ingredients. Water content and water activity, especially in the case of pellets used for fodder purposes, is decisive as far as development of microflora is concerned, thus determining pellets durability. Measuring changes of water activity in pellets will allow to create adequate conditions that needed during their production and storage.  The performed one-way analysis of variance ANOVA (one-dimensional significance test) at a level of significance of P = 0.05 allowed to observe a significant influence of the content of potato pulp in the densified mixture with buckwheat hulls on heat of combustion and calorific value of pellets obtained from it. On the basis of the obtained correlations, it can be concluded that pulp content has a slight influence on the values of heat of combustion and calorific value of the tested waste materials. As pulp content is increasing, heat of combustion and calorific value of the tested waste materials are decreasing only very slightly. Increasing pulp content from 0 to 30% causes a slight reduction of heat of combustion, from 19.44 to 19.05 MJ kg This is confirmed by Liu et al. Influence of pulp content Increasing pulp content in a mixture with buckwheat hulls from 0 to 30% causes only a slight increase of ash content ( The obtained values of heat of combustion and calorific value (  The performed determination of the elemental composition (chlorine, sodium, potassium, phosphorus, and nitrogen, i.e. the elements important in the process of combustion) makes it possible to conclude that fuel from potato pulp, in comparison with buckwheat hulls, could become a valuable and attractive boiler fuel that might be used by local council's power industry, or by individual users (non-industrial use).  The performed one-way analysis of variance ANOVA (one-dimensional significance test) at a level of significance of P = 0.05 allowed to observe a significant influence of potato pulp content in the densified mixture of buckwheat hulls and potato pulp on chlorine content in the mixture and in the obtained pellets. Potato pulp addition makes it possible to reduce chlorine content in the obtained pellets. Chlorine content in pellets produced from a mixture of buckwheat hulls and potato pulp determined at each of the values of potato pulp content allow the obtained pellets to be accepted as full-quality fuel pursuant to CEN/TS 15289 and ISO 17225 norm The obtained pellets with a potato pulp content exceeding 20% can also be used as a solid fuel by professional power industry in high-efficiency biomass boilers (with strictly specified limit parameters for fuel), for example for bubbling fluidized bed boilers  Increasing pulp content in a mixture with buckwheat hulls from 10 to 30% caused a reduction of power consumption of the pellet mill by approx. 61.5% (from 4.68 to 1.80 kW). Increasing pulp content in a mixture with buckwheat hulls from 10 to 30% caused a reduction of density of the obtained pellets by approx. 32% (from 1234.86 to 841.71 kg/m Potato pulp addition to pelleted buckwheat hulls of 10% allowed to obtain very high density (1234.86 kg/m Potato pulp addition to pelleted buckwheat hulls of up to 20% allows to obtain high quality pellets, which are a full-value solid fuel. Increasing potato pulp content in a mixture with buckwheat hulls from 10 to 30% has an impact on a significant increase of water activity, moisture content of the densified mixture, as well as of pellets produced from it. The pelleting process has an influence on a reduction of both water activity and moisture content of the densified mixture. In order to reduce water activity of the obtained pellets below 0.6 and prevent mould from growing in the tested pellets, their moisture content has to be reduced down to approx. 8%. The obtained values of heat of combustion and calorific value prove that the tested waste materials (mixtures of buckwheat hulls and potato pulp) are a material of high energy qualities. Increasing potato pulp content in a mixture with buckwheat hulls from 0 to 30% caused a reduction of heat of combustion, from 19.44 to 19.05 MJ/kg (for dry matter of the mixture), and of calorific value, from 18.89 to 17.51 MJ/kg (for dry matter). Increasing potato pulp content in a mixture with buckwheat hulls from 0 to 30% caused a reduction 0.0833% (for buckwheat hulls) to 0.0474% (for pellets produced from mixtures of buckwheat hulls with a 30% potato pulp addition). Research performed as part of S/WBiIŚ/2/2015 work realized at the Faculty of Civil and Environmental Engineering of Bialystok University of Technology.