A fundamental understanding of the factors influencing particle shape is of central importance for optimisation of the output quality from crushing plants for aggregate production. The literature reports that the wear on and setting of a cone crusher influence particle shape, The fact that wear on and the setting of a cone crusher influence particle shape is considered common knowledge and is also reported in the literature. To date, no mathematical model for predicting particle shape has been presented.
                  A novel model capable of predicting aggregate shape is presented in this paper. The particle flakiness model has two parameters: the average particle size of the feed and the closed side setting (CSS) of the crusher. A common method used for controlling the process flow in a crushing plant is also demonstrated. Detailed process knowledge is important in order to minimize the circulating load whilst still maximizing product quality.
                  The model shows that the flakiness of the product can be estimated with knowledge of the following two parameters: CSS and the average particle size of the feed. Additional investigations are needed to improve the precision of the model.In general, it is difficult to control the crushing process due to lack of knowledge on how changes in process parameters affect the final product. The obvious goal is a process where the quality parameters can be monitored automatically and where the different objects in the process can be controlled in order to achieve a certain product target. This idea behind automated process control can be found in various books on the subject of control theory as well as in previous research on crusher performance ( In the crushing process there are many objects that can be controlled. Examples of controllable objects are the mixer and the crusher shown in Previous research in this area has studied factors that may influence product flakiness, and It is common knowledge that if there is little variation in the process, i.e. the frequency of a certain particle size is close to constant, a relatively small sample can be taken without the risk of it being non-representative ( Until recently, Swedish aggregate producers measured the flakiness by means of the FAS3 method. Since July 2004 this method has been replaced by the European Standard for classification of aggregate characteristics. The new standard mainly used for determining the shape of aggregate is the The Flakiness index ( is the mass of the sample, in grams; is the sum, in grams, of the mass of the flaky particles, which have passed through a bar sieve with a bar distance Di/2. The FAS method ( is the mass fraction in percent of the bar sieve that comes closest to allowing more than 50% of the material to pass through it. is the mass fraction in percent of the bar sieve that comes closest to allowing less than 50% of the material to pass through it. This work aims to produce tools for controlling product quality and will illustrate simple methods to determine the material flow. Such knowledge may be useful for future quality control strategies. The goal of this research is to produce an empirical model for predicting product flakiness. The tests were performed at a Swedish aggregate production facility in Göteborg. The plant has a fairly typical mix of machines for aggregate production. A jaw crusher is used during the primary stage and a gyratory crusher during the secondary stage. Two cone crushers are employed during the tertiary stage. The plant has several screens and conveyors to separate the different products. In This work focuses on the machines used before and after the cone crushers and the cone crushers themselves, see boxed area in Another aim of this work was to determine how product quality varies over time during production. Repeated tests were therefore performed over the course of one day. Samples were taken at 1-h intervals, starting at 07:30 am and ending at 02:30 pm with the exception of 12:30 pm when no samples were taken. A total of 14 samples were taken that day, of which seven were taken before the material went through the crusher. The remainder were collected after the crushing process. The cone crusher was fed with 0–80 mm material and configured to produce material of 0–32 mm. The samples consisted of a total of approximately 110 kg of 0–32 material and 130 kg of 0–80 mm material. The average particle size in the feed was calculated, in order to obtain a clearer picture of the variation in mean particle size. The average particle size is determined by calculating the arithmetic mean as shown in Eq. = = =  There is a variation in flakiness over the course of the day and, as a result, one sample is insufficient as it cannot represent the flakiness in the average daily production. This becomes clearer in Earlier research by In a comparison between the average particle size in the feeds shown in Results from another study were investigated in order to obtain a deeper understanding of how the average particle size influences product flakiness. In this study, test results were analyzed from 10 different rock materials originating in different parts of Sweden ( If the average feed sizes in the 10 samples are compared with the average flakiness index for the product in the respective samples, one can clearly see that there is a strong connection between feed size and flakiness, see Flakiness may depend on the composition of the material fed to the crusher. The question is what other factors influence product flakiness. In This model is an attempt to create an empirical model for predicting flakiness in aggregate production and demonstrates how the aforementioned factors interact and how it is possible to predict the flakiness outcome for a specific cone crusher. Later in this paper, the model will be compared to flakiness measured in one of the materials shown in The model is described in Eq. Because of the nonlinearity of the function, the Jacobean matrix must be determined; this is shown in Eq. The difference between estimated flakiness and measured flakiness is described as function Because the system is over determined, Eq. Multiplication by the transpose of the Jacobean matrix will produce a 3 A clarification of Eqs. The new parameters are then calculated as the difference between the old estimated parameters and the vector The method is an iterative process, and checking to ensure that the norm of the function Applying Eq. The new equation is presented in Eq. The model has proved valid for the most common crusher chambers used for aggregate production, and the range for the CSS parameter is between 6 and 20 mm. The range for the parameter The developed model predicts the flakiness well when compared to measured data from the studies in Göteborg and Dalby. Those discrepancies that exist can be due to the fact that the model does not consider the mantle geometry or material composition of the aggregate. In This work has generated a new model for predicting flakiness in a crushed aggregate. The model is based partly on conclusions from previous research and partly on two new independent studies. The model is a black box model with two parameters that influence product flakiness. This paper shows that there are two major parameters that influence flakiness: average feed size and CSS. Due to the fact that the model is not based on any other parameters or physical phenomena, a more dynamic model is needed. There are discrepancies that may be due to measuring error, physical factors such as material or machine characteristics. These could also be investigated and included in future models. Future research should focus on how chamber geometry influences particle shape. The black box model needs to be complemented by a model that is based on mechanical characteristics such as crusher stroke and eccentric speed. The author wants to thank Bengt-Olof Tjell and Torsten Åhman at Sandvik Rock Processing in Svedala for all the help with test results. Erik Oscarsson at Skanska Teknik is also acknowledged. The personnel at Vikans Kross for there help with supplying the large amount of material that where used. The author also wants to thank Skanska Teknik and Sandvik Rock Processing for their financial support.