Objective
                  In 1981, Moore introduced a new classification for dislocation-type fractures caused by high-energy mechanisms. The most common medial Moore-type fractures are entire condyle fractures with the avulsion of the median eminence (tibial anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) insertion). They are usually associated with a posterolateral depression of the tibial plateau and an injury of the lateral menisco-tibial capsule. This uniform injury of the knee is increasingly observed in the recent years after skiing injuries due to the high-speed carving technique. This uprising technique uses shorter skis with more sidecut allowing much higher curve speeds and increases the forces on the knee joint.
                  The aim of this study was to describe the injury pattern, our developed operative approach for reconstruction and outcome.
               
                  Methods
                  A total of 28 patients with 29 postero-medial fracture dislocation of the proximal tibia from 2001 until 2009 were analysed. Clinical and radiological follow-up was performed after 4 years on average (1 year in minimum). Evaluation criteria included the Lysholm score for everyday knee function and the Tegner score evaluating the activity level. All fractures were stabilised post primarily. The surgical main approach was medial. First, the exposure of the entire medial condyle fracture was performed following the fracture line to the articular border. The posterolateral impaction was addressed directly through the main fracture gap from anteromedial to posterolateral. Small plateau fragments were removed, larger fragments reduced and preliminarily fixed with separate K-wire(s). The postero-medial part of the condyle was then prepared for main reduction and application of a buttress T-plate in a postero-medial position, preserving the pes anserinus and medial collateral ligament. In addition, a parapatellar medial mini-arthrotomy through the same main medial approach was performed. Through this mini-arthrotomy, the avulsed anterior eminence with attached distal ACL is retained by a transosseous suture back to the tibia.
               
                  Results
                  We could evaluate 26 patients (93%); two patients were lost to follow-up due to foreign residence. Median age was 51 years (20–77 years). The fractures were treated post primarily at an average of 4 days; in 18 cases a two-staged procedure with initial knee-spanning external fixator was used. All fractures healed without secondary displacement or infection. As many as 25 patients showed none to moderate osteoarthritis after a median of 4 years. One patient showed a severe osteoarthritis after 8 years. All patients judge the clinical result as good to excellent. The Lysholm score reached 95 (75–100) of maximal 100 points and the Tegner activity score 5 (3–7) of maximal 10 points (competitive sports). The patients achieved a median flexion of 135° (100–145°).
               
                  Conclusion
                  In our view, it is crucial to recognise the different components of the injury in the typical postero-medial fracture dislocation of the proximal tibia. The described larger medial approach for this type of medial fracture dislocation allows repairing most of the injured aspects of the tibial head, namely the medial condyle with postero-medial buttressing, the distal insertion of the ACL and the posterolateral impaction of the plateau.Proximal tibia fractures are commonly described according to the Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Osteosynthesefragen/Orthopedic Trauma Association (AO/OTA) We observed an increasing number of these injuries in the past 10 years, mainly in ski accidents probably due to the new high-speed carving technique. In this technique, shorter skis with more sidecut are used, allowing much higher curve speeds. The forces onto the knee joint increase. This could be the reason for more complex, that is, fracture-dislocation-type injuries. In the literature, several descriptions of double and single approaches to the proximal tibia are published. The objective of our study was to describe our single but larger medial approach to all relevant fracture elements in postero-medial fracture-dislocation injuries as well as the clinical and radiological outcomes. All patients with a postero-medial fracture-dislocation of the proximal tibia admitted to our trauma centre from 2001 until 2009 were evaluated. Follow-up was achieved after a minimum of 1 year radiologically with two plane knee radiographs and clinically using the Lysholm, Tegner activity as well as the OAK (Orthopedic Task Group Knee of the Swiss Orthopedic Association) scores. All fractures were treated post primarily either after application of a knee-spanning external fixator (all knees with persisting dislocation and/or cases with signs of a compartment syndrome) or after simple immobilisation. For operation, the patient was brought in a supine position and the injured leg slightly elevated, with 20° flexion of the knee joint. The other leg was lowered to allow lateral fluoroscopic imaging. A strictly medial skin incision was made from about 5 Only then was the reduction process started: to reduce the postero-medial main fragment, the interjacent postero-centro-lateral depressed plateau fragment was addressed first. The reduction of this fragment was achieved through the main fracture gap anteromedially. The fracture gap was opened using a larger bone spreader. Through the entire tibia head, from anteromedial to posterolateral, this plateau fragment could be reached, manipulated and reduced under fluoroscopic control ( In the time period between January 2001 and September 2009, 365 proximal tibial fractures were admitted to our trauma centre. A total of 29 fractures (7.9%) in 28 patients were classified as postero-medial fracture-dislocation of the proximal tibia. As many as 22 patients were injured in skiing, two in snowboard accidents and four in other activities. We could follow up on 26 patients (93%); two were lost to follow-up due to foreign residence, including the one patient with bilateral injuries. The median follow-up range was 4 years (1–8 years). The median age at the time of injury was 51 years (20–77 years). Twelve patients were male and 14 female. Compartment syndrome of the lower leg occurred in one patient. It was diagnosed and treated with the initial surgical management. The definitive reconstruction was performed in average after 4 days (0–9 days) after injury. Small-fragment implants (3.5 All fractures healed within 2–4 months without secondary displacement. As many as 25 patients showed none to moderate osteoarthritis, according to Kellgren and Lawrence, after a median of 4 years. One patient showed a severe osteoarthritis after 8 years. The operative treatment in dislocation-type fractures of the proximal tibia is challenging. Several aspects must be considered, such as the soft-tissue condition including the imminent compartment syndrome, the possible ligament instability and the definitive treatment strategy. The medial condyle type is the most common dislocation-type fracture of the proximal tibia (type I and II according to Moore). It is known that ligamentous injuries are extremely common in these fracture types. Tscherne and Lobenhoffer described that 96% of ACL injuries and 85% of all medial collateral ligament injuries were found in dislocation-type fractures. In our collective, we could observe a consistent combination of three main injuries: Postero-medial main condylar fragment (±metaphyseal comminution). It never involves really the ‘entire’ condyle, but it consists of about 70–80% of the medial condyle. The main fracture plane starts anteromedial, passes through the centre of the tibial head involving the tibial eminence and ends posterolateral. Postero-centro-lateral plateau depression, usually not in the weight-bearing zone of the lateral plateau. Proximally displaced osseous avulsion of the ACL in all cases. These fragments of the tibial eminence are usually quite large, sometimes separated in two or three fragments and belong to the attachment of the ACL and anterior horn of the lateral (and sometimes) medial meniscus. This injury pattern does correspond neither exactly to the type I nor type II, according to Moore. At the time of admission and X-ray examination, in nearly 50% of the cases the knee was in a true dislocation at the lateral part (intact main lateral condyle) ( In the literature, different approaches have been described to address these injuries. A central midline incision with medial dissection and arthrotomy is proposed using an extensive midline approach with division of the patellar ligament or even an osteotomy of the tibial tuberosity. With our developed single large medial approach, all three main injuries can be addressed adequately without great risk of wound-healing disturbances or other serious problems. The most difficult part is the reduction of the centro-posterolateral depression using this transosseus access through the main fracture gap. However, for us, it seems easier to accomplish than a separate lateral approach. Using a lateral approach, an osteotomy is necessary, as the anterior part of the lateral plateau is not fractured and no access to the posterolateral depression zone exists. With our strategy, we could achieve good to excellent results in nearly all cases. This might be related also to the fact that the tibial eminence with the intact ACL was refixed in all cases. In our view, it is crucial to recognise the increasingly observed postero-medial fracture-dislocation of the proximal tibia in knee injuries in winter-sport areas. The described larger medial approach for this type of medial fracture dislocation allows addressing most of the injured aspects of the tibial head, namely the medial condyle with postero-medial buttressing, the distal aspect of the ACL and the posterolateral depression of the plateau. With our strategy, we achieved good middle to long term-results in nearly all patients. The authors exclude any potential conflicts of interest or any financial and personal relationships with other people or organisations that could inappropriately influence their work.