The effects of directions and magnitudes of static electrical field on solidification of Al33 wt.%Cu eutectic alloy were investigated. For this purpose, a new directional solidification apparatus was specially designed to solidify the AlCu eutectic alloy under static high electrical field (E). For the first time, the AlCu molten eutectic alloy was solidified under different directions; parallel and antiparallel of the solid liquid interface growth direction (E+ and E−, respectively) and magnitudes (7–10 kV/cm) of static high electrical fields. The lamellar spacing (λ), eutectic grain size (EGS) and hardness (HB) of the AlCu eutectic alloy solidified with different values of E+ and E− were measured with standards methods. It was observed that the static electrical field is an effective control parameter on the directional solidification and the values of λ, EGS and HB are increased and decreased with increasing the values of E+ and E−, respectively in the AlCu eutectic alloy. Finally, the dependency of λ, EGS and HB values on E+ and E− values were obtained with linear regression analysis in the AlCu eutectic alloy.The directional solidified binary or ternary eutectics may produce well aligned regular structures consisting of fibrous (rod-like) or laminated components [ By controlling the alloys solidification parameters; composition of alloy (X), temperature gradient (G) and growth rate (V) with directional solidification, it can be determined how the microstructures and thus basic mechanical and physical properties of the eutectic alloys such as lamellar spacings (λ), microhardness (HV), electrical resistivity (ρ) etc. are changed according to these parameters. So far, numerous theoretical and experimental studies have been carried out on the directional solidification of binary and ternary metallic alloys to reveal the relationship between the solidification parameters and the material properties [ Recently, new external control parameters such as alternate current (AC) field, direct current (DC) field, high current density electropulsing, magnetic field and DC electrical field on directional solidification were wildly investigated [ In the crystal growth process, it was shown that the microstructure formation can be regulated by electrical and magnetic field generated by externally applied alternating current in the Bi In addition, researchers agree that the mechanism of the electric field effect remains unclear [ Despite all these study and investigation, there is a not sufficient study on solidification of metallic alloys under static high electric field. So far, the static high electrical field was not applied to be parallel or antiparallel of the solid-liquid interface growth direction to see real effects on growth rate in the literature. Besides previous studies do not have a suitable prototype design for producing an industrial cast under uniform electrical fields. Thus, the effects of directions and magnitudes of static high DC electric field on the microstructure and hardness in the Al An experimental apparatus for directional solidification under static high electric field is specially designed and its schematic illustration is shown in The heating furnace was constructed from an alumina tube (90 mm ID, 110 mm OD and 150 mm long). Kanthal-A resistance wire insulated with ceramic bids was wound on the tube to give a hot zone; 100 mm long from 20 mm bottom of alumina tube and the heating element was covered with fire clay cement. The alumina tube was placed into Yutong stone placed into metal carcass. The furnace was set up with the tube axis vertical. The heating furnace temperature was controlled by with an on/off temperature controller using a K-type 0.5 mm thick a thermocouple insulated but fixed to the heater windings. The cylindrical cooling tank is made of stainless steel. It had a 38 mm ID, 42 mm OD, and 150 mm in length and both ends of stainless steel bore was closed. All joints on the cooling tank were made by welding and tested for air leaks by placing under water using pressurized air. A 50 mm length of the cooling tank was vertically inserted into heating furnace alumina tube at the bottom of heating furnace. The temperature of water in the cooling tank was kept at 291 K using a heating/refrigerating circulating bath in the present work. Static high electrical field line was set by connecting a FUG HCP 1400–35,000 type DC high voltage power supply with the graphite specimen crucible, directly placed on stainless steel cooling tank and placing a stainless steel disc connected to earth at a few mm far from the graphite specimen crucible in series or vice versa as shown in The space between the specimen and stainless steel disc were measured from the photographs of the space maker with an accuracy of ±0.5 mm. The fixed distances between the specimen and stainless steel disc were measured as about 18 mm from the photographs of the space maker. The fractional uncertainty in the measurements of the fixed distances between the specimen and stainless steel disc is about 2.7%. The specimen produced with none electrical field and static high electrical fields for measuring the lamellar spacing, eutectic grain size and hardness must be solidified under certain and same solidification or growth conditions otherwise an experimental error comes from different microstructural length scale due to different solidification conditions or growth rates. To prevent length scale problems, the directional solidification conditions with none electrical field such as composition of alloy, the preheating temperature of heating furnace, liquid alloy temperature and cooling water temperature and flow rate were identified and kept constant and same size graphite crucibles were used for directional solidifications under static high electric fields. In present study, Al Static high electrical field directions were chosen as positive, E To see clearly the effects of electrical field on the microstructures, the applied electrical field force on the charged liquid atoms must be equal or bigger than the sum of surface tension and fluidity force of liquid atoms at least. Therefore, the critical electrical field value dependence on kind of alloys and it must be identified. Thus, the required critical electrical value for the Al Cu eutectic alloy was found to be 6 kV/cm by doing a few experimental works. The space between the graphite crucible and the stainless steel disc was set as 6–12 mm. The required electric field was applied avoiding of possible electric arc, electropulsing or electric current using high DC voltages generator. After applying the required voltage to molten alloy, the cooling water was turn on and the input power for heating furnace was turn off to directionally solidify the specimen from bottom to top under static high electrical field. When the heating furnace temperature reached to 70 K below the eutectic melting temperature of alloy, the high DC voltages generator power was turned off. The time for applying high voltage was about 25 min during the solidification of molten alloy. Finally the samples were quickly taken from the graphite crucible and rapidly quenched by throwing it into a water tank at a temperature of 25 degrees. The solidification experiments are carried out under the different directions (positive and negative) and magnitudes of high electric fields (7–10 kV/cm). In addition, a specimen was solidified under the same solidification conditions with none the electric field for a reference specimen. Electric field can be expressed as 1 V/m, as well as 1 N/C. Output voltages of the high DC voltages generator power were directly read from front panel of generator with an accuracy of 0.3%. The estimated error in the measurements of electrical field, E can be expressed as The total estimated error in the measurements of electrical field, E is sum of the estimated error in the measurements of voltage reading and fixed distances between the specimen and stainless steel disc. Thus, the estimated error in the measurements of electrical field, E is about 3.0%. The solidified Al Microstructure of Al Lamellar spacing and grain size were measured from optical images taken from cross sections of specimen using the NIS-Elements Version 4.30 software supplied by Nikon Company. The lamellar spacing is considered utilising linear intercept method [ Hardness is one of the most important parameters that give an idea about the mechanical properties of the materials. The Brinell hardness, HB can be expressed as In the hardness measurements, the values of sample radius (r), the ball diameter (D) and track diameter (d) are measured. Thus, the estimated experimental error in the measurement of HB is the sum of fractional uncertainty of the sample radius and diagonal length (d) and it can be expressed as The values of r, D and d were measured from photographs sample and the indentation traces. The fractional uncertainty for measurements of D and d are about 1%, respectively. Thus, total estimated experimental error in the measurement of microhardness is about 4%. As mentioned above, the lamellar spacing of Al It is well known that the application of an electric field to conducting liquid solutions can produce substantial changes in composition due to differences in ionic mobility. The value of λ The value of λ The variations of λ As can be seen from The exponent values of E Typical optical images of the eutectic grains for the Al As shown in The measured values of Brinell hardness (HB) for directionally solidified samples under different directions and magnitudes of static electrical field are given in As shown in From present results of microstructure and hardness analysis in the Al The applied electric field constitutes an electrical force on liquid atoms or molecules and the electrical field force leads an increment or decrement in the number of atoms or molecules transferring from liquid phase to solid phase when its direction is the parallel or antiparallel to the solid liquid interface growth direction. The negative and positive electric fields decrease and increase the microstructure parameters such as lamellar spacing and grain size and mechanical properties such as hardness of the eutectic Al The static electric field can be considered an effective control parameter for the directional solidification of the Al The critical value of static high electrical filed in both positive and negative electrical field directions for the Al There is no apparent difference in the microstructure along the specimen whether the electric field in negative or positive electric field. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This research was supported financially by the