The results of patellar fracture fixation using metal wire and non-absorbable polyester (5 Ethibond) are presented. In group 1 (21 cases), the standard ‘AO’ technique using stainless steel wire was used, and in group 2 (16 cases) we used 5 Ethibond. Patients were assigned to the two groups on surgeon preference. Post-operative management in the two groups was similar, with patients being allowed to mobilise as comfort allowed, under the supervision of the physiotherapists. All patients were followed-up until union of the fractures or until further surgical intervention was carried out. At a mean of 2 years and 6 months (range 1–4 years), we reviewed the notes and X-rays of all 37 cases. In group 2 there were no cases of infection but there were three cases of post-operative infections in group 1. Re-operation rate was 6/21 (38%) in group 1 and 1/6 (6%) in group 2. Therefore, the relative risk of re-operation in the metal group is six times that in the non-absorbable polyester group. The risk of infection in the metal group is also higher. These have implication on patient morbidity associated with the operative treatment of patellar fractures. Non-absorbable polyester appears to compare favourably with the use of metallic wire to fix patellar fractures.Patellar fractures account for approximately 1% of all skeletal injuries, but only a third of these require surgery Several techniques have been advocated for internal fixation of patella fractures The current study was started in 1994 and reports on 37 cases of patellar fractures using either stainless steel wire or Ethibond to stabilise the fractures. Stainless steel wire was used traditionally to stabilise patellar fractures requiring operative management. One group of surgeons in our institution deemed it to be the strongest method of fixation. The senior author preferred to use Ethibond because of its perceived benefits outlined elsewhere in this paper. Over a 4-year period we have studied 37 cases of patellar fractures treated operatively in our hospital. Patients were divided into two groups, group 1 being treated by the ‘AO’ technique using stainless steel wire, and those in group 2 having their patellae fixed using non-absorbable polyester (5 Ethibond-Ethicon Ltd., Edinburgh) as the fixation material of choice. In the former group, fixation was achieved using Kirschner wires and a tension band, and in group 2, fractures were fixed using a cerclage suture complemented with an anterior figure of eight looped deep to the quadriceps and patella tendons. The patients were divided into the two groups on surgeon preference. The senior author's patients had non-absorbable polyester as fixation material of choice whereas some of the other surgeons in the department preferred stainless steel wire. Post-operative management in the two groups was similar. The patients were allowed to mobilise as pain allowed, under the supervision of the physiotherapists. Weight bearing was allowed as tolerated and only if there was any concern over wound healing were patients given dorsal splints to wear until wounds had healed. After discharge from hospital patients were followed-up until union of the fractures or until further surgical intervention was carried out. The notes and X-rays were reviewed at a mean of 2 years and 6 months with a range 1–4 years from the index operation. All fractures were classified radiologically Of the 37 cases, there were 13 males and 24 females, with an average age of 64 years and 6 months, and a range 19–84 years. The commonest cause of injury was a fall (31 cases), but five were as a result of road traffic accidents and one was following a sporting injury (football). There were 21 cases in group 1 and 16 cases in group 2. The details of the cases are given in In group 1 the average age of patients was 69.5 years (range 19–84 years), and group 2 had an average age of 62.6 years (range 33–89 years). There were eight males and 13 females in group 1, five males and 11 females in group 2. The fracture pattern in the two groups is summarised in In the 37 cases there were two grade II open fractures but all other injuries were closed. One of these cases was in an 84-year-old lady (case 15 in group 1) who sustained a comminuted displaced fracture, internally fixed using stainless steel wire. She made an uncomplicated recovery and the fracture union occurred at 3 months. The other patient with grade II open fracture (case 7 in group 1) was one of the three patients in group 1 who developed wound infections. There were no cases of wound infections in group 2. Although the infection rate differences in the two groups are clinically significant, the numbers are too small to be statistically significant. The other two wound infection cases in group 1 were cases 5 and 20. Case 7 was of a 19-year-old male patient who had sustained a grade II open fracture of the patella following a road traffic accident. This was internally fixed using stainless steel wire, following wound debridement and under antibiotic cover. After 7 months of the operation, the wires became prominent causing pain in the patella and erythema around the wound. After removal of the metalwork all symptoms subsided and the patient made an uneventful recovery. Case 5 was an 84-year-old lady who had a closed, displaced transverse fracture stabilised using stainless steel wire. After 4 weeks of the operation the wound became infected requiring debridement, removal of wires, patellectomy and skin grafting. Following this the wound healed but some residual knee pain persisted. Case 20 was a 74-year-old man, who had a closed comminuted displaced fracture internally fixed with stainless steel wire. Fracture united 6 months following this but developed a wound infection subsequent to this. After removal of metalwork he made a full recovery. In the metal wire group there were eight re-operations out of 21 cases (38%), whereas in the non-absorbable polyester group there was one re-operation out of 16 cases (6%, these do not reach statistical significance with Three out of the re-operated cases in group 1 have been discussed above, but the five cases were operated upon again because the metal wires became prominent, leading to pain in the patella. Symptoms subsided in all cases after metalwork removal. There was one other patient in this group who too had prominent and painful wires, but did not wish to undergo another operation.   Braided polyester suture offers several advantages compared with other materials when it is used as an alternative to stainless steel wire. It is mechanically superior to other non-absorbable and resorbable sutures in vitro, with high stiffness and high ultimate tensile strength The main biomechanical function of the patella is to increase the effective lever arm of the quadriceps in effective knee extension or resisting knee flexion