The properties of iron ore green pellets with varying additions of a surface-active flotation collector reagent (Atrac) were studied by small-scale balling. The compression strength and plasticity were measured with a semi-automatic measuring device and the pressure curves were saved and subjected to further mathematical treatment. The green pellet breakage was also filmed with a high-speed camera. Adding Atrac to the pellet feed seriously damaged the quality of green pellets, even in small dosages. This is because an increasing amount of air bubbles became so strongly attached on the particle surfaces that they could not be removed during compaction by balling. The adsorption of air in green pellets was seen as an increase in porosity and a decrease in the filling degree (proportion of pores filled with water). Both the wet and dry compression strength decreased. The air bubbles behaved in wet green pellets like large, plastic particles and the plasticity increased beyond an acceptable level. Breakage started inside the green pellets, along the air bubbles, and generated multi-breakage patterns in wet as well as dry green pellets. Green pellet breakage to crumbs instead of a few distinct segments, promotes the generation of dust and fines and leads to lower bed permeability in the pelletizing machine.
                  The results show that the decrease in iron ore green pellet wet strength in the presence of surface-active agents is not fully described by the so called Rumpf equation, where surface tension and contact angle are used as variables to describe the capillary forces. The green pellet breakage in the presence of air bubbles took place by crack propagation along pore structures rather than through the loss of the capillary forces.In the iron ore industry, agglomeration is large-scale. An iron ore pelletizing plant produces typically between 4 and 7 million tonnes of iron ore pellets per year, which corresponds to an hourly production rate of 500 to 900 t/h. Agglomeration is started by grinding and upgrading the iron ore to a concentrate with desired chemical quality and with a particle size distribution suitable for balling. The iron ore concentrate is then filtered, mixed with a binder, usually bentonite, and balled in large balling drums to wet green pellets. The capacity in one balling circuit can be up to 200 t/h. The green pellets are screened to collect the on-size fraction (9–16 mm) for induration; the under-size fraction is recycled back to the balling drums as seeds. The recycling loads are usually large, about 1.2–2.0 times the amount of fresh feed. The on-size green pellets are conveyed to the pelletizing machine where they are dried and indurated to strong, sintered agglomerates, ready for transportation to blast furnaces or direct reduction plants. The strength and behaviour of green pellets in wet and dry states has a major influence on the pellet plant capacity. Weak green pellets result in increasing circulating loads in the balling circuits. Also, breakage during drying and induration results in dust generation and decreased permeability in the pellet bed, with negative consequences for both production capacity and pellet quality. The practical behaviour of iron ore agglomeration systems in production plants is quite well known. Increasing the moisture content and decreasing the binder dosage both increase the green pellet growth rate. Insufficient moisture content causes oscillation in balling circuits. A certain level of oscillation is a commonly accepted means of determining the lowest possible moisture content for the specific pellet feed. Recently, a new measuring method was introduced to measure the plasticity in wet green pellets Agglomeration of iron ore concentrates cleaned by flotation (flotated pellet feeds) has always been recognized as a problem However, no experimental studies to validate the dependency of agglomerate strength on variations in the contact angle (hydrophobicity) were found. This is probably because specific adsorption and low surface tension tend to coincide and also, because of the difficulties to reliably measure contact angle on mineral particles Luossavaara–Kiirunavaara AB (LKAB) has magnetite iron ore deposits at Kiruna and Malmberget in northern Sweden. The Kiruna ore deposit contains some apatite, which is cleaned by reverse flotation. The phosphorus content is lowered from 0.10% P in the flotation feed to < Development work has recently been done at LKAB to achieve better reproducibility in laboratory-scale balling and also to develop the measuring methods used for green pellet characterization The magnetite pellet concentrate sample was collected from the LKAB Kiruna concentrating plant after flotation, after the final magnetic separation step. The sample contained 71.4% Fe, 0.44% SiO Bentonite was used as a binder in balling. The bentonite showed an Enslin value of 580% (after 2 h) and a fineness of 94%–75 μm. The bentonite was dried overnight at 105 °C and stored in a desiccator before balling. The collector reagent, Atrac 1563 (Akzo Nobel, Sweden), is a mixed anionic collector with carboxylic functional groups, consisting of a main collector, a co-collector and a foam regulator. It consists to about 95–98% of surface-active compounds and 2–5% organic compounds such as maleic acid and glycol derivates. Atrac 1563 is a yellow, fairly high-viscosity liquid (150–200 mPa s at 20 °C) consisting of protonated carboxylic acids. A 5% emulsion was prepared and the pH was adjusted to 8.5 The surface tension was measured by a digital tensiometer K10ST (Krüss GmbH) using the Wilhelmy plate. Atrac solutions were allowed to stand for 10 to 20 min before the surface tension was measured. This is long enough for the surface-active compounds to arrange at equilibrium concentration at the air–water interface. The amount of Atrac which adsorbs on the magnetite concentrate under conditions relevant for the micro-balling tests was roughly estimated by mixing weighted amounts of dry magnetite concentrate powder with Atrac solutions of 2 and 5 mg/dm In iron ore industry, small-scale balling is commonly referred to as micro-balling. Micro-balling was done in 7-kg batches of filtered material with about 6% moisture content. The moisture content was adjusted in two steps. First, the moisture was adjusted to 0.5% below the target moisture content. The batch was then allowed to stand in an acclimatization cabinet at 80% relative humidity and 40 °C for 2 h The variation in strength and plasticity between individual green pellets within one micro-balling batch and the repeatability between ten parallel batches was shown earlier Water glass and MIBC were not used in the micro-balling studies, mainly because more mixing would have started the agglomeration already in the mixer. Also, the MIBC frother can be expected to be washed away during the last magnetic separation stage after the flotation. The water glass might influence the amount of Atrac adsorbed on the magnetite concentrate. The laboratory adsorption tests carried out without water glass as described under The measuring methods used to measure the green pellet compression strength and plasticity have been described in detail earlier The green pellet breakage point is defined as the maximum load after which the pressure falls by at least 10% The drop number is measured by dropping the green pellets from a height of 0.45 m to a steel plate. The breakage is visually detected. The drop number is given as the average number of drops before a fracture is observed. Moisture content was measured by drying overnight at 105 °C and is given by moist weight, according to standard practice within the iron ore industry. Porosity was measured on dried green pellets by the GeoPyc 1360 instrument (Micromeritics Inc.) and absolute density by the AccuPyc 1330 gas displacement pycnometer (Micromeritics Inc.). These methods have been described earlier in detail To describe the liquid surface tension in the balling experiments, equilibrium surface tension in Atrac 1563 solutions in distilled water, in plant water (140 mg/dm The results from the adsorption tests are shown in Wet compression strength (wet-CS) as a function of the amount of Atrac added in the pellet feed before balling is shown in Polished samples of dried green pellets were prepared and studied by SEM. An overview of the green pellet structure about 1.5 mm beneath the outer surface is shown in Green pellets show fairly large structural variations even if they are taken from the same micro-balling batch. Therefore, even if microscope images confirm air inclusions in green pellets, the Some typical pressure curves collected with the PMP instrument from wet-CS measurement are shown in Dry compression strength, dry-CS, as a function of Atrac addition is shown in Some micro-balling experiments were done by mixing EtOH into the pellet feed. EtOH decreases the surface tension in the water phase without influencing the wettability of the magnetite particles. The EtOH concentrations varied between 2 and 14%, which results in surface tension values between 65 and 45 mN/m, according to Some micro-balling experiments were also done by mixing both EtOH (3%) and Atrac (60 g/t) simultaneously into the magnetite concentrate before balling. The measuring points are shown in earlier figures, When the surface-active agent, Atrac, was mixed with the magnetite concentrate, an increasing amount of air bubbles became so strongly attached to the particle surfaces that they could not be removed from green pellets during compaction by balling. The best way to detect that Atrac is carried over to the pelletizing plant is to measure the green pellet porosity and moisture content and calculate the filling degree. The main increase in porosity took place at Atrac dosages below 10 g/t, which is roughly the maximum adsorption capacity for the magnetite concentrate, but wet-CS continued to decrease and Def(1 daN) continued to increase, even at larger Atrac dosages. This decrease in wet-CS can hardly be explained by a decrease in the capillary forces, because the amount of water is so small that the CMC point is passed as soon as the specific adsorption on magnetite is completed. Therefore, at Atrac dosages above 10 g/t, the surface tension becomes low and constant and micelles are formed. If the micelles had adsorbed on magnetite, a further increase in porosity would have been expected. It could be that the micelles behave as a lubricant, increasing the green pellet plasticity and decreasing the green pellet wet strength. Wet-CS is also largely dependent on the viscosity developed in the bentonite suspension and its rheological behaviour in the presence of large amounts of surface-active agents is not known. An Atrac addition of 10 g/t caused a 2%-unit increase in green pellet porosity. Earlier data with similar raw materials In earlier textbooks Balling with water/ethanol mixtures also decreased the wet-CS values in green pellets, but ethanol had no influence on porosity. The decrease in wet-CS followed approximately the Rumpf equation (Eq. Atrac is highly selective for apatite. With Atrac adsorption by 10 g per tonne magnetite concentrate, the adsorption on apatite would be around 500 g per tonne apatite mineral (Atrac dosage of 50 g/t in flotation and 1% P in the flotation feed). A certain over-dosage of Atrac is needed to assure high enough P-reduction. Increased Atrac over-dosage can be expected to lead to increased specific adsorption on the magnetite surfaces. Therefore, to minimize the draw-backs of Atrac carried over to the pelletizing plant, proper control over the flotation process is essential. This also covers a strict control to hinder the apatite froth from being carried over to the pellet feed. In the flotation process the contact area between particles and air bubbles is maximized in order to float the apatite mineral. Thus, the conditions are favourable for air bubbles to adsorb on magnetite particles, as well, even if the amount of air bubbles would not be high enough to float the magnetite. In the micro-balling experiments, the air bubbles were generated either during mixing or during spraying of the Atrac solution into the mixing vessel. Therefore, the number of attached air bubbles and their size distribution could differ in the laboratory balling experiments compared to production plant conditions. In spite of this difference, samples collected from the pelletizing plant have shown quite similar changes in porosity, as was seen in the micro-balled green pellets.  When applied to practical process control, the main conclusion from this work is that the best way to detect that Atrac is carried over to the pelletizing plant and causes problems in balling is to measure the filling degree. The corrective process control measure would be to revise the status of the flotation process. Also, a slight decrease in the moisture content might reduce the drawbacks of highly plastic green pellets. Calculating the filling degree is essential for the evaluation of green pellet properties, although for a different reason than shown in earlier textbooks. Under normal balling conditions for iron ore green pellets, the filling degree is above 100% and does not give any information about agglomerate behaviour. This is because balling is a self-regulating system and an increase in the moisture content is compensated by an increase in porosity, which results in a constant filling degree. In the presence of air bubbles, however, the filling degree drops well below 100%. This low filling degree is not a sign of the agglomerate being in the funicular state, because the air in green pellets is embedded as air bubbles, which behave like large, plastic particles. The decrease in iron ore green pellet wet strength in the presence of surface-active agents is not fully described by the so called Rumpf equation, where surface tension and contact angle are used as variables to describe the capillary forces. The green pellet breakage in the presence of air bubbles took place by crack propagation along pore structures rather than through the loss of the capillary forces. This work has been performed within the Agricola Research Centre (ARC) at Luleå University of Technology, Sweden. ARC is funded by the Swedish Foundation for Strategic Research, LKAB and Boliden AB.