Comminuted fractures of the proximal humeral shaft with head-splitting extension in young patients are exceptionally rare. We present a case of a high-energy compound comminuted head-splitting anterior fracture–dislocation of the proximal humerus with considerable bone loss in a teenager, which was treated by minimal internal fixation. This illustrated a successful method of management with preservation of the humeral head and considerable capacity for bone regeneration to occur in the humeral shaft. To our knowledge, this injury has not previously been reported. A 17-year-old man was admitted following a high-speed road traffic accident. He sustained severe injuries to the right upper limb, which consisted of a compound comminuted fracture of the proximal third of the humeral shaft with complete head-splitting extension of the fracture line ( At surgery thorough debridement was carried out and the proximal third of the humeral shaft was found to be highly comminuted with marked degloving and soft tissue stripping of multiple fragments in this segment. These fragments were loose and devitalised and were therefore removed, leaving only ∼50% of the diameter of diaphyseal bone remaining, which still had an intact soft tissue attachment. This half-diameter column of bone extended over approximately 10–12 Soft tissue and bony healing occurred without further surgical intervention. The humeral head fracture united with no evidence of avascular necrosis, confirmed radiologically by a normal three-phase isotope bone scan (technetium-99). The humeral shaft fracture united fully both clinically and radiologically within 3 months without the need for further surgery or bone grafting ( Proximal humeral fractures are common in the elderly but much less common in younger patients. In this case, the injury pattern resulted from a direct lateral impact at high velocity to the proximal humerus. CT scan enabled surgical planning and is recommended if a head-preserving surgical approach is being considered. The humeral head fracture was reduced and fixed within 6 The primary aim of the trauma surgeon in treating a head-splitting fracture–dislocation of the proximal humerus in the young patient is preservation of the humeral head. This case demonstrates the value of CT scan in surgical planning and the role of minimal internal fixation in treatment of humeral head-splitting fractures and achieving preservation of the head. It also demonstrates the remarkable capacity of the proximal humeral shaft to regenerate and heal, despite substantial bone loss, provided initial debridement has been adequate.