Damping and elastic properties of binary powder mixtures were investigated by a dynamic measurement method using vibration. Experiments were performed on a range of binary powder mixtures comprised of glass sphere, sand, polyethylene and rubber powders. Loss factor and Young's modulus of binary mixtures were calculated from the experimental data. The calculated loss factors were dependent upon the mixing fraction, but almost independent of compressive stress and packing conditions. In order to describe the properties of binary mixtures, a simple two-phase model has been developed and compared with experimental data. Reasonable agreement between the model and the experimental data was obtained.Many industrial powder systems are multicomponent and their mechanical properties play an important role in determining their processing performance in unit operations such as storage in hoppers and silos, flow of materials, compaction and comminution The properties of binary powder mixtures may be associated with many complex factors such as nonlinear characteristics of individual component properties, microscopic arrays of component particles distributed in bed space, macroscopic mixing condition and others. Although a quantitative prediction of the properties of binary mixtures is fundamentally difficult, several simplified assumptions of elastic behaviour have been developed The elastic behaviour of binary mixtures has been investigated by many researchers This paper presents an investigation of the damping and elastic properties of binary powder mixtures using dynamic measurement Experiments were performed on a range of binary mixtures comprised of glass spheres, sand, low-density polyethylene and rubber powders (Black resin crumb, Grey sponge crumb; supplied by J. Allcock and Sons) with the size distributions (mass basis) shown in Glass spheres, sand and polyethylene powders were sieved to provide material with the required size range, and the other samples have the wide size distributions. A least-squares method was used to fit the experimental data to  A perspex test cell (78 mm inner diameter, 20 mm height) was mounted on an impedance head (9311B, Kistler, Switzerland), consisting of a force transducer, driven by an electromechanical vibrator (V403, Ling Dynamic Systems, UK), with a vertical line of action. The sample in the cell was surmounted by a top cap mass onto which an accelerometer was mounted. The vibration exciter was a system with a programmable feedback controller (DSC4, CED, UK). Feedback control was obtained via the accelerometer (8636C50, Kistler) on the base plate, which provided input signals for the controller to modify and provide output feed to the power amplifier (PA100E, Ling Dynamic Systems), which drove the vibrator, to give a known acceleration at a chosen frequency range. Accelerometers and force transducer were of the piezoelectric type. They were connected via a coupler, to an analogue/digital interface (1401, CED), which recorded data at a rate of 12.5 kHz per channel, onto the hard disc of a PC. Piezoelectric devices are characterised by very rapid response times with high accuracy and reproducibility and are standard instrumentation for vibration studies The sample powder was placed in a perspex test and surmounted by the required top cap mass (diameter 70 mm). Tests were then performed over a range of frequencies with a constant peak acceleration of 0.02× Okudaira et al. The data were available in the form of time series of top cap and base accelerations. Fast Fourier Transform analysis was used to obtain the transfer function between these accelerations, using a commercial package—Spike2 (CED). The powder beds behaved as single, damped harmonic oscillators and provided a dominant resonant frequency This linearisation of an essentially nonlinear dynamic system is justified over the small deformations used in this experimental system (strains of the order of 10 A least-squares algorithm was used to fit the measured The bed properties are generally dependent upon the compressive stress because of the change of the contact conditions that may result. The correlation coefficients of the experimental data to Several empirical and theoretical analyses have been derived which define the elastic behaviour of binary composite materials relative to the elastic properties of the component phases In this section, simple two-phase models: series and parallel models are developed for prediction of damping properties of binary powder mixtures. In the series model, the Young's modulus of binary mixture Similarly, the spring and damping constants of binary mixtures are also written: Here, we assume that equal effective mass From In the parallel model, the Young's modulus of the binary mixture In the same manner as the series model, the loss factor of binary mixture is expressed as: Young's modulus in The bed mass of mixtures was estimated by using  In the original sample powders, the compressive stress affected the bed stiffness but had little effect upon the loss factor A comparison of experimental data and the two-phase models for loss factor and Young's modulus, as a function of volumetric solids fraction of component B, is given in Comparisons with the model for all sample mixtures were made using the series model In the cohesionless binary systems such as Mixes 1, 4 and 7, the loss factor is nearly constant in both the experimental data and the model. These systems are comprised of original sample powders whose loss factors are nearly identical The softer materials tended to be most sensitive to pressure, and this produced the greatest deviations from the model, particularly at small values of Mixes 4 and 6 presented problems due to inhomogeneous mixing. It was very difficult to get uniform mixing in these systems due to a large size ratio and the cohesionless nature of the materials. The damping and elastic properties of binary powder mixtures were investigated. For prediction of damping and elastic properties, a simple two-phase model was developed and compared with experimental data. The following conclusions resulted: The series, volume fraction model can predict the loss factor of binary mixtures with good agreement. The loss factor of binary mixtures is independent of the applied compressive stress over the range studied. When the loss factors of the constituted materials are nearly identical, the loss factor of the binary mixture is nearly constant and independent of the packing conditions. Agreement between the series, volume fraction model and experimental data for Young's modulus is consistent with the results reported by Okudaira et al. There are indications that the properties of binary powder mixtures are dependent upon the quality of mixing. damping constant of component A (Ns/m) damping constant of component B (Ns/m) damping constant of powder bed (Ns/m) damping constant of binary mixture (Ns/m) average particle size (μm) Young's modulus (Pa) Young's modulus of component A (Pa) Young's modulus of component B (Pa) Young's modulus of binary mixture (Pa) frequency (Hz) height of powder bed (m) spring constant of component A (N/m) spring constant of component B (N/m) spring constant of powder bed (N/m) spring constant of binary mixture (N/m) effective mass (kg) mass of accelerometer (kg) mass of powder bed (kg) mass of top cap (kg) compressive stress to powder bed (Pa) cross-sectional area of powder bed (m transfer function of acceleration between bottom and top of powder bed (–) top cap displacement (m) base displacement (m) empirical constant defined by empirical constants defined by volume fraction of solids (–) volume fraction of solids of component A (–) volume fraction of solids of component B (–) Hausner ratio (= loss factor of powder bed (–) loss factor of component A (–) loss factor of component B (–) loss factor of binary mixture (–) loose bulk density of powder bed (kg/m tapped bulk density of powder bed (kg/m true density of material (kg/m rotational frequency, =2 This work was supported by a collaborative research grant funded by the CRE Group.