It is a dilemma for proton selective membranes to balance perm-selectivity against ionic flux. To overcome this issue, a simple strategy for constructing H+ transfer channels in the membranes was proposed through the formation of acid–base pairs between basic 1-vinylimidazole (VI) monomers and acidified sulfonated poly(2, 6-dimethyl-1, 4-phenylene oxide) (SPPO-H). The hydrogen bonding networks based on the acid–base interaction make the membranes compact and block Zn2+ transfer. On the other hand, the sulfonic acid groups electrostatically interacted with imidazole groups can allow the transfer of H+, leading to a considerable flux of H+ through such acid–base pairs membranes. As a result, the final membranes exhibit an extremely low Zn2+ leakage but a considerable permeation of H+. This study shows that the aicd–base pairs membranes can be used for the treatment of zinc hydrometallurgy effluents. Specifically, the phase-separated morphology decreases the membrane area resistance without compromising its water uptake (WU) and ion exchange capacity (IEC). Meanwhile, the formation of acid–base pairs can enhance the thermal stability.dry weight of the membranes g wet weight of the membranes after immersion in distilled water at 25 flux of the H volume of the dilute side of the electrolyte cm active area of the membranes cm duration of electrodialysis process s perm-selectivity between Zn transport number of Zn transport number of H concentration of Zn concentration of H leakage of Zn The treatment of waste acids containing heavy metals emerges as a major environmental issue during industrial processes such as hydrometallurgy, electroplating and circuit board etching, affecting every industrialized country in the world In our previous study Sulfonated poly(2, 6-dimethyl-1, 4-phenylene oxide) (SPPO-H, H 10 Ion exchange capacity (IEC) was measured to investigate the effective content of –SO Water uptake (WU) was measured to investigate the membrane hydrophilicity. The dry membrane samples were weighed and then immersed in deionized water at 25 The tensile properties were measured on an Instron universal tester (Model 5900) at 25 Thermal stability of the membranes was characterized by thermo-gravimetric analysis (TGA) using a TG-DTA analyzer (SDT Q600) under N FTIR spectra of the membranes were recorded using an FTIR spectrometer (Vector 22, Bruker) with a resolution of 2 Tapping mode AFM (atomic force microscopy) observations were performed with a Veeco di-lnnova SPM, using micro-fabricated cantilevers with a force constant of approximately 20 ED was performed in a lab-scale experimental set-up ( The flux of H Perm-selectivity and Zn Moreover, Zn Area resistance was measured using the same apparatus. The only difference is that the test solutions on both sides of the PSM are 0.5 IEC and WU values of the membranes are shown in The chemical structures of the prepared membranes are analyzed by using FTIR. As shown in The formation of acid–base pairs further influences the mechanical strength of the membranes. As shown in The thermal property of the prepared membranes was investigated using TGA shown in To test the separation performance, the acid–base pairs membranes along with the pristine SPPO membrane were used in the system of H For high-performance PSM, high ionic flux is another crucial parameter. Traditionally, improvement of monovalent ion selectivity is always at the expense of H The phase images of SPPO and the acid–base pairs membranes were obtained using tapping mode AFM under ambient conditions. They provides a obvious evidence on the above discussions. As shown in Area resistance of an ion exchange membrane is a standard mark for energy consumption when electrodialysis is concerned. From the viewpoint of energy saving, it prefers membranes with lower area resistance. For the traditional preparation method of PSMs, the increase in area resistance is a frequently encountered problem. However, as shown in Proton selective membranes have been prepared by polymerizing vinyl imidazole in SPPO-H solution. The characteriztions of the membranes by FTIR, TGA and AFM indicate the formation of acid–base pairs between the sulfonic acid groups of SPPO-H and imidazole groups of PVI. With increasing the PVI content, the WU of membranes slightly decreases, while the IEC of membranes decreases dramatically. Moreover, the acid–base pairs effectively enhance the thermal and mechanical stability of membranes. Importantly, the acid–base pairs membranes exhibit very low Zn This research is supported in part by the