Nowadays, as the demand for iron ore increases together with the depletion of high grade ore deposits, mining companies have been investing to produce iron ore concentrates, such as pellet feeds (95% lower than 0.15mm) with low level of contaminants. It is well-known that its lower particle size negatively affects the permeability of the sintering process, restricting its use to small quantities. In this way, this work was focused on the use of this fine material in sintering process by replacing regular sinter feeds. The pellet feed was prepared in roller press aiming different levels of specific surface. The iron ore mixtures were evaluated in a regular preparation route composed by two drums, one for mixing and another for granulating. To carry out this study, 25% of pellet feed was added to the mix replacing sinter feeds. The mixtures were tested in pilot sintering pot test under process conditions close to the industrial practice. The results obtained in pot test showed that the previous mechanical treatment of pellet feed is suitable to enable the use of this fine material in sintering process. It was possible to obtain an optimum performance in the granulation step, promoting good process permeability conditions without causing any significant metallurgical or strength demerit in sinter product. The productivity increased from 25.8t/day/m2 to 29.4t/day/m2 by adding raw pellet feed and treated by roller press, respectively. Additionally, solid fuel decreased from 69.3kg/t to 65.9kg/t, respectively.The iron ore sintering process consists in high temperature agglomeration method where mainly sinter feeds together with fluxes, solid fuel, other ferrous materials and additives are mixed and charged into the sintering machine. The sinter product is the main raw material for hot metal production, which will later be transformed into steel. According World Steel Association (WSA), this technological route accounts for more than 70% of global steel production and its world production increased from 850 To use pellet feed in sintering process it is necessary to adjust the conventional raw materials preparation route, normally mixing and granulating steps, which requires different process conditions, and also adjustments in additives consumption. Some examples of recent applied technologies were cited in literature, such as In this context, the present work aims to evaluate the pretreatment of pellet feed in roller press as an alternative to replace regular sinter feeds in iron sintering process. The amount of pellet feed tested was fixed with different levels of specific surface, achieved by passing it several times in roller press. The focus was on the evaluation of this alternative in the regular preparation route, which consists of one drum for mixing and another drum, in sequence, for granulation. Sintering pot test was carried out with different mixtures to verify the effect of these replacement on the sintering process and in sinter product chemistry, physical and metallurgical quality. Additionally, to better understanding of the mechanism involved during the use of pellet feed, granulation test and quasi-particles evaluation by drop test and optical microscopy were carried out. A Brazilian pellet feed was previously prepared in a laboratory roller press (LABWAL model, manufactured by Polysius AG). The pellet feed passed through roller press once and 5 times. The pressing parameters were the same for both situations, i.e. 80 The specific surface of natural and pressed pellet feed was determined using different laboratories techniques, one based on air permeability test (Blaine index) Qualitative image analyses of the samples, aiming to investigate the shape and roughness of the particles, were performed by means of Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM), using a Carl Zeiss® microscope, EVO MA15 model. The mineralogical composition of the pellet feed was determined by optical microscopy, using a Carl Zeiss microscope. Sinter feeds from Australia and Brazil were used in this work. To evaluate the sintering behavior of the materials, sintering pot tests were conducted. In these tests, the cold agglomeration route was composed by two drums in series, one for mixing and another one for granulating. Sintering pot test evaluation was based on the French simulation technique, which consists in balancing return fines condition, where coke breeze was added until the amount of return fines achieves the aimed value To collect samples, the sinter cake was disintegrated using an ASTM drum device with 50 revolutions. After that, the sinter was screened in different sizes from 5 Beyond chemical analysis, the quality of sinter obtained from each mixture was evaluated considering physical properties, size distribution and mechanical strength (tumbler ISO 3271 and shatter index JIS M 8711), and metallurgical performance (Reduction Degradation Index, RDI–ISO 4696-2 and Reduction Degree, RI–ISO 7215). Additionally, the mineralogical composition and porosity were determined by optical microscopy and mercury intrusion porosimetry, respectively. For a better understanding of the phenomena involved during the granulation step, quasi-particles evaluation and granulation test were carried out. A quasi-particle is formed by a nucleus containing a coarse particle surrounded by fine particles The sample of quasi-particles were collected just before the loading of the sinter pot test and evaluated by optical microscopy, using a Carl Zeiss® microscope, Axio Imager Z2 The granulation and quasi-particles drop tests were carried out using the same mixtures, applying a small drum. The setup conditions for mixing and granulating are reported in Concerning the granulation test, the sample passed through a dry sieving process and the amount of fines below 0.25 The quasi-particles drop test was carried out with a procedure based on the standard JIS M 8711 used for Shatter Index determination of sinter product. In this test, the amount of fines below 0.15  Concerning hematite crystals morphology ( The fluxes and solid fuel, used in sinter pot tests, have similar characteristics of that one used in industrial scale sintering plant in steel mills.  Isotherms of adsorption–desorption were presented in   The results of productivity and fuel consumption obtained in sinter pot tests for each case are reported in  Sintering yield is the ratio of the amount of sinter in the size range able to be use in blast furnace to the amount of iron ore mixture (including return fines, fuel and fluxes). The higher the sintering yield is, the better the productivity is and less fines are generated by the produced sinter. The charge density is also another parameter that directly affects productivity: the higher the charge density, the better the productivity is. So, when the reference case is compared with the other cases ( Coming back to the flame front speed results, it increased with the increase of specific surface of pellet feed and also with the amount of particles below 0.045 About solid fuel consumption, To better understand the sinter pot test performance of the mixtures with natural and pressed pellet feed and to confirm the hypothesis raised about the improvement in granulation step, an investigation of the quasi-particles formed during balling step before the pot test was performed using optical microscopy. Additionally, the drop test carried out with samples collected for these two cases ( Finally, the granulation test results were also in line with the observations previously reported confirming the hypothesis about the improvement of the granulation of the Case III in comparison with Case I (  About metallurgical performance, The results of reducibility were slightly improved when the hematite pellet feed replaces goethite sinter feed. This result could be explained by the decrease in alumina content of the iron ore mixture which were concentrated in adherent fines, introduction of pellet feed with very low alumina content, which promote similar segregation obtaining when selective granulation method is applied in sintering process leading to an overall better sinter quality as reported in literature In general, the use of hematite pellet feed with different levels of specific surface replacing goethite sinter feeds from the market does not compromise the overall quality of the produced sinter. The use of pellet feed in sintering process replacing regular sinter feeds of the market was studied through sinter pot tests (25% of iron ore mixture). It was shown that the alternative of pre-treatment of the pellet feed in roller press is interesting to promote the use of it in this process. Based on the present work, the main conclusions were: The use of hematite pellet feed in sintering process is a good alternative to improve the chemical composition due to the high iron content and a lower level of contaminants, i.e. SiO The mechanical treatment of pellet feed in roller press leads to an increase in the ultrafine fraction of the regular pellet feed, i.e. amount less than 0.045 The use of pellet feed with higher specific surface leads to an increase on the productivity of the sinter pot test. This is due to the better granulation behavior of pressed pellet feed when it is compared to the non-pressed pellet feed, leading to a better permeability (higher flame front speed). Comparing with the reference case, which has no addition of pellet feed, charge density as well as sintering yield (higher sinter strength) also contributed to a better productivity. In terms of sinter quality, the sinter strength results showed an increase of tumble and shatter index as consequence of the introduction of pellet feed (hematite ore) replacing Australian sinter feed (goethite ores). Considering metallurgical performance, interesting results were achieved and RDI results were in line with the microstructural characterization of the sinters. Case III, with the highest specific surface (pressed pellet feed five times in roller press), showed better results than Case I, with lowest specific surface (natural pellet feed, not pressed). The authors declare no conflicts of interest. The authors would like to thank CAPES-PROEX, FAPEMIG and CNPQ, as well as all collaborators involved in the work at Vale S.A. and Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais (UFMG).