The unloading process of rocks under high initial stress is complex, and verifying the mechanism of the unloading process in the field or in a laboratory is not straightforward. In this study, the unloading process of rocks under high initial stress was characterised by a mathematical physics model, which was then implemented in the finite element program LS-DYNA for analysis. In particular, the implicit and explicit methods were performed in sequence in the finite element simulation of rocks with initial stresses. In the numerical simulation, the characteristics of the dynamic unloading process of rocks were investigated for various peak initial stresses, initial stress release paths and initial stress release rates (ISRRs). The numerical results indicated that the rock failure could be induced by the release of the initial stress; furthermore, there is a relationship between the magnitude of the unloading failure and the peak initial stresses, the initial stress release paths and the ISRRs. When the initial stresses were at the same level, the equivalent initial stress release rate (EISRR) was introduced to quantitatively describe the characteristics of the unloading process. Using the numerical results, the unloading failure process was characterised, and a method for the static stress initialisation-dynamic unloading of rock was developed.Underground rocks or ores have initial stresses and deformations. In civil tunnelling and underground mining excavation, rocks are removed using different excavation techniques, such as using a tunnel boring machine and blasting excavation, which create a dynamic unloading process during excavation. The underground dynamic unloading process is well understood by the spring model, as shown in The magnitude of the initial deformation of the “rock spring” mainly depends on the magnitude of the deformations produced by the initial stress. Under the high initial stress condition, the unloading-induced stress release or transfer and the related deformation relaxation during excavation can drastically influence the stability of the underground openings. For instance, during the mining excavation process, unloading might induce rock destruction The initiation and the propagation of stress-releasing-induced damage or failure is a necessary precursor of all of the underground excavation unloading problems in mining and civil tunnelling engineering. In practice, stress-induced failure can be directly observed using an electron microscope, such as the acoustic emission and the microseismic electron microscopes Previous studies have investigated the unloading failure of rocks in the laboratory The unloading failure mechanism of rock using the disturbed state concept was studied by Wu and Zhang In civil and underground engineering, numerical analysis methods are popular and powerful for modelling brittle materials, such as rock and concrete. An extensive review of the numerical methods used in rock mechanics is presented by Jing and Hudson In this study, the finite element program LS-DYNA was employed to simulate the unloading process of rocks with initial stresses. The solver of LS-DYNA is based on explicit time integration, but an implicit solver is also available. The static stress initialisation and the dynamic unloading process can be performed in sequence in the same software package, drastically reducing the computational complexity of the problem. In this paper, hard-rock unloading problems were studied using theoretical and numerical methods. The dynamic unloading process of rock in an elastic state was described by an elastic dynamic equation using a mathematical physics analysis method. The solution of the elastic dynamic equation identified the main factors dominating the unloading process. Based on these factors, a three-dimensional (3D) elastic–plastic model was then established by LS-DYNA. In the numerical model, the continuous surface cap model (CSCM) was employed for the rock material. The material model was validated by simulating the performance of a standard rock sample under uniaxial compression. This validated material model was then used to derive the initialisation-dynamic unloading process of the rock. More specifically, the implicit and the explicit finite element methods were performed in sequence to analyse this process. The main factors of the dynamic unloading process were clearly identified; in particular, the results showed that the dynamic control of the equivalent initial stress release rate for inducing failure can minimise the excavation energy. Additionally, the equivalent initial stress release rate can be dynamically controlled to protect the stability of the surrounding rocks. As discussed in the introduction, the unloading problem can be represented by the spring-back model. However, as in any statically indeterminate system, the magnitude of the spring back depends on many factors. To simplify the problem, the unloading process is assumed to occur only in one direction, and the initial spatial stress exists only in one direction, i.e., the circumference is stress-free. Therefore, the initialisation–unloading process is estimated using the sample shown in This sample is a cylindrical rod, and the left end of the rod in the Based on the elastic dynamic theory, the elastic dynamic differential equations in the Assuming that the initialisation–unloading process only occurs in the Additionally, the different excavation methods can be characterised by different initial stress release paths and different initial stress release rates. Therefore, in this study, For hard rocks, it is difficult to capture the characteristics of an unloading failure following different paths in the field or laboratory. To more directly and reasonably solve this problem, the main factors dominating the equation are employed in conjunction with the numerical simulation method to study the unloading process of hard rocks in the following sections. Many material models, such as the geologic cap model, the Taylor–Chen–Kuszmaul model, the Johnson–Holmquist model and the continuous surface cap model (CSCM) have been developed recently to simulate the damage and the fracture progress of rock or rock-like material in LS-DYNA The cap moves to simulate the change in the plastic volume, expanding to simulate plastic volume compaction and contracting to simulate plastic volume expansion, referred to as dilation. The motion of the cap is based on the hardening rule by Damage in the CSCM is governed by the fracture energy and the material softening in tension and regions of low confining pressure. Damage accumulation is based on two distinct formulations, which are referred to as brittle damage and ductile damage. The damage parameter applied to the six stresses is equal to the current maximum of the brittle or ductile damage parameters The strength of the model is increased with increasing strain rate. The CSCM applies the rate effects to the limit surface, the residual surface and the fracture energy The CSCM for rock with appropriate parametric values is incorporated into LS-DYNA in the following section to validate the material model by simulating the performance of rock samples under standard uniaxial compression loading. To validate whether the capacity of the material model is suitable for simulating the failure mechanism of rock, the material model was used to simulate tests on samples under standard uniaxial compression. A standard sample with a cross-sectional diameter of 50 For the CSCM, the properties of the fracture energy ( Furthermore, a 3D model is developed using 3D solid elements for the uniaxial compression simulation, which is the same size as the standard testing sample in the laboratory. The uniaxial compressive loads controlled by the displacement are also applied vertically. The final input values are adjusted based on the results of the calculation and the experiment. In The results illustrate that there are only slight differences in the failure patterns and stress–strain relationships, indicating that the material modelling is suitable for simulating the hard rock. The material properties used in the CSCM for rock are shown in The numerical model validated above is used to conduct parametric studies on the unloading process of rock with initial stresses. In this section, the numerical results from a static stress initialisation-dynamic unloading case are described in detail to verify the mechanism of the unloading process. The numerical simulation of unloading is discussed briefly. First, the implicit finite element method is used to solve the static stress initialisation of the rock before the dynamic unloading begins. The deformed shape, the pre-stress and the strain in the rock are then transferred to the explicit code, which is accomplished by creating a database file that updates the geometry and the stress history of the explicit element so that it matches the implicit static solution. An explicit file, which can be obtained by modifying the previous implicit file that was used in the initialisation, is then prepared to perform the dynamic unloading process. An unloading curve with an initial displacement of zero and a command for calling the results of the implicit initialisation are added while the node and element components are deleted because they are not required during the explicit stage. In particular, the unloading curve describes the initial stress release path. Various unloading curves represent different initial stress release paths, and, if the unloading curve is not defined, an “instantaneous unloading” process is expected. Finally, the explicit solver is utilised to execute the rock dynamic unloading problem in the static stress initialisation stage. Rocks underground are in a 3D stress state, and the unloading process of rocks under a 3D initial stress is very complex; therefore, it is complicated to use 3D modelling to investigate this problem. However, civil tunnelling and mining excavation only operate in one direction. To simplify the problem, it is assumed that the circumference of the rock sample is stress-free, i.e., the confining stress is zero, which simplifies this case to a 1D stress state problem to characterise the unloading process of rock under axial initial stress only. In addition, although a 1D stress state is assumed for the rock sample under an initial axial stress, i.e., the static stress initialisation-dynamic unloading is only performed along the Convergence tests are conducted to investigate how many elements are needed to achieve a reliable estimation by decreasing the size of the elements until the difference between the results for two consecutive element sizes is less than 5%. The convergence tests resulted of the element number that was employed in the simulation. Eight-node solid elements were used for the model, and the total number of elements for this model was 20,000. The size of the finite elements varies as shown in the cross section of According to the mathematical physics analysis in Section Based on previously published results, if the rock mass is unloaded, the unloading forces may dominate over the tensile strength of the rock mass, resulting in failure Furthermore, the dynamic unloading process can produce a tensile pulse, i.e., a tensile wave. In general, the velocity of the wave of the rock sample in  In general, when the peak initial stress is at the same level, the key factor of the unloading process is the ISRR. The linear path represents a uniform unloading path based on the previous definition of the ISRR; the slope of the linear unloading path is the ISRR. When the peak initial stress is defined, it is easier to change the different magnitudes of the ISRR by changing the unloading period. The time of the initial stress release in The simulated results of the unloading process are shown in The unloading process produces a tensile stress wave, and the waveform is not well defined. However, if the unloading period is very short compared to However, when the unloading period is increased, the rise time of the tensile wave is not significantly shorter than Until now, the ISRR was constant, which is not typically the case. For example, the nonlinear unloading paths composed of cosine and exponential functions that are shown in The equations for these paths are presented in Furthermore, for any unloading process, the time integral of the stress is the stress impulse Therefore, Therefore, for the three different paths illustrated in For the linear path: For the cosine unloading path: Many other nonlinear unloading paths were also tested, and the results indicated that the “EISRR” can quantitatively describe the characteristics of the failure behaviour. All of the failures generated in the previous simulations are induced by the reflection and the superposition of tensile waves because the initial wave does not have a sufficient amount of energy to induce direct failure, i.e., the rock failure is not induced before the initial wave arrives at the fixed left end. Therefore, to achieve direct unloading failure, the initial stress  To investigate how the unloading paths affect the response of the rock samples when In addition, two nonlinear paths are investigated for From the analysis above, it can be concluded that releasing the initial stress of the rock can induce rock damage and eventual failure. The newly defined “equivalent initial stress release rate (EISRR)” is the key factor dominating the unloading process. This finding is significant because, in underground excavation engineering, different excavation methods can be characterised by different unloading processes. Based on this finding, in practical engineering, by dynamically controlling the release of the initial stress to induce rock failure, an appropriate method can be developed to minimise the excavation energy. Furthermore, employing an appropriate excavation method protects the stability of the surrounding rocks by decreasing the initial stress release rate. For example, during the blasting excavation process, the optimal EISRR can be achieved by manipulating the spacing network geometry, the charge configuration and the delay time. The mathematical physics analysis method was developed in conjunction with numerical simulations performed by LS-DYNA to study the unloading process of rocks, particularly to investigate how the initial stress release paths and rates influence the unloading and the failure of rocks during the unloading process. The numerical results clearly indicate that releasing the initial stress of rocks can induce rock failure. The “equivalent initial stress release rate” (EISRR) was then introduced to quantitatively describe the unloading process. Many unloading paths were employed and tested to confirm that the “equivalent initial stress release rate” dominates the unloading process and the corresponding failure behaviour. The results show that with the same initial stress level, the unloading characteristics of rocks are mainly dependent on the magnitude of the EISRR. This finding contributes to the development of an optional excavation method to generate stress-releasing rock failure to minimise the excavation energy and protect the stability of the surrounding rocks by dynamically controlling the equivalent initial stress release rate. The research presented in this paper was jointly supported by the