The adsorption of Cr(VI) using polypyrrole/Fe3O4 nanocomposite adsorbent was investigated in a continuous flow fixed-bed column. The effects of composition of the nanocomposite, adsorbent mass, influent Cr(VI) concentration and flow rate on the adsorption characteristics of adsorbent was explored at pH 2. Experimental results confirmed that the breakthrough curves were dependent on bed mass, initial Cr(VI) concentration and flow rate. Three kinetic models; Yoon–Nelson, Thomas, Bohart–Adams were applied to the experimental data to predict the breakthrough curves using linear regression and to determine the characteristic parameters of the column that are useful for process design. The Yoon–Nelson and Thomas models were found appropriate for description of the whole breakthrough curves, whereas the Bohart–Adams model could only predict the initial part of the breakthrough curves. Using environmental water, the PPy/Fe3O4 nanocomposite demonstrated its effectiveness in Cr(VI) removal below acceptable level by processing 5.04L water with initial 76.59mg/L Cr(VI) concentration using only 2g of adsorbent mass. It can be concluded therefore that PPy/Fe3O4 media provides alternative solution to ameliorate water contaminated with Cr(VI).Water pollution by heavy metal ions is considered to be one of the major environmental issues due to the adverse effects of heavy metals on ecosystem and on human health. Chromium(Cr) is one of the heavy metals that is discharged from untreated or partially treated effluents from industries like mining operation, electroplating, leather tanning, water cooling and pigment manufacturing Comparatively, to handle a large volume of wastewater with low concentration of Cr(VI), adsorption is considered as the simplest and the most cost effective method In this context, recent advances in nanotechnology have explored the use of nanomaterials with unique properties as adsorbents of Cr(VI). As adsorption is a surface phenomenon, nanoadsorbents offer high sorption efficiency and rapid process kinetics due to their large surface area and easily accessible sorption sites Consequently, as a continuation of our previous research the objectives of this study are to evaluate the performance of the PPy/Fe Pyrrole (Py) monomer, anhydrous ferric chloride (FeCl The PPy/Fe Surface morphology and core–shell structure of the prepared nanocomposite were explored using field-emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM) and high-resolution transmission electron microscope (HR-TEM). FE-SEM images with energy dispersive X-ray analysis (EDX) were obtained on a LEO, Zeiss SEM. TEM specimen was prepared by putting a drop of dilute suspensions of the samples in 2-Propanol on copper grid. For structural characterization, X-ray diffraction patterns were measured on a PANalytical X’Pert PRO-diffractometer using Cu Kα radiation (wavelength, For Cr(VI) adsorption experiment, a stock solution of 1000 The experimental setup employed in this study is shown in Contaminated groundwater samples containing Cr(VI), To recover the adsorbed Cr(VI) and to regenerate the adsorbent for further use desorption studies were conducted in the same column. At first Cr(VI) ions were loaded onto 2 The detailed physico-chemical characteristics of the PPy–Fe To check the structure of the prepared nanocomposite, HR-TEM image was taken and is shown in The crystalline structure of the nanocomposite was characterized by XRD as shown in To evaluate the thermal stability of the nanocomposite, thermogravimetric analysis was carried out under air atmosphere from 25 It is already reported in our previous research Adsorption is the process of accumulation of an adsorbate species at an adsorbent surface or interface. In a fixed bed adsorption system, the adsorbent situated near the solution inlet saturates first where maximum adsorption takes place initially. This adsorption zone moves further as time proceeds and approaches towards the exit of the bed. When the adsorption zone reaches the exit of the bed, the concentration of the adsorbate in the outlet solution becomes equal to the inlet concentration. A plot of outlet concentration as a function of elapse time or volume of water processed is known as breakthrough curve. The recommended limit of Cr(VI) in drinking water is 0.05 The performance of a fixed bed adsorber is directly related to the number of bed volumes (BV) processed before the breakthrough point is reached During continuous flow operation, the adsorbent is gradually exhausted. The rate of exhaustion is defined as the mass of adsorbent deactivated per unit volume of water treated at breakthrough point and is given by the following equation: The design of a fixed bed adsorber depends on the effects of various operational parameters like adsorbent bed mass, flow rate and initial adsorbate concentration. The effects of these parameters on Cr(VI) removal using PPy/Fe The breakthrough curves obtained for different compositions of the PPy/Fe Adsorption is dependent on the adsorbent mass as it determines the number of active sites available for sorption. Experiments for the effect of adsorbent mass were carried out at constant Cr(VI) concentration of 100 It is observed in It is observed that the values of The effect of initial concentration on breakthrough performance of the PPy/Fe Flow rate of water stream is an important parameter in designing a fixed bed adsorption column. The breakthrough curves for three different flow rates (3, 5, 7 Meanwhile, the adsorbent exhaustion rate is observed to increase from 0.55 to 1.3 In order to model the breakthrough behaviors of Cr(VI) adsorption onto the PPy/Fe Yoon and Nelson The value of maximum adsorption capacity of an adsorbent is important in designing an adsorption column. Thomas model The Thomas rate constant ( The values of To assess the feasibility of the PPy/Fe Based on the surface reaction theory Bohart and Adams To facilitate real field applicability, the PPy/Fe Desorption/recovery of Cr(VI) from the PPy/Fe Removal of Cr(VI) using PPy/Fe We would like to thank the National Research Foundation (NRF) of South Africa for the financial support under Nanotechnology Flagship Programme.