This work describes hydrogen generation using a heterogeneous chemical system for small scale portable applications. Hydrogen generation using acidified water and solid sodium borohydride (NaBH4) is presented. The effects of two modes of contacts – (1) a flow through type and (2) a diffusion type – contact in a 5mm3 device are discussed. The effects of contacting several mineral and benign acids with NaBH4 are compared by monitoring hydrogen yield. Among the mineral acids examined, HCl generates a maximum hydrogen yield of 97% of the theoretical yield at 3N concentration. The benign acids are required in higher concentration compared to mineral acids. Formic acid produces 87% of the hydrogen yield at 12N. The products of the reaction have been characterized using scanning electron microscopy and X-ray diffraction. A combination of acid strength, porosity of the interface, and solubility of the byproducts contributes to the different hydrogen yields in the presence of various acids.Fuel cells have attracted immense interest as energy sources for portable devices The light elements of I, II and III group (Li, Na, Mg, B, and Al) form a variety of metal hydrogen complexes Small scale devices have space constraints. Alkali stabilized NaBH Hitherto production of hydrogen by contacting liquid with a solid source of hydrogen in miniaturized device and the effects of hydrogen generator design on hydrogen yield is not yet examined. In this paper we examine the hydrogen yield from NaBH The mineral acids HCl, H The two hydrogen generators were designed with a volume of 5 In the second generator (R The theoretical hydrogen yield from NaBH One mole of NaBH The flow rate of liquid reactants was fixed at 1  The reaction of NaBH Two different types of acids were used: mineral acids with interfering anions and benign acids with non-interfering ions. Bench scale studies have shown that stronger acids can lead to greater hydrogen generation rates by reaction of acids with sodium metaborate to form tetraborate  The percentage of hydrogen yield obtained from the reaction of NaBH The rate of hydrogen evolution for mineral acids at 3N can be estimated from the yield vs. time data. A plot of hydrogen evolved in terms of mm From the preceding sections it can be inferred that the hydrogen yields vary with the type of acids used in both the generators. This can be attributed to multiple reasons. Firstly, the strength of the acid can be expected to play a crucial role on the hydrogen yield. Secondly, the fact that this chemical system is heterogeneous (liquid–solid); it raises the question about the role of interface in the hydrogen yield. Thirdly, it is not unreasonable to expect that boron chemistry can contribute to the changes noticed in the hydrogen yield. These possibilities have been examined and are the subjects of discussion in the remaining part of this paper. The strength of the acid is a measure of the dissociation of the acid in an aqueous media. The dissociation constant (estimated from p The second possibility pertains to the heterogeneous nature of the chemical system. In heterogeneous systems, the reaction interface plays a crucial role in controlling the reaction rate and the hydrogen yield. The factors that can contribute to the role of interface include interface porosity and composition of the byproducts. In order to maximize hydrogen yield, the reaction interface should permit the transport of the liquid reactant for further reaction with the unreacted NaBH SEM images of byproducts formed after the reaction with water, 3N HCl, H In the case of the benign acids, no pore formation can be noticed with either formic acid or acetic acid. The surface appears to be unaffected after the addition of the benign acids ( Instantaneous reaction with NaBH Another interesting observation can be made by comparing the hydrogen yield using benign acids with HNO XRD was used to identify the composition of the interface products formed after the reaction with 3N acids. X-ray diffractograms obtained for NaBH Eqs. When the different acidified water reacts with NaBH The XRD of NaBH The reaction of NaBH Thus, the XRD analysis of the reaction interface indicates that, a host of byproducts can be simultaneously formed as a result of the reaction between NaBH A third possibility arises as a result of the unique chemistry of the borate byproducts. From the XRD analysis, it is understood that several reactions lead to the formation of a number of borate compounds (NaBO These observations confirm that several factors, proposed earlier, contribute to the hydrogen generation rates and yield in heterogeneous small scale systems. Instantaneous generation of large volumes of hydrogen and byproduct solubility can manipulate the porosity, roughness, and liquid transport. Such interfacial transformation influences the free movement of liquid to the unreacted borohydride and alters the hydrogen yield. The proposed system is unique in that a simple one-step catalyst-free hydrogen generation from borohydrides by manipulating the pH of the hydrolysis media is presented. At extremely small dimensions we believe that this system can be user friendly as it can help mitigate the issues that can be a limitation with catalyst based systems. The effects of the addition of several mineral and benign acids on the catalyst-free efficient production of hydrogen from solid borohydride using a small scale device have been demonstrated. A diffusion type contact provides higher hydrogen yield with 70% of the hydrogen delivered in half the time compared to a flow through type device. Acid concentration and surface morphology change are identified as critical to the production of hydrogen with high yield in the absence of catalyst. Three chemical systems were found most promising to produce hydrogen with very high efficiencies (∼90%). These include, 97% of hydrogen yield (NaBH The authors would like to thank the department of defense, advanced projects research agency (DARPA) for the funds provided for this project. Contributions from Dr. Likun Zhu for reactor fabrication are also acknowledged. Useful discussions with Professors Mark Shannon and Richard Masel of University of Illinois are greatly appreciated. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 