The need to minimise pollution through waste water production is recognised world wide. Mining and mineral processing companies in Western Australia acknowledge this and aim to provide best practice in waste water pollution control. Mining and mineral processing industries have been for a long time considered to be environmental polluters. The latest developments, in line with the Edith Cowan University Mining Safety Research Group proposals, are aimed at the minimisation of the negative environmental impact of mining and mineral processing operations. This report reviews current practices deployed in Western Australian metal ore mining, coal mining and mineral processing operations to reduce pollution from waste water. Coal and metal mining operations interfere with the natural circulation of water. At a number of Western Australian mines, ground water accumulates and must be pumped to prevent flooding. The composition and temperature of effluents depend on the geological composition of soils, the depth at which mining operations take place, and the type of ore being mined. Generally, the following two types of mine effluents persist in Western Australia: Effluents originating from deep mines, which are neutral or mildly alkaline, and systematically segregated according to salt content. Effluents possessing low concentrations of salt are utilised as industrial water, whilst those with high salt content are collected separately and disposed of in an orderly, and planned, manner. Effluent originating from open cut operations. Sulphur often persists within these discharges in the form of pyrites. During leaching and extraction, the following chemical reactions take place: The reaction velocity of the oxidation process depends on pH, concentration of oxygen, concentration of FeS Discharges of acidic mine effluents can be minimised by redirecting rain water into drainage basins and beyond the immediate mine and catchment area, or by segregating ground and surface waters. The chemical composition of acidic mine effluent can be regulated by minimising its contact with oxidised sulphur compounds, by permanently pumping seepage water and by decommissioning exhausted sections of the mine. Before disposing of effluent into water courses, acidic mine effluents must be treated to adjust pH, remove iron and heavy metals, and reduce SO The reaction time in the neutralisation reactor usually lasts between 1 and 2 Neutralisation processes using solely grounded limestone are used exclusively on effluent with low SO Desalination of mine effluents is considered in these areas, where there is a shortage of other sources of water. Depending on the composition of the effluents discharged, the availability of relevant technologies and power, ion exchange or membrane separation procedures are employed, in particular reverse osmosis and electrodialysis. According to their chemical composition, metal ores are: Ores with an elementary (pure) metal (e.g. silver, gold and platinum). Metal oxide ores. These are metal ores where the metal has formed a compound with oxygen to become a metal oxide. This is the most frequently occurring type of metal ore. Pyrite ores (metal ion in a compound with sulphur. Frequently, also arsenic and antimony are present to form a compound substance with the metal). In Western Australia, waste mine rock contains as its main components silicates, Al In order to obtain a metal concentrate, ore is separated from waste rock by comminution, gravity or magnetic processes, and flotation. These processes are carried out in water, the consumption of which is typically between 3 and 15 Waste waters deriving from ore processing plants are contaminated with: Insoluble substances, predominantly waste sludge (finely ground waste rock). The concentrations of these solids are usually within the range of 20–300 Soluble substances, which are extracted from the ore (heavy metals, sulphates). Chemicals used in the flotation process. Froth flotation agents of phenolic composition were used in the past, causing substantial contamination of recirculated water. Currently, flotation processes feature ethylxanthogenates, which, despite being toxic, are subjected to hydrolytic decomposition whilst standing within the tailings dam. Other chemicals used in froth flotation processes include cyanides, the salts of heavy metals, slacked lime and sulphuric acid. The basic strategy used for treating waste waters from mineral processing is the tailings dam itself, where waste rocks are separated by sedimentation. Waste water treatment after mineral processing employing a froth flotation process also uses precipitation (where the metal is heavier than water and sinks to the bottom of the container), oxidation (where oxygen is used in the mineral processing) and hydrolytic (where water is used) reactions. The use of these processes enables there to be a significantly reduced concentration of contaminants in the water. The velocity (rate of motion) of this chemical reaction determines the rate at which the water circulates in the process. Metal ores are further subjected to various metallurgical processes, particularly, pyrometallurgy (at high temperatures) and hydrometallurgy (processes in the aqueous media). Hydrometallurgy is being used more and more frequently, since it facilitates metal-winning from the lowest graded ores, and from poly-metallic ores. The main stages of hydrometallurgy processes include leaching (extraction), separation of leach liquids, their purification, and finally, metal-winning. Leaching (extraction) processes use various solvents (water, acids, alkalis, salts, organic solvents or extractants), and metal-winning itself requires electrolysis, and reduction using hydrogen, another agent or by precipitation. Compared with pyrometallurgical processes, hydrometallurgy is much more environmentally friendly. The volume of gaseous pollutants liberated into the atmosphere is only a fraction of what would be generated during pyrometallurgical processes, and emissions of sold particles are comparatively non-existent. Since hydrometallurgical processes are carried out in an aqueous media (or aqueous phase), there is, however, greater potential for contamination of large volumes of water. Waste waters from hydrometallurgical processes contain soluble metal compounds, chelating compounds and organic solvents. The central issue with waste water treatment in Western Australia is the maximisation of water recirculation in all circuits. This is supplemented with technologies suitable for the removal of metal ions, such as precipitation, ion exchange, electrochemical processes or solvent extraction. Mining companies in Western Australia are generally proactive in aiming for cleaner production. In some cases, this is forced on the companies through the need to meet safety and environmental legal requirements. Australia generally requires a very high standard of pollution control, and mining companies pride their organisations as being examples of excellence in this field, usually through compliance with the Australian Mineral Industry Code for Environmental Management. As well as looking at cleaner production companies, including Alcoa of Australia, Iluka Resources and BHP Billiton, have been involved in turning dredging ponds and water treatment plants into permanent wetlands, and have revegetated lands once mining is finished so that people can enjoy natural, pollution-free bushland. As a summary, it has been found in Western Australia that using hydrometallurgical mining processes instead of pyrometallurgical methods reduces pollution and minimises the negative environmental impact that mining and mineral processing can cause. Hydrometallurgical mining processes decrease the production of gas and solid pollutants into the atmosphere and maximise the recirculation of solvents at every level of waste water treatment. The extra electrowinning of metal using the circular hydrometallurgical process ensures that the maximum amount of mined metal is recovered. Reducing pollution helps to improve company profitability.