In the Gran Paradiso metagranodiorite (Western Alps) small scale lower amphibolite facies shear zones record the transition from a mylonite composed of polycrystalline mineral aggregates to a homogeneous ultramylonite with a grain scale phase mixture. Polycrystalline quartz aggregates in the mylonite deform by dislocation creep developing a crystallographic preferred orientation (CPO) and a monoclinic surface orientation distribution function (ODF). The polymineralic matrix of the mylonite and the ultramylonite deform by diffusion creep. In the ultramylonite the quartz CPO is randomized and the surface ODF becomes orthorhombic. The transition from mylonite to ultramylonite is accompanied by a grain size decrease and a disintegration of quartz aggregates, concomitant with the precipitation of K-feldspar (±biotite) between quartz grains.
                  In quartz, reduction from the dynamically recrystallized grain size in the aggregates (110 μm) to the size of the dispersed grains in the ultramylonite (25 μm) occurs through the following processes: K-feldspar precipitates at opening sites along grain boundaries (strain incompatibility) pinning the grain size in quartz aggregates. Coalescence of K-feldspar leads to enhanced grain boundary sliding and disintegration of the quartz aggregates. Solution precipitation reduces the size of the dispersed grains to less than subgrain size (∼45 μm).High strain viscous deformation in natural shear zones frequently produces two types of microstructures: (1) Monomineralic aggregates and (2) Polymineralic mixtures. Both microstructures may occur in the same shear zone in alternating layers. The monomineralic layers typically deform by dislocation creep as indicated by a strong crystallographic preferred orientation (CPO; e.g. The polymineralic mixtures are often characterized by a fine grain size and a high degree of mixing of phases. Many workers agree that the latter two properties are an expression of diffusion creep with grain boundary sliding (e.g. A potential switch from dislocation creep to diffusion creep is characterized by grain size reduction. The most common processes for grain size reduction are dynamic recrystallization ( The transition from dislocation to diffusion dominated creep has great consequences for the rheological behavior of the rock. Thus, the questions of what triggers or controls such a transition and which processes are active are essential to understand viscous rock deformation. In order to analyze these aspects, we present a detailed microstructural study on small scale shear zones in a metagranodiorite covering the progressive transition from a mylonite with monophase polycrystalline quartz aggregates embedded in a polymineralic matrix to an ultramylonitic phase mixture. The main points of the paper will be to discuss the microstructural transition and the associated processes which explain the quartz grain size reduction, phase mixing, and CPO destruction. The complete microstructural development of the mylonite from the protolith is beyond the scope of this contribution. In the analyzed shear zone quartz constitutes the rheologically stronger phase which does not appear to be atypical in many natural shear zones. However quartz is often considered (by experimentalists, theoreticians, and modelers) as weak mineral and therefore key mineral to estimate crustal strength (e.g. The samples investigated are from three small-scale shear zones in the metagranodiorite of the Gran Paradiso Unit from of the Gran Paradiso nappe in the Piantonetto valley (Alpe Drosa area and Lago Teleccio area; GP4: 32T0371554/5037041,GP9: 32T372881/5038395 GP11: 32T0371389/5037047). These rocks have been studied intensively (mainly by The granitoids underwent an early, at least in the low strain domains, static high-pressure metamorphism at around 1.0–1.6 GPa and 500–550 °C. During the later formation of the shear zones, the pressure decreased to 0.6–0.7 GPa while the temperature remained relatively high at 550 ± 50 °C ( The shear zones are straight, regularly spaced, subparallel, up to several centimeters wide, and planar over distances up to several tens of meters ( In the studied metagranodiorite we distinguish a protolith, a mylonite and an ultramylonite with a transition zone. The protolith is a metagranodiorite and occasionally shows a weak initial foliation defined by the preferred elongation and orientation of aggregates of polycrystalline plagioclase and biotite. K-feldspar crystals (up to 15 mm long) display a weak alignment. Quartz grains of magmatic origin are up to several mm in diameter; in the close vicinity of relatively rigid K-feldspar porphyroclasts, they may recrystallize dynamically along the grain margins ( In the mylonitic part, the K-feldspar clasts and the biotite are dynamically recrystallized ( In the ultramylonite, the quartz layers are disintegrated and mixed into the surrounding matrix. At that point no layering can be observed anymore, all phases are thoroughly mixed. During the disintegration of the quartz aggregates and continued deformation the quartz grain size decreases until all phases have approximately the same grain size in the center of the shear zone ( In the following, the shear zones will be displayed such that on all micrographs the shear sense is sinistral (except We used EBSD for the texture analysis. Using a ZEISS Evo 50 SEM equipped with a Digiview II EBSD camera and OIM For better visualization the Euler angle images were transformed to In addition three principal misorientation images were calculated using the CIP (computer integrated polarization microscopy) software, which served as the basis for image segmentation and grain size determination. Pole figures were calculated using the MTEX software ( The maximum of a pole figure depends on the kernel width, the CPO geometry, and on the number of individual grains that have been measured and only yields a rough estimate of the strength of a CPO. If the full ODF is known, the M-index can be calculated. It is proposed as a robust description of a texture strength omitting the problems associated with the examination of pole figure maxima ( Grain sizes were measured from grain maps. Two types of source images were used: SEM/BSE contrast images and the three principal misorientation images. Grain maps were obtained by supervised segmentation using the freeware Image SXM ( On the grain maps, the cross sectional areas were measured and the equivalent diameters, Using subsets of the best resolved grains from the grain maps used for grain size analysis up to ∼200 grains were selected. The particle fabric is quantified using the PAROR method ( The bulk properties of the particle fabric as a whole are determined from the projection curves The shape of the individual grains, i.e., the lobateness of the grain boundaries, is described in terms of the PARIS factor ( The sources for CIP, STRIPSTAR, SURFOR, PAROR and ISHAPES, the software which calculates the PARIS factor, are available at Phase distribution analysis was used previously to test the randomness of mixtures using the method of Modal content was determined from SEM/BSE images, from phase maps that were calculated from EDS element counts, or from transmitted-light light photomicrographs. The quartz content was measured at different scales. In the weakly deformed to mylonitic part of the shear zone, the composition is homogeneous only in areas of a few cm The mylonitic metagranodiorite appears as a rheologically bi-phase material consisting of (1) polycrystalline quartz aggregates and K-feldspar porphyroclasts (both of slightly higher viscosity) embedded in (2) a polymineralic matrix of lower viscosity ( The results will be presented in the following sequence: The first section will concern quartz in the mylonite and the ultramylonite. The second section will concern all the other major minerals constituting the matrix in the mylonite and the ultramylonite (except quartz). The third section concerns the microstructural transition from the mylonite to the ultramylonite. The evolution of the quartz distribution will be treated in the last section. The quartz aggregates are fully recrystallized and appear as elongate objects with a size corresponding to the magmatic grain size ( Recrystallized quartz grains in the mylonite have a slightly lobate shape and boundaries are occasionally pinned at second phase particles ( The ultramylonite consists of a phase mixture where a distinction between quartz aggregates and matrix is impossible ( The diameter of the recrystallized quartz grains in the mylonite ranges between 40 and 200 μm; with Subgrain boundaries in the recrystallized grains recorded by EBSD and CIP are infrequent. Most subgrain boundaries <7.5° cut across larger grains and the resulting “cells” are within the lower range of size distribution of recrystallized grains (20–65 μm eq. diameter, The PAROR analysis of the recrystallized grains yields a bulk axial ratio, (b/a)bulk of ∼0.8, and an average axial ratio, b/a, of the grains of ∼0.6. Thus, there is a weak but consistent shape preferred orientation ( The quartz grains in the ultramylonite have an equant shape with bulk axial ratios, From the mylonite to the ultramylonite, the PARIS factor of the quartz grains decreases from an average of ∼10%–∼4%. ( Quartz aggregates in the mylonite show a CPO with a strong peripheral The typical inclined, peripheral The modal content of quartz does not change from the mylonite to the ultramylonite ( When measured in the mylonite, using a light microscope, the average content of (visible) quartz is 29 ± 2%. Approximately 5% of the quartz is not visible because it occurs as very small grains in the matrix. Correcting for the ‘invisible’ quartz yields a total quartz content of 30 ± 2%. In the ultramylonite the quartz contents is found to be 31 ± 1.5% (obtained by thresholding of Si-EDS counts). The matrix in the mylonite consists of plagioclase (plg), K-feldspar (kfs) and biotite (bt,), with a minor content of white mica (wm) and accessory epidote, clinozoisite, garnet, titanite, and ilmenite; the grain size of most phases is <20 μm. The phases in the mylonite matrix are not homogeneously mixed. Instead, a layering can be observed ( In contrast in the ultramylonite the matrix phases are homogeneously mixed and diluted with the 30% quartz of the mylonite. Plagioclase in the deformed matrix of the mylonite (see above) appears in the form of oligoclase grains (Ab16–23), with pure albite cores ( \Prior to the main deformation, magmatic plagioclase in the protolith is pseudomorphically replaced by fine-grained plagioclase (albite and oligoclase) intergrown with minor amounts of white mica, epidote and clinozoisite. In undeformed plagioclase aggregates ( Albite grains in the plagioclase aggregates of the protolith are almost isometric with an average grain diameter In the mylonite the plagioclase grains have a Plagioclase grains in the ultramylonite have a K-feldpar in the mylonite resembles very much plagioclase ( K-feldspar grains occur in layers of quartz, plagioclase, plagioclase and biotite, or in entirely mixed layers. Isolated K-feldspar often fills the space between quartz grains ( The average PARIS factors of plagioclase (∼8%), K-feldspar (∼10%) in the ultramylonite is larger compared to quartz (∼4%), as well as the smaller bulk axial ratio of the feldspar grains indicate quartz is almost equiaxed and fully convex while the feldspar grains are more elongated and slightly lobate (compare Most mica in the mylonite is a brown biotite which is originally recrystallized from magmatic biotite in the protolith ( The transition zone from the mylonite to the ultramylonite ( The transition from polycrystalline aggregates to single dispersed grains is accompanied by a switch from a monoclinic to an orthorhombic geometry of the quartz surface ODF together with a decrease of the bulk axial ratios ( At the beginning of the transition, near the mylonite quartz aggregates are highly deformed and occur as increasingly thinned layers. At first, isolated K-feldspar can be found in triple junctions, triple (and quadruple) junctions of smaller grains, grain boundary jogs and along aligned grain boundaries of large grains ( The quartz CPO in the transition zone shows a considerably weaker and inclined peripheral By calculating grain-size-dependent CPOs it can be seen that the preferred orientation is restricted to the fraction of larger quartz grains (e.g. The incipient K-feldspar precipitation between quartz grains produces a different microstructure than dynamic recrystallization. Initial K-feldspar precipitates show a particle ODF with a maximum at an angle to the foliation (22°), inclined against the sense of shear ( Phase boundaries between quartz, K-feldspar and plagioclase are often lobate. Small plagioclase grains often bulge into quartz grains ( The spatial distribution of phases can be seen on phase maps. These were prepared for quartz, plagioclase, K-feldspar, biotite and white mica (Figs. Here, we use a modified phase distribution analysis that is based on Rgp versus grain size plots of quartz ( The following discussion is in part based on an interpretation of the strain gradient in the analyzed shear zone. Generally, a strain gradient in shear zones can result from (1) a gradient in the shear strain rate while the whole shear zone is deforming, or (2) from localization of deformation in the internal parts of the shear zone at later stages of the deformation (type II, In the following we will discuss the process of progressive phase mixing, the deformation mechanism in the mylonite and ultramylonite, and the processes involved in the grain size reduction. Finally we will evaluate possible reasons that may cause the phase mixing and rheological implications. The transition from the mylonite to the ultramylonite takes place across a continuous transition zone. Polycrystalline quartz aggregates preferentially disintegrate at grain boundaries which are (sub)perpendicular to the layering by K-feldspar or biotite precipitating in dilatant sites (Figs. Cavitation is used to describe the process of the formation of dilatant sites (e.g. The location of K-feldspar nucleation apart from an adjacent source of potassium and aluminum requires that material transport must have taken place by grain boundary diffusion or, more likely, in a grain boundary fluid film. Only in a few cases, layer parallel seams inside quartz aggregates are formed as tails of small K-feldspar sigma-clasts. Therefore, we infer that the major part of intergranular material inside the quartz aggregates must have formed by syndeformational nucleation and growth. Similar inferences have been made for for K-feldspar in granitoid mylonites ( Most of the quartz in the mylonite occurs in polycrystalline aggregates which have formed by dynamic recrystallization of the magmatic quartz. The fine-grained matrix in the mylonite originates from different processes: dynamic recrystallization (bt, kfs), myrmekitic feldspar reaction (plg, qtz, wm) during deformation ( In the mylonite, polycrystalline, monophase quartz aggregates deform by dislocation creep as indicated by a strong CPO ( The dynamically recrystallized grain size of monomineralic quartz aggregates is stable across the entire strain gradient of the mylonite. The quartz subgrain size is smaller than the recrystallized grains size ( The fine grained albitic plagioclase in the protolith and the mylonite matrix is assumed to be a product of the static HP metamorphism and is not related to dynamic recrystallization, because fine grained albite is also present in the undeformed parts of the protolith. The static decomposition of plagioclase into fine-grained aggregates which pseudomorphically replace igneous grains has been observed elsewhere in situations where high pressure metamorphism is preserved in low strain domains (e.g. Plagioclase in the matrix remains at a constant size in the mylonite, in the transition zone, and in the ultramylonite ( Fine-grained biotite in the mylonite results from dynamic recrystallization of primary magmatic biotite (e.g. K-feldspar matrix grains initially form recrystallized layers, occasionally intermixed with minor albite/oligoclase. The plagioclase in these layers is in part of myrmekitic origin ( The transition from a mylonite to ultramylonite marks the transition from a 2-phase rheology to a single-phase rheology material (ultramylonite). The quartz aggregates are disintegrated ( Despite the decreased quartz grain size, dispersed quartz grains still show a surface and particle ODF different from the other matrix minerals ( Rocks deforming by diffusion creep with a dominant contribution of grain boundary sliding often show equant grain shapes (e.g. The grain to phase boundary area ratio Rgp and the quartz fraction of a layer both decrease with decreasing grain size ( The dominant grain size-controlling process in quartz is dynamic recrystallization producing a constant grain size in the monomineralic quartz aggregates. Both, subgrain rotation and grain boundary migration recrystallization are inferred to operate together as recrystallization mechanisms. Grain boundary migration is generally inferred to follow the nucleation of new grains by subgrain rotation (e.g. The local quartz grain size decrease is observed at sites of initial K-feldspar precipitation (Figs. Dissolution, diffusion, and precipitation are considered to be sequential processes during diffusion creep of geologic materials under low to high grade conditions ( The individual size of quartz grains in advanced stages of phase mixing is negatively correlated with the distance between grains which are separated by K-feldspar. In a single layer the average grain size decrease correlates with a relative quartz content decrease, as grains are separated parallel to the foliation and diluted by other phases ( We measure a constant quartz content in the mylonite and the ultramylonite ( Therefore, quartz dissolution must be accompanied by precipitation near the sites of dissolution (probably on the micron to mm scale). However, there are only few direct indications for quartz precipitation apart from the myrmekite-related quartz ( The volume of dissolved quartz in the ultramylonite (as evidenced from the grains size reduction) is at least 75% (conservatively assuming a size reduction from 28 μm to 19 μm, see As an alternative to the proposed processes of grain size reduction, annealing could also account for the difference in grain size between the phase mixture and the monomineralic quartz aggregates. Grain growth in the ultramylonite could be impeded by pinning while grains in the monomineralic quartz aggregates could experience substantial growth. However, we do not think that substantial post-kinematic grain growth took place, for the following reasons: 1) Grains in the monomineralic aggregates show anisotropic shape preferred orientations (Figs. Straight boundary segments and equilibrium angles in quartz microstructures are usually related to annealing. However, based on the above-mentioned arguments, a substantial grain size increase due to post-kinematic grain growth in the Gran Paradiso mylonites is unlikely. The observed microstructure is more likely related to a high grain boundary migration rate. In quartz aggregates, the K-feldspar and biotite precipitate distribution is heterogeneous at the grain scale but often homogeneous at the aggregate scale (e.g. Figs. The quartz CPO with a strong peripheral single maximum and prism-parallel subgrain boundaries suggest that basal <a> is the single dominant slip system ( Shear zones tend to localize either by an intrinsic instability ( From microstructural observations along a strain gradient across a 5 cm wide shear zone the following conclusions can be drawn: In the mylonite, the quartz aggregates (up to 6 mm diameter) deform predominantly by dislocation creep maintaining a dynamically stable grain size of In the ultramylonite ( In the mylonite and the ultramylonite, quartz is the phase with the highest viscosity. The texture and microstructure of the quartz aggregates is characteristic for dislocation creep with subgrain rotation and grain boundary migration recrystallization. With the onset of diffusion creep in the ultramylonite, the surface ODF changes from a monoclinic to an orthorhombic symmetry and the CPO is randomized. Failure to deform compatibly with the imposed kinematic framework of the matrix (only basal <a> slip system active), leads to a disintegration of the quartz aggregates by nucleation of K-feldspar (and occasional biotite) along dilatant grain boundaries and triple junctions oriented at high angles to the stretching direction ( With the precipitation of K-feldspar and biotite, the grain boundaries in the quartz aggregates (now effectively phase boundaries) are pinned and grain boundary migration is suppressed, causing a local decrease in grain size during dynamic recrystallization from Grain size is further reduced during and after the disintegration of the quartz aggregates from The total volume fraction of quartz (30 ± 1.5%) is constant from the undeformed protolith to the most highly deformed ultramylonite. Dissolution of quartz (leading to the above mentioned grain size comminution) requires that quartz precipitation must take place within the ultramylonite. During diffusion creep of the polymineralic mixture, the surface fabric of K-feldspar and plagioclase is strengthened which indicates grain boundary alignment, impeded grain growth and K-feldspar precipitation adjacent to quartz grains. Luca Menegon and Giorgio Pennacchioni are thanked for introducing RK to the field area and outcrops in the Gran Paradiso and stimulating discussions. Marco Herwegh is kindly thanked for providing access to and help with the EBSD facility at the University of Bern. Willy Tschudin has prepared excellent thin sections. SEM images were taken at the Center of Microscopy, University Basel. The study was founded by the