The present study shows that nanostructure–dendrite composites successfully synthesize in the Fe–Zr binary eutectic system, exhibiting a better combination of strength and plasticity than bulk metallic glass or nanograined materials. The composites composed of microscaled dendritic phases (Fe2Zr or α-Fe) and nanoscaled lamellar eutectic matrix (Fe2Zr+α-Fe) exhibit high compressive strength (1.8–2.6GPa) and plasticity (2.5–12%) under compression. In particular, the plasticity can be improved when coarsened ductile dendritic phases are reinforced in the fine-scaled lamellar eutectic matrix. Among the alloy systems for the BMGs or NGMs, the Fe-based alloy systems are the most attractive due to the abundance of the natural resources, the low material cost and its unique properties, such as high corrosion resistance. Even though Fe-alloy systems have such advantages, so far only a few reports on the formation and properties of nanostructure–dendrite composites in Fe-based alloy systems are available The Fe–Zr binary alloys were prepared by arc-melting high-purity elemental constituents under an Ar atmosphere. Each alloy was re-melted at least three times to ensure compositional homogeneity. The alloy samples were prepared by injection casting into a cylindrical cavity 1    The mechanical properties of as-cast Fe In order to understand the high strength and plasticity of hypoeutectic Fe Multicomponent nanostructure–dendrite composites have been highlighted in Ti- and Zr-based alloys due to their high strength (∼1.5–2 However, the hypereutectic Fe In summary, high-strength ultrafine-scale eutectic composites with good plasticity can be obtained by selecting an appropriate cooling rate and composition design in an Fe–Zr binary system. The eutectic in the Fe–Zr alloys investigated in the present study is composed of α-Fe and Fe This work was supported by the Global Research Laboratory Program of Korea Ministry of Science and Technology. J.M. Park, S.W. Sohn and T.E. Kim acknowledge the support from the second stage of the Brain Korea 21 Project in 2007.