A novel synergistic solvent extraction (SSX) system consisting of LIX 54 and Cyanex 923 in ShellSol D70 to recover lithium and separate it from sodium in chloride solutions has been developed. With the SSX system, over 97% of lithium was extracted at pH11 from a synthetic solution with almost no extraction of sodium in a single contact, resulting in a separation factor of lithium over sodium of 1560, indicating very good separation. The co-extracted sodium could be readily scrubbed from the loaded organic solution using water. Lithium was readily stripped with acidic solution and complete strip was achieved at an equilibrium pH of 3.5. The lithium extraction McCabe Thiele diagram showed that three theoretical stages could be used to completely extract lithium from the synthetic solution using an aqueous/organic (A/O) ratio of 2:1. Based on the lithium strip McCabe Thiele diagram, two theoretical stages are required with a 0.5M HCl strip solution at an A/O ratio of 1:3. The lithium extraction and strip kinetics were very fast. The extracted lithium species was found to be LiAB, where A and B represents the deprotonated LIX 54 (A) and Cyanex 923, respectively.Lithium has gained increasing applications in recent years in many industries such as glass, ceramics, pharmaceuticals, and mostly, in electronic and electrical industries ( In addition to spodumene, brine water ( Several processes for lithium recovery from high sodium concentration solution using solvent extraction (SX) have been reported. Solvent extraction of lithium with β-diketone has been intensively studied.   A new solvent extraction technology was developed by In general, the synergistic system consisting of β-diketone and some neutral ligands could provide the best system for lithium extraction and its separation from sodium in sulphate systems. In order to develop more applicable SX systems for lithium recovery from chloride solutions, the organic system consisting of LIX 54 (a β-diketone derivative) and the neutral ligand Cyanex 923 (trialkyl phosphine oxide) was chosen in the current study. Unlike TOPO which is in a solid state and very difficult to be dissolved in commonly used diluent, Cyanex 923 is a liquid product and highly dissolvable in various organic diluents. LIX 54 and Cyanex 923 were supplied by Cognis (now BASF) and Cytec Industries, respectively, and used without further purification. ShellSol D70, ShellSol 2046 and ShellSol A150 were supplied by Shell Chemicals, Australia. Three synthetic chloride solutions were prepared by dissolving the corresponding analytical grade (AR) grade metal chloride salts (purchased from Sigma-Aldrich) in de-ionised water. The metal concentrations in the three synthetic solutions are (g/L) Li 1 and Na 23 (Feed solution 1), Li 1 and Na 80 (Feed solution 2) and Li 0.1 and Na 2.3 (Feed solution 3). Feed solutions 1 and 2 covered the sodium concentration range of 20–80 Shake-out tests were carried out in a 250 The metal extraction distribution isotherms were determined under various A/O ratios at a selected pH and 40 To determine the extraction kinetics, the organic system was first loaded at an A/O ratio of 1:1 at a selected pH and 40 Slope analysis tests were conducted with organic solutions containing various LIX 54 and Cyanex 923 concentrations and Feed solution 3 containing the 0.1 The two phases of the solution mixture samples were separated through a Whatman 1PS filter paper which only allowed organic solution to pass through. The aqueous phase of each sample was, again, filtered through a 0.45 The pH isotherms of lithium and sodium were determined with the organic system consisting of 0.4 The performance of the current LIX 54/Cyanex 923 system was similar compared with that of the LIX 54/TOPO system reported by The effect of Cyanex 923 concentration on metal extraction was investigated by varying its concentration in the SSX system with a constant LIX 54 concentration of 0.4 The addition of Cyanex 923 to the LIX 54 system significantly increased the lithium extraction, suggesting a strong synergistic effect of Cyanex 923 on the lithium extraction. The lithium extraction increased from 0.8% with the LIX 54 alone to 70% with 0.1 The effect of LIX 54 concentration on metal extraction and separation was investigated by varying its concentration in the range of 0–0.4 The lithium extraction was significantly increased with the addition of LIX 54. It increased from 0.7% with no LIX 54 addition to 78% with a 0.1 Three diluents with different proportion of aliphatic and aromatic components, namely ShellSol D70, ShellSol 2046 and ShellSol A150 were tested for lithium extraction and its separation from sodium using the organic system consisting of 0.4 The effect of temperature on lithium extraction and its separation from sodium was studied with the organic system consisting of 0.4 The lithium extraction under various A/O ratios was investigated with the organic system consisting of 0.4 The lithium extraction McCabe Thiele diagram was constructed and shown in The organic system consisting of 0.4 The same loaded organic solution was used to study the metal strip distribution isotherm. The lithium stripping distribution isotherm was conducted with the loaded organic solution and the 0.5 The metal extraction kinetics was studied with the pre-equilibrated organic system consisting of 0.4 It was reported that LIX 54 played the role of extractant and Cyanex 923 synergist since LIX 54 is a hydrogen ion donor and Cyanex 923 a neutral extractant (  Based on Eqs.  In Eqs. The dependence of the extraction distribution coefficient of lithium on the LIX 54 concentration at a constant pH of 9.5 and a constant Cyanex 923 concentration of 0.2 The dependence of the extraction distribution coefficient of lithium on the Cyanex 923 concentration at a constant pH of 9.5 and a constant LIX 54 concentration of 0.4 The extracted lithium species with β-diketone (HA) and unidentate neutral ligands (B) was reported as a mixture of The extraction of lithium and its separation from sodium in chloride solutions were studied with the SSX system consisting of LIX 54 and Cyanex 923. The lithium extraction was 97% at pH The lithium extraction distribution isotherm and its McCabe Thiele diagram at an A/O ratio of 2:1, pH The authors would like to thank Dr Keith Barnard and Mr Karl Bunny for reviewing the paper and providing valuable suggestions. The support of the