Study Design
                  Clinical commentary.
               
                  Introduction
                  Proximal humeral fractures (PHF) are the third most common fracture in the elderly with an increased incidence expected in the coming years with the aging population, causing an important burden to the healthcare system. The management of PHF is challenging due to its complexity and the wide variety of fractures and treatment options.
               
                  Purpose
                  The objective of this clinical commentary is to update the available evidence on clinical presentation, classification, imaging, medical treatment, and rehabilitation of acute PHF.
               
                  Methods/Results/Discussion
                  N/A for clinical commentary.
               
                  Conclusions
                  The first step to a successful management of PHF is the clinical and radiographic examination of the shoulder, which enables the physician to classify the fracture and choose the appropriate treatment option. The Neer and OA classifications are commonly used and are based on the identification of the fractured parts of the humerus, as well as the displacement of the fragments. In case of non-displaced or minimally displaced fractures, a conservative treatment, consisting of initial immobilization and a rehabilitation program will be chosen. Displaced or unstable fractures will be managed operatively. Different surgical options exist and will vary according to the fracture type, patient's age, and functional needs, followed by rehabilitation.
               
                  Level of Evidence
                  5.Proximal humerus fractures (PHFs) are the third most common fracture in the elderly, after proximal femur and distal radius fractures, PHF includes all fractures to the anatomical neck, surgical neck, greater tuberosity (GT), or lesser tuberosity, either isolated or in combination. The 2 most common clinical presentations for PHF are (1) high-level energy trauma such as sports injuries and motor vehicle accidents, usually observed in patients aged between 20 and 45 years and (2) low-energy trauma, such as a fall from a standing position or a direct blow to the shoulder, usually observed in the elderly. There is a steep rise in the incidence of PHF beyond 45 years of age and more so in women than in men. There are 2 main classifications used for PHF (Neer and AO classifications) and one specific to GT fractures. In 1970, Neer proposed a classification, which divides the proximal humerus in 4 functional parts: the head (articular segment), lesser tuberosity, GT, and humeral shaft. Anatomically, the head is almost hemispherical and is set between 130° and 150° cephalad to the long axis of the humeral diaphysis in the coronal plane, whereas the GT footprint projects 5-7 mm distally to the most cranial point of the humeral head convexity. Neer's classification takes into consideration whether the fracture is associated with a dislocation, the presence of a head split, and the extent of fragment displacement. A displaced fracture is classified as 2-part, 3-part, or 4-part fractures, according to the number of fragments, with more than 45° of angulation or more than 1 cm of displacement. However, different criteria apply to the GT, which is considered to be displaced beyond 5 mm of displacement. A Neer I (1-part) fracture is considered undisplaced and represents most fractures of the proximal humerus, although recent data suggest that displaced fractures are more prevalent than originally stated by Neer. The 1987 AO classification uses a 3-category division of A, B and C. Type A fractures are simple fractures, type B fractures involve the surgical neck, and type C involve the anatomical neck. In 2014, Mutch et al. These 3 classification systems have been studied for their reliability. Data on reliability can be found in When a PHF is suspected, a conventional radiography is the first examination to be performed. Most PHF may be diagnosed on anteroposterior (AP) radiographs of the shoulder, but characterizing the fracture displacement and classifying the fracture type on radiographic studies are very difficult, especially for more complex fractures. Another view that can be performed in the context of trauma to the shoulder is the axillary view ( Choosing operative or nonoperative management depends on the type and severity of the fracture, concomitant soft-tissue injuries, and other patient-related factors such as age, comorbidities, activity level, quality of bone, and motivation of the patient. The vast majority of nondisplaced PHFs are successfully treated conservatively. The results of 3 recent systematic reviews and meta-analysis have shown that conservative management of PHF resulted in less complications and that operative management did not significantly improve functional and clinical outcomes Few studies have been published on the efficacy of rehabilitation programs after PHF immobilization. Rehabilitation exercises after PHF will aim at restoring range of motion and normal shoulder strength and ultimately function. To prevent the complications caused by the immobilization, patients have to be adequately educated. As recent evidence suggests, rehabilitation protocols should start as early as possible, As mentioned in the conservative treatment section, recent evidence has shown no significant benefit with surgery over conservative treatment, even for complex fractures, in terms of functional outcomes and health-related quality of life, in elderly patients. The morphology of the fracture will dictate the fixation strategy. For open surgery, the deltoid split approach is used. The skin incision should start 1 cm proximal to the ridge of the acromion and be extended distally for a total length of 5 cm. The incision is usually located in the junction of the anterior third and the middle third of the acromion. One or 2 suture anchors can be screwed in the fracture bed at the boundary with the cartilage. Sutures are passed through the rotator cuff tendon. Then, it is important to use fluoroscopy to evaluate tuberosity reduction before final fixation. The fragment is held in its anatomic position, sutures are tightened, and a small plate is applied on the lateral side of the fragment. Experienced surgeons can fix these fractures arthroscopically, although initial hematoma and bone bleeding can decrease visibility. It should also be noted that usual rotator cuff suture passers are not meant to go around the bone fragment. The second-row anchors can be in poor bone and be implanted 1 cm distal to the fracture ( These fractures are treated by open reduction and internal fixation, using a proximal humerus locking plate and proximal humerus nail ( In the case of a fracture dislocation or head split fracture in a young patient, all efforts should be made to fix the fracture instead of planning a joint arthroplasty. Humeral head comminution with very small tuberosity fragments, often present with severe osteoporosis, fractures with dislocation in elderly patients, or fractures with cuff tear arthropathy are indications for humeral head replacement. There are 2 types of arthroplasty: anatomic arthroplasty and reverse shoulder arthroplasty. List of the more common surgical complications are found in Evidence regarding rehabilitation following operative management of PHF is scarce. Rehabilitation protocols are often variable because restrictions will depend on the concomitant injuries and surgical protocols, such as associate shoulder dislocation or concomitant rotator cuff repair. The postoperative rehabilitation protocol after open reduction with internal fixation or humeral head replacement for 4-part fractures proposed by Basti et al Despite these guidelines, it is important to note that exercise regimens, return to sport, and return to work protocols should always be done with respect to the level of pain felt by the patient. Therefore, the therapist involved in the patient's rehabilitation will need to adapt the rehabilitation program according to the patient's progress and condition. Evidence regarding prognostic factors related to the patients' condition is scarce. However, a recent study about these factors for different fractures and including PHF have shown that higher comorbidities as measured with the Charlson Comorbidity Index, malnutrition, and loss of mobility on the Parker Mobility Score was associated with a greater risk of mortality at 1 year. Higher comorbidities and loss of mobility on the Parker Mobility Score were also associated with the loss of independence defined as a score lower than 80 on the Barthel Index, which measures performance in activities of daily living. Because the majority of PHFs are fragility fractures and occur in osteoporotic elderly women, interventions following PHF should include an evaluation of the presence of osteoporosis or osteopenia, as stated by the guidelines of the Canadian Medical Association regarding the management of osteoporosis. PHFs represent a common problem in the elderly population, and the management of patients presenting with these types of fractures remains a challenge. Proper radiographic imaging of the glenohumeral joint is warranted. Imaging of the glenohumeral joint will allow clinicians to classify the fracture and determine treatment plan accordingly. Conservative treatment will usually be undertaken in cases of nondisplaced or minimally displaced fractures; this approach shows satisfactory results for the majority of these patients. Surgical treatment is recommended for displaced PHF on initial x-rays or CT scan or after secondary displacement in the first 3 weeks of follow-up. In both treatment options, initial immobilization in a sling with an early mobilization program will allow the patient suffering from PHF to minimize complications due to immobilization. Thereafter, a graded rehabilitation program aimed at restoring range of motion and shoulder strength while limiting stress to the healing fracture will allow an adequate restoration of function in most patients.  Management of PHF is initially based on the age and general health of the patient the therapist's evaluation classification via X-ray pain and AROM on the first visit to therapy The distinction between _____________ and ______________ fractures is critical in setting the plan of treatment displaced and non-displaced dominant and non-dominant arm longitudinal and horizontal non-displaced and stress There is a steep rise in the incidence of PHF after the age of 35 65 55 45 Results of conservative treatment have been shown to be best when mobilization has been initiated at about ____ week(s) post fracture four six one two The vast majority of non-displaced PHFs can be successfully treated conservatively false true When submitting to the HTCC for re-certification, please batch your JHT RFC certificates in groups of 3 or more to get full credit.