The ability of Raman spectroscopy to investigate chemical substances in water media was applied for studying the surface products of the chalcopyrite–sodium isopropyl xanthate flotation system. Performing the reaction in model conditions, i.e. at high concentration of the collector, led to the formation of copper isopropyl xanthate and diisopropyldixantogen on the chalcopyrite surface. The recorded Raman bands of these compounds were determined on the basis of the vibrational band assignment of normal vibrations of the corresponding individual compounds. The latter facilitated the Raman spectroscopic elucidation of the reaction products formed on the chalcopyrite surface in real industrial flotation conditions with a sodium isopropyl xanthate collector.The separation of minerals from ores is a very important industrial process. The commonly applied separation method is flotation, which ensures the required relation between the hydrophobic and hydrophilic properties on the surface of the mineral particles. This is achieved by adding to the crushed ores, dispersed in water, organic reagents known as collectors. For selective flotation of sulfide minerals, xanthate collectors (ROCS A distinct progress in identifying the structure of the surface products formed on the mineral surface after the sorption of the collector has been achieved with the aid of spectroscopic methods, especially infrared (IR) spectroscopy. Previous attempts by other researchers were focused on clarifying the character of the metal–xanthate (M–X) bond obtained after the sorption of the collector on the mineral surfaces. The alkali–xanthates were known to have an ionic character whereas the chemisorbed xanthates were expected to be covalently bonded with the surface metal. Therefore, the first aim was to determine which of the two limited structures, (1) or (2), elucidate the character of the M–X bond. Since the obvious difference between structures (1) and (2) is the type of CS bonding, IR spectroscopy has been applied for determining the structure of the metal xanthates. A series of xanthate molecules and compounds with similar structures have been studied using IR with assignment of some of their bands Until recently the use of Raman spectroscopy for monitoring the composition and the structure of surface flotation products has been very limited despite its several principal advantages over IR. The most important among them is that water solutions and samples in water media can be investigated directly since water bands have low Raman intensity. We pointed out with B. Schrader in a recent paper In this paper, the Raman spectra of some surface products obtained by processing of chalcopyrite mineral with sodium isopropyl xanthate collector in model conditions and under conditions close to those employed in an industrial froth flotation are reported. The natural chalcopyrite (CuFeS Two flotation experiments were performed: (i) a model study at high collector concentration of 50 g/l NaiPX water solution, and (ii) in conditions close to those employed in an industrial flotation—100 mg/l (5.7×10 The Raman measurements were performed using a dispersive Jobin Yvon T 64000 Raman spectrometer with a microprobe attachment. Excitation of the spectrometer was ensured by the 514.5 nm line of an argon ion laser with a power (at the laser outlet) 0.05–0.02 The preliminary study on different xanthate homologues: sodium ethyl-, sodium IR spectra of the individual compounds NaiPX, CuiPX, and iPX The Raman spectra of NaiPX, CuiPX, and iPX It is seen from the data in The The data from the vibrational band assignment presented in The collected surface products obtained during the interaction of chalcopyrite mineral with NaiPX were studied with Raman spectroscopy after rinsing the sample with water. The surface spectrum of unwashed 50 g/l NaiPX–chalcopyrite model system was also studied. The latter showed Raman bands that completely resemble the spectrum of the pure collector NaiPX probably because of its high concentration and eventual existence of precipitated NaiPX on the mineral surface. When the mineral surface is carefully washed the precipitated species are expected to be removed. Indeed, after rinsing the samples, the registered Raman spectra of the remaining surface products did not contain NaiPX characteristic bands but a series of band maxima, which could be divided into two sets. The first set includes bands at the following wavenumbers: 1226/1217 s doublet, 1120 w, 1020 m, 910 w, 654 w, 275 w; and the second set—those at 1021 s, 797 w, 694 m, 502 w The IR investigations on sulfide minerals–xanthate surface products pointed out Following the results of these IR studies we compared both sets of Raman bands obtained for the chalcopyrite–NaiPX model system with the data for the individual compounds of CuiPX and iPX The second set of Raman bands resembles the iPX It is worth to stress again that the considered species, CuiPX and iPX In their IR spectroscopic and electrochemical studies on the chain length influence of the xanthate collectors upon their adsorption on chalcopyrite, Mielczarski, et al. The processing of chalcopyrite minerals with a collecting system of 100 mg/l NaiPX–100 mg/l frother water solution corresponds to conditions near to those employed in an industrial flotation. Our study pointed out that the frother Raman bands at 855, 724, 692, and 675 cm The Raman spectrum of the surface products on the chalcopyrite conditioned with this solution containing 100 mg/l of NaiPX and 100 mg/l frother, after washing, is presented in From the spectra in The results from the last two points give a base for the assumption that by conditioning of chalcopyrite with NaiPX the first surface product is the chemisorbed CuiPX, probably followed by adsorption of iPX In order to test the potential of ordinary Raman spectroscopy for studying the surface flotation products, we attempted to register the Raman spectrum of a real flotation concentrate. The latter has been obtained after a preliminary treatment of the feed material with 10 mg/l Fe In Finally, the detected surface product on the flotation concentrate by means of Raman spectroscopy is of interest as other workers have indicated that the surface products appear to be unstable Two reaction products were determined with Raman spectroscopy to be present on the chalcopyrite surface when performing flotation at high NaiPX collector concentration: the chemisorbed CuiPX and the physically adsorbed iPX We would like to thank Dr P. Murphy from WITS University, Johannesburg for performing the Raman measurements.