An analytical model is developed to simulate false brinelling in a bearing based on the theory of energy dissipation. This model is capable of predicting false brinelling damage when the bearings are under vibrating conditions. The bearing used in this simulation is a cylindrical roller bearing which is made of 52100 high carbon bearing quality steel (ASTM A295). The model provides a local prediction of false brinelling for the position of each roller of a cylindrical roller bearing. The model is validated using the modified 3D FE model and test-rig developed by the authors in previous work. The analytical model is shown to be far more time-efficient (by more than 10000 times) compared with the false brinelling 3D FE model. The model is used to compare the false brinelling damage in the inner and outer raceways, in both the lateral and axial directions of the bearing. The results showed that the wear marks on the outer raceway were approximately 5% shallower than the ones on the inner raceway; the volume of wear on the outer raceway was about 9% greater than the wear on the inner raceway. The model is also used to investigate the influence of the amplitude of the normal load and vibration on the wear damage caused by false brinelling. It is shown that the depth of wear increases when the normal load is decreased, and the vibration amplitude is increased. This change is particularly significant when the normal load (maximum contact pressure) on the bearing is less than 1000 N (800 MPa). The minor and major of the elliptical stick area 1/E (E is the modulus of elasticity) The energy dissipation The energy dissipation in the axial direction The energy density The energy dissipation in the lateral direction The resultant energy dissipation The threshold energy of wear activation The inner static load distribution The maximum load on the top roller The outer static load distribution The radial load Oscillation frequency The shear modulus The wear depth The deflection coefficient The load deflection factor The number of cycles The radial load integral The effective roller length The semi-major axis coefficient of contact ellipse The total number of cycles The traction distribution The tangential load during the loading and unloading processes Exponents The maximum tangential load The radial clearance The volume of wear Points inside the contact area The number of rollers The energy density wear coefficient The angle of the lateral force applied to each roller The energy wear coefficient The tangential displacement during loading  The tangential displacement during unloading The total elastic deflection along the radial loading based on contact deformation The maximum tangential displacement during oscillation The load distribution factor The friction coefficient The Poisson ratio and The correction factor The position angle of rollers False brinelling is a phenomenon which occurs in stationary bearings, and is due to an external oscillation force [ To date, several models have been proposed to model fretting wear processes. In many studies, energy dissipation is one of the most common concepts used to simulate wear and fretting wear [ To date, several studies have been conducted to model false brinelling [ In the authors' previous work [ To date, most false brinelling models have been based on the finite element method, using commercial finite element software. These models incur large computational costs, making it difficult to use them for a parametric study. Moreover, to reduce the computational time, FE models usually model just a small (critical) part of the bearing rather than providing a full bearing model. In this research, an analytical model for predicting false brinelling in bearings was developed, based on energy dissipation theory [ This section presents the methodology used in this research. The first part details the equations used in the analytical model. The FEM model is then presented in the second part. In the third part, the false brinelling test-rig is detailed. This section details the methods used in developing the analytical model for predicting false brinelling damage in a bearing. The method of wear used in this model is based on the energy dissipation method proposed by Mindlin [ The false brinelling process is depicted in All the mechanical processes depicted in The profile that the model starts with is new and unworn. The load distribution is based on Wan's model [ For roller bearings The deflection coefficient For point contact For line contact Then, the approximate value of total elastic deflection along the radial loading based on contact deformation Then, the value of the load distribution factor Then, the value of the radial load integral Therefore, improved approximate of Equations Afterwards, the inner static load distribution is calculated based on the roller location and its number ( In this model, the assumption is that there are oscillatory displacements in lateral and axial directions [ According to the feedback shown in The angle of the lateral force applied to each roller is calculated as: In the case of displacement input, the maximum tangential load ( When the external vibration is force input, the maximum tangential displacement ( The energy dissipation is calculated based on the Mindlin et al. studies [ The energy dissipation is the area of the tangential load-displacement graph during loading and unloading, which can be calculated per cycle as shown in The energy dissipation in the lateral and axial directions is calculated separately based on Equation The volume of wear can be calculated as [ The wear depth can be calculated as [ This model is valid for elliptical and circular contacts and can be used for any type of bearing that carries the radial load. It depends on the distribution of traction forces for wear depth and correction factor for wear volume Equations A three-dimensional FE model [ In the analytical model, the energy approach is used to model the false brinelling to more conveniently take into account an energy threshold for wear activation. In the FE model, Archard's equation is used to simulate the false brinelling process. Although in some studies Archard's equation validity has been questioned [ The false brinelling test-rig that was presented in the authors' previous work [ The false brinelling test-rig can simulate lateral vibrations by altering the housing mount to the shaker platform. The experiment begins with the mounting of the shaft and the bearing using the housing system shown in Then, the test results for the wear marks on the inner race surface are scanned using a Taylor Hobson Talysurf i5 surface profiler to measure the maximum depth of wear. In the first part of this section, the analytical model is verified by the FE model. The second part presents the validation results of the analytical model, FEM and test-rig. In the third part, the case study results of the analytical model are presented. The results for the analytical model were compared with the results for the FE model in terms of the false brinelling wear depth and the shape of the false brinelling wear profile. Several simulations are performed for a range of normal loads (110,150,1100 and 5000 N) and the lateral vibration of 2 g. In both simulations, the threshold energy of wear activation The comparison of false brinelling wear profiles of the analytical and FE models is shown in   Details of the experimental validation are provided in Ref. [  In this study, the material properties (friction and wear coefficient) are obtained from the authors’ previous paper [ The analytical model was used to predict false brinelling for a range of normal loads and lateral and axial vibrations. The simulation parameters are listed in Under the axial forcing, the depth and volume of wear on the inner and outer raceways have the same pattern as those under the lateral forcing (  In general, the difference in volume and depth of the wear is due to changes to the normal load and the tangential displacement. The normal load decreases by around one third for the top roller and third roller respectively according to the load distribution as seen in The analytical model was used to investigate the influence of a normal load and vibration on the wear damage caused by false brinelling. To this end, the bearing was tested under a range of acceleration amplitude (0.1–3 g) and normal load (up to 5000 N). The duration of the simulation was 192 h with 24 Hz. An analytical model was developed to simulate the false brinelling process in bearings. This model includes three main parts to determine the load distribution, model the contact mechanics and simulate the wear process. This model was verified by a 3D FE false brinelling model, in terms of the maximum wear depth and the wear profile shape. The analytical model was approximately 10000 times more time-efficient compared with the false brinelling 3D FE model, achieving an error within 10%. Also, the analytical model was validated using a false brinelling test-rig. The analytical model predicts the wear depth within 30% error of the experimental results. This could be due to the simplification of determining the threshold energy wear activation, wear and friction coefficient. The results obtained from the experiments and the models show that the depth of wear decreases when the normal load is increased under constant tangential forcing. It was shown that an increase of the normal load increases the maximum normal pressure. This results in a decrease of the relative sliding displacement, although the traction increases as a result of increasing the normal load. The effect of relative sliding displacement decrease dominates over the effect of traction increase causing the maximum energy density to drop, thereby reducing the depth of false brinelling wear. The results showed that the wear marks on the outer raceway were shallower than those on the inner raceway by approximately 5%, while the volume of wear on the outer raceway were about 9% greater than the wear volume on the inner raceway. This is because the contact areas between the outer race and rollers were about 20% larger than the contact areas in the inner race, which can result in a greater amount of wear. Moreover, the larger area reduces the maximum normal pressure on the surface which in turn reduces the depth of wear. Under the axial forcing, the depth and volume of the wear on the inner and outer raceways was the same as those under the lateral forcing. However, the wear depths caused by axial vibration (under the same normal load and vibration) were greater than those caused by lateral forcing. The reason is that the relative sliding displacements of the axial oscillations were about 30% greater than those in the lateral direction. This causes greater energy dissipation in the axial direction than the lateral direction. The analytical model was used to perform a sensitivity analysis of the influence of a normal load and vibration on the false brinelling wear damage. The results showed that the wear depth increases non-linearly when the acceleration amplitude is increased. This is because an increase of the vibration amplitude with constant normal pressure increases the tangential displacement. In addition, it was shown that the wear depth decreases when the normal load is increased. This is because increasing the normal load decreases the tangential displacement which causes a reduction of the frictional energy density. The wear depth decreased more sharply when the normal load (maximum contact pressure) was below 1000 N (800 MPa). The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors greatly appreciate the financial support given by the