The structural characteristics of copper deposits resulting from immersion plating of copper are presented. In this study halide is replaced by perchloric acid, which is found to effectively break down the impervious oxide film from aluminium surface and to facilitate copper plating. Increase in copper concentration results in a smooth deposit, showing layered structure where crystallite grows in fine globular shape. Perchloric acid concentration has a significant effect on the deposit morphology. Increase in its concentration mainly affects the crystallite size and its distribution on the substrate surface. At higher perchloric acid concentrations no dendrite formation is observed but surface corrosion is initiated. Increase in plating temperature results in the nodular growth and also surface corrosion. The activation energy calculated from the Arrhenius plot is found to be 34.19 kJmol−1.Aluminium is known for its resistance to plating because of the presence of an adherent oxide coating over its surface. To overcome this difficulty immersion plating of Zn on Al (zinc coating) ( The experimental set up is same as discussed earlier ( The reaction kinetics of copper deposition onto aluminium from an oxalate bath at varying copper sulphate, perchloric acid concentration and temperatures are reported in our earlier publication ( The effect of initial copper concentration in the plating solution and the immersion time is reported in our previous publication ( Halide ions have been used ( The SEM photomicrograph of copper deposit obtained at lower perchloric acid concentration i.e. 0.34 g The previous study ( At room temperature (28 °C) the deposit is thick and compact and the crystallites are spherical shape and distributed non-uniformly over the aluminium surface ( Increase in plating temperature to 50 °C further deteriorates the surface morphology of copper. The SEM photomicrographs of the deposit at different magnifications are taken and compared. The deposit at lower magnification i.e. ×200 appears to be compact but having a rough surface and big pit due to corrosion. Corrosion of plated copper due to Cl The results on the surface morphology indicate that increase in plating temperature from room temperature (28 °C) to 50 °C deteriorates the deposit. Surface corrosion is initiated at 45 °C and is enhanced at higher temperature. Enhanced surface corrosion is also marked by sudden fall in the plating rate. Similar observations are also reported elsewhere (  Perchloric acid effectively breaks down the impervious oxide film from Al surface and facilitates immersion plating of copper. Rate process is improved by increase in initial concentration, perchloric acid, plating time and temperature. Higher copper concentration does not deteriorate the deposit as the case of Cl Increase in concentration of perchloric acid affects crystallite size and its distribution on substrate surface. Perchloric acid concentration above 0.51 g/l reduces the crystallite size drastically along with surface corrosion. But, no dendrite formation is observed as reported in the case of Cl Temperature plays a significant role in deciding the surface morphology of plated copper. A temperature between 35 and 45 °C produces coarse deposit and results in nodular growth. At 50 °C the deposit appears to be more compact along with a rough surface and an elongated pit. The nodular structure also reappears in this case. The activation energy calculated from the Arrhenius plot is found to be 34.19 kJ The authors wish to extend their thanks to the Director, and the H. O. D of the department for their inspiration and kind permission to publish the paper.