Mill tailing are one of the most important components of cemented paste backfill (CPB). However, there is still a lack of knowledge on the effect that tailings fineness and density has on the quality of paste backfill. Therefore, this paper presents the results of an experimental study done to evaluate the influence of the tailings particle size and density on the quality of CPB. The criteria examined of the paste backfill quality are: its mechanical strength (uniaxial compressible strength), economic performance (based on binder cost), water demand (pulp density and water to cement ratio) for a given consistence and its microstructure (porosity and pore size distribution). The end results have shown that the tailings fineness and density significantly influence the properties of the hardened (strength, cost, microstructure) and fresh (water demand) paste backfill.Cemented paste backfill (CPB) is an engineered mixture of dewatered tailings (generally composed of fine silt-size particles) from the milling or processing operation of the mine, water and hydraulic binders containing between 70% and 85% solids by weight. CPB represents a relatively new technology. Hence, many fundamental factors affecting paste backfill quality are not well understood. Among these aspects, the effect of tailings fineness and density on the quality of fresh and hardened paste backfill is not well understood. Only a few works ( Therefore, the main purpose of this study was to evaluate by a series of experiments the influence of tailings fineness and density on the performance properties of the paste backfill. The studied performance properties included the strength, cost and microstructure of the hardened paste backfill and the water demand for the fresh paste backfill. The tailings materials used in this study were collected from a gold (Mine A) and a polymetalic (Mine B) in eastern Canada. The sampled tailings were reprocessed to create several grain size classes corresponding to fine (20 μm particles >60 wt%), medium (35–60 wt% of 20 μm particles) and coarse (15–35 wt% of 20 μm particles) tailings. This was done by separation of the tailings by hydrocyclone and/or sieving (elimination the coarse tailings particles). Since the density of tailings materials is strongly dependant on the sulphur content ( About 150 CPB samples, which had tailings particle size or density differences, were prepared to study the effect of tailings fineness and density on the properties of CPB. Some paste backfill cylinders were punched at their bases to study the effect of drainage according to tailings fineness on porosity of the fresh paste backfill and the consequence on the CPB properties. The tailings materials, binders and water were first mixed and homogenized in a double spiral mixer to produce the paste backfill mixtures. After that, slump tests, according to ASTM C 143-90, were done to evaluate the transportability of the backfill. The pulp density and the water/cement ratio were also determined to evaluate the water demand of the CPB. The paste backfill mixtures produced were then poured into curing cylinders, 10 cm in diameter and 20 cm high. These samples were then sealed and cured in a humidity chamber at approximately 80% humidity and 23   The results of the study of the effect of tailings fineness on water requirement of the fresh paste backfill have demonstrated that the tailings fineness has a pronounced effect on backfill water demand, i.e. on its W/C ratio ( It was shown that increasing of the tailings density gives generally the paste backfill a higher strength for the same binder proportion ( The presented results have shown that the tailings particle size and density has a considerable effect on the performance properties (strength, cost, water demand, microstructure) of the paste backfill. It was demonstrated that the tailings particle size, particularly the proportions of fines tailings particles (<20 μm) significantly affect the porosity of the paste backfill and the pore size distribution within it, its water drainage ability and consequently, its strength development and the water requirement for a given consistency. It was also shown that not only does the overall porosity influence the strength of the paste backfill, but the pore size distribution plays a decisive role in the strength development of the cemented backfill. The paste backfill water demand increases with the fineness of the tailings material used. Increasing the tailings density is associated with volumetrically higher binder consumption, i.e. more expensive backfill. In general, higher binder consumption gives the paste backfill higher strength. This work brings new light on the effect of tailings on CPB properties that can contribute to better optimization of paste backfill mixtures. The authors would like to thank IRSST and FUQAT for financial supporting of this research.