Aims
                  
                     in vitro effects of bone morphogenetic protein 7 (BMP-7) on proliferation and differentiation of dental pulp stem cells (DPSCs) have not been investigated, nor has an appropriate dose been established.
               
                  Main methods
                  Human DPSCs obtained from healthy volunteers were cultured with BMP-7 at 25, 50, and 100 ng/ml. Cell viability was measured by Cell Counting Kit-8 assay. Expression profiles of selected odontogenic differentiation-related markers in DPSCs were evaluated using quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR), immunocytochemistry, and western blot analysis. Mineralization of DPSCs was evaluated by alizarin red staining. The Smad5 signaling pathway was examined by qRT-PCR and western blot analysis.
               
                  Key findings
                  Diminished cell viability was found in DPSCs induced with 25, 50, and 100 ng/ml of BMP-7 for 7 days, showing a dose-response effect (P-trend = 0.03). DSPP, OCN, DMP-1, and RUNX2 were upregulated by BMP-7 induction after 7 and 14 days, especially at 50 and 100 ng/ml (P < 0.05). Immunocytochemical staining revealed strong expression of DSPP, DMP-1 and ALP in DPSCs induced by BMP-7, whereas null or weak expression in untreated cells. Western blot analysis confirmed over-expression of DSPP in cells induced by BMP-7. Alizarin red staining confirmed formation of mineralized nodules 4 weeks after BMP-7 induction. BMP-7 treated cells showed dose-dependently increased expression of BMPR1A, Smad5, and p-Smad5.
               
                  Significance
                  Our data indicated that BMP-7 at 50 ng/ml and 100 ng/ml was capable to induce DPSCs toward odontogenic differentiation through the Smad5 signaling pathway and not dramatically halt cell proliferation in vitro.Tooth defect is a frequent illness caused by pathological conditions such as periodontal and carious diseases, fractures, and injuries. The associated aesthetic and functional changes could adversely impact the quality of life of affected patients of all ages. Dental restoration using artificial materials is the current standard treatment, but artificial restorative materials generally do not share the same physical and biological properties as the natural tooth. As such, long-term durability of dental restorations is still not satisfactory because the tooth-restoration interface does not ensure complete marginal integrity or undergo identical dimensional changes over time, which may result in microleakage, secondary caries, and eventually restoration failure [ Human tooth is highly specialized, comprising the outer mineralized layer of enamel, the middle hard layer of dentin, and the inner portion of dental pulp. Odontoblasts reside at the periphery of the dental pulp and are capable to induce dentin formation, but their capacity to form new dentin is too limited to allow sufficient self-recovery from tooth defects [ Inductive morphogenetic factors, along with dental stem cells, are the essential elements of dentin-pulp tissue regeneration. A range of molecules have been identified as capable of stimulating regenerative and mineralizing processes within the dentin-pulp complex in The aim of this study, therefore, was to evaluate the effects of various doses of BMP-7 on DPSCs proliferation and differentiation. In particular we focused on the effect toward odontogenic differentiation. We isolated human DPSCs from impacted third molar and then determined whether administration of BMP-7 at different concentrations modified DPSCs proliferation and expression profiles of odontogenic differentiation-related markers. In addition, we investigated the role of BMP receptor type 1A ( Normal human impacted third molar teeth were collected from healthy young adults (19–25 years of age) at Jinling Hospital. The study was approved by the Medical Ethics Committee of Jinling Hospital, and informed written consent of each study subject was obtained prior to participation. DPSCs were isolated and established in culture as previously described [ Cells were plated in T75 flasks in the medium as above. One day after cell seeding, medium was changed with fresh medium containing BMP-7 at various concentrations (25, 50, and 100 ng/ml, respectively), and medium alone as controls. Adherent cells were then incubated at 37 °C and 5% CO2, with BMP-7-containing medium changed every 3–4 days. Cell morphological features after 1, 7, and 14 days of culture were recorded by inverted microscope (CKX41SF, Olympus, Japan). Cell viability was measured by Cell Counting Kit-8 assay (CCK-8, Dojindo, Japan). CCK-8 is a highly sensitive colorimetric assay using tetrazolium salt WST-8 to generate a colored formazan dye, which is proportional to the number of living cells. DPSCs were seeded in 96-well plates at 5 × 10 qRT-PCR was used to assess the mRNA expression of selected odontogenic differentiation-related markers in cells treated with various concentrations of BMP-7 and untreated cells as controls for 1, 7, and 14 days. Total RNA extraction was performed with TRIzol (Ambion, Carlsbad, US). Isolated RNA was reverse transcribed by HiScript Q RT SuperMix kit (Vazyme, China) according to the manufacturer's protocol. The mRNA expression of dentin sialophosphoprotein ( Immunocytochemical staining was performed for odontogenic differentiation-related markers, including DSPP, DMP-1 and alkaline phosphatase (ALP). The primary antibodies were rabbit anti-human DSPP polyclonal antibody (1:150 dilution, Bioss, China), rabbit anti-human DMP-1 polyclonal antibody (1:150 dilution, Bioss, China), and rabbit anti-human ALP polyclonal antibody (1:100 dilution, Boster, China). The secondary antibody was horseradish peroxidase labeled goat anti-rabbit IgG (1:100 dilution, BioWorld, Atlanta, US). Cell suspensions obtained by trypsin (0.25%) digestion were washed with phosphate buffered saline (PBS) and resuspended in α-MEM with 10% FBS. The resuspended cells were seeded on coverslips in 6-well plates and incubated overnight at 37 °C to allow cells to adhere to the coverslips. Adherent cells were then treated with various concentrations of BMP-7 in α-MEM with 10% FBS. After 7 days in culture, the coverslips were washed in PBS, followed by a 20-min cell fixation with 4% paraformaldehyde. The fixed cells were exposed to 1.5% blocking serum in PBS for 30 min to suppress non-specific staining and subsequently incubated with corresponding primary antibody for 1 h at room temperature. The cells were then incubated with the secondary antibody for 45 min followed by three more PBS washes. A DAB kit (Bioss, China) was used for colorimetric detection. Finally, cells were counterstained with haematoxylin, mounted, and observed under an inverted microscope. DPSCs were seeded in 6-well plates at a density of 5 × 10 Cells treated with various concentrations of BMP-7 in α-MEM with 10% FBS for 14 days were used for western blot analysis. Total proteins were extracted using RIPA lysis buffer (Beyotime, China) and total protein concentrations were determined using a BCA kit (Pierce, Rockford, US). Equal amounts of protein were separated on SDS-PAGE gel and electrotransferred to a PVDF membrane (Roche, Indianapolis, US). The membrane was blocked with 0.1% Tween-20 (TBST) and 5% skim milk in PBS for 2 h at room temperature. After incubation with the anti-DSPP antibody (1:150 dilution, Bioss, China), anti-Smad5 antibody (1:1000 dilution, Proteintech, Chicago, US), anti-phospho-Smad5 (p-Smad5) antibody (1:1000 dilution, Proteintech, Chicago, US) and anti-GAPDH (1:3000 dilution, Abcam, Cambridge, US) at 4 °C overnight and TBST washes, the secondary antibody, anti-rabbit IgG (whole-molecule)-peroxidase antibody produced in goat (1:100,000 dilution, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, US) was added for additional 2 h incubation at 37 °C, followed by TBST washes. Blots were visualized by chemiluminescence (Pierce, Rockford, US) and exposed to X-ray film. Band density was obtained using the UN-SCAN-IT gel analysis software (Silk Scientific, Orem, US) and normalized with the GAPDH band density. Results were expressed as mean ± standard deviation (SD). Differences among groups were analyzed using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) and Fisher's LSD test or post-hoc Tukey HSD Test as appropriate. A least-squares linear regression analysis was performed to determine the dose-effect relationship. DPSCs were treated with BMP-7 at concentrations of 25, 50, and 100 ng/ml along with control (no BMP-7) for 1, 7, and 14 days. Inverted microscope images of these cultured DPSCs are shown in  To evaluate the potential effects of BMP-7 on odontogenic differentiation, we first quantitatively measured mRNA expression of Next, to further assess whether BMP-7 affects expression of proteins involved in odontogenic differentiation, immunocytochemical staining patterns for DSPP, DMP-1 and ALP were tested. As illustrated in Western blot was used to further determine the dose effect of BMP-7 on protein expression for DSPP ( To verify the enhanced odontogenic differentiation potential of BMP-7 treated DPSCs, Alizarin red staining was performed ( DPSCs were treated with various concentrations of BMP-7, and the mRNA expression level of DPSCs are valuable sources of cells for application in dental regeneration. They are normally quiescent but can be activated into proliferation and differentiation in response to external stimuli In the study, we defined expression profiles in DPSCs treated with BMP-7, using qRT-PCR, immunocytochemistry, and western blot analysis. qRT-PCR analysis revealed upregulation of The exact mechanism underlying the process of differentiation of DPSCs into odontoblasts remains largely unknown. BMP-7 belongs to the transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) superfamily, which initiates signals by binding to type I and II serine/threonine kinase receptors. Once activated, the BMP receptors induce phosphorylation and activation of receptor-regulated Smads (R-Smads), which then complex with Smad4, translocate into nucleus, and trigger transcription of downstream genes. The Smad-dependent BMP signaling pathway is composed of various molecules and is broadly involved in the development of various organs, including tooth and bone [ In the present study, we found that BMP-7 exhibited opposite effect on proliferation and differentiation of DPSCs Although at a very low level, we detected DSPP expression by immunocytochemistry in human DPSCs without BMP-7 induction. Such observation was also reported in other studies, and has been attributed to self-differentiation of stem cells after long-time In the study, most cells exhibited typical spindle sharp of mesenchymal cells, suggesting multilineage potential of DSPCs within 14 days of incubation. We found no obvious difference in morphology between BMP-7-treated cells and untreated cells. This may be due to limited induction time because previous studies reported that cell morphological changes were found in differentiating DPSCs after long-term cultures (5–6 weeks) [ Our results support that BMP-7 at appropriate concentration ranges is capable to induce DPSCs toward odontogenic differentiation and not dramatically halt cell proliferation. Thus, our study provides new insights into the utilization of BMP-7 in dental tissue regeneration. Our future study is aimed at evaluating the capability of DPSCs to regenerate the dentin matrix through BMP-7 induction and to comparing properties of the regenerated dentin matrix and the natural dentin in animal models. The authors declare no conflicts of interest. The authors thank Professor Yan Jin (the Fourth Military Medical University) and Quan Zhao (School of Life Sciences, Nanjing University) for their assistance with the development of this project. This work was supported by the