The present investigation is an attempt at correlating the crystallographic orientation and mechanical properties of hexagonal commercially pure titanium (cp-titanium). Annealed cp-titanium sheets are subjected to tensile deformation along the rolling direction, along 45° to the rolling direction and along 90° to the rolling direction respectively. Crystallographic textures and mechanical properties of these cp-titanium samples are investigated in the present study. The hardness of different grains/orientations is estimated through nanoindentation, grain average misorientation, orientation estimated elastic stiffness and Taylor factor measurements. It is observed that the hardness of the grains close to basal orientation is higher compared to non-basal orientations. It is further observed that the estimated bulk mechanical properties of cp-titanium have a direct relationship with the volume fraction of basal grains/orientations.Titanium and its alloys are one of the most widely used materials for structural and industrial applications In the present study a systematic micro–macro correlation of mechanical properties w.r.to orientation/texture of cp-titanium has been investigated through tensile testing, nanoindentation, XRD (X-ray diffraction) and EBSD (electron backscattered diffraction). Hardness of individual grains/orientations is estimated by nanoindentation and the proportions of different grains/orientations have been correlated with the bulk mechanical properties of cp-titanium. The microstructural developments w.r.to orientation of grains in cp-titanium has also been investigated in the present study. Cp-titanium (grade-2) plate of 5 XRD is carried out in a Panalytical MRD system. For XRD texture four poles, (01 EBSD is carried out in a FEI Quanta-3D-FEG scanning electron microscope using a TSL-OIM (Tex. SEM. Ltd. — Orientation Imaging Microscope) EBSD package. An approximate area of 1 Nanoindentation tests are carried out using a nano-mechanical testing instrument, Hysitron Triboindenter (TI 900). A Berkovich diamond indenter is used for indentation. Hardness of more than 300 grains is measured using a load of 9000 Mechanical properties of cp-titanium w.r.to its orientation (i.e. along rolling direction, 45° to the rolling direction and 90° to the rolling direction) is shown in Nanoindentation of the cp-titanium sample is shown in  To quantify the extent of deformation during tensile deformation of cp-titanium, the GAM development is estimated.  The Taylor factor has been estimated for different grains/orientations using respective slip systems and the results are shown in  The results show that the basal/near-basal grains/orientations of an annealed cp-titanium have higher hardness ( Higher hardness of basal grains/orientations in cp-titanium is in line with the literatures A similar type of study in a single-phase Zircaloy 2, a material of similar deformation behaviour as cp-titanium, has been observed by Sahoo et al. Although hardness of individual grains may not be important in the context of the overall properties of a material, the anisotropic nature of cp-titanium showed a sensible relationship between the volume fraction of individual orientations and bulk mechanical property. As shown in  The basal/near-basal orientations are found to be the hardest orientations in annealed cp-titanium. The grain average misorientation (GAM) which is a measure of misorientation in a grain is lower in basal/near-basal grains during tensile deformation of the material. The orientation estimated elastic stiffness is highest for basal/near-basal grains. The active slip systems for basal/near-basal & off-basal grains/orientations are prismatic, pyramidal, first & second order pyramidal slips, while those for non-basal are basal, first & second order pyramidal slips. Both tensile twins characterized by a misorientation 94.8° about < The basal/near-basal grains/orientations have low Taylor factor values compared to off-basal & non-basal grains/orientations. Cp-titanium with maximum volume fraction of basal/near-basal orientations/grains has high strength and Young's modulus. The authors would like to thank