In the analyses of metal forming processes by the flow formulation, deviatoric components of stress are calculated. However the total components of stress must also be known. Hence it is necessary to evaluate the hydrostatic stress, as well. One of the major drawbacks of the flow formulation is that in this method the hydrostatic pressure cannot be accurately evaluated. In this paper, hydrostatic stress is obtained by satisfying the equilibrium equations for the current distribution of deviatoric stresses. The divergence of the deviatoric stresses are approximated by the moving least squares method. In the present work for the first time, the equilibrium equation is approximated in a least square sense, by its minimisation with respect to hydrostatic pressure. Determination of the approximated pressure field is achieved, using the conventional finite element approach.
                  This approach is first satisfactorily verified, using a cantilever beam with known analytical stress field. Finally this method is applied to a typical 2D axisymmetric bulk metal forming process. Approximated pressure field has been compared with available solutions. The results of the present approach are very encouraging.In the analysis of metal forming processes by the flow formulation, the pressure field obtained either from the Lagrangian formulation or from the penalty equation is not accurate and may exhibit spurious modes. When using the penalty method, the penalty constant is introduced rather arbitrarily for computational convenience. However, a proper choice of this constant is important in a successful simulation of metal forming processes. Too large a value of the penalty constant may cause difficulties in convergence, while too small a value result in unacceptable large volumetric strains One solution to this problem is to obtain the total (not incremental) values of hydrostatic stress, which satisfy the principle of equilibrium for the current distribution of deviatoric stresses. The equilibrium equation can be written as One of the main contributions of the present work is introducing a simple and effective finite point approach for the determination of divergence of deviatoric stresses. In contrast to the previous work in which conventional finite element method have been engaged for this purpose, using the finite point technique, yields continuous fields of deviatoric stresses and their divergences. In this work the equilibrium equation is approximated in a least square sense, by minimising it with respect to the nodal hydrostatic pressure values. The deviatoric stress tensor   The same mesh that was used for the calculation of displacements and deviatoric stresses is engaged for the recovery of hydrostatic pressure. To perform the integration process of It may be noted that at free surfaces the traction of the stresses vanish or To verify the effectiveness of the procedure, two examples are considered as follows. The Timoshenko beam which is a simple elastic problem with analytically known stress field is considered first (see Comparison of the nodal hydrostatic pressure values with theory shows effectively no errors.  An axisymmetric upsetting problem is selected as the second example of the hydrostatic pressure recovery method. Kobayashi et al.  This irregularity can be also observed for the other Gauss points, say numbers 7 and 4 where the predicted values for the hydrostatic pressure is more than that at numbers 2, 3 and 6 ones while logically they must be less.  On the other hand it can be seen from It is shown that the values of the hydrostatic pressure obtained by the flow formulation can be far from being logical and real. It is especially severe when the hydrostatic pressure is considerable. The proposed hydrostatic pressure recovery method, can be considered as a post-treatment procedure which not only improves the precision of the obtained hydrostatic pressure field by the flow finite element method but also considerably improves the state of equilibrium. The results show that if the deviatoric stress field is sufficiently precise, the hydrostatic pressure field can also be precisely predicted by the present new hydrostatic pressure recovery method. The example of upsetting shows that by employing the MLS method, it is possible to have a fair prediction of the divergence of deviatoric stresses. Consequently, the pressure field can also be estimated satisfactorily. Since the method is a post-treatment procedure, it is inexpensive.