Based on the water-only cyclone, a new cyclone named cyclone column separator (CCS) was developed by combining a positive cone with the common negative cone to form a non-continuous three-stage complicated cone (CC). The performance of the CCS was compared with that of water-only cyclones with single angle of 70°, 90°, 110° and 120° by coal slime separation tests. Compared with the water-only cyclones with single cone structure, the separation performance of the CCS with CC structure was significantly improved and much less losses of +0.25mm low density coarse coal were resulted. It produced a probable error of 0.058 for +1mm fractions, and 0.083 for 0.5–1mm fractions. It also gave an imperfection of 0.202 for a rather broader size range of +0.25mm. All results show that the CCS was a coarse coal separation equipment of high efficiency.Water-only cyclone was first developed in 1959 in the Central Testing Station of Dutch State of Mines at Treebeck. Compared with hydrocyclone, it presents a cone of 80–140°, and a coarser and deeper vertex finder. The water-only cyclone can form a dense medium bed at the cone part and realize separation based on density ( In order to improve the separation performance of the water-only cyclones, many scholars studied the structure of the cone. The structures of the cone include DSM type ( Among these cone structures, the structure Lewis Hydrosizer takes a baffle plate to change the flow direction of the slurry to produce upward flow. The fine particles rise with the upward flow to form overflow while the coarse particles sink down on to the inclined plate, slide upward along it under the effect of the flow, and fall into the coarse discharge channel after crossing the top of the cone ( Based on the water-only cyclone, a new cyclone named cyclone column separator The CCS used in the experiments has the same structural parameter with the traditional water-only cyclones, which is formed by replacing the single cone in the traditional water-only cyclone with a special complicated cone (CC). The experimental water-only cyclone used is shown in The first and the third negative cones of the CC are of 90°. The cone angles of the water only cyclones taken as a comparison include 70°, 90°, 110°, and 120°. The raw coal was of − The ash content of the clean coal and the tailing coal, as well as the percentage to clean coal for all size fractions under different cone structure conditions are shown in For the CCS, the ash content of the relatively coarse fractions (+ With the increasing of single cone angle, the difference among the percentages of all size fractions into the clean coal decreases, which means that the classification effect eliminates during separation. For the CCS, the percentage of each size fraction into the clean coal shows only slight difference. It means that the classification effect is rather weak and the separation effect dominates definitely. Sink and float analysis was carried out with regard to the clean coal and the tailing coal of all size fractions. The partition curves of all size fractions are shown in For the size fractions of + For the broad size fraction of + The cut point of the CCS is significantly higher than that of 90° single cone cyclone. It means that the added positive cone on the basis of 90° cone enhanced the separation strength. Based on the water-only cyclone, a new device named CCS was developed by integrating a positive cone with common negative cone of 90°. The novel cone structure is a complicated three-stage discontinuous one. The separation results show that the CCS improved the separation of coarse coal and presents lowest probable error and lowest imperfection as compared with the traditional water-only cyclones with single cone. The probable error for the broad size fraction of + The authors gratefully acknowledge the