As the excavation of roadway, new fractures will be formed and the pre-existing fractures extend with the redistribution of stress in surrounding rocks. Eventually, fracture zone and bed separation are formed in rocks because of the developed fractures. Therefore, mastering the fracture evolution of surrounding rocks is very important to maintain the stability of roadway. The surrounding rocks of main haulage roadway in a certain coal mine is so broken and loose that the supporting is very difficult. Based on comprehensive analysis of the engineering geological conditions, a sight instrument was used to observe the fractures of internal surrounding rocks. Four indices, i.e., the width of fracture zone W, the number of fractures n, the width of fractures d and rock fracture designation RFD, are put forward to evaluate the fracture development. According to the evolution rules of the soft rock roadway from this paper, control principles by stages and by regions are presented through the research. At the same time, the best time of grouting reinforcement is determined on the basis of fracture saturation. Field practice shows that the roadway can satisfy normal production during service periods by suitable first support and grouting reinforcement.After the excavation of a roadway, the original balanced state of stress is broken and its field redistributed inside the surrounding rock. When the stress exceeds the limit of the rock strength, fracture zones within a certain range of the surrounding rock will appear from both pre-existing and new fractures. Hence, understanding the development of fractures is the key to controlling the stability of the surrounding rock. However, fractures are always hidden inside the rock and present surveying methods, such as ultrasonic waves, ground penetrating radar and seismic CT technology, which are greatly affected by external conditions cannot capture the process of fracture development of the surrounding rock directly. Although methods of probing holes can show intuitively the development of fractures, it cannot quantify this development because, at present, there are no comprehensive evaluation indices of fractures The main petrographic compositions of the surrounding rocks consist of mudstone and fine sandstone in the main haulage roadway at a depth of 480 X-ray diffraction and SEM tests show that the main components of mudstone samples are kaolinite, illite, quartz and illite smectite mixed layer, together accounting for 70% of the material. The speed of deformation was so quick that the roadway was severely damaged at the initial excavating stage because the mudstone (the main component of the surrounding rock in the roadway), with its low integral strength was loose and broken. Even then, deformation continued at great speed during the stable period after excavation, lasting a long time. The phenomena of fractures and collapse of the roof and corner of the roadway, severe cracking and cutaneous pulp dropping from the sidewalls are the main manifestations as shown in Targeting the internal deformation and fracture process of the surrounding rock, our sighting instrument was used to detect the holes in the roof, corner and two sidewalls of the roadway. Fracture development in the surrounding rocks was provided by analyzing internal measuring images during excavation and the stable period after excavation and damage. There are a small number of fracture zones and fissures, although the integrity of the rock surrounding the newly excavated roadway is strong. The size of the fracture zone of the sidewalls was the largest, reaching 0.8 The fractures range from shallow to deep due to the redistribution of the stress field after excavation. The fracture zones of the roof reached 2.0 The fracture zones of the roof, sidewalls and corner holes were 2.7, 2.0 and 3.3 After excavation, deformation occurred quickly, the roof collapsed and both sidewalls were squeezed, judging from the damage to the surface of the roadway. The speed of rheological deformation was still fast and the deformation lasted a long time, before the deformation tended to become stable. In this period the roof and corner started to fracture and fall while the sidewalls generated cracks with the dropping of cutaneous pulp. Given the development of internal fractures, the fracture zones of the newly excavated roadway were located within 0.5 The deformation in different directions along the roadway section occurred at different speeds after excavation. The fractures always started to enlarge from the location where the deformation was most acute and where the spalls fell like squama. Thus the width of the fracture zone continued to increase and the depth of the damage to the roof and corner went deeper than elsewhere. The deformation along the direction of the roadway was different, while the geo stress, abnormal in this local geological structure belt, resulted in a significant deformation of the roadway Just presenting the images of the surrounding rock as a method to monitor the detection of holes is insufficient. Further analysis is necessary for understanding the development of fractures and their characteristics in the surrounding rock and evaluating the stability of the roadway. Based on data from a large number of holes, four analytical indices are proposed to explain these fracture features (we do not consider longitudinal fractures). Width of fracture zone Fracture number Fracture width The rock fracture designation RFD refers to the ratio between the width of the sum of the cracks and the width of the fracture zone. This measure evaluates the state of fracture development in the surrounding rock, shown as a percentage. For a better understanding of fracture development and the characteristics of the surrounding rock, as well as evaluating the stability of the roadway, we compared and analyzed the fractures on the basis of four analytical indices. After excavation, the status of triaxial stress in rocks turned into a biaxial stress or a triaxial stress with low confining pressure. The surrounding rock expanded through shear failure and fractures extended from the surface to deep into the rock until they reached a new balance. Rock fracture development is a gradual process for it starts shallow and continues to deep in the rock, it goes from small to large fractures, from slow to fast development and is closely related to time. It can be seen that over time, the width of the fracture zones of the surrounding rock increased continuously, along with the range of damage to the roof, while the corner and two sidewalls of the roadway gradually stabilized, as shown in RFD and the speed of deformation of the roadway varied in different directions of the surrounding rock and the fracture zone generated is inconsistent with the profile of the roadway. The spatial distribution of the crack images of corner holes in the walls at different stages is shown in As an example, we show the effect on a one load layer of a layered structure causing cracks through the entire thickness of the structure. As the load increased gradually, new cracks were formed from existing ones. Crack insertion is the process where the number of cracks increases and the space between cracks decreases continually. When the spaces between cracks decrease to a specified value, crack insertion will terminate and reach a saturated state, known as crack saturation. From this moment on, cracks will only increase the opening width of fractures instead of forming new cracks from the existent cracks, even if the load increases continuously, In fact, this situation occurred in the deformation and fracture processes of soft rocks surrounding our roadway. When the intact rock was subjected to the full force of destruction under high stress, cracks formed in the rock. Over time, these cracks gradually developed into fractures and these became fracture zones in the surrounding rock with adjacent fractures. Rocks within fracture zones continued to develop new cracks and fractures, given the increase in the degree of fragmentation. But this increase was limited, for there was a balance and when the number of fractures reached this point, it no longer increased, i.e., the fractures reached saturation. In our case, the deformation and damage to the surrounding rock in the fracture zone was mainly related to the extension and transfixion of the original fractures with a smaller increase in the number of new fractures. Therefore grouting in time to reinforce all kinds of cracks, enriching weak surfaces and cementing rocks can effectively control the stability of roadways. Over time, fractures in rocks of surrounding roadways become less uniform and continue to expand from the surface to deep in the rock. Sometimes these fractures will break with characteristic jumps, a phenomenon referred to as interval fractures, shown in Our comprehensive analysis of the development of deformation and fractures shows characteristic stages of deformation and damage in the surrounding rock. This meant that the initial speed of deformation was very fast, resulting in quick deformation during the stable period after excavation. Therefore, for controlling the deformation of the surrounding rock, a suitable first support should be used to generate a suitable width of the fracture zone where the deformation energy of the surrounding rock should be released as much as possible under the condition of smooth blasting. Then we ought to backfill and compact the fractures by grouting in order to prevent the fracture zones to expand further and to avoid spreading and penetration of the fractures. The term “zoned” has two meanings: one applies along the roadway direction and the other along the roadway section direction. Reinforced support was applied by grouting in the place where the surrounding rocks were broken along the roadway direction. Along the direction of the roadway section, the roadway was divided into three areas for control of roof, corner and the two sidewalls of the roadway. Previous analysis has shown that the spread of fracture zones in surrounding rock is uneven: its range in the corner is the largest, next is that of the roof and the smallest was in the sidewalls. Although the width of the fracture zone of the sidewalls is the smallest, the surrounding rocks broke under high stress, suggesting that measures preventing the development of fractures should be taken by using high pretension bolts to reinforce the shallow rock of sidewalls. Roof and corner are the key parts to maintain the safety of a roadway, where the major form of rock cracks is continuous expansion deep into the rock. Therefore, an anchor range must be added and sufficient working resistance guaranteed to prevent the development of fractures deep into the rock  Bolt (anchor cable) supporting technology: the section of our roadway was a straight wall with semicircular arch. The support parameters are shown in Gunite technology: an appropriate thickness of concrete spraying over the entire full section is 20–50 Grouting technology: the chemical seriflux is the prior grouting material of choice, the diameter of the grouting holes 28 The phenomenon of fracture saturation indicates that due to the redistribution of stress and the poor properties of the surrounding rock, the rock generates continuous fractures after roadway excavation. But this increase is limited, the number of fractures will not increase when it passes a point of balance, referred to as fracture saturation. At this point, deformation of the surrounding rock consists mainly of fracture zones and perforation of the original fractures, rather than a massive generation of new fractures. Thus, timely grouting and reinforcing all kinds of cracks, enriching weak surfaces and cementing rocks can effectively control the stability of a roadway. As shown from We applied this control plan to our roadway. The results of our monitoring are shown in  The deformation of the main haulage roadway in this coal mine showed staged properties and characteristics of heterogeneity. The deformation was, at first, very large because it moved at a rapid. Later, the deformation tended to become stable. This stability lasted for a long time. The speed of deformation varied in different directions along the section; the depth of failure was greater in the top and corner of the roadway. The deformation and damage along the direction of the roadway also differed in various places. The geo stress, abnormal in local the geological structure belt, makes for a noteworthy deformation of the roadway. Targeting the development of fractures and the characteristics of the surrounding rock, four analytical indicators have been proposed to evaluate the stability of a roadway with a large amount of drilling, i.e., the width of the fracture zone Given the analysis of rock fractures as a function of time, fracture saturation appeared during the process of roadway deformation and sustained damage. That is to say, the number of fractures increased gradually after excavation and when it became stable, the fractures expanded and penetrated from the original cracks, i.e., it reached “fracture saturation”. The spatial distribution of breaks in the surrounding rock show that rock fractures are not uniform and continuous from the surface to deep into the rock; interval fractures occur in this process. Given the characteristics of rock fractures, we have presented control principles by stages and by areas in a roadway. The best time to grout and reinforce by fracture saturation is defined at the 30th day after excavation. Financial support for this work, provided by the