Micro fabricated sensors based on nanomechanical motion with piezoresistive electrical readout have become a promising biochemical sensing tool. The conventional microcantilever materials are mostly silicon-based. The sensitivity of the sensor depends on Young's modulus of the structural material, thickness of the cantilever as well as on the gauge factor of the piezoresistor. UV patternable polymers such as SU-8 have a very low Young's modulus compared to the silicon-based materials. Polymer cantilevers with a piezoresistive material having a large gauge factor and a lower Young's modulus are therefore highly suited for sensing applications. In this work, a spin coatable and photopatternable mixture of carbon black (CB) and SU-8, with proper dispersion characteristics, has been demonstrated as a piezoresistive thin film for polymer microcantilevers. Results on percolation experiments of SU-8/CB composite and fabrication of piezoresistive SU-8 microcantilevers using this composite are presented. With our controlled dispersion experiments, we could get a uniform piezoresistive thin film of thickness less than 1.2μm and resistivity of 2.7Ωcm using 10wt% of CB in SU-8. The overall thickness of the SU-8/composite/SU-8 is approximately 3μm. We further present results on the electromechanical characterization and biofunctionalization of the cantilever structures for biochemical sensing applications. These cantilevers show a deflection sensitivity of 0.55ppm/nm. Since the surface stress sensitivity is 4.1×10−3 [N/m]−
                     1, these cantilevers can well be used for detection of protein markers for pathological applications.Biosensing applications demand fast, easy to use, inexpensive and highly sensitive methods for recognition of target analytes The conventional microcantilever materials are normally silicon-based. The sensitivity of the sensor depends on Young's modulus of the structural material as well as the thickness of the cantilever. UV patternable polymers such as SU-8 have a very low Young's modulus compared to Si based materials and therefore are good candidates as structural layers. Cantilevers with an integrated piezoresistor enable electrical transduction of strain by a resultant change in resistance. The resulting change in resistance can be represented in terms of deflection and surface stress with the help of equations A typical biomolecular interaction creates surface stress on the cantilever. The surface stress sensitivity depends on the ratio of gauge factor ( SU-8 microcantilevers with an integrated gold strain gauge have been reported earlier In this paper we demonstrate the fabrication and characterization of SU-8 cantilevers of smaller thickness (∼3 In order to use SU-8/CB as a piezoresistor layer, the SU-8/CB composite material should satisfy certain prerequisites such as (i) proper dispersion of CB in SU-8 (ii) the resultant material being spin coatable (iii) photolithographically patternable (iv) conductive and (v) having good adhesion with the gold, which is the electrode material. Experiments were carried out to optimize on these properties. Carbon black used in these experiments was Conductex 7067 Ultra from Columbian chemical company. Experiments were carried out with different weight percentage of CB in SU-8 2002 from Microchem. With the addition of CB, the photosensitive nature of SU-8 2002 needs to be retained. It was observed that films with increased CB wt% required a higher dose to fully crosslink the UV exposed patterns. After development in the SU-8 developer solution, CB residues were seen even in the non patterned areas ( Oxidized silicon wafers were patterned with Cr/Au as contact pads. These samples were dehydrated at 120 The design parameters for the SU-8 cantilevers are listed in The cantilevers were fabricated using flip-chip approach involving six mask levels ( The fabricated cantilevers were electromechanically characterized in shielded probe station. Calibrated micromanipulator probe needle was used to deflect the cantilever tip. Current voltage characteristics were performed on these cantilevers using Keithley 4200 source measuring unit. The minimum measurable downward movement of this micromanipulator is 10 In order to use these cantilevers for biosensor applications, the cantilever should be bio-functionalized with biomolecules specific to the target analyte like a specific antibody for an antigen. The steps involved in biofunctionalization Surface modification of SU-8 is done using dry method which is by the pyrolytic dissociation of Ammonia gas inside hot wire CVD chamber at filament temperature of 1450 Treatment with 1% aqueous solution of the homo-functional linker Glutaraldehyde for 30 Incubate SU-8 sample with human Immunoglobulin (HIgG) with concentration of 1 Dip the samples for 1 To verify the immobilization process, fluorescent microscopic image of the immobilized SU-8 surface and the SU-8 cantilevers was taken. The fluorescent micrograph of a functionalized patterned SU-8 surface is shown in The resistivity of this composite decreases with increase in CB wt% ( The optical and scanning electron microscopic images of the cantilevers are shown in The electromechanical characterization results of these cantilevers are shown as Δ Improved dispersion of carbon black in SU-8 2002 and better conductivity at lower carbon concentrations have been demonstrated in this work. The percolation threshold was found to be 6.5