A highly sensitive inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) method with microwave-assisted sample digestion for the determination of total platinum in rat whole and ultrafiltrate plasma was developed and validated. A first step of this study concerned the optimization of the mineralization procedure, in order to obtain good extraction recovery (higher than 90%) and repeatability (less than 6%) and the absence of matrix effect. ICP-MS analysis was then performed using the “hot plasma/protective ion extraction” mode, achieving high sensitivity and very high signal/noise ratio. Iridium was added as internal standard. The method was then submitted to validation, performed according to the FDA Bioanalytical Validation Methods guidelines and to the Eurachem guide. Validation was carried out in terms of limit of detection (LOD), limit of quantitation (LOQ), linearity, precision, accuracy and stability. An instrumental LOQ of 1.9ngL−1, corresponding to a concentration of 955ngL−1 in matrix under the adopted conditions, was obtained, allowing the quantitative analysis of Pt ultratraces. Instrumental linearity was verified in the range 1.9–14,000ngL−1, corresponding to a concentration range from 955ngL−1 to 6825μgL−1 in matrix. Accuracy was evaluated by analyzing control samples for both matrices at different concentration levels; a good agreement (<15%) was obtained. Sample stability was tested by analyzing control samples maintained for 4h at room temperature or submitted to three freezing–thawing cycles. Finally, the developed method was applied to the analysis of plasma and ultrafiltrate plasma of rats treated with oxaliplatin-base drug, thus demonstrating its reliability in pharmacokinetic studies.Platinum coordination complexes, such as cisplatin, carboplatin and oxaliplatin, are widely used in the treatment of a variety of tumors. In particular, oxaliplatin, a 1,2-diaminocyclohexane (DACH)–Pt complex, is used in the treatment of testicular, colorectal and ovarian cancer The analytical techniques employed for the determination of Pt in biological fluids have been well documented and reviewed since the early 1990 Moreover, when ultratrace levels of metals should be determined in complex matrices, a sample treatment method showing high recovery and repeatability is requested. Microwave-assisted mineralization represents a suitable alternative between the time consuming conventional open-vessel digestion and the dilution methods, enabling relatively fast, complete and reproducible digestions The aim of this work was the development and the validation of an ICP-MS method with optimized microwave-assisted sample digestion for the determination of total Pt in plasma and free Pt (the drug fraction unbound to plasma proteins) in ultrafiltrate plasma. The reliability of the developed method in pharmacokinetic studies was evaluated by analyzing plasma and ultrafiltrate plasma of rats treated with an IV dose (10 Pt stock solution (1000 Plasma samples were obtained by centrifuging whole blood for 5 Method development and validation study were performed on plasma and ultrafiltrate plasma of drug-untreated rats spiked with appropriate amount of Pt standard solutions. In addition, for each matrix, quality control samples at two different concentration levels, namely Low Quality Control (LQC; 1970 Finally, the reliability of the method was assessed by analyzing different samples of plasma and ultrafiltrate plasma obtained from rats treated with an IV dose (10 Experimental measurements were made on the ICP-MS X SeriesII (ThermoFisher Corporation, Waltham, MA, USA) equipped with a AS-500 autosampler (CETAC, Omaha, NE, USA) operating under X All the platinum and iridium isotopes were acquired, but only In order to avoid contamination due to the environmental presence of ultratrace levels of platinum, all glassware, quartzware and polyethylene vials were carefully cleaned with deionised water, then treated with aqua regia for 10 Mineralization of plasma and ultrafiltrate plasma samples was performed in a MLS-1200 MEGA (Milestone, Sorisole, Italia) apparatus equipped with a MDR-1000-6 rotor. Each digestion vessel consisted of a 20 Several time/power cycles of mineralization were tested in order to optimize extraction recovery and repeatability, starting from conditions suggested by the manufacturer: Initial program (irradiation time @ power): 2 Final (optimized) program: 1 After cooling, the solution was transferred in a volumetric flask and diluted with deionised water to the final volume of 10 Method validation was carried out according to the FDA Bioanalytical Method Validation guidelines Detection limit ( The blanks were obtained by applying the full microwave procedure. A calibration line in the range 1.5–6 Instrumental linearity was evaluated in the range 1.9–14,000 Homoschedasticity was preliminarily verified by applying the Cochran test Repeatability and inter-day precision were calculated in terms of R.S.D.% by analyzing for each matrix the LQC and the HQC in three different days and with three replicated analysis per day. The same quality control samples were used to assess accuracy, which was calculated in terms of percentage recovery. Sample stability was tested by analyzing quality control samples maintained for 4 All statistical analyses were performed by using the SPSS v. 9 software package (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). As preliminary work, the relative sensitivity of the instrument versus the different species of Pt was calculated by comparing the slopes of the calibration curves obtained from mineralized solutions of Pt standards (platinum chloride complex) and oxaliplatin; no significant differences were found as shown in In addition, the use of the “hot plasma/protective ion extraction” mode, with a positive voltage on the frontal extraction lens, allows the achievement of very good detection limits since sputtered and matrix-related ions, that are the main responsible of unspecific noise, could not reach the quadrupole analyzer, due to kinetic discrimination: as a result very low blank counts (few cps) were measured regardless of the species used. Finally, the absence of relevant spectroscopic interferences was verified by comparing the various isotope ratios for platinum and iridium both in the standard solutions and in spiked matrices. The ICP-MS determination of metals at very low concentration levels is seriously hampered by the sticking of the biological matrix, namely proteins and non-polar compounds, on the system introduction walls. This could cause in turn, long-term unpredictable effects on the resulting concentration values, due to the selective getter of the analytes on the contaminated walls and their subsequent release, for instance when the pH of the delivered solution is changed. This behavior could be not easily corrected by the use of internal standard since it is strictly dependent on the nature of the element determined. For this reason the simple dilution of the samples was not performed and the mineralization process was selected. The fit-for-purpose of the mineralization process was evaluated by comparing the results obtained from the treatment of simple standard solutions and spiked plasma and plasma ultrafiltrate matrices. Three concentration levels (1, 5, 10 Results obtained by using the initial microwave power program are shown in the first part of A more than 100% scattering of the replicate data was observed in both the data from standard solution samples and from the spiked-matrix ones when the above time/power cycle was used. A mean recovery of 86% was obtained for ultrafiltrate plasma and of 62% for plasma. In order to asses the matrix effect presence, the slopes of the regression curves were compared by means of a The ratio between the acid mixture and the sample volumes suggests that a classical matrix effect, i.e. due to incomplete mineralization, is hard to believe, while the data scattering even in the standard solution suggested that the mineralization process could be too strong causing the analyte loss by dissolution in the surrounding hydrogen peroxide solution. All the subsequent steps were aimed at trying more mild mineralization conditions. Final results obtained by using the optimized mineralization program are shown in the last part of By using the optimized program a very good reproducibility was obtained (R.S.D.% <5) and the mean recovery rose up to 100% for ultrafiltrate plasma and to 102% for plasma. Using the final mineralization program, no effect due to the different matrices was detected; in fact the calculated Since the plasma matrix is considered much heavier than the ultrafiltrate one, these results indirectly demonstrate also the absence of non-spectroscopic interferences, typical of the dilution-based methods On the basis of these findings, also considering the low volumes of plasma and ultrafiltrate plasma available, further validation experiments were performed by using mineralized standard solution for calibration purposes. Very low LOD and LOQ values were calculated, being LOD equal to 0.9 These findings demonstrate the capability of the developed method of quantifying platinum at ultratrace levels and the benefits of the “hot plasma/protective ion extraction” mode configuration, since the blank counts were very low. Linearity was evaluated in the range 1.9–14,000 Homoscedasticity was preliminarily verified by applying the Cochran test. The results of Cochran test showed that the variance significantly differs among concentration levels at 0.05 significance level; in particular, it can be observed that variance increases with the concentration level, while the relative standard deviation is quite constant (about 5%). When homoscedasticity is not verified, the simple least-squares procedure cannot be used without reducing the reliability of the estimation The regression model calculated by mean of the weighted least-squares procedure was described by the following equation: Calibration curve is shown in The wide linearity range allows the analysis of plasma and ultrafiltrate plasma samples with very different platinum concentration levels, as requested in pharmacokinetic studies. Quality control samples were used to verify intra-day precision (repeatability), inter-day precision (intermediate precision) and accuracy. The results, reported in Finally, the stability under different storage conditions of the quality control samples was tested, verifying the presence of significant differences by means of a As a last step, the reliability of the developed method in pharmacokinetic studies was evaluated by analyzing plasma and ultrafiltrate plasma of rats treated with an IV dose (10 As example, The optimized sample treatment method based on microwave mineralization showed a very good reproducibility and absence of non-spectroscopic interferences. The more labor-intense sample preparation is well counterbalanced by the subsequent very easy ICP-MS determination, due to the absence of sticking on the sample introduction system. The detection limits are comparable to those reported in the latest papers The suitability of the developed method for the intended purpose was demonstrated, taking also into account the very low volumes of plasma and ultrafiltrate plasma availables.