We formulated cetrorelix acetate, as an adhesive mixture for use in dry powder inhalation. To achieve the highest possible deposition efficiency we investigated both the influence of different micronization techniques and different inhalers. The Novolizer with an air classifier as the powder de-agglomeration principle and the ISF inhaler were used for in vitro deposition experiments (cascade impaction). Micronization by milling as the classical approach and micronization by spray drying and spray freeze drying as advanced particle engineering techniques were investigated to determine whether advanced techniques are necessary to obtain high fine particle fractions (FPF) for this specific drug. It was found that the effects obtained with a certain micronization technique depended on the complex interaction of the physical characteristics of the drug substance with the type of formulation chosen, as well as with the de-agglomeration principle used. The combination of particle engineering by spray drying and the use of the air classifier technology resulted in a fine particle fraction of 66%, while spray freeze drying yielded extremely fragile particles resulting in a FPF of only 25%. The behaviour of the milled material showed similar trends as the spray dried material but FPF values were lower. It was concluded that when a drug is to be formulated as a powder for inhalation with high fine particle fractions, it is profitable to use advanced particle engineering techniques, however the applied technique should be tuned with the characteristics of the formulation type and process as well as with device development.Cetrorelix acetate, for convenience referred to as cetrorelix, is used for the controlled ovarian super stimulation for assisted reproductive technique in a 0.25 Cetrorelix, a decapeptide, is currently used in a subcutaneous dosage form. For systemic administration, the pulmonary route offers opportunities as well as great advantages compared to other non-invasive routes of administration ( Lizio et al. showed that after pulmonary administration of a liquid cetrorelix formulation systemic absorption occurred, demonstrating the suitability of this route of administration ( The aerosol of a drug for dry powder inhalation should preferably have a high fraction of particles in the aerodynamic size range of 1–5 The aim of this study is to formulate cetrorelix with a high fine particle fraction as a powder for inhalation using three different methods for micronization, namely milling, as an example of a standard technique, and spray drying and spray freeze drying as examples of more advanced techniques applied in particle engineering. We investigated the effects of the three methods on shape, size and density in relation to the aerosolization behaviour, in order to decide which micronization method delivers the particles that are most suitable for inhalation using the adhesive mixture type of formulation. For dispersion of the formulations we used the Novolizer dry powder inhaler ( Cetrorelix acetate was obtained from Sofotec (Frankfurt, Germany) in the form of a lyophilisate. The lyophilisate was used as raw material for the comminution studies. Small batches (50 The milling of cetrorelix was performed with a pearl-mill equipped with a cryostat. The system was cooled to −60 For the spray drying experiments, 2.5 For spray freeze drying, the same solution of 2.5 The dose for cetrorelix when administered subcutaneously is 0.25 Adhesive mixtures were prepared by mixing cetrorelix with pharmatose 110 The specific surface areas (m The apparent particle densities of the micronized materials were measured at a temperature of 20 Moisture isotherms of micronized cetrorelix were determined with a dynamic vapour sorption apparatus (DVS 1000, Surface Measurement Systems Ltd., London, UK) at 25 Particle size distributions of the micronized materials were measured in duplicate (differences for all samples were <1%) with a HELOS Compact model KA laser diffraction apparatus (Sympatec GmbH, Clausthal-Zellerfeld, Germany: 100 Scanning electron micrographs (SEM) were recorded with a JEOL JSM 6301-F Microscope (JEOL, Japan). The powder was dispersed on top of double-sided sticky carbon tape on metal disks and coated with 150 The purity of the starting materials, as well as that of the raw material of cetrorelix was determined with HPLC ( The adhesive mixtures were filled out in the dosing system of the inhalers. For the Novolizer cartridges were filled and dosing was performed with the built-in metering system, while for the ISF device, capsules were filled to the same degree as the commercial product which corresponded to approximately 25 Particle size distributions of aerosols generated by formulations of milled, spray dried and spray freeze dried cetrorelix, respectively, were measured with a HELOS Compact model KA laser diffraction apparatus (100 Cascade impactor analysis was carried out with a glass constructed four stage liquid impactor of the Fisons type (Elgebe, Leek, The Netherlands). The ISF inhaler or the Novolizer was attached to a dry bent induction port. The airflow, created with a pressure-difference of 2.8  In The densities of milled and spray dried cetrorelix ( The specific surface area of the micronized materials differ considerably ( Results of the dynamic vapour sorption studies are given in Mixing experiments with pure carrier material with and without stainless steel balls indicated that the presence of these balls has no significant effect on the particle size and morphology of the carrier (results not shown).  Scanning electron micrographs of the micronized materials formulated as an adhesive mixture with pharmatose (5%, w/w) are shown in   We performed univariate analysis of variance on the obtained fine particles fractions. We observed large differences between both the type of inhaler ( Advanced formulation techniques, like the use of force control agents or large porous particles may be necessary to obtain the required quality attributes for an inhaler product. Typical examples are stabilization of unstable proteins ( The milling process used in this study resulted in agglomerates consisting of primary particles which were generally smaller than 1 The observation that spray dried cetrorelix had a higher fine particle fraction than milled cetrorelix is explained both by the particle size of the drug powder and the (flake-like) shape of this powder. As a result of the irregular surface of spray dried cetrorelix, the de-agglomeration into an aerosol is improved, as shown by the low first stage deposition ( The physical characteristics we found for the spray freeze dried product are comparable to those found by other authors, e.g. large surface area, high porosity ( Next to the physical characteristics of the drug particles in the adhesive mixtures the fine particle fraction generated by a dry powder inhalation system is also determined by the efficiency of the de-agglomeration principle applied in the inhaler. The higher de-agglomeration efficiency of the Novolizer is reflected in the lower first stage deposition compared to the ISF inhaler. On the first stage, mainly drug particles that are still attached to the carrier are deposited. For both formulations the first stage drug deposition is higher for the ISF inhaler. It is clear that the higher de-agglomeration efficiency of the air classifier in the Novolizer results in higher fine particle fractions than the fractions obtained with the ISF inhaler. Furthermore, Finally, it should be mentioned that the lower first stage deposition of the Novolizer would not only reduce the waste of valuable drug but could also potentially reduce side effects. The effects of different techniques for micronization used in the development of a peptide-containing dry powder formulation for inhalation were investigated. High fine particle fractions in the aerosol are required and losses during inhalation should be minimized to obtain the highest possible effect and lowest waste of drug. We showed that it is possible for a stable peptide to be micronized with milling, spray drying and spray freeze drying without degradation of the drug. Whether a micronization technique produces particles that are suitable for use in an inhalation formulation was found to depend on the type of formulation and formulation process used. Furthermore, the performance of the different formulations (aerosolization behaviour expressed as fine particle fraction) was found to depend on the efficiency of the de-agglomeration principle applied. By combining the best particle engineering technique for this type of formulations with the most efficient de-agglomeration principle very high third and fourth stage depositions could be obtained. Such an inhalation system could be further developed to be a non-invasive alternative for routine administration of cetrorelix. The authors would like to thank Dr. Goede, Dr. Fyrnys and Dr. Irngartinger for the supply of materials, analysis of the purity of the samples and their valuable contribution to the discussions in the preparation of this manuscript. Mrs. Joke Beekhuis is also gratefully acknowledged for the careful screening of the manuscript.