This study deals with ultrafine wet grinding of calcite particles in a stirred bead mill. As the size decreases during the process, the particles are strongly subjected to attractive interparticle forces leading to an aggregation phenomenon that generates an increase of the suspension viscosity. In order to improve the process efficiency, the use of grinding aids, such as two polyelectrolytes (sodium polyacrylate (SPA) and polystyrene sulfonate), has been tested. The adsorption of the polymer chains on the particle surface is found to prevent the aggregation through an electrosteric effect, so allowing the suspension viscosity to be reduced.Grinding processes are considered as energetically expensive and additives are usually used for fragmentation operations. Such additives are chemical compounds which, incorporated with the powder or into the suspension submitted to grinding, allow obtaining finer particles. The increase of specific surface area may vary from several percent up to 20 times the specific surface area of the particles ground without any additive ( The efficiency of the additives can be explained by different approaches, strongly dependent on the nature of the material, the size of the ground product and the grinding technology used. This can be described by the prevention of the aggregation phenomenon that may result from interparticle attractive forces, considering the DLVO theory ( Calcium carbonate was ground during wet batch grinding experiments performed in an agitated bead mill under various operating conditions. Without any additive, the aggregation of the produced fine particles is found to occur. In order to prevent this phenomenon, the influence of the concentration and molecular weight of two polyelectrolytes (sodium polyacrylate and sodium polystyrene sulfonate) was studied on the grinding results. A peculiar attention was paid on the fineness of ground particles and on the rheological behavior of the ground suspensions. Wet batch grinding experiments were carried out in a Drais Perl Mill PML-H/V. It is a laboratory stirred bead mill with a grinding chamber of 0.8 l. A double jacket ensures the cooling of the grinding chamber. A stirrer with four perforated discs fixed on a driven shaft provides the energy required for the size reduction. Silicate zirconium beads with a diameter of 400–600 μm were used as grinding medium. The agitation speed controlled by a pulley arrangement was fixed at 2130 rpm to limit the beads wear. The filling volume of the beads was fixed at 80%. A temperature probe placed in the middle of the grinding chamber allows controlling the temperature. For all experiments, the temperature in the grinding chamber was kept lower than 40 °C. The grinding chamber was first filled with the grinding medium (filling volume 80%) and the calcite suspension. Then, the process was started and stopped after different grinding times in order to remove some samples for size analysis. About six or seven samples were removed per run without modifying too much the suspension volume inside the chamber. Two or three runs were then performed under the same operational conditions to ensure reproducibility and have a complete size characterization. For rheological and specific surface characterization, specific runs were done and stopped after given periods in order to collect a sufficient amount of suspension at each grinding time. The particle size distribution was measured after dilution using a laser sizer (Malvern Mastersizer S) based on light diffraction. The specific surface area of the samples was characterized by the BET method with nitrogen gas using a NOVA 1000-QUANTACHROME. The zeta potential of the particles was determined with a Zetasizer Malvern 4000 based on the Smoluchowsky approximation. The rheological measurements were performed by using a Carri-Med CSL2 500 rheometer (TA Instruments). The experiments were carried-out at 298 K with a cone-plate geometry (diameter, 40 mm; cone angle, 3°59). A constant shear rate was applied and the corresponding shear stress was measured as a function of time. The procedure was repeated for different shear rates and the characteristic flow behavior was determined. Prior to any measurement, a pre-shearing step at 100 s Precipitated pure calcite (>99%, MERCK) corresponding to the rhombohedral crystalline form of calcium carbonate was taken in this study. The initial powder is constituted of agglomerates with a median diameter of about 30 μm. The powder has a density of 2710 kg m Sodium polyacrylate (SPA) is a common polyelectrolyte used as a dispersing agent for mineral fillers ( The dispersing ability of sodium polyacrylate was tested on calcite suspensions. For that purpose, 10 ml of suspension containing 30% w/w of powder ground for 3 min were poured in stoppered teflon (PTFE) tubes. The particle median size was 1.45 μm. One milliliter of solution containing varying polymer concentrations was added. The tubes were then agitated for 16 h at ambient temperature. After equilibration, the qualitative evolution of the suspension was noted during 72 h. Photographs were taken at different time intervals ( Initially, some particles are observed to adhere on the inner wall of the first three tubes, while it is significantly less pronounced for the other tubes. As the surface of the inner wall is hydrophobic (PTFE), these observations suggest that the increasing amount of polyacrylate renders them more hydrophilic (better wetted by water) so that their deposition on the PTFE surface is reduced. This observation suggests that it is due to the presence of the adsorbed polymer chains on the calcite surfaces. After 30 min, two separated phases can be clearly distinguished in tube 4 corresponding to the faster sedimentation rate. After 3 h, the presence of a separated supernatant is still hardly observable in tubes 1 to 3. The supernatant in tube 4 is the clearest and the sedimentary volume the smallest. For higher SPA concentrations (tubes 5 to 9), the supernatant is cloudy. After 8 h, the sedimentary volume in tubes 3 and 4 does not evolve anymore. For tubes 5 to 9, the supernatant remains cloudy until 24 h while the sedimentary volume decreases. Finally, after 72 h, the presence of a supernatant is slightly observable for the first three tubes. For all the other ones, the supernatant is clear and it can be considered that almost all the particles are settled. The sedimentary volume for tubes 5 to 9 is approximately the same but smaller than that of tube 4. The final sedimentary volume is indicative of the dispersion state of the suspension. It is correlated to the nature and the intensity of the interparticle forces as illustrated in From the above different settling behaviors, the following general trends may be assumed: Without any additive (tube 1), particles tend to aggregate under the effect of attractive Van der Waals forces. This is reinforced due to the enhanced hydrophobicity of the particles upon grinding in the earlier instants, as revealed from the measured increase of the contact angle of the particles with water through a Washburn test (capillary rise) method ( For higher polymer concentrations (tubes 5 to 9, i.e. concentrations higher than 0.1%), the adsorption of the charged polymer chains contributes to build a thicker and protective layer around the small aggregates or even individual particles. The dispersion state of the suspension increases and the upper phase remains cloudy for longer times. When sedimentation occurs, the deposit constituted of very small aggregates becomes denser and hard to disperse by simple manual shaking. Viscosity measurements on the different mixtures have confirmed the previous results. The suspension viscosity was found to decrease with increasing the polymer amount. However, for polymer concentrations greater than 0.1%, the viscosity remained unchanged ( Grinding process without additive was studied in detail in the previous work ( Concerning the run without any additive, the median diameter of the ground particles strongly decreases during the first minutes of grinding. Then, it reaches a minimum value (0.44 μm) and increases later, when aggregation of fine particles occurs. After 60 min, a constant median size (1.8 μm) is reached again. For a 30% w/w solid concentration, the aggregation phenomenon is illustrated by a bimodal particle size distribution with a first peak corresponding to fine particles produced and another peak corresponding to the aggregates of fine particles ( During the first 3 min, the addition of the polymer, whatever its concentration, slightly enhances the particle size reduction. For longer grinding periods and for the two lowest concentrations, the median diameter decreases first before increasing then due to particles aggregation. This aggregation occurs earlier and with a larger extent with the lowest concentration (0.1% SPA). Although the effect of the polymer is not clearly put in evidence looking at the evolution of the median diameter versus time, it was found that the number of fine particles was significantly increased in the presence of the additive. In that case, the quantity of additive is not sufficient enough after a certain period to disperse fragments and it can be assumed that the numerous fines produced during the first minutes promote aggregation. Moreover, the polyelectrolyte effect is related to its capability to be adsorbed on the particle surface. SPA is negatively charged, as well as calcite at basic pH. The adsorption mechanism of SPA on calcite is rather complex and not fully identified. However, it was shown ( For the most important concentrations, the median diameter decreases and reaches a minimum value and levels off. For 2% of SPA, the particle size is the smallest (0.36 μm); moreover, this value is reached quickly during the process (12 min). The particle size does not change up to 30 min. The particles are thus well dispersed and the suspension remains stable with time ( The addition of polymer in sufficient amount thus allows obtaining particles with a maximum fineness and with a narrow size distribution. The SEM photographs shown in The polymer chains adsorbed on the surface allow preventing the aggregation of the particles through an electrosteric effect ( The particle aggregation, which already arises after 3 min, induces a strong increase of the suspension viscosity in the absence of additive. After 7 min, the suspension becomes pasty and it is no more possible to remove samples from the grinding chamber for viscosity analysis. The viscosity remains quasi-constant during 1.5 min of grinding and then strongly increases for longer grinding periods when the number of fine particles becomes important ( The yield value ( It is well known that the presence of polymer chains can notably influence the rheological behavior of suspensions and the modifications depend on the polymer properties ( For 3 and 12 min, the index SPA allows reducing markedly the viscosity of the ground pulp and this has an influence on the particle fineness. Without additive, the specific surface area increases first and then reaches a constant maximum value (25 m Moreover, the specific surface area obtained with a concentration of 2% is higher than that with a concentration of 1%. The increase of the specific surface area (Δ An efficiency factor representing the amount of surface created with additive divided by the surface obtained without additive ( The energetic gain can also be estimated assuming that the energetic consumption (  As the use of an additive allows decreasing the interparticle attractive forces and thus the viscosity of the ground suspension, it can offer the opportunity to treat more concentrated slurries. Experiments realised with a 40% w/w solid concentration and without additive were found to obtain, after several minutes, a compact pasty pulp and an insufficient movement of the beads for the fragmentation of the particles. The suspension and the beads remained coated in the grinding chamber. A grinding experiment with the same solid concentration and with 2% SPA was carried out. The results were compared with those obtained with a 30% w/w solid concentration and 2% of SPA. The evolution of the median diameter versus grinding time is shown in Concerning the particle fineness, the specific surface area obtained after 30 min of grinding are similar (29.5 m Another polyelectrolyte was used: sodium polystyrene sulfonate (SPSS). Compared to SPA, the distance between the charges is equivalent but the chain of the polystyrene sulfonate is more rigid. Moreover, the adsorption mode differs. SPSS adsorbs at the particle surface of the carbonate according to a bridging mechanism with the Ca  A series of experiments was done with the SPSS having the smallest molecular weight (20,000 g mol  By preventing aggregation, the SPSS allows to strongly increase the fineness of the particles since the specific surface area for particles ground 30 min with 2% of polymer is equal to 27 m Investigations about the influence of additives on ultrafine grinding of calcite particles were carried out. Two polyelectrolytes were used (sodium polyacrylate and sodium polystyrene sulfonate) differing according to their adsorption mode and by their molecular weight. Ground without additive, calcite, as other minerals, has a strong tendency to aggregate under the attractive Van der Waals forces. After some minutes of grinding, the number of fine particles becomes important and aggregates appear. The grinding efficiency of the process is altered due to a strong increase of the suspension viscosity in the grinding chamber. By preventing the aggregation of the particles, an additive allows reducing the suspension viscosity and maintaining the particles in a dispersed state. The required amount of additive to be added depends on the fineness of the ground product to be obtained and on the desired dispersion state. Consequently, it is not surprising to find in the literature various results depending on the ground minerals and the technology used. Moreover, the use of a dispersing agent allows to increase the solid concentration for a given particle fineness or to reach a higher fineness for a given solid concentration. The increase of specific surface area is rather important for the calcite grinding in distilled water with the two polyelectrolytes since the fineness efficiency factor is nearly equal to 2. When a sufficient amount of polyelectrolyte is added, the suspension remains stable with regards to aggregation phenomena. At last, the energy consumption for a given particle size is strongly decreased.