Leg fractures are common and further increasing in prevalence in paediatric patients. The diagnosis is readily made in most cases. Choosing the best treatment is the main issue. Non-operative treatment is the reference standard for non-displaced or reducible and stable fractures but requires considerable expertise and close monitoring, as well as an immobilisation period that far exceeds 3 months in many cases. Some surgical teams therefore offer elastic stable intra-medullary nailing (ESIN) as an alternative to children who do not want to be immobilised for several months. Internal fixation is required for unstable or irreducible leg fractures. ESIN is often used as the first-line method, based on its very good risk/benefit ratio. For fractures that do not lend themselves to ESIN, optimal stabilisation can be achieved by choosing among the other available options (screw-plate fixation, rigid intra-medullary nailing or external fixation) on a case-by-case basis. Close monitoring during the first few days is crucial to ensure the early detection of compartment syndrome. The other complications and sequelae are non-specific.Leg fractures are common in paediatric patients, in third position by order of frequency after forearm and femoral fractures. Background information on paediatric leg fractures is dealt with only briefly here, as the 2005 instructional course lecture by B. De Courtivron offers an excellent overview By definition, leg fractures are located between two metaphyses, although secondary fracture lines may involve the neighboring joint. Consequently, fractures involving the epiphyses or confined to the metaphyses are not discussed here. The annual incidence of leg fractures has been estimated at about 1% in girls and 2% in boys. The overall prevalence of paediatric leg fractures is on the risen The main causes are traffic accidents, falls, direct impact and sports injuries. The diagnosis is readily made in most cases. Attention should be directed to the possibility of a hairline fracture in a young child, which may be challenging to detect; a pathological fracture at the site of an osteolytic lesion; battered child syndrome; and stress fracture. Compound fractures are not infrequent given the superficial location of the anterior tibia. The patient must be carefully examined for evidence of neurovascular injuries, other fractures and other types of lesions. Antero-posterior and lateral radiographs of the leg including the knee and ankle should be obtained. Leg fractures can be classified based on fracture line direction (transverse, oblique, spiral, butterfly, or comminuted) or location (proximal, middle, or distal third). In addition, young children may experience incomplete fractures (greenstick fractures, torus fractures, bowing fractures). The most useful classification, however, distinguishes between stable fractures (tibia only or both bones but with a transverse or short oblique fracture line) and unstable fractures (spiral, long oblique, bifocal, with a third fragment, or with comminution of both bones). The standard measures should be taken: insertion of an intravenous line, administration of potent analgesics (morphine if needed) and nitrous oxide, scrupulous wound cleansing with antiseptics and prophylactic antibiotic therapy if the skin is breached and immobilisation by a posterior plaster splint. The importance of taking nothing by mouth should be impressed on the patient and parents. The main advantage of non-operative treatment is non-invasiveness: as no material is implanted, there is no scarring and there is no risk of infection if the skin is intact. Affordability is another asset. Drawbacks The plaster cast can be made at the emergency department, with analgesics and nitrous oxide to ensure pain control. A snug long-leg cast should be fashioned with two bandages and no cotton padding or one bandage and very little cotton padding. The first layer must be made of plaster of Paris to ensure tight moulding over the fracture. Resin may be added subsequently to decrease the weight of the cast. Special care should be taken at sites where the skin is exposed to injury (calcaneus, Achilles tendon and head of the fibula). Some mechanisms of injury such as high-energy trauma, direct impact and crush injury carry a high risk of oedema, for which a preventive measure is immediate splitting of the cast, a procedure performed routinely by many surgical teams. The fracture should be reduced in the operating theatre under general anaesthesia and fluoroscopic guidance. An aide holds the thigh with the knee flexed at 90° and maintains the foot by holding the toes. Another option consists in making the cast with the leg hanging over the edge of the table. If the fibula is intact (2/3 of cases), the application of forces in valgus and flexion to correct the varus and recurvatum is sufficient to reduce the fracture. In contrast, when both bones are fractured, the rotational displacement must also be corrected, by assessing the position of the malleoli relative to the patella with the knee flexed, as well as the loss of limb length, which should ideally be kept below 10 A snug plaster boot is fashioned and the corrective forces are then applied while the plaster dries. Even distribution of the forces is important to avoid necrosis under the cast. If the reduction is satisfactory, the plaster cast is extended up to the greater trochanter with the knee in 30° to 50° of flexion. When full control of all displacements is difficult to achieve and unacceptable angulation persists, one option consists in waiting a few minutes for the plaster to harden then wedging the cast. Cast wedging is an integral part of the non-operative treatment armamentarium. We advocate open wedging to avoid the risks of limb shortening and skin impingement associated with closed wedging. The exact site of the deformity should be marked, for instance by taping a paper clip to the cast then obtaining a radiograph. The plane of the main deformity is then assessed. The cast is cut circumferentially at the apex of the deformity, perpendicularly to the axis of the leg, leaving only a 2 to 3 Cast wedging is effective during the first 3 weeks, before the callus is substantially calcified. Cast wedging is not appropriate to treat limb shortening, translation or rotation deformities. If the angulation exceeds 20°, the best strategy is to make a new cast. After closed reduction in the operating theatre, the patient should be admitted for at least one night to allow monitoring of the limb and to ensure the early detection of compartment syndrome. Emphasis should be put on the importance of resting with the limb slightly elevated during the first 72 Ambulation with crutches is possible from about 7 years of age onwards but is often difficult initially. Radiographs should be obtained after reduction then on days 15, 30, 45, and 90 The long-leg cast is usually replaced by a resin walking boot on day 30 or 45, depending on the progression of fracture healing. Care should be taken to immobilise the ankle at 90° of flexion. Weight bearing is then allowed. Natural remodelling occurs in children, spontaneously correcting certain angle deformities. Factors associated with a greater potential for spontaneous correction include younger age, location of the fracture near a growth plate and deformity within the plane of the motion range of the adjacent joint. In theory, correction is best for flexion and varus and worst for valgus and recurvatum Proximal fractures and isolated tibial fractures deserve special attention given the risk of secondary valgus angulation, even in the absence of initial displacement. The parents must be informed of this possibility. A waiting period of at least 2–3 years is recommended, as spontaneous realignment of the underlying tibia is common. If realignment does not occur, medial tibial epiphysiodesis appears to be a reasonable option. Several methods are available. Selection of the appropriate method is based on fracture type and patient age. Technique: elastic stable intra-medullary nailing (ESIN) is specifically intended for the treatment of paediatric fractures. Although ESIN has been described in detail elsewhere The patient is supine. A pad may be placed under the knee to facilitate traction. We find it useful to assess hip rotation and to place a pad either under the ipsilateral buttock to induce internal rotation or under the contralateral buttock to induce external rotation. The patient is thus, in a three-quarter oblique position, so that slightly rotating the leg allows both antero-posterior and lateral views to be obtained without moving the image intensifier. The nail diameter should be as large as possible, i.e., about 0.4 times the diameter of the intra-medullary canal measured on a radiograph at the isthmus. Special nails that are flattened on one side ensure better filling of the canal. Importantly and in contradiction to frequently expressed opinion, although the external tibial cross-section is triangular, the tibial canal is round. Therefore, the standard ESIN technique applies ( Antegrade nailing is usually preferred, via two proximal entry points on either side of the anterior tibial tuberosity, whose integrity must be preserved with the greatest care ( In theory, once the construct is complete, the two nails exert opposing forces, thereby providing elastic stability. Nevertheless, the construct should be adapted to the forces applied to the bone by the muscles and tendons. To this end, the direction of the nails should be chosen carefully to ensure optimal reduction and stability. Before fully impacting the nails into the bone, the quality of the reduction should be checked in all three planes, with special attention to rotation. If any deformities persist, the appropriate corrections should be made ( Advantages: low cost, early mobilisation, minimal scars, low risk of infection and preservation of the growth plates Drawbacks: specific training in the technique is required Technique: identical to that used in adults. Advantages: early mobilisation and weight bearing, good correction of rotational displacement and excellent stability of the construct. Drawbacks: suitable only for adolescents whose skeletal growth is nearly complete, as the nail crosses the proximal tibial growth plate; possible increase in the risk of compartment syndrome Technique: a simple plate may be used, although a locking plate provides better immediate stability. The technique is the same as in adults. Appropriately sized material must be used and care taken to preserve the growth plates when the diaphysis is fractured near the proximal or distal joint ( Advantages: fluoroscopy is not always necessary when a direct approach is used, the technique is simple and nearly always feasible and the cost is moderate if non-locking plates are used. Drawbacks: the direct approach to the fracture site increases the risk of infection, the scar is longer and subsequent lengthening may be more common. Refracture may occur, as stress shielding results in thinning of the cortices. Removal of the material is associated with specific morbidity. Technique: the techniques are the same as those used in adults. The size of the fixator and pins must be appropriate for the size of the child and care should be taken not to damage the growth plates. A unilateral or ring fixator may be used. The new generation hexapod ring fixators equipped with software have the major advantage of ensuring faultless secondary correction, thereby obviating the need for revision surgery Advantages: external fixation is usually simple and rapid and is nearly always feasible. Drawbacks: Although rarely used, screw fixation is a useful technique that is simple and inexpensive. Limited invasiveness is another advantage. However, screw fixation is only suitable for spiral fractures, and additional cast immobilisation is required ( Postoperative care is the same as in patients treated by closed reduction in the operating theatre (Section Weight bearing is a challenging issue. In theory, immediate weight bearing is possible with external fixation, screw-plate fixation and rigid intra-medullary nailing, except when stability of the construct is in doubt. We also allow immediate weight bearing in patients with stable fractures treated by ESIN. In contrast, it seems reasonable to wait until the callus starts to form (about 1 month) after non-locking screw-plate fixation or after ESIN used to treat an unstable fracture of both leg bones. In every case, we advocate gradual resumption of weight bearing, as guided by the pain. As a rule, we do not add cast immobilisation after internal fixation methods, including ESIN. However, a resin-walking boot may be useful in some cases after ESIN. Rehabilitation therapy is not indispensable given the low risk of stiffness in paediatric patients. Self-exercises to maintain muscle strength should therefore be recommended. Range of motion at the knee and ankle returns to normal with time. Removal of the fixation material can be performed after 3 months at the earliest, provided the callus is sufficiently well formed. Ideally, removal should be done after 6 to 12 months. Overall, fracture healing is readily achieved in paediatric patients due to the high level of periosteal activity and natural remodelling occurs as indicated in Section The choice between non-operative treatment and surgery as the first-line strategy can be guided by classifying leg fractures into two main groups: non-displaced or displaced but reducible and stable; and displaced and unstable, irreducible and/or comminuted. Non-operative treatment is clearly the preferred option in this situation. The contraindications are absolute or relative and include the following: although not a contraindication, a breach in the skin classified Gustilo 1 or 2 should be trimmed and cleansed and the cast should be windowed to allow wound monitoring; a Gustilo 3 skin lesion or crush injury is, in our opinion, a contraindication to casting in overweight children, optimal casting is difficult to achieve and stabilisation by fixation material is often required; finally, the child and family can be asked about their preferences and internal fixation may be offered if they object to 3 months of immobilisation The advantages and drawbacks of both methods should be explained in detail. The option of internal fixation for reasons of personal preference should be discussed openly, to avoid an excessively aggressive treatment strategy. Internal fixation seems legitimate in this situation. When feasible, ESIN appears to be the best option In theory, external fixation is nearly always suitable. External fixation is extremely valuable in certain complex fractures Immobilisation in a resin long-leg cast for 1 month is usually sufficient for hairline fractures. Stress fractures respond well to rest alone. Immobilisation in a walking boot for 1 month is another option. In patients with brittle bones due to constitutional disorders, preserving normal leg alignment is crucial. Non-operative treatment can be used provided a light-weight immobilisation system is used and weight bearing is resumed rapidly. This is an excellent indication of ESIN, with sliding nails. The other option is a telescopic intra-medullary nail. In patients with pathological fractures, casting to allow a staging workup and a biopsy if needed is the best course of action. ESIN can be extremely useful to stabilise benign bone lesions. In the event of multiple injuries, internal fixation is recommended to facilitate nursing care. Floating knee is a rare injury that requires internal fixation. We believe the most logical sequence starts with treatment of the femur, by supracondylar trans-osseous traction, taking care to preserve the growth plate. Then, the tibial fracture is stabilised. Fracture occurring in congenital pseudarthrosis must be treated surgically. Healing is usually difficult to achieve in this pathology. Complications can occur with all the available techniques. The complication rate seems to be lowest with ESIN Skin breach: the location of the tibia immediately under the skin tibia carries a risk of skin injury. The wound must be debrided and cleansed on an emergency basis. Prophylactic antibiotic therapy should be started at the emergency room and continued for 48 Infection: infection is rare when the fracture is closed. Local subcutaneous infection can develop at the nail entry sites after ESIN or at the pin entry sites during external fixation. Local debridement is usually sufficient, with concomitant antibiotic therapy if needed. Infected external fixator pins may need to be changed. If infection develops at the fracture site, microbiological samples should be collected and the site should be debrided and abundantly irrigated. The fixation material should be removed. In most cases, immobilisation is then achieved by external fixation or, in some instances, casting. Two intravenous antibiotics should be given in combination. Vascular complications: in the event of ischaemia, revascularizing the limb is an urgent priority. The fracture should therefore be reduced and stabilised without seeking a perfect result. Proximal metaphyseal fractures are those most often associated with vascular injuries. Compartment syndrome: compartment syndrome must be sought routinely, as the diagnosis may be difficult in paediatric patients and the symptoms may occur early, within the first 72 Secondary displacement is chiefly seen after non-operative treatment. If the displacement is unacceptable, either further reduction under general anaesthesia or cast wedging is required. Secondary displacement can occur after ESIN and is then usually ascribable to a technical error. Correction may be achievable by adding a cast. Otherwise, the internal fixation construct must be modified. Delayed healing occurs mainly in compound fractures or fractures due to high-energy trauma. Patience is often the best approach in paediatric patients, in whom problems are rare if the fixation material is sufficiently stable to allow weight bearing. An external fixator can be replaced by another method if it is poorly tolerated. Skin impingement by internal fixation material: Skin impingement is not uncommon at ESIN entry sites. Great care is needed when cutting the ends of the nails. If the fracture is well healed, the nails can be removed. Otherwise the ends must be cut. Non-union: non-union is rare in paediatric patients and occurs mainly in complex cases (e.g., compound, multifocal or comminuted fractures). Healing can usually be achieved by using an external fixator to apply compression forces to the fracture site or by reaming the intra-medullary canal then implanting a rigid intra-medullary nail (if permitted by the patient's age). A fibular osteotomy is indispensable; removing 1 Mal-union: the potential for natural remodelling has been mentioned in the section on indications. Most cases of mal-union causing a major deformity eventually require either a corrective osteotomy or asymmetrical epiphysiodesis if permitted by the patient's age and nature of the deformity. Limb length discrepancy: The difference in limb length is usually less than 2 Tibio-fibular synostosis: tibio-fibular synostosis may gradually induce valgus malalignment. Excision of the synostosis may deserve consideration in this situation. Refracture: refracture may occur after removal of the fixation material. External fixation and screw-plate fixation result in stress shielding and therefore carry the highest risk of refracture. Consequently, the material should not be removed until a strong callus has developed. The family must be informed that weight bearing should be resumed only gradually, if possible with no running or jumping during the first 6 weeks. A 1-month transition period with a walking boot may be helpful. Impact is best avoided until patency of the intra-medullary canal is re-established. In theory, the use of intra-medullary fixation material eliminates the risk of refracture. Leg fractures are common in the paediatric population. Most leg fractures are stable and readily reduced, a situation in which non-operative treatment is usually effective. Non-operative treatment is a painstaking technique that requires considerable experience on the part of the surgeon and close monitoring of the patient. A drawback of non-operative treatment is the need for a lengthy period of immobilisation, often exceeding 3 months. Alternative treatments (chiefly ESIN) should be offered to the patient and family, as some paediatric patients prefer internal fixation to prolonged immobilisation. Unstable or complicated fractures require stabilisation by external or internal fixation. ESIN seems to offer the best risk/benefit ratio. When ESIN is not suitable, the other methods constitute valuable options. Close monitoring during the first few days is crucial regardless of the method used to ensure the detection of complications, which are rare but potentially devastating. The authors declare that they have no competing interest. None. JDM: 75%– Data analysis, writing and correction of the manuscript. DD: 25%– Data analysis, writing and correction of the manuscript.