The formation of nanosized lanthanum hydroxide particles in aqueous medium was studied in the presence of double-hydrophilic block copolymers (DHBC). These copolymers contain a polyacrylic acid (PAA) block as an ionizable block, and a polyacrylamide (PAM) or a polyhydroxyethylacrylate (PHEA) block as a neutral block. The nanoparticles are synthesized by a two-step procedure. Firstly, the complexation of lanthanum ions in water by the polyacrylate blocks induced the formation of star-shaped micelles stabilized by the PAM or PHEA blocks. The micelles were characterized by dynamic light scattering (DLS), small-angle neutron scattering (SANS) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Secondly, the inorganic polycondensation of lanthanum ions led to the formation of organic–inorganic nanohybrids. Hairy needle-like colloids were obtained. The size of the sterically stabilized colloids was controlled by adjusting the polymer-to-metal ratio.The synthesis of well-defined nanoparticles is of main interest in pharmaceutical, bioengineering, catalytic or ceramic applications due to the specific properties of nano-objects. For a few decades, different routes have been investigated to control the particle size and morphology using either well-chosen chelating agents La(NO TEM images were recorded using a Philips CM200 ‘Cryo’ microscope operated at 80 kV. Dry specimens were prepared by depositing one droplet of the micelle or particle suspension onto glow-discharged carbon-coated copper grids. After 1 min, the liquid in excess was blotted with filter paper and the remaining film allowed to dry. Approximately 100 objects were measured in order to estimate the mean size. Cryo-TEM samples were prepared by quench-freezing a thin film of the micelle suspension into liquid ethane cooled down to −171 The hydrodynamic sizes of the micelles and particles were measured using a light scattering instrument (zetasizer 3000HS, Malvern, UK) with a 10 mW laser operating at 633 nm. At low PAA 1000-b-PAM 10 000 dose, the hydrodynamic size of the micelles was measured on a zetasizer 1000HS from Malvern with a 50 mW laser operating at 532 nm. SANS experiments were performed at the Leon Brillouin Laboratory (CEA/CNRS Saclay, France) using the PACE spectrometer. Scattering data are presented as a function of the magnitude of the scattering vector In aqueous medium, PAA-b-PAM or PAA-b-PHEA copolymers behave like hydrophilic polymers and do not form micelles whatever the DHBC concentration. Various amounts of copolymer solution were added in lanthanum nitrate solutions so that the final concentration of La The structuration of DHBC into micelles induced by complexation can be compared to the formation of micelles of amphiphilic block copolymers in water, which are composed of a hydrophobic core stabilized by hydrophilic blocks. With amphiphilic copolymers, micellar aggregates may present spherical, rod-like or discs shapes, the morphology being mainly governed by the concentration, the temperature and the ratio between the length of the hydrophilic block ( In the second step, micelles are used as supramolecular precursors for particle formation. Inorganic polycondensation of lanthanum ions is induced by forced hydrolysis. The hydrolysis ratio, called In this paper, we studied the role of DHBC in the formation of sterically stabilized lanthanum hydroxide nanoparticles. The nanohybrids are synthesized in two steps: the formation of star-shaped micelles is firstly induced by complexation of lanthanum ions by the ionizable block of the copolymer and their size is independent on the polymer concentration. In a second step, forced hydrolysis is used to promote the formation of the nanoparticles. During this stage, the copolymer remains attached to the particle. Finally, particle growth and stability are controlled by the complexation rate. One of the authors (F.B.) acknowledges financial support provided by Rhodia. The authors thank Dr M. Destarac, from Rhodia, for providing the copolymers, and Dr L. Auvray for his help with neutron scattering measurements performed on PACE at the Laboratoire Léon Brillouin (CEA, Saclay, France). M. Floure, from Malvern, is also acknowledged for DLS measurements on the 1000HS zetasizer.