Light metal hydrides show a high potential for reversible hydrogen storage applications. In view of the potential future storage of large amounts of hydrogen, an economic tonnage scale production will be required. This viewpoint set introduces production methods and discusses the potential for simplifying processing routes and reducing costs in view of an industrial mass production. For this purpose, sodium alanate, for which cost-competitive large-scale production is already considered feasible, is used as an example for future promising hydrides, like complex hydrides or reactive hydride composites.Reversible solid storage of kilogram amounts of hydrogen in tanks containing conventional transition metal alloys (e.g., TiFe Reaction kinetics of light metal hydrides depend on the surface area of the material exposed to hydrogen, the dimensions and homogeneity of the microstructure, as well as the types of additives and heterogeneous catalysts and their dispersion. For example, fine microstructures with a high density of interfaces and phase boundaries provide short diffusion distances, fast diffusion pathways and a high number of nucleation sites for the phase transformation in the solid-state reaction In view of the technical implementation of these materials, for example, as mobile hydrogen storage devices in future zero emission vehicles within a comprehensive clean energy concept, economic tonnage scale production of the materials is necessary. Assuming a storage capacity of 10 Metal hydrides have to be produced from metals due to the much weaker metal–hydrogen bonding as compared with metal–oxygen or metal–chlorine bonding, which are predominantly present in light metal ores. Although electrolysis has to be used, for example, for the isolation of Na, Mg, Ca and Al, these metals are relatively cheap, with today’s market prices ranging typically from about $0.30 Production of the hydrides of these elements is of importance, because they can serve not only as potential storage materials, as in the case of MgH Therefore, the production of hydrides from bulk metals offers a high potential for the reduction of costs within an entire processing concept. Whereas the alkali and alkaline earth metals obtained as bulk material from the solidified melt do not take up significant amounts of hydrogen, the mechanical treatment of the bulk can facilitate its conversion to hydride. Super plastic deformation methods, such as equal channel angular pressing (ECAP), lead to the introduction of micropores and a defect-rich microstructure, which allows hydrogenation, as has been demonstrated for Mg-based materials For the production of the complex metal hydrides, fine hydride powders may be preferred as precursor to the pure metals because they can be easily dispersed in other media to facilitate reaction. For example, LiAlH Therefore, simpler methods to produce complex hydrides have also been proposed. For example, Dymova et al., milled AlH The discovery of reversible hydrogen sorption on NaAlH A way to avoid the use of high pressure and the associated high-pressure equipment during production of hydrogen storage material is to first produce a precursor corresponding to the dehydrogenated state and subsequently activate it in the storage tank shell. The activation of the decomposed state has been demonstrated in all promising reversible systems that are known today: reversible hydrogen sorption was demonstrated in NaH/Al mixtures Since the desorbed state in complex hydrides or reactive hydride composites is a fine and homogeneous composite, the main challenge is to reproduce such a microstructure by effectively mixing the initial components. For NaAlH Fast hydrogen sorption is essential, in particular in light metal hydrides used for automotive applications, where a tank has to be filled within 3–5 Therefore, the composite formation of the desorbed state in complex hydrides or reactive hydride composites may also be achieved in mixers, for example, in pentane suspension. In view of the less deformable components, like B or MgB A future commercialization using milling as a production step would necessitate the processing in tonnage batches or in continuous mode in combination with low power consumption. For this purpose, suitable industrial-scale milling equipment has to be chosen. For the synthesis of nanocrystalline materials on a kilogram scale, a number of experiments have been carried out with horizontal attrition mills, which exhibit very high milling intensity For the final implementation of the material into a suitable tank shell, additional properties apart from kinetics and capacity of the material will be of importance. These are, in particular, high heat conductivity, for fast heat transfer; high density, in order to keep the volume of the system low; and the ability to accommodate to the volume changes of the material during reaction A further simplification of the production might also be achieved if, after mixing the initial powders, the refinement of the microstructure is combined with the compaction in a process step, which involves plastic deformation, like cold rolling or ECAP. The main challenge, however, will be to maintain a rest porosity after the process. The production of promising light metal hydrides based on complex hydrides or reactive hydride composites is found to be most efficient by producing a composite corresponding to the desorbed state of the material that can be activated in the final tank shell. For NaAlH Considering the strong differences of cost and abundance of the light metals, the end price of the hydrogen storage materials may be determined to a large extent by the content of less abundant elements, like Li or B. Therefore, systems such as Ca(BH In a next step, the functionality of such lightweight hydrides in large hydrogen storage tanks has to be proven, implying the design and testing of a suitable heat management system for fast sorption of hydrogen on a kg scale.