The effect of some typical oxide and sulfide minerals, as well as activated carbon, on synthetic gold thiosulfate leach solutions was examined. The presences of pyrite and goethite in a synthetic ore slurry have a significant effect on the adsorption and stability of gold, silver, copper and polythionates in ammoniacal thiosulfate solutions. Adsorption of tetrathionate in particular leads to significant gold and silver losses. The adsorption of copper on mineral surfaces inhibited gold and silver losses, even in the presence of tetrathionate. However, goethite was found to strongly adsorb copper(II). It is concluded that gold extraction from natural ores is lower than that obtained with cyanide, partly as a result of sorption or precipitation reactions. Furthermore, the presence of silver in solution catalyses the precipitation of a mixed copper/silver/gold sulfide in ammoniacal thiosulfate solutions containing tetrathionate.With increasing regulatory scrutiny of new gold projects and a lowering of what are considered acceptable levels of cyanide discharges, world industry attention has focused on ammoniacal thiosulfate as a relatively cheap and non-toxic reagent alternative to cyanide for leaching gold ores. The establishment of an economic and environmentally acceptable option for extracting gold without the use of cyanide would seem highly desirable, and in some cases, essential. Previous research has shown that by maintaining sufficient concentrations of thiosulfate, ammonia, copper and oxygen in the leach solution under suitable E In addition, the levels of reagent concentrations for effective leaching rates in ores are normally at least 50 times greater than that used in the cyanide leaching system. Furthermore, extending leaching times in an attempt to increase gold extraction can result in the loss of gold from solution, due to the formation of increased concentrations of thiosulfate degradation products such as tetrathionate, sulfide and trithionate. This ultimately reduces the effectiveness of thiosulfate as an alternative lixiviant to cyanide for leaching gold. There have been extensive studies investigating additives to enhance gold and silver leaching, some beneficial and others detrimental ( Whilst thiosulfate leaching is currently attractive for carbonaceous ores, a number of issues and problems must be resolved before a general process can be demonstrated as practical and economic for typical oxidised gold ores ( The main reasons for lower gold extraction in thiosulfate compared with cyanide systems undoubtedly include precipitation or adsorption of species from solution associated with particular minerals in the ore ( Although carbon has a low affinity for Au(S Particular oxide and sulfide minerals were chosen as representative of those commonly present in gold ores and mixed with finely ground quartz to produce a synthetic ore. The minerals investigated, together with the values for their specific surface areas and the mixtures with quartz used are indicated in Unless stated otherwise the synthetic leach solution contained 0.4 The polythionate concentrations for experiments containing polythionates were determined by High Performance Liquid Chromatographic (HPLC) technique. Chromatographic separations of thiosulfate and polythionates were performed using an eluent of 0.005 Comparisons were made between the loss of reagents and stability of precious metals in solution for individual mineral components. Data from these experiments were used to quantify the extent to which mineral components ‘preg-robbed’ gold and silver contributed to the loss of reagents from solution. Duplicate experiments were conducted on many of the tests with only average results reported, due to the standard deviations of all the tests being within 3%. In all figures in this paper the gold and silver losses have been expressed as mg per kilogramme of mineral to gauge the adsorption capacity of some minerals under conditions typically used in leaching. Under the gold and silver solution concentrations and mineral quantities used, a 100% loss of gold and silver in the presence of kaolinite or goethite is equivalent to 60 and 30 Equilibrium adsorption isotherms for gold and silver on pyrite, chalcopyrite and activated carbon in copper-free ammoniacal thiosulfate leach solutions are shown in In comparison, the sesquioxide minerals did not readily adsorb gold and silver under the conditions used. Since Au(S  Generally the stability of gold and silver in solution was unaffected by reducing the ammonia concentration to 0.1 In the presence of pyrite, significant gold and silver (> In the presence of pyrite, a thiosulfate concentration of around 0.05 Adsorption of ammonia onto mineral surfaces was minimal with approximately 1 In dilute ammoniacal thiosulfate solutions, Cu(II) is rapidly reduced by thiosulfate to Cu(I) and an equilibrium ratio of Cu(II):Cu(I) is established that depends upon the relative concentrations of ammonia, thiosulfate and dissolved oxygen. Adsorption isotherms for the separate minerals bottle rolled in solutions containing either Cu(I) added as cuprous chloride in a 0.05 Generally, oxide minerals have a preference for Cu(II) adsorption over Cu(I) with higher copper losses being associated with activated carbon, goethite and kaolinite. In the Cu(I) thiosulfate solution, kaolinite loads around 70 Clearly lower copper losses from solution are possible by maintaining the majority of copper in solution as Cu(I) by adjustment of the ammoniacal thiosulfate concentrations. However, some Cu(II) is required to catalyse the gold dissolution process.  Polythionates are produced in ammoniacal thiosulfate through reactions between copper(II) and oxygen and thiosulfate ( Adsorption isotherms for tetrathionate from copper-free leach solution onto individual mineral components are shown in By contrast, no significant loss of trithionate was observed, which indicates that trithionate behaves like thiosulfate — rather than like tetrathionate.  Overall, gold and silver losses increased with time with decomposition of tetrathionate. Our work has also shown that gold and silver losses increased with increased tetrathionate concentrations. Consequently the concentration of tetrathionate during the thiosulfate leaching process should be kept low or preferably eliminated to prevent some gold and silver precipitating from solution. For comparison, Overall, the loss of gold and silver from solution was found to be unchanged with time in the presence of trithionate for all the minerals examined. With the exception of pyrite, there were no significant changes in gold and silver concentrations in the presence of the minerals after the first half-hour. Losses in the presence of activated carbon are associated with direct adsorption. The significant loss of gold and silver in the presence of pyrite is similar to that found in the absence of trithionate where no copper is present (see The mechanisms and pathways for the decomposition of tetrathionate species depend upon E Fundamental studies on the kinetics of decomposition of tetrathionate, trithionate and thiosulfate in alkaline solution ( Addition of sulfide ion is reported to quantitatively precipitate gold and silver from solution ( The effects of copper on the stability of gold and silver in ammoniacal thiosulfate solution containing ~ The addition of copper significantly reduced gold and silver losses in the presence of tetrathionate (comparing The presence of silver has been shown to be beneficial in increasing the rate of gold dissolution in thiosulfate leach solutions ( As shown in The impact of the addition of sulfite to remove tetrathionate on the stability of precious metals was examined. The benefits of adding sulfite during thiosulfate leaching has been reported in the literature ( A comparison between the stability of precious metals in the presence of minerals in ammoniacal thiosulfate solutions containing trithionate with and without sulfite was made and the results for goethite and pyrite are shown in Sulfite addition partially reduced precious metal loss to goethite and significantly reduced precious metal loss to pyrite. Sulfite had no effect on precious metal loss to kaolinite or activated carbon. Sulfite eliminated tetrathionate, which was causing precious metal precipitation to pyrite. The preg-robbing of gold and silver by pyrite was also found to be independent of trithionate concentration examined (0.005 to 0.01 Trithionate concentration appeared to be the same or lower where sulfite was present. The lower concentration of trithionate in some solutions in the presence of sulfite is unclear.  Whilst sulfite can eliminate tetrathionate in solution thus preventing gold and silver precipitation by one mechanism, sulfite itself can decompose and precipitate gold and silver from solution. Consequently some control of the addition of sulfite to prevent tetrathionate in solution and adequate aeration is required. To determine the gold preg robbing mechanisms and identify possible options for reversing gold and silver adsorption on mineral surfaces, a four-stage elution process was carried out on minerals that were bottle rolled in copper ammoniacal thiosulfate solutions containing precious metals. This elution method is a modification of that used by The investigation was carried out by first bottle rolling mineral components separately in 32 After collecting the filtered solution the residue was then stirred with water in a beaker for 0.5 The residual gold, silver and copper on mineral surfaces after each treatment are shown in For activated carbon, the water wash removed 66% of the gold and 55% of the silver entrapped. The ammonia thiosulfate wash and stronger adsorption ability of resin were required to remove the balance of gold and silver adsorbed on the carbon surface. No cyanide leach was carried out as direct adsorption of residual gold as a cyanide complex on carbon would be expected. For pyrite, the water wash removed about 50% of the gold and 8% of the silver. Whilst ammonium thiosulfate solution was effective at removing the majority of the silver, the rest of the gold remained on the pyrite. Hence the behaviour of the majority of silver deposited in the presence of pyrite is different to gold. Only with cyanide elution was the gold and remaining silver removed from the pyrite surface. Evidence of gold precipitation has been reported in the literature (e.g. Copper was not recovered from any mineral surfaces except for quartz in the presence of a water wash and hence was strongly adsorbed or precipitated. Around 35% was eluted in ammoniacal thiosulfate solutions and a total of 70% recovered following the addition of resin. The copper recovery with both ammoniacal thiosulfate solution and resin can be attributed mainly to desorption reactions. However some redissolution of a copper sulfide precipitate with the ammoniacal thiosulfate solution cannot be ruled out. Residual copper extracted by cyanide for both goethite and pyrite (30%) is associated with precipitation reaction. The presence of releached copper in solution following ammoniacal thiosulfate elution can potentially leach any silver sulfide precipitate following a substitution leaching mechanism for silver sulfide by copper ions proposed in the literature ( This study has investigated the effects of copper, silver and polythionates on the stability of gold on selected oxide and sulfide minerals, as well as activated carbon, in the ammoniacal thiosulfate leaching system. It is concluded that gold extraction from natural ores in copper ammoniacal thiosulfate solutions is lower than that obtained with cyanide partly as a result of the following sorption or precipitation reactions: Tetrathionate, a product formed from the degradation of thiosulfate and presence of silver has detrimental roles in destabilising both gold and silver thiosulfate complexes in ammoniacal thiosulfate solutions. Whilst the adsorption of ammonia, thiosulfate and trithionate is insignificant, the adsorption of tetrathionate on mineral surfaces leads to significant gold and silver losses where the presence of silver in solution catalyses the precipitation of gold and silver as a sulfide. It was shown that: The addition of sulfite eliminates tetrathionate and prevents the gold and silver precipitation reaction. No significant loss of gold and silver occurs in the presence of trithionate, which is relatively stable in solution. Copper adsorption onto mineral surfaces inhibits gold and silver losses to the mineral surfaces, even in the presence of tetrathionate. The outcomes are that: The presence of copper either competes with gold and silver for sites on the mineral surfaces thereby reducing the precious metal loading as in the case for activated carbon and clay minerals, or the copper maintains potentials near the mineral surfaces sufficiently high to prevent precipitation of precious metals. The preferential adsorption of copper on some minerals (goethite The presence of pyrite and activated carbon has significant effects on the stability of gold and silver in ammoniacal thiosulfate solutions as a result of both sorption and precipitation reactions, whereas adsorption of gold and silver on the minerals goethite and kaolinite is low (~ In a copper ammoniacal thiosulfate solution with polythionate formation kept at a minimum, gold and silver thiosulfate complexes are largely stable in solution in the presence of kaolinite, goethite and quartz, and any precious metals entrapped can be readily removed in a water wash. Pyrite enhances the production of tetrathionate from thiosulfate through catalytic oxidation of thiosulfate to tetrathionate by pyrite. Silver can catalyse and precipitate along with gold as a mixed sulfide in the presence of tetrathionate. In addition gold/silver adsorbs and precipitates as the metal at defect sites on the sulfide mineral surface. Whilst silver lost on pyrite can be recovered through re-dissolution in copper ammonia thiosulfate solution and ion exchange resin, gold and some silver precipitated on pyrite surface are not recoverable without treatment with cyanide. Carbon normally only constitutes a small component of a carbonaceous ore and the quantities of reactive carbon with similar properties to activated carbon are even smaller. The precious metals lost in the presence of activated carbon are associated with direct adsorption on carbon in ammoniacal thiosulfate solution. Gold and silver adsorbed on the carbon surface can be displaced by ion exchange resin which has a stronger affinity for precious metal complexes. Remedies to combat pregrobbing are as follows: The concentration of tetrathionate during the thiosulfate leaching process should be kept low or preferably eliminated to prevent some gold and silver precipitating from solution. The addition of sulfite can be used to react and eliminate tetrathionate and prevent pregrobbing providing there is adequate aeration. Possible remedies such as the addition of phosphate in small quantities to suppress the catalysis of pyrite may have benefits ( Regulating the concentration of copper in solution could reduce precious metal loss, although the activity of copper needs to be controlled to prevent detrimental effects on reagent consumption and the buildup of polythionates. Keeping thiosulfate degradation to minimum and favouring conditions where trithionate forms during leaching rather than tetrathionate can reduce preg robbing. Using a suitable ion exchange resin to recover gold and silver thiosulfate complexes from solution. The first author acknowledges the help and support of the late David Muir in the early development of the thiosulfate programme at CSIRO. The authors wish to thank industry sponsors of the