Ruthenium doped indium oxide (In1−xRuxOy) films fabricated using DC magnetron co-sputtering with In2O3 and Ru targets were investigated for use as transparent conductive oxides. The In1−xRuxOy films had an amorphous structure in the wide compositional range of x=0.3–0.8 and had an extremely smooth surface. The transmittance and resistivity of the In1−xRuxOy films increased as the Ru content increased. The transmittance of the In0.38Ru0.62Oy film improved to over 80% when the film thickness was less than 5nm, while the specific resistivity (ρ) was kept to a low value of 1.6×10−4
                     Ωcm. Based on these experimental data, we demonstrated that thick indium tin oxide (In0.9Sn0.1Oy, ITO) (150nm)/ultrathin In0.38Ru0.62Oy (3nm) bilayers have a high effective work function of 5.3eV, transmittance of 86%, and low ρ of 9.2×10−5
                     Ωcm. This ITO/In0.38Ru0.62Oy bilayer is a candidate for use as an anode for organic electroluminescent devices.Transparent conductive oxides are commonly applied as anodes in organic electroluminescent (OEL) devices. The properties required in a perfect anode material are a low electrical resistivity, high transmittance in the visible range, excellent surface contact, and a high work function (Ø). Currently, indium tin oxide (In For these reasons, several approaches have been proposed to improve the Ø of ITO and to develop a new anode material. One approach is to introduce oxygen to replenish the oxygen deficiency of ITO films using surface treatment techniques such as oxygen plasma, oxidation annealing, and laser irradiation We observed that ruthenium oxide (RuO In this paper, the influence of Ru content on the electrical and physical characteristics of the In  ITO/In An X-ray diffractometer (XRD, Bruker D8 discover) using CuKα radiation was employed to examine the crystal structure and phase formation of the films. The morphology of the ITO/In The chemical composition of the In The reason of amorphous structure formation is thought to be due to the difference of crystal structure and volume of unit cell between pure In The surface morphology of the In  Next, we examined the thickness dependence of the transmittance of the In  We next examined the C–V characteristics of ITO/In  The electrical and physical properties of the In K. T. and G. L. acknowledge the financial support from the