It is becoming a standard practice for governments to require mining operations to post reclamation bonds. Yet, there have been few theoretical treatments examining the rationale for bonding mechanisms, and even fewer empirical treatments of the effectiveness of bonding. This paper addresses some of these holes in the literature. It begins by examining the rationale underlying reclamation bonds, and discusses the strengths and weaknesses of bonding as a tool for enforcing reclamation requirements. The role of bonding mechanisms is to help enforce standards, not necessarily yield efficient outcomes, and these mechanisms are best viewed as a complement to — not a substitute for — liability rules. The paper also examines the effectiveness of bonding by drawing on evidence from hardrock mining on public lands in the western United States.The use of bonding mechanisms to ensure site reclamation is pervasive in the mining industry worldwide, yet there are few theoretical or empirical treatments of bonding issues ( In this paper, I outline a model for thinking about these questions through the lens of law and economics scholarship ( If polluters are liable for the harms they cause others, then bonding might be considered unnecessary or even superfluous. Bonding mechanisms, however, have a number of features that make them a complement to — not a substitute for — liability rules. The use of bonds also transfers some of the risk of default from the public to the private sector. In many cases a third party, such as a surety provider, will assume part of this risk. For a fee, the surety posts the bond on behalf of a firm, agreeing to cover the amount of the bond if the firm defaults. The use of a third party further reduces public exposure by increasing the number of parties potentially liable for the cleanup. The financial incentives and reputation effects inherent in the use of bonding mechanisms and liability rules have a number of attractive features, but these features do not necessarily imply that mandatory bonding is desirable. First, although bonding encourages compliance with reclamation agreements, there is no a priori reason to believe that the benefits of reclamation always exceed the costs. In other words, bonding promotes regulatory compliance, but it in no way suggests that the standard promulgated by the regulations is necessarily efficient. Second, bonding encourages low-cost cleanup because firms are the residual claimant for the difference between the bond amount and the realized cleanup costs. Consequently, firms have the incentive to minimize cleanup costs, as well as to take precautionary actions during the operation phase to facilitate lower cleanup costs. The analysis in this paper is a starting point for addressing issues germane to reclamation bonds. The following section discusses the basic problem of moral hazard, the particular problems associated with bankruptcy risk, and the principal motivations for using bonding mechanisms. This is followed by an examination of a firm's decision on whether to reclaim a site. The effectiveness of bonding is then evaluated using evidence from hardrock mining on public lands in the western United States. Although there has been considerable interest in the environmental economics literature concerning the choice of efficient regulatory instruments, there has been relatively little attention paid to regulatory enforcement ( The problem of enforcing contracts and regulatory provisions is often framed as a principal–agent problem. In the case of US mining, the environmental standards stipulated in operating permits are often a product of negotiations between the regulatory agency (the principal) and the regulated firm (the agent) where environmental laws provide a baseline negotiations ( When there is an agreement between the principal and the agent that can be verified by a third-party, assigning liability to the agent effectively addresses the moral hazard problem. For example, it is often easy to observe if vegetation has taken hold at a reclaimed mine site, or to sample water for high concentrations of heavy metals. If monitoring costs are low and the terms of the agreement are clear, it is a straightforward matter for the principal to recover damages by assessing a fine or taking legal action against the shirking agent. In response, the agent is more likely to take the appropriate level of care. Liability rules will not promote compliance if the regulated firm is a bankruptcy risk. Environmental liabilities are debts, and therefore can be discharged in bankruptcy proceedings. In effect, the firm's assets are the upper bound on liability. A firm is said to be “judgment-proof” for liabilities beyond existing assets, and consequently ex post fines or damage awards do not provide adequate deterrence. Thus, the possibility of bankruptcy affects firm incentives and behavior even for a solvent firm, and the judgment-proof problem is considered a central weakness of sole reliance on liability rules ( A simple equation illustrates the use of bonds as collateral: The collateral also shifts the burden of proof from the regulator to the firm. That is, if the regulator retains the collateral (for whatever reason), the firm must initiate a court action in order to recover the funds. The illustration does not incorporate the effects of the burden of proof, but presumably it is more costly for the firm to win as a plaintiff than as a defendant. As for the regulator, holding a bond is comparable to having a bird in hand. There are several problems associated with bonding mechanisms that limit their applicability ( A second problem is that bonds can impose liquidity constraints on firms. Cash, treasury bonds, certificates of deposit, and other liquid assets are often acceptable forms of collateral, but these instruments can tie up a firm's operating capital. This liquidity constraint becomes more binding as the deposit amount increases. One way to mitigate the liquidity constraint is by involving a third party, for instance, a surety. For a fee, a surety agrees to cover the amount of the bond if the agent fails to fulfill its obligation, which also transfers a portion of the default risk from the public to the surety provider (there is not necessarily a transfer of funds that the landowner holds in trust; instead, the surety assumes a legal obligation to provide funds if the firm reneges on its agreement). The use of a surety reduces, but does not eliminate, liquidity constraints. The firm must pay an annual premium, and the bond amount is also a liability on the firm's balance sheet that adversely affects the firm's credit. Although collateral reduces the firm's moral hazard, it also introduces moral hazard on the side of the regulator. A wealth-maximizing regulator may have the incentive to retain the bond whether or not reclamation is performed. This is a potentially serious defect of the bonding mechanism. If, however, the operating permit specifies reclamation requirements that can be verified by a third-party at a low cost, the firm should be able to successfully challenge the regulator's decision. Moreover, it would be difficult for a state with a poor reputation to attract capital to its jurisdiction, and surety providers would be less likely to underwrite contracts for operations within that state. Once mining is completed (and probably even before mining is completed) firms choose to reclaim the site or default on the bond. For a solvent firm the decision is independent of whether the firm or the surety posts the bond; if the firm fails to reclaim the site and the surety reimburses the regulator for the amount of the bond, the firm remains liable to the surety for the amount of the bond, and to the landowner for any cleanup expense over and above the amount of the bond. Notice that these costs are approximately the same as those expected under a liability rule, as a defaulting firm would incur legal expenses, and would also be liable for any damages. Default has other monetary and non-monetary costs. For instance, firms have repeat dealings with surety providers, and surety providers charge higher premiums or refuse to issue policies on behalf of firms with poor credit histories. In addition, regulators often have the authority to block permits for any operator that has a record of noncompliance. Thus, a firm that remains solvent will incur higher future costs in obtaining a surety because of higher premiums and collateral requirements, as well as the cost of being denied access to a given jurisdiction. This can pose a serious limitation for mining firms if the landowner (e.g., the government) is a dominant source of mineral potential. If government agencies were to place a permit block on a firm — thus denying the firm access to other state lands — the amount of land available for exploration and development could be seriously limited. These characteristics show that the potential costs of default are liability to the surety for amount of the bond ( Case 1: Case 2: Case 3: In each case, the expected costs of defaulting are directly related to the probability of being detected. An increase in the probability of being detected increases the likelihood that bond amount encourages reclamation. In the first two cases the firm definitely chooses to reclaim the site because total expected costs exceed reclamation costs. The expected outcome in the first case is no different than what we would expect under a simple liability rule. The interesting result is that in Case 2. If In the third case the reclamation costs exceed the sum of the bond default amount (for which the firm is liable to the surety) and additional costs associated with reputation effects. Even so, the firm's decision is not unambiguously to default. Even if the firm defaults on the bond, it may still be found liable to the landowner for cleanup expenses beyond the amount of the bond. Thus, it is not clear what a firm will do in Case 3 until a number of other variables are quantified — the probability that a landowner sues to recover damages, the probability that the landowner wins the suit, expenses defending these suits, and the expected payments. For a solvent firm, it is likely that site reclamation is the preferable strategy even if realized reclamation costs far exceed the bond amount. This helps to explain why in a number of industries (landfills, underground storage tanks, and oil tankers) firms must have adequate capital reserves in order to operate, but bonds are not required. The implication of the simple model is that firms with deep pockets are likely to reclaim regardless of the relationship between the bond amount and the realized reclamation costs. This suggests that the firm's financial position should be a factor in determining whether a bond is appropriate. The results also suggest that setting the bond amount at the worst-case scenario would be an extremely risk averse strategy. In fact, the basic intuition suggests that compliance can be induced by setting the bond amount less than the expected reclamation costs. This, however, is not an unqualified endorsement for setting bonds below expected reclamation costs. There are well-known limitations of reliance on liability rules, as well as marked uncertainties concerning likely reclamation costs, especially at large-scale operations that have the potential to degrade water quality. Moreover, reputation effects only work in games with repeat players. The illustration does show, however, that there are other ways to encourage site reclamation than to increase the bond amount. Well-functioning surety markets and use of permit blocks may add to costs, The legacy of mining in the western United States includes thousands of abandoned mines sites that pose a variety of environmental hazards and safety risks. The possible degradation from heavy metal contamination or acid drainage is of course a continuing concern. In addition, old mine sites often pose public safety hazards, as a number of people meet untimely deaths in abandoned mine shafts each year. In Montana the state has evaluated more than 3000 sites based on their environmental and safety characteristics, and 350 of these sites are on a priority cleanup list. The state of Arizona — currently the leading US producer of hardrock minerals — has surveyed 5890 mine openings, shafts, adits, prospects, and quarried out areas. Of these sites, 118 (2 percent) have possible environmental hazards, and 668 (11 percent) pose public safety hazards ( The abandoned mines legacy is attributed both to a lack of concern about potential hazards and an absence of regulation. Attitudes about the public lands, however, have changed. Mining is now governed by an extensive regulatory structure that consists of federal statutes, regulations from federal land agencies, including the Bureau of Land Management (BLM) and the Forest Service, and state statutes and regulations. The relevant federal statutes include the Clean Water Act, the Clean Air Act, National Environmental Policy Act, the Endangered Species Act, and Superfund. These laws are not specifically tailored to mining, but the federal land management agencies each have mining-specific surface management regulations. The agency regulations address both the effects of current operations, as well as financial assurances for site reclamation. State governments also have laws and regulations covering exploration, development, and reclamation. Mandatory bonding is in place to prevent today's mining operations from becoming tomorrow's abandoned mine sites. Because there is often substantial overlap of federal and state requirements, state and federal agencies have a Memorandum of Understanding that establishes which agency has the primary regulatory responsibilities. In most cases, state agencies have the primary roles for permitting the mine, conducting on-site inspections, and enforcing the permit requirements. This is true even when the rules are issued by Congress or a federal agency, and even when the mining takes place on federal lands. The lead agency negotiates permit provisions with the mine operator using state and federal rules as a baseline for the negotiations. This relationship suggests the principal–agent model is an appropriate way to think about bonding issues. The operating permit includes a reclamation plan and a reclamation cost estimate, as well as a financial assurance of site reclamation. Reclamation requirements apply whether the operation is a rudimentary surface scratching that can be addressed with a handful of grass seed, or a multi-million dollar cleanup of a mine site that operated for a decade or more. The basic objectives are to minimize public health risks and to allow the land to support other uses when mining is completed ( The monitoring costs for reclamation requirements vary, but in many cases can be expected to be reasonably low. The firm requests the release of the bond, and the regulator has the discretion to withhold the bond if the site is not satisfactorily reclaimed. In response, the mine operator (or the surety) can challenge the decision in court. The court will make its decision based on a comparison of the permit terms and the condition of the site, and the probability that nonperformance is detected is likely to be close to one. In general, there have been two ways to set bond amounts. The first is a per-acre calculation. Second, the bond is set at the expected reclamation costs, which usually includes administrative expenses and a profit margin for a third-party contractor. The BLM regulations illustrate these two cases. The agency caps bond amounts at $1000 per acre for exploration projects, and $2000 per acre for development. In contrast, operations using cyanide or with potential for acid drainage are bonded at the expected reclamation cost. These BLM requirements are considered minimum standards, because the western states have their own bonding rules. Montana and Nevada, for instance, require bonding at the expected reclamation costs for all projects.  Firms with limited assets or spotty financial histories pay a premium that is a much higher percentage of the bond amount. Small firms also post a higher percentage of collateral in terms of the bond amount. A 1988 GAO report found that small coal operations posted collateral of 25 percent of the face value of the bond; whereas the amount for large operations was less than 10 percent ( In response to the problem of surety availability, some state governments have bond pools for operations that cannot secure surety bonds privately. Nevada operators that cannot obtain a private surety, for instance, can join the state bond pool, but the costs of joining the pool are higher than obtaining a surety privately (of course, if the firm could obtain a bond privately, it would not have to pay higher rates). To enter the Nevada pool, the operator posts a collateral deposit of 15 percent of the face value of the bond, and pays a 10 percent annual premium. The state allows maximum bonds of $250,000 for exploration, and $1 million for mines.  There have been audits of surface management regulations in the western states by the US General Accounting Office (GAO) and state agencies. The first was a 1986 GAO report revealing a poor record of ensuring reclamation on BLM lands. Even after BLM promulgated its regulations in 1981, the agency only required bonds for operators that had a record of noncompliance. The GAO audit identified 556 operations in ten states and found that only one operator was required to furnish a bond ( A GAO examination of the Forest Service program in 1987 showed more promising results. GAO found that the Forest Service required financial guarantees for 214 of the 336 operations evaluated for five national forests in Nevada, Idaho, Montana, and California. ( The success rate was lower at the 19 sites where the Forest Service did not secure financial guarantees. Nine of these sites posed no significant disturbance, in six cases the operators had reclaimed the site even without the bond, and four sites were unreclaimed ( More recently, the Inspector General of the Department of Agriculture finished an audit of the Forest Service's handling of abandoned mines. The Inspector General found that “the percent of active sites that become problems when abandoned are small, [but] the resulting reclamation costs can be large” ( Finally, a legislative audit of Montana's mining enforcement, though critical in many areas, found no problems with bond releases ( The collateral posted for the sites listed in   Interestingly, most of these conditions are in place for ongoing operations (few parties, clear permit provisions, fixed time horizon), yet mine operators are not bonded out for water quality, air quality, and other environmental performance standards. The probable reason is monitoring costs. Most mine sites are infrequently monitored. In 1996, for instance, the Inspector General of the Department of Agriculture reviewed 115 active operations on Forest Service land and found that 69 (60 percent) had not been inspected for more than three years. Of the sites that had been inspected, 25 had been inspected once, 13 twice, and only eight sites had been inspected three times. The Forest Service cited budget constraints, lack of qualified personnel, remoteness of sites, and higher priority work as reasons for the lax inspection record ( The bonding mechanism has been compared to a deposit-refund system — the agent makes an up-front deposit that is refunded when the principal verifies compliance ( That the deposit-refund system is operable is undeniable — the polluter that tosses a can in the ditch pays by forfeiting the deposit. There is, however, no way to tell if this is an instrument that will deliver socially optimal environmental quality at the lowest possible cost. In fact, it is not clear that the deposit in any way approximates the marginal social damages associated with failing to return the can. This underscores the role of the bonding mechanism as a means to enforce a standard, not to necessarily yield an efficient outcome. The empirical literature on environmental enforcement shows that monitoring effectively deters regulatory violations ( The analysis also introduces a number of lingering questions. For instance, it is clear that there are similar motivations for minimum financial requirements and bonding mechanisms. What is less clear is whether these instruments are close substitutes, and the conditions where one instrument is preferable to another. The analysis also shows that the appropriate level of the bond amount is a function of firm's capital assets and the probability distribution over expected reclamation costs. These issues will have to be addressed if effective public policies for bonding issues are to be developed. I would like to thank Bob Winegar at the Montana Department of Environmental Quality for his assistance. I would also like to thank Sian Mooney for her comments.