Surface crystallization in a rare-earth aluminosilicate glass (Nd2O3–Al2O3–SiO2–TiO2) was studied using an isothermal method and the crystal growth rate of the glasses was evaluated as a function of the composition. For measuring the surface crystal growth rate, two different methods: measurement of the crystal layer in the longitudinal and lateral growth direction. It was found that crystallization proceeded by surface crystallization only and TiO2 did not act as a nucleating agent. The growth rate was strongly dependent on the viscosity of glass and agreed with prediction from the Preston model using the known viscosity and melting temperature. As the Si/Nd and Si/Al ratios decreased, the crystal growth rate increased. TiO2 and Nd2O3 played the role of network modifier, which decreased the viscosity of the glass, facilitating crystallization of the rare-earth aluminosilicate glass.Aluminosilicate glasses containing large amounts of rare-earth oxide have recently received significant interest because of their unusual properties such as high hardness, high elastic constants, and excellent chemical durability as refractory glasses For devitrification of glass, volume and surface crystallization should be considered in terms of composition control, such as addition of nucleating agents. In this work, only the surface crystallization mechanism for Nd Glasses were prepared in 50 g batches using reagent grade Nd The glass transformation temperature (  Crystallization starts from the surface of the sample inward, as shown in The growth rates as a function of temperature, i.e. the gradients obtained from The crystal growth rate determined by the first method increases as alumina is substituted for silica as shown in As shown in This relationship of the composition (contents of Nd Based on the viscosity effect on the crystal growth rate, the Preston model relating the rate of crystal growth to temperature, viscosity and liquidus temperature Several factors to control surface crystallization, such as surface quality (irregularities, cracks, and contamination), chemical compositions, atmosphere, and temperature are considered for the surface crystallization phenomena of glass. In this study, under the same condition for crystallization except chemical composition of the glass, the neodymia–silica–alumina–titania glass system is discussed in terms of the crystal growth rate. On the phenomena of the surface growth rate as a function of temperature ( The crystallization rate increases as Nd The effect of TiO Considering the surface crystal growth in silicate glasses, in general, the rate of crystallization is inversely proportional to the viscosity, directly proportional to the rate of diffusion and to the degree of supercooling. The main factor for controlling the growth rate of glasses is the viscosity term Nd The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the Iranian Ministry of Culture and Higher Education, the ARC (Grant No. IRFK9604), and Sunchon National University (1996, non-directed research fund).