Nanoemulsions have considerable potential for encapsulating, protecting, and delivering lipophilic and hydrophilic bioactive components via different routes, most commonly; transdermal and oral. The bioactive components may be pharmaceuticals (drugs) and nutraceuticals (phytonutrients with specific health benefits). Nanoemulsions can be fabricated from generally recognized as safe ingredients, using usually simple processing operations. Some of the potential advantages of nanoemulsions include higher bioaccessibility, physical stability, and optical clarity, in addition to small particle size, controlled release of actives with prolonged duration of action. Many phytonutrients have shown promise as curative agents. Various types of nanoparticles, such as nano-/microemulsions, have proved suitable for the delivery of active forms of phytonutrients. Examples include curcumin microemulsions that improved its delivery via local and transdermal routes. Also, wheat bran oil nanoemulsions showed good stability over time together with antioxidant activity making it suitable for use in food applications. Liquorice transdermal microemulsions (TD ME) possessed potent antioxidant capacity and good stability. Also, the boswellia TD MEs provided excellent prolonged anti-inflammatory potential with no local irritation. Fennel essential oil transdermal nanoemulsions proved to have a potent antidiabetic effect with a prolonged action. Other contributions comprise cumin essential oil for transdermal antioxidant activity.Recently, a significant growth in the field of food nanotechnology is observed. Such growth has been stimulated by the possibility of making use of the large surface area to volume ratio of nanoparticulate materials to improve the bioavailability of active ingredients, introduce controlled and targeted release and other attributes ( The field of nanoparticle delivery systems for nutrients and nutraceuticals, especially those having poor water solubility, has been expanding and some of these technologies are now already being incorporated in food products. The commercial potential of these new technologies is expected to increase greatly over the next years. The interest in the pharmaceutical and food-related applications of these technologies has sparked remarkable progress in the processes to obtain such nanoparticle systems ( As the link between dietary habits and health conditions was well developed, bioactive compounds possess health-promoting functionalities and receive great attentions from the scientific community. Nutraceuticals have been regarded as an emerging method for preventing chronic diseases. In contrast to modern medical methods that target immediate relief of symptoms and diseases, diet regimen promotes a moderate long-term process for prevention and treatment of diseases and illness. Nutraceuticals are expected to exhibit relatively less toxicity and side effects than conventional drugs used to treat similar symptoms, as they are isolated from natural dietary sources. The list of nutraceuticals continues to grow as more new compounds are identified and isolated from various sources. Examples include bioactive peptides, phenolic compounds, lipids, and vitamins ( Encapsulation of bioactive compounds in nanoemulsion-based delivery systems can also represent a useful approach to improve the dispersion of the bioactives into food products, to protect them against degradation or interaction with other ingredients, and to reduce the impact on properties of food ( The aim of this chapter is to elucidate the enhanced potency and medical efficacy of selected phytonutrients when encapsulated in nano drug delivery systems, with special emphasis on micro-/nanoemulsions administered mainly via oral and transdermal routes. The word “nano” is derived from the Greek for “dwarf”. A nanometer is a thousandth of a thousandth of a thousandth of a meter (10 Nanotechnology mainly deals with the formation, characterization, and handling of structures of sizes smaller than 100 Several researchers believe that the first bases of the field of nanotechnology were put down by Richard Feynman, the physicist at California Institute of Technology ( Nanoscience and nanotechnology have already been applied in various fields, such as computer electronics, communication, energy production, medicine, and food industry ( Nanotechnology can be found in nature with several processes acting at the atomic, molecular, and supramolecular levels. Many systems in biology and physics operate at a range less than 100 The term “nanomedicine” means essentially applying nanotechnology in the field of medicine ( Drug delivery nanosystems constitute a major portion of nanomedicine ( The development of nanotechnology products may play an important role in adding a new armamentarium of therapeutics to the pipelines of pharmaceutical companies ( Enhanced delivery of poorly water-soluble drugs. Targeted delivery of drugs, either to specific tissues or even to specific cells. Transcytosis of drugs across tight epithelial and endothelial barriers. Delivery of large macromolecule drugs to intracellular sites of action. Simultaneous co-delivery of two or more drugs, thus easily presenting a combination therapy. Visualization of sites of drug delivery by combining therapeutic agents with imaging modalities ( Real-time understanding on the in vivo efficacy of a specific therapeutic agent ( Nanotechnology is an emerging technology that holds potential to revolutionize the food industry ( Examples for advances in the field of food industry achieved through implementing nanotechnology include ( Sensors for pathogens and other food contaminants, leading to higher safety in manufacturing, and processing of food products. Devices that help to keep environmental records of specific products and easing the process of tracking shipments. Increasing safety and efficacy of food processing through smart systems that combine sensing, reporting, and control of food products. Another very promising application of nanotechnology is that it can help to improve the water solubility, thermal stability, and oral bioavailability of functional compounds ( Long before the development of the distinct scientific discipline of nutrition, philosophers and later physicians paid close attention to the role of the daily diet in individual and public health. Interestingly, during the last 2000 Nutraceuticals are foods and food constituents that provide health benefits beyond basic nutrition ( Among this range of nutraceuticals, plant and herbal products are of definite interest. A wide range of phytochemicals are produced by plants, which are used to protect the plant from UV light, as insect or pest defense, and to produce color and other organoleptic characteristics ( Accumulating evidence has suggested that dietary consumption of nutraceuticals is associated with decreased risks of multiple chronic diseases. The oral delivery of nutraceuticals follows the same natural pathway of consumption of food in the human body, thus it is the most acceptable and preferred route. It is also characterized by being a noninvasive route that needs no special handling or difficult instructions for use. However, the disadvantage of this route is the presence of several dietary factors that could affect the bioavailability of nutraceuticals ( Another interesting approach for delivery of nutraceuticals is through the dermal and transdermal routes. Accumulation in the skin could take place through dermal application of nutraceuticals ( In this chapter, the authors aim to present a summary on the use of nanoparticulate delivery systems as a means for delivery of nutraceuticals and herbal drugs in order to achieve their maximum potential. An overview of various carriers that can be used in this field will be presented. Special attention will be given to micro-/nanoemulsion systems concerning their characteristics and examples of use for encapsulating various nutraceuticals. A suitable nanoparticulate carrier should ideally acquire two main attributes. First, it must be able to deliver the drug to site of action controlled by the requirements of the body, during the treatment phase. Second, it must transport the active part of herbal drug to the site of action ( It is noteworthy that, different from the nanoparticulate-based delivery systems utilized in the pharmaceutical industry, nanoparticulate-based delivery systems for food application have to be manufactured with 100% food grade materials, such as edible lipids, proteins, carbohydrates, and surfactants, which have considerably increased challenges in creating effective delivery systems ( Medications incorporated in microspheres possess advantageous properties, being able to be administered orally or parenterally in addition to controlled release, site-specific delivery, and organ targeting of drugs ( Liposomes are lipid vesicles that are microscopic and spherical in structure. They are mostly composed of phospholipids and have the ability to hold a small amount of solvent ( Phytosomes are delivery systems that are structurally related to liposomes ( Various popular herbal extracts including SLNs are a class of submicron emulsions, which contain a solid or semisolid lipid core structure ( In recent years, technological advancements have brought about many new innovative drug delivery systems. Among those, polymeric nanoparticulate system, from biodegradable and biocompatible polymers, is an interesting option for In the last two decades, PLGA has attracted considerable attention and interest due to its excellent biocompatibility and biodegradability ( Transfersomes are vesicles consisting of an inner aqueous compartment, which is surrounded by a lipid bilayer with specific properties resulting from the incorporation of edge activators into the vesicular membrane ( Micro-/nanoemulsion systems are considered as novel systems for drug delivery which provide sustained or controlled release for transdermal, topical, oral, nasal, intravenous, ocular, parenteral, and other administration routes of active entities ( Micro-/nanoemulsion drug delivery systems offer improved site-specific targeting, therapeutic activity, and reducing toxicity of drugs. As a result of various advantages offered by micro-/nanoemulsion systems, they show a great potential to be used as delivery vehicles for a variety of drugs ( Emulsions, like other disperse systems, are thermodynamically unstable due to high free energy coupled with the surface of the internal phase ( Nanoemulsions, as a result of their comparatively high kinetic stability, low viscosity and clarity/translucency, are very attractive for various industrial applications including the pharmaceutical field where they have been investigated as drug delivery systems ( The preparation of nanoemulsions involves the use of a large amount of energy or the use of surfactants. In some situations, energy and surfactants are used together ( High-energy methods usually use mechanical devices to produce intensely disruptive forces that lead to break up the oil and water phases and the formation of nanosized droplets. This can be possible through means like ultrasonication or high-pressure homogenization ( In this technique, a high-pressure homogenizer is used. The nanoemulsions produced by this method are usually of a very small particle size that can be as low as 1 This method makes use of a microfluidizer for mixing. A microfluidizer is a device that uses a high-pressure positive displacement pump that forces the components through a chamber consisting of small channels called “microchannels”. The product flow through these microchannels results in the production of particles in the submicron range ( This method is also called the “Phase inversion composition method”. This method produces nanoemulsions at ambient temperature with no need of either heat or organic solvents and thus has become of interest in various fields including pharmaceutical sciences. Nanoemulsions obtained from this process are characterized by a long-term colloidal stability as well as high kinetic energy; however, they are not thermodynamically stable ( In this method, a solution of the drug is emulsified in another solvent in which the drug used is insoluble. Then the solvent, in which the drug is soluble, is evaporated leading to precipitation of the drug. Aggregation and crystal growth are controlled through the production of a high shear force using a high speed stirrer ( Implemented from the “nanoprecipitation method”, which is used for the preparation of nanoparticles, the “solvent displacement method” is developed for spontaneous formation of nanoemulsion. This method involves three main steps as follows ( A homogenous solution is prepared from the oil phase in addition to the hydrophilic surfactant. The organic phase is then slowly injected in the aqueous phase with continuous magnetic stirring, thus oil-in-water (o/w) emulsion is formed. The water-miscible solvent is then removed by evaporation under reduced pressure. Nanoemulsions have recently become of wide interest in the field of health care and also in other related fields. This could be attributed to the following advantages ( Nanoemulsions have a very small droplet size. This leads to a great reduction in gravitational forces and the Brownian motion of the particles prevails over gravity. Consequently, no creaming or sedimentation is expected upon long-term storage. This also will prevent any flocculation and coalescence of the droplets. This high stability makes them a favored carrier for many drugs when compared to other less stable carriers such as liposomes. Nanoemulsions are considered an efficient delivery system for active ingredients intended to be delivered through the skin. A rapid penetration of drugs is expected owing to the small particle size and large surface area provided by these systems. Nanoemulsions are usually transparent in nature and of suitable viscosity, especially if low concentrations of oil are used. This makes them a suitable carrier for different routes of administration. Nanoemulsions are typically formulated with reasonable concentrations of surfactants that are approved for human consumption. For example, less than 10% of surfactant is enough for the formation of a 20% o/w nanoemulsion. The small size of the droplets gives the whole system low surface tension besides low interfacial tension of the o/w droplets. This is particularly suitable for administration of the skin, making good wettability and spreadability. The nano-encapsulation in o/w micro-/nanoemulsions-based delivery systems represents an effective approach for incorporating bioactive compounds in foods. The micro-/nanoemulsions, lipid droplets of nanometric size (50–200 Nanoemulsion production for encapsulation and delivery of functional compounds is one of the emerging fields of nanotechnology applied to food industry ( Frankincense is the hardened gum resin extruded from incisions in the trunk of several  The plant resin of BC is a frequent constituent of traditional Chinese herbal therapy, whereas BAs from Oleogum resin from  Because BAs are steroidal (lipophilic) in nature and do not solubilize into the intestinal fluid, their systemic availability is limited ( A study was conducted to formulate and characterize the bioactive fraction of BC-loaded transdermal microemulsion (TD ME) formulations to enhance the bioavailability of biological actives through promoted stratum corneum permeation with the aim of acquiring enhanced and prolonged anti-inflammatory efficacy using low-dose resin loaded MEs and avoiding side effects encountered from high dose and repeated oral administration ( Liquorice is, doubtless, one of the most popular medicinal plants ( The roots of The active component of liquorice, GA (glycyrrhizin), is hydrolyzed in vivo to glycyrrhetinic acid, which is responsible for most of its pharmacological properties ( GA was reported to have antiallergic, antiviral and anti-inflammatory activities. GA was also found to suppress the rise in fasting blood glucose and insulin levels and improve glucose tolerance ( Such characteristics propelled studying the potential of encapsulating GA in various nanoparticulate formulations to increase its bioavailability and efficacy such as nanosized w/o emulsions (   Turmeric ( Nevertheless, the majority of the orally administered curcumin is excreted in the feces and the urine, very few is detected in the blood plasma ( Improving bioavailability, protection from degradation and metabolism, and increasing targeting capacity of curcumin are simple approaches that can help in dealing with the limiting factors of curcumin. The delivery of curcumin can be achieved through the use of different types of nanoparticulate carriers, such as polymeric nanoparticles, micelles, lipid vesicles, nano-/microemulsions, nanogels, SLNs and polymer conjugates ( A formulation of curcumin nanosuspension crystal stabilized by D-a tocopheryl polyethylene glycol 1000 succinate was assessed for the pharmacokinetics and biodistribution of curcumin after intravenous administration in both rabbits and mice ( Setthacheewakul et al. have reported a self-emulsifying liquid formulation of curcumin. The formulation exhibited 99% loading of curcumin and particle size of about 30 Several studies have investigated the potential of microemulsions and nanoemulsions for the delivery of curcumin. Microemulsions loaded with curcumin were successfully developed for dermal delivery. The limonene microemulsion system was demonstrated to be a promising tool for the percutaneous delivery of curcumin ( A number of vegetal by-products have shown to be good sources of functional ingredients ( Wheat bran oil (WBO) has been reported to contain an important content of bioactive compounds, such as tocopherols, alkyl resorcinols, steryl ferulates and other phenolic compounds. Due to its lipophilic character, WBO must be formulated before it can be used for aqueous-based matrix applications. The preparation of stable wheat bran o/w nanoemulsion with the minimum possible droplet size was reported. The minimum droplet size was obtained when the mixture of Span 80 and Tween 80 was used in the preparation and the antioxidant activity of the optimal WBO nanoemulsion was evaluated ( Essential oils are aromatic oily liquids obtained from plant material (flowers, buds, seeds, leaves, twigs, bark, herbs, wood, fruits and roots) ( Despite the fact that a considerable number of essential oil components are generally regarded as safe and/or approved food flavorings, some research data indicate irritation and toxicity (  Fennel has a long history of herbal uses. Traditionally, fennel seeds are used as anti-inflammatory, analgesic, carminative, diuretic and antispasmodic agents (  The other classes of phytochemicals present in A study of the potential of fennel essential oil, after encapsulation in nanoemulsions was recently reported ( Cumin ( This spice is cultivated in India, Pakistan, Iran, Egypt, Turkey, Morocco, China, Russia, Japan and Algeria. The essential oil of the fruit is known to be an effective antiseptic besides other uses ( The major components of cumin oil are cuminaldehyde, cymene, and terpenoids. Numerous studies were conducted on pharmacological characteristics of the essential oil of black cumin and thymoquinone on antioxidant activity ( It is evident that nanodrug delivery systems and in particular micro-/nanoemulsions hold great promise in improving the bioavailability of phytonutrients administered either through the oral or transdermal route. Examples are demonstrated through engineered micro-/nanoemulsions encapsulating the selected discussed phytonutrients.  Moreover, essential oils were incorporated in nanoemulsions; fennel and cumin essential oils. The authors of this chapter succeeded in attaining promising antidiabetic and antioxidant remedial effects for the two oils, respectively, through single, noninvasive, transdermal application of their respective nanoemulsion formulations. The achieved results signify the highly promoted medical efficacy of phytonutrients on engineering in nanoparticle delivery systems. Special emphasis on nanoemulsions is made in this chapter. It is evident that this promising delivery system is safe, potent, long acting and targeted to required sites resulting in using, by far, low-dose medication compared with the phytonutrient per se, and hence, giving excellent remedial effects. Such achievements would encourage researchers to proceed with clinical trials using phytonutrient loaded nanoemulsion formulations to acquire safe, long-acting, targeted and high medical efficacy with providing good patient compliance and convenience.