The objective of this work was to control and monitor the solvent extraction process of gold chloride by tri-butyl phosphate (TBP) through measuring Oxidation Reduction Potential (ORP). The results effectively indicate the application of ORP measurement approach in on-line monitoring/controlling the process of gold chloride solvent extraction. This approach showed that any decrease in gold extraction leads to an increase in ORP value. Based on this finding and by applying the slope analysis method, it was proved that Au tetrachloride is the predominant anion in aqueous phase and each mole of Au is absorbed by three moles of TBP. Considering the fact that a variety of ions are extracted from aqueous media in solvent extraction process a new equilibrium would be created. On the basis of Nernst equation, the electrochemical potential of system is changed. This research aims at anticipating the kind and concentration of ionic species based on the potential value of solution.Solvent extraction is known to be an efficient technique for the separation and recovery of metal ions, which has received a lot of attention due to its advantages, such as ease of application, low cost, and recoverability of components ( This is especially true when the solvent extraction process involves different species. An example of such a solvent extraction process is the extraction of Au from chloride media. Due to the electrochemical nature of different Au chloride complexes, it will be useful to base the analysis of such systems on electrochemical criteria. As an example, measuring the electro-conductivity of the extractant sand the HAuCl TBP is a reasonably priced reagent with low solubility in water and good extraction performance. It has been commonly used as an organic extractant in the metal extraction species from acidic solutions. In the present work, TBP was chosen as an extractant for tetrachloroauric ion extraction and the effects of parameters such as hydrochloric acid, Au and TBP concentration on solvent extraction processes were identified and analyzed. The slope analysis method is also used to identify the extraction reaction of Au by TBP from a chloride solution. Furthermore, in order to monitor the changes in the concentration of Au species in the aqueous phase during Au extraction by the organic phase, the ORP was employed and the corresponding data was electrochemically justified. Stock gold chloride solution was prepared by dissolving analytical grade Hydrogen gold tetrachloride (HAuCl Batch experiments were conducted in a flask containing equal volumes (20 The effect of hydrochloric acid concentration on the extraction of gold at different concentration of TBP is shown in As it can be seen, Au extraction percentage increases intrinsically with an increase in the concentration of hydrochloric acid concentration. At low TBP concentration, from 0.025 to 0.1  Based on Eq. Gold metal, under standard conditions and in the presence of chloride ions is oxidized to Au The Nernst equation calculates the equilibrium potential for ionic species based on any change on the valence and concentration of that ion at ambient temperature. Equilibrium potential ( As it can be seen in  This slope value is, however, 0.0162 at 65 Equilibrium constant was calculated by thermodynamic database ( On the other hand, as specified in   Comparing As reported ( The extraction constant is described as follows: The distribution coefficient of Au may be written as: The following expression can thus be derived: It is worth noting that due to the high concentration of hydrochloric acid, system pH is approximately constant. Thus, the plot of log This study was based on ORP, which is the tendency of a reacting ionic species system for accepting or donating electrons. This technique was successfully employed for both monitoring the Au extraction by TBP and identifying the electrochemical reactions. The transfer of ionic species can be monitored and evaluated by measuring ORP based on the major reactions involved in Au–TBP extraction system. The ORP value decreases by increasing HCl and/or decreasing “Au’s initial” concentration. This diminution in ORP values equals an increase in gold extraction. This research shows that gold plays an oxidizing role in the Au–H