A new recycling process, according to the zero-waste concept, was investigated for an iron rich waste stream, more specifically a secondary lead smelting matte. The process consists of a selective citrate leaching of Pb, Cu, Ni and Zn in combination with a roasting step, leading to a simultaneous recovery of hematite as a secondary iron resource. The parameters, such as leaching time, leaching temperature, H2O2 concentration and roasting temperature, were experimentally optimized. The maximum Pb leaching efficiency was 93% and the leachability of Cu (33%) and Zn (11%) increased slightly in the presence of 0.5M H2O2 in 1M citrate at 25째C and pH5.5. Importantly, almost no Fe was leached (<0.6%) from the iron rich matrix material at this condition allowing for a maximal recovery of hematite as a secondary resource after further treatment (i.e. roasting or sulfur removal). The leachability of Pb, Cu, Ni and Zn was strongly affected by the roasting temperature. Maximum leaching efficiency in 1M citrate (25째C, L/S ratio 10, pH6.5) was 93% for Pb, 80% for Cu and 60% for Zn at a roasting temperature of 600째C, while for Ni the maximum leaching efficiency of 53% was reached after roasting at 650째C. Furthermore, when oxidative roasting was applied, the leaching residue consists dominantly of hematite (Fe2O3) with minor quantities of PbSO4, which can be used as pig iron ore (Fe >60wt%).The total annual production of lead worldwide is > In the pyrometallurgical processing of Pb, two types of slags are generated, namely carbonate based (Na Most of the research on lead smelting slag has focused on the leachability of metals in inorganic ( In hydrometallurgical processes, carboxylic acids have been proposed as an alternative, probably less expensive and environmentally friendly leaching agent ( In this study, the leaching behavior of the valuable metals Pb, Cu, Ni, and Zn from secondary lead smelter residues were investigated in citrate solution. Furthermore, the effects of phase differences (sulfides or sulfates), obtained through oxidative roasting of the smelting residues, on the metal leachability were studied. The experimental process optimization aims to simultaneously extract valuable metals and valorize the mineral matrix of the residues. The lead smelting residues were collected at a lead smelting company. The residue was produced in a shaft furnace fired with coke and loaded with a charge composed of lead scrap, iron scrap (flux), and lime (additive). The smelted and molten residues which consist of two layers, i.e., matte (sulfur-rich layer, more dense) and slag (oxides), were tapped off into a cone-shaped pot, cooled, turned over and physically separated. The > A total of 16 individual scoops (4 Representative samples for analysis were obtained after crushing, grinding and sieving below 125 Roasting was carried out in an alumina crucible, which was placed in a temperature controlled muffle furnace (L/H 30/13, Nabertherm). The samples were heated at a rate of 2 Leaching tests were carried out in a 60 The reagents used in this study were H After each leaching experiment, the slurry was filtered by filter paper (Whatman) of 0.45 Galena (PbS) which is a main phase of lead in the matte, can be oxidized by hydrogen peroxide according to the following reactions. The solubility of lead sulfate (PbSO However, when the sodium citrate salt is completely ionized in solution it is able to associate with H    During oxidative roasting at temperatures between 425 and 650 The conversion of FeS to hematite has the advantage to decrease the Fe leachability as well as to transform the iron rich matrix to a form more suited as secondary iron resource for the production of pig iron. The oxidative roasting of galena, PbS, produces different phases depending upon the temperature of roasting. For example, anglesite is formed at 300  After oxidative roasting between 500 Sphalerite (ZnS) is the main phase in sulfide zinc concentrates, which will oxidize during oxidative roasting. However, the formation of ZnFe Thus, the decrease in leaching efficiency above 600 Leaching of the roasted matte sample was tested at different citrate concentrations, ranging from 0.3 to 2   Finally, leaching experiments were performed after roasting of the matte sample at 600  A new recycling process was investigated for a secondary lead smelting matte. The process consists of a selective citrate leaching of Pb, Cu, Ni and Zn in combination with a simultaneous recovery of hematite as a secondary resource. When the matte, which mainly consists of sulfides, solely underwent citrate leaching without prior treatment, the Pb leaching was highest (93%) in the presence of 0.5 An oxidative roasting step prior to leaching improved the leachability of Pb, Ni, Cu, and Zn from the matte in 1 Also the leaching residue after roasting dominantly consists of hematite with the presence of a minor quantity of PbSO This research project (MaxiVIA), (MIP-ICON, IWT Ref