In recent years, developments in control strategy for banks of flotation cells have included process control based on mass pull. Mass pull, or the flowrate of solids reporting to the concentrate, is affected by changes in froth structure and stability which are in turn affected by changes in operating parameters such as air flowrate and froth depth.
                  Air recovery, or the fraction of air entering a cell that overflows the lip as unburst bubbles, is a robust, non-intrusive measure of froth stability that passes through a peak as cell air rate is increased. Furthermore, it has been shown that when operating a cell at the air rate that yields the ‘Peak Air Recovery’ (PAR), an improvement in flotation performance, particularly mineral recovery, can be obtained.
                  In this paper, results from industrial experiments are reported that compare the effect of air rate on air recovery and flotation performance, and specifically the effect on mass pull and mineral recovery. The results show that an increase in mass pull does not necessarily yield an increased mineral recovery in all cases, since it is dependent on whether the air rate must be increased or decreased to obtain the ‘Peak Air Recovery’. This work shows the potential gain to be made from control using air recovery measurements and operating at PAR conditions.Flotation performance is affected by changes in froth stability, which in turn is affected by variations in operating parameters such as air flowrate and froth depth. Recent studies ( Air recovery has been shown to be a reliable, non-intrusive technique that yields valuable information on the behaviour of the overflowing froth. The concept was first introduced as a parameter to describe froth stability by  They related the effect of changes in aeration and the corresponding changes in air recovery to the flotation performance in the following way: Low air rates, below the peak air recovery (PAR) air rate, produce highly laden, well drained froths but with low mobility resulting in bubbles that largely collapse before overflowing the cell lip. These froths yield low air recoveries and low mineral recoveries, but at high concentrate grades. High air rates, beyond the PAR air rate, produce free flowing froths with high water content that are unstable due to low bubble loadings, and so bubbles tend to burst before overflowing, giving low air recoveries. Such froths yield reasonable mineral recoveries but at low concentrate grades. At intermediate air rates, a balance between the competing effects of bubble loading and froth mobility results in a stable froth, hence a peak in air recovery, and therefore a high mineral recovery, without excessively compromising the concentrate grade. The study of   In these studies, however, the total volume of air added to the bank remained constant for each profile. These findings highlight that understanding the changes in froth stability with variations in operating conditions such as air flowrate can lead to improvements in process performance, particularly when operating at the PAR air rate. The aim of this paper, therefore, is to further explore the effect of operating below or beyond PAR on froth behaviour. In particular, the focus is on changes in mass pull and mineral recovery, since developments in machine vision technology have resulted in the implementation of control systems that seek to optimise mass pull, predominantly using froth velocity. One such system is that reported by The results from two experimental campaigns are presented in this paper; the first was carried out at Modikwa, and the second at Western Limb Tailings Retreatment Plant (WLTRP). Both of these plants are Anglo Platinum PGM concentrators in South Africa. In both case studies, preliminary air recovery tests were carried out during which the air rates to the first two cells in the bank were varied and the air recovery measured. No additional measurements were taken during these preliminary characterisation tests. Following this, surveys were carried out at the As Found air rates and at the optimised Peak Air Recovery (PAR) air rates, during which, in addition to air recovery measurements, samples of the feed, concentrate and tails to each cell were taken. In order to determine the air recovery, digital video cameras were set up near the lip of each cell above the overflowing froth surface. Under steady state conditions for each condition tested, the top surface of the froth was video recorded for off-line analysis using the image analysis software Smartfroth ( Tests at Modikwa were carried out over the first three cells of the rougher bank (labelled A–C hereafter), Outokumpu Tankcells of diameter 3.6 The results of the preliminary air recovery tests for cells A and B are given in Tests were carried out on the first four cells of the rougher bank (labelled A–D), which are Outukumpu Tankcells with a diameter of 5 The results of the preliminary air recovery tests can be seen in  A summary of the experimental conditions for both case studies in relation to the air recovery curve is given in the schematic shown in Firstly, the effect on air recovery and froth velocity of operating at the As Found and PAR air profiles is shown in In all three cells, the velocity of the overflowing froth increases as the air rate is increased to obtain the PAR. For the air recovery, an increase in the first two cells at the optimised PAR air rate is followed by a marginal drop in air recovery in cell C, however this cell was not subject to the same preliminary air recovery tests as were the first two cells. It is interesting to note that, in cell C, the increase in froth velocity under the assumed PAR conditions is not reflected by an increase in air recovery, which is due to air recovery also being dependent on the overflowing froth height and on the inlet air. Cumulatively over the three cells, however, an increase in air recovery from 47.3% to 50.1% was obtained by increasing the air rate in each cell from the As Found to the PAR value, indicating a more stable froth. It has been reported that some machine vision based flotation control systems use froth velocity to control mass pull in order to increase mineral recovery ( Whilst  The increase in mineral recovery can similarly be attributed to both the increase in air rate and the increase in air recovery, yielding a faster flowing, more stable froth, hence a higher recovery of both attached valuable particles and non-selectively entrained valuable particles. The bubbles are therefore less coated with valuable hydrophobic particles, however a more mobile froth ensures a high overflow of bubble surface such that a high mineral recovery can be obtained. Consequently, by increasing the air rate to the three cells in order to operate at the PAR air profile, a faster flowing froth, higher mass pull, lower concentrate grade but higher mineral recovery are obtained. This is underlined in Whilst these trends are observed in cases where the air rate to a bank of cells is increased in order to obtain the PAR air profile, the opposite and more common case, where the air rate is reduced to obtain the peak in air recovery, must also be considered. In comparison to the tests carried out at Modikwa, preliminary air recovery tests at WLTRP showed that the PAR air profile could be achieved by reducing the air rate to each of the four cells tested. The results of the froth velocity and air recovery measurements taken during the comparative surveys for the As Found and PAR air profiles are given in It can be seen that an increase in air recovery was achieved in each cell by dropping the rate of aeration. Cumulatively, operating at the optimised PAR air rate resulted in a relative increase in air recovery of over 20% (from 45.4% to 55.9%) compared with the plant set values. There is, however, no clear effect of air rate on froth velocity in any given cell.  For example, in cell A, the froth flows at a velocity 6.5% lower at the PAR air rate than for the As Found air rate, however this translates to a 17.6% increase in air recovery (11.7% difference between the two values) and a mass pull almost half of that at the As Found conditions. The results from WLTRP, therefore, show that changes in cell aeration can result in variations in mass pull that are not always reflected in the changes in froth velocity alone. This is particularly evident in cell D, where operating under PAR conditions yields a significantly lower mass pull, which can be related to changes in the froth structure. Additionally, although a lower velocity and mass pull were recorded in cell A at PAR conditions, a more stable froth is actually indicated from the air recovery measurements.  For the case in which the air rate to each cell in the bank is reduced in order to obtain the PAR air profile, as at WLTRP, the decrease in cell aeration results in a reduction in the non-selective entrainment of gangue particles. A more stable froth is obtained, hence the longer froth residence time allows more drainage, and together with the higher bubble loading associated with lower air rates ( On the other hand, the higher As Found air rates lead to an increase in the entrainment of particles, both valuable and gangue, into the froth, which yields a higher mass pull, however the high air rate, low particle attachment and low air recovery leads to a drop in mineral recovery when compared to PAR conditions, for a significantly lower concentrate grade. The relationship between mass pull and recovery is shown in The results presented in this paper highlight the importance of understanding the behaviour of the froth with different operating parameters, in this case cell aeration. Specifically, understanding where current operation is in terms of the air recovery curve is the key to optimising flotation performance. This is broadly summarised in the schematic in In summary, whilst a high mass pull is more likely to result in a higher mineral recovery, this work shows that it is not necessarily the case that a high recovery can only be obtained at high rates of mass pull. Moreover, by operating under conditions that yield a higher air recovery, hence a more stable froth, a high mineral recovery can still be obtained potentially for a much lower mass pull, therefore reducing the circulating load further downstream. It should be highlighted that it is not necessarily the case that every cell in a bank will be over-aerated at the As Found air profile, or indeed that they will all be under-aerated. It is fortuitous for these two experimental campaigns that the banks were all set to be either under-aerated or over-aerated. From the authors’ experience, in industrial operations, over-aeration of flotation cells is more often the case than under-aeration. Air recovery, or the fraction of air entering a cell that overflows the cell lip as unburst bubbles, has previously been shown to be a reliable, non-intrusive technique for quantifying froth stability. Previous studies have shown that the air recovery passes through a peak as cell aeration is increased and furthermore that operating at the air rate at which the peak air recovery is obtained, or PAR air rate, yields the optimum mineral recovery. In this paper, two case studies were presented exploring further the relationship between cell aeration, air recovery and flotation performance. Of particular interest was the effect on mass pull and mineral recovery of operating above and below the PAR air rate. To this end, the two case studies considered an operation where As Found air rates were below the PAR air rates (Modikwa) and conversely where the As Found air rates were higher than the PAR air rates (WLTRP). The results showed that when the air rate was increased from the As Found to the PAR profile, both the froth velocity and the mass pull increased, as did the mineral recovery, although a drop in concentrate grade was obtained. This was related to the increase in froth stability and mobility. For the opposite case, where the air rate is decreased from As Found to PAR conditions, little change in froth velocity was measured, although the mass pull was significantly lower. An increase in both concentrate grade and mineral recovery was obtained, due to the lower air rate, higher solids loading and more stable bubbles. The key findings from this work are, therefore: Increased mass pull is not always indicative of increased mineral recovery. Operating at the PAR air rate results in an improved mineral recovery for lower mass pull if the air rate is decreased from As Found to PAR. If air rate is increased from As Found to PAR, a higher recovery is obtained for a higher mass pull. This highlights the potential benefit from operating under conditions at which a peak in air recovery is obtained. This work was supported by funding from The peak air recovery-based froth flotation optimisation methodology is protected by a PCT-stage patent application, covering most of the countries of the world, with additional protection in Chile and Peru.