Comparative comminution between high voltage pulses and conventional grinding, at the same specific energy levels, shows that the electrical comminution generates a coarser product with significantly less fines than the mechanical breakage. However, minerals of interest in the electrical comminution product are better liberated than in the conventional comminution with an over 95% statistical significance. There is a potential to use less energy in the electrical comminution to generate the similar degree of mineral liberation as in the mechanical comminution. Distribution of the liberated minerals demonstrates that, in the electrical comminution product, a large percentage of the liberated minerals appear in size fractions coarser than 53μm; while in the mechanical comminution product, the liberated minerals are accumulated in fine and very fine size fractions. Therefore there may be potential benefits in recovering the coarse liberated minerals in the electrical comminution product, prior to further grinding.Over the past decades great improvements have been made in the understanding of comminution equipment, simulation and control, but nevertheless, enhancement in liberation should also be a major aim. The release of valuable minerals from the rock matrix is an essential process in comminution. The ideal liberation method is by intergranular breakage; where breakage occurs along the grain boundaries of the mineral phases, allowing preservation of natural grain size and minimization of over-grinding. Liberation enhancement is sought for two main reasons. Firstly, if liberation is achieved without needing to grind particles to fine sizes, less energy is required. Secondly, over-grinding is very costly and produces fines that tend to interfere with the subsequent separation process, making the downstream processing both inefficient and more expensive. The problems of the current liberation technology are: the high capital costs of the comminution process and its maintenance; a relatively high consumption of energy ( In existing comminution processes (such as SAG and ball mills), direct control over liberation does not exist due to random breakage in the mechanical process. The only control parameter is the product size distribution. By generating fine particles, which geometrically minimizes the percentage of composite fragments at the boundary with the rock matrices, an acceptable amount of liberated particles can be ensured for downstream separation. Increasing liberation without the over production of fines is difficult in mechanical comminution. The development of a specific selective liberation method, by preferable intergranular breakage of ore particles, becomes an important task for mineral processing. Various attempts have been reported on novel methods of ore fragmentation, such as fragmentation by induction heating then followed by water cooling ( A unique liberation process, involving the disintegration of ores by high voltage pulses has been suggested ( A report on the benefits to diamond liberation using high voltage pulses ( However, the reported energy consumption in the high voltage disintegration was high. A comparative assessment of the efficiency of liberation was conducted on a PGM (platinum group metal) ore in terms of energy consumption and recovery ( In addition to the high energy consumption, the literature also suggests that better liberation results using high voltage pulses often show only marginal improvements. In general, there is a lack of statistical analysis of the comparative tests providing unambiguous evidence of the improved liberation. As a result, the ability of high voltage pulse breakage mechanisms to improve mineral liberation has remained an uncertainty to the mining industry. In this study a detailed experimental program was undertaken to compare the mineral liberation results of two sulphide ores and one PGM ore. Each was subjected to two routes of treatment; one by high voltage pulses and the other by conventional mechanical breakage, both with the same specific energy input. Statistical analysis of the data was performed. The major outcomes of the investigation are presented below. Two sulphide ores and one PGM ore were selected for this study: Ore 1 sample was from a copper–gold mine located in New South Wales, Australia. The copper–gold mineralization occurs as quartz veins, sheeted quartz sulphide veins and stockworks. The gold occurs mainly as free grains in quartz or on the margins of sulphide grains. The principal copper sulphide minerals are chalcopyrite and bornite. The major silicate minerals are quartz, orthoclase, hornblende, chlorite, anorthoclase, and the non-silicate minerals include magnetite, calcite and apetite. Grain size distributions of the valuable mineral chalcopyrite show 10% passing 20 Ore 2 sample was from a low grade gold ore mine located in Western Australia. The primary gold-bearing sulphides in the waste rock and wall rock are pyrite and arsenopyrite. Carbonates are extensive on the site, consisting predominantly of calcite and ankerite. The secondary mineral precipitates in localized areas include hexahydrite, halite, gypsum, basanite, siderite and hematite. Grain size distributions of the valuable mineral pyrite show 10% passing 61 Ore 3 sample came from a platinum group metal (PGM) mine located in South Africa. The Platreef plays host to a number of metals, most notably the platinum group metals, as well as gold, silver, nickel, copper and cobalt. Pyrrhotite and pentlandite are the major minerals bearing the valuable metals, although some PGMs are associated with other minerals. The rock types include feldspathic pyroxenite, pyroxenite, parapyroxenite, serpentinite and calc-silicate. Grain size distributions of the valuable mineral pyrrhotite show 10% passing 38  The amount of samples received at the JKMRC varied from 300 The high voltage pulse breakage experiment was conducted with selFrag Lab equipment installed at selFrag AG based in Switzerland. The name of selFrag refers to selective fragmentation. The equipment consists of a high voltage power supply, a high voltage pulse generator, portable process vessels and a lifting table for easy loading and unloading of the process vessel. More details can be found in an earlier publication ( The selFrag Lab is designed to process mineralogical and geological samples in the one kilogram range. The operation occurs in a wet batch processing mode. For the liberation tests, the operating parameters were set at 100–120 Any variations in voltage, electrode gap or number of pulses will be reflected in the total pulse energy in the selFrag tests. The selFrag machine is equipped with a display system, from which the applied voltage, electrode gap, pulse frequency, number of pulses, and total pulse energy can be recorded. The total pulse energy is displayed in Joules. Since the specific energy in kWh/t has been widely used by mining companies around the world, the SI unit (International System of Units) Joule was converted to kWh, then divided by the sample mass in each batch test to obtain the specific energy in kWh/t. Note that the pulse energy is regarded as the net breakage energy, which does not account for the energy loss due to transform efficiency and during the machine idle period. A laboratory rod mill installed at the JKMRC pilot plant was employed as a mechanical breakage device to treat the ore samples. Mono size fractions of the ore samples, similar to those treated by selFrag, were ground in the rod mill for a given period of time. Both selFrag and rod milling processes were in open circuit breakage. The net mill power consumption was calculated using a method reported by Representative samples of the selFrag and rod mill products were taken for quantitative mineralogical analysis using MLA. The XBSE (back-scattered electron) measurement collects a series of BSE images which undergo a number of steps of image processing. An X-ray spectrum is collected from each mineral grain identified in the pre-segmentation of the back-scattered electron image. The software used for the quantitative mineralogical analysis in this work was MLA SUITE 2008. Two liberation indicators, the cumulative mass percentage of mineral in the >95% liberated classes and the Phase Specific Interfacial Surface Area (PSISA), were adopted to compare the liberation results between selFrag breakage and conventional mechanical breakage. The MLA data gives the percentage mass of the minerals of interest at various liberation classes, either in an instantaneous or a cumulative form. It is believed that a particle with greater than 95% liberated mineral is easy to be recovered in a downstream process such as flotation. Hence the cumulative mass percentage of the mineral in the >95% liberation class was used to refer to mineral liberation in this study. The liberated mineral deportment by size can be computed as a product of the mineral distribution by size and the mass percentage of the mineral in the >95% liberated classes, while the mineral distribution by size is computed as the product of modal abundance of the mineral and the mass retained on size, divided by the head abundance in the 0–3.35 The phase specific interfacial surface area between the mineral phase of interest and the other minerals, can be used to gain an indication of the extent of valuable mineral interlocked with the other minerals ( In this study 2448 sub-product samples were generated (3 ores To estimate the MLA measurement errors associated with the liberation data, a method published by On the other hand, of all the different particle sizes in the three ore samples tested by selFrag and the mechanical breakage mode, there were 170 sets (2 It was found through statistical analysis, that the difference in the means of the CoV between the selFrag and the mechanical breakage tests is insignificant. The electrical and mechanical comminution data were therefore combined to increase the sample size in estimating the mean of the CoV. It was also found that the CoV increases dramatically with particle size, which reflects the variation in the number of particles counted in the MLA measurements. For example, the size-averaged CoV in modal abundance was 0.025 for the 0.106–0.15 The 95% CI of CoV was computed from Eq. Eq. The results presented in this section are mainly from Ore 1. Results from the other two ores are used to validate the trends observed from the Ore 1 sample. Despite the fact that breakage occurred with the two comminution methods at the same specific energy levels, particle size distributions appeared completely different.  In order to investigate the size by size mineral liberation trend in the whole product size range, more detailed mineralogical analysis was carried out on seven fragment size fractions for Ore 1. Two minerals in Ore 1 were used as indicators of the valuable minerals: chalcopyrite, a major copper-bearing mineral; and pyrite, a major gold-bearing mineral. The seven MLA size fractions for Ore 1 included: 2.36–3.35 MLA measurements were not performed on every consecutive product size fraction due to cost and time constraints. To reconstruct the liberation data for the whole product size range, a data interpolation technique was adopted. The solid symbols in   Comparison of the >95% liberated minerals deportment between the mechanical and electrical comminution in the 0.053−0.30 Since the +3.35 mm size fraction is unlikely to contain >95% liberated minerals of interest due to the mineral grain size nature, it would be interesting to compare the distribution of the >95% liberated minerals in the 0–3.35 The electrical product contained significantly more >95% librated chalcopyrite and pyrite in the size fractions coarser than 0.053 The data provide strong evidence of better liberation of the valuable minerals at coarser sizes by the electrical comminution. The PSISA refers to the extent of chalcopyrite or pyrite interlocked with other minerals – the smaller value of PSISA indicating a better liberation of the valuable minerals. In general, the majority of the PSISA of chalcopyrite and pyrite is smaller in the electrical product than in the mechanical product, indicating that the chalcopyrite and pyrite minerals produced by the electrical comminution are less interlocked with other minerals. Since the large measurement errors are associated with the particles coarser than 0.15 The PSISA data agree with the >95% liberated mineral deportment trends presented in Sections Three ore samples were tested in the mineral liberation study. In order to validate the trends observed in Ore 1, (tested with 8.9 The data demonstrated that the electrical comminution generated significantly more liberated chalcopyrite and pyrrhotite minerals from the Ore 1 and Ore 3 samples. For the Ore 2 sample, the deportment of the liberated pyrite mineral generated by the electrical comminution at 5 The graphs of PSISA of the valuable minerals in the three ore samples are presented in The additional data have further confirmed the better liberation trend by the electrical comminution method, in all three ore samples tested, at various specific energy levels. The effect of energy on electrical comminution is one major scope of this investigation. A relationship between the size reduction parameter The data suggest that the electrical breakage is not an ideal comminution method if used merely for size reduction. However, the recent research has provided evidence that high voltage pulse comminution may be employed for particle pre-weakening, rather than size reduction, to improve energy efficiency in downstream processing ( As discussed above, the electrical comminution generated coarser product but with better liberated minerals than mechanical breakage. Since the specific energy used to generate the liberated minerals in each test is available, it is possible to compare the energy requirement for similar degree of liberation.  At 21.9 The data suggest that in electrical comminution the amount of liberated mineral produced and the amount of specific energy applied is not in a linear relationship. There is an optimal range of specific energy application in electrical comminution, which will give the minimum amount of energy requirement to generate a unit mass of liberated minerals of interest. Note that in this study, the experiment was conducted in an open circuit with the same specific energy levels for both mechanical comminution and electrical comminution, with a focus on investigation of mineral liberation in the −3.35 The present study has found that a large amount of liberated minerals are distributed in the coarser size fractions in the electrical comminution product. This is contrary to what is found in the mechanical breakage product, in which large amounts of the liberated minerals are cumulated in the fine or very fine size fractions. Taking Ore 1 as an example: in the mechanical breakage product, there was 67% liberated (in the >95% liberation classes) chalcopyrite mineral accumulated in the −53 Such a distribution of the liberated mineral in the electrical comminution product may find a potential benefit for the recovery of valuable liberated minerals at coarse sizes and at an early processing stage. Since it is well known that fines have an adverse influence on recovery, if the liberated minerals can be recovered before further grinding to less than 53 A detailed experimental program was undertaken to compare the mineral liberation results of two sulphide ores and one PGM ore subjected to two routes of treatment by high voltage pulses and conventional mechanical breakage. One distinguishing feature of this study is that the two routes of comminution were conducted at identical specific energy levels. Extensive mineral liberation analysis was conducted to provide sufficient data for statistical analysis of the comparative results. The data demonstrated that at the same specific energy level, the electrical comminution generated a much coarser product with significantly less fines than were generated in the mechanical breakage. Despite the coarser product, the percentage of the >95% liberated minerals of interest in the electrical comminution product was higher than that in the mechanical breakage product, generated with the similar specific energy, and the difference was statistically over 95% significant. This trend has been examined and confirmed by various liberation criteria, and with different minerals of interest. The experimental results show that at low specific energy input level (E3), electrical comminution requires 46% less energy than the mechanical comminution to produce the similar degree of liberated chalcopyrite. However, at high specific energy input level (E6), the electrical comminution requires more energy. There may exist an optimal range of specific energy application in electrical comminution, which will give the minimum amount of energy requirement to generate a unit mass of liberated minerals of interest for a specific ore. It was found that in the mechanical comminution product, a large percentage of the >95% liberated minerals was accumulated in the fine and very fine size fractions (−53 The authors would like to acknowledge financial support from the Australian Research Council Linkage Scheme (AMSRI – LP0667828), AMIRA International, the State Governments of South Australia and Victoria, and the sponsors of AMIRA International Project P924: BHP/Billiton, Rio Tinto, Orica Explosives, Anglo Platinum, Xstrata Technology, Freeport McMoran and AREVA NC. selFrag AG kindly provided the high voltage pulse testing facility for the experiment. Assistance provided by Dr. Alexander Weh of selFrag in the experimental work and by Dr. Elaine Wightman of the JKMRC in MLA measurement is appreciated. Useful discussion on statistical analysis was held with Prof. Tim Napier-Munn of the JKMRC. The initial work from Dr. Mike Daniel in arranging the preliminary experiment with selFrag is acknowledged. Support from Anglo Research, Newcrest, Newmont and Xstrata mining companies in sample collection is gratefully acknowledged.