Background
                  The management of tibial plateau fracture is challenging. Restoration of articular congruity and early range of motion should be the primary goal. Proper and adequate preoperative planning is essential for a good outcome.
               
                  Purpose
                  The study was a retrospective analysis of failed surgical treatment of tibial plateau fractures.
               
                  Methods
                  Twenty-five patients with tibial plateau fractures were referred to our hospital after having undergone surgery elsewhere. Because of functional disability, the patients received revision surgery with concomitant treatment of associated soft tissue injuries. The average age at operation was 43.5 years (range, 27–71 years). The average interval between the first treatment and the secondary operation was 10.4 months (range, 6–24 months). From the radiographs and operative findings, we analyzed the factors that cause failure of the index surgical treatments for tibial plateau fractures.
               
                  Results
                  Schatzker classification identified five type II, one type III, four type IV, seven type V, and eight type VI fractures. Among these 25 cases, nonunion was found in seven (28%) patients and malunion in 18 patients (72%). The causes of failed surgeries included inadequate fixation (76%), malreduction (84%), and bone defect (100%). In addition, there were associated soft tissue injuries in nine patients (36%).
               
                  Conclusions
                  The main elements of the surgical management of tibial plateau fractures are anatomical reduction, firm fixation, and bone grafting. Inadequate fixation, malreduction, and bone defects can lead to the failure of surgical treatment. The key to successful surgical treatment is a well-designed surgical scheme tailored on the specific fracture type and soft tissue condition; this can prevent serious complications and resultant malpractice suits.