Indium tin oxide (ITO) is one of the important materials used as transparent conducting oxide (TCO) layer in thin film solar cells, digital displays and other similar applications. For applications involving flexible polymeric substrates, it is important that deposition of ITO is carried out at near room temperature. This requirement puts constraint on stoichiometry leading to undesired electrical and optical properties. Effect of oxygen partial pressure on ITO films deposited on flexible Kapton® by the RF magnetron sputtering is reported in this paper.ITO is one of the most studied TCO material for application as transparent conductive electrode in optoelectronic devices, flat screen displays, thin film photovoltaics due to its high electrical conductivity and high transmittance in the visible spectrum. ITO is a wide bandgap ( In order to optimize the optical and electrical characteristics, ITO film deposition is carried on heated substrates and annealing of samples above ITO crystallization temperature range ( With the advancement of thin film devices towards flexible electronics like flexible thin film solar cells, flexible displays, foldable e-paper and others, significant efforts are towards development of thin TCO films at low substrate temperatures on polymeric substrates In this paper, we report the results obtained on ITO films deposited by RF magnetron sputtering on flexible Kapton ITO films were deposited by RF magnetron sputtering on flexible Kapton Prior to deposition, cleaning of Kapton The sputtering chamber was evacuated to a base pressure of 2×10 The optimization of deposition parameters is not always straightforward. ITO films require certain density of defects (oxygen vacancies and substitutive Sn) for conduction as seen from Oxygen partial pressure was varied between 0% and 1.5% of the total deposition pressure. Deposition rates and oxygen concentration in the working gas for deposition of these films are tabulated in In presence of oxygen partial pressure the transmittance of the deposited ITO film was not affected significantly though an increase in the transmittance would normally be expected. This was confirmed from the transmittance of ITO films deposited on Corning 1737 glass with and without oxygen partial pressure as shown in The X-ray diffraction pattern of ITO film on flexible Kapton From the Hall measurement data, it is observed that bulk carrier concentration decreased with increase in oxygen partial pressure during sputtering. This is because with increase in oxygen partial pressure the concentration of oxygen vacancies decreases, resulting in reduced carrier concentration. It was observed that when oxygen partial pressure was increased from 0% to 0.6%, the carrier mobility however increased by about one order of magnitude. This increase could be due to improvement in crystalline nature of the ITO films. However on increasing oxygen partial pressure above 0.6%, the carrier mobility value decreased. This could be due to the scattering effect of oxidized impurities that offsets the improvement due to improvement in the crystalline structure. Overall, the resistivity of ITO films depends on bulk carrier concentration and carrier mobility values. The lowest value of resistivity (8.2×10 Lattice strains were calculated from the XRD data for ITO films deposited on Corning 1737 glass substrate. ITO films were under compressive stress as indicated by the XRD pattern. On flexible Kapton Stress management in ITO films is of utmost importance. Stresses generated in ITO films tend to develop cracks, which make ITO less conductive. Presence of cracks was confirmed from optical microscopy. These stresses could be reduced to some extent by carrying the deposition at lower plasma power and providing substrate cooling Indium tin oxide thin films were deposited on flexible Kapton Above work was carried out with financial assistance from the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, Government of India.