I have read the paper entitled “Tunnel Boring Machine (TBM) selection using fuzzy multicriteria decision making methods”, Tunneling and Underground Space Technology 30 (2012) 194–204, with interest and would like to congratulate the authors for providing valuable research on TBM selection using Fuzzy MADM techniques. In the published paper, the authors developed a decision making model and employed the Fuzzy Analytic Hierarchy Process (F-AHP) and Fuzzy Technique for Order Performance by Similarity to Ideal Solution (F-TOPSIS) to obtain the weight of the evaluation attributes and rank the alternatives, respectively. The problem is really important but is difficult to solve because of a need to handle lots of criteria simultaneously in the decision making process. In the rest of this contribution, I would like to discuss some of the difficulties associated with this type of analysis and request comments and additional information from the authors. In the paper, the background of the research and an introduction of fuzzy set theory and F-AHP and F-TOPSIS are presented in sections 1–4. The authors employed the The authors, also identified nine criteria namely face stability (C1), rock mass permeability (C2), grain size distribution (C3), safety (C4), speed of excavation (C5), groundwater control (C6), cost (C7), risk (C8), and surface settlement (C9) in TBM selection problem. There are a few comments that are highlighted here: The first question is how many parameters should be taken into consideration in decision making process of the appropriate TBM as the evaluation attributes and if these criteria are enough for a complex TBM selection problem. The authors have chosen nine criteria for the case study in the paper and these criteria have not been clustered. The number of selected criteria is only 9, although there are certainly more criteria that could be applicable in a real case. Considering this fact, in order to control the consistency of decision matrix and also include more criteria in TBM selection problem, it is suggested that, the criteria might be clustered in future studies with the maximum number of criteria and sub-criteria in every cluster limited to seven. Hence, some other important criteria could be added and categorized in the decision making process in the paper. For instance, parameters such as face stability, groundwater control, surface settlement together with other geological hazards such as fault zone, squeezing and mixed face condition could be sub-criteria of difficult ground conditions which are of crucial importance for TBM selection as were previously mentioned by In trying to follow the details of the work described, I developed some additional questions that I believe would be helpful for readers of the paper. For example, it seems that a mixture of factors for selection of TBM in hard rock and soft ground conditions was provided in the paper. For instance, in soil, the grain size distribution (C3) is one of the decisive factors when selecting the type of shield machine to be applied. In the paper, it is not specified how it is determined for hard rock in the case of open, single shield and double shield TBMs. Also, there are some degrees of uncertainty regarding a number of the available criteria. For example, it is not clear what exactly is meant by the speed of excavation (C5). It seems to be the machine advance rate in meters per hour or day. However, this is a critical dependent variable which itself is a function of lots of parameters in the project and cannot be easily estimated for each different machine. The same is also true for the criteria of risk (C8) which was not discussed as to whether it is a qualitative or quantitative parameter. Additional insight from the authors with regard to these questions would be helpful I believe to the readers of the paper who are engaged in similar research. I hope that the authors would find the foregoing remarks, clarifications and questions valuable for further work on the application of fuzzy MADM techniques for the selection of Tunnel Boring Machines.