This paper investigates the potential for using skirted foundations as an alternative to spudcans in an attempt to mitigate punch-through failure of jack-up rigs during installation and preloading in sand-over-clay deposits. The results from a series of numerical analyses on the skirt length were presented in combination with different conditions of sand-over-clay deposit. Three-dimensional large deformation finite element (LDFE) analyses were carried out using the coupled Eulerian-Lagrangian approach. The sand was represented with a modified Mohr-Coulomb model and the clay with an extended Tresca model. The results showed that the likelihood and severity of punch-through increased with (i) increasing the thickness of the sand layer, (ii) increasing the strength of the clay layer, and (iii) reducing the strength non-homogeneity of the clay layer. The degree of mitigation was increased with increasing the skirt length. An optimal skirt length of 0.25D was suggested accounting for the rig towing constraint. Prediction models have been proposed for assessing (i) the potential for punch-through failure, and (ii) the resistance profile for skirted foundations penetrating sand-over-clay deposits.Jack-up rigs are one of the most commonly used offshore drilling platforms in the oil and gas industry, especially for site exploration and drilling in water depths up to 150 m. A jack-up rig is comprised of a buoyant hull with three or four K-lattice legs. The legs are retractable, mobilised vertically by rack-and-pinion jacking systems and connected to footings called spudcans. Typical spudcans have an effective diameter of up to 20 m ( Jack-ups are installed on a site with no intervening auxiliary equipment. During the installation of a jack-up rig, footings are lowered to the seabed by jacking down the legs while the hull floats. After lowering the legs to the seabed, seawater is pumped into the vacant ballast tanks in the hull to fill in the tanks and pre-load the footings. The footings are then pushed into the seabed, based on the established installation procedure, such as all legs penetrating simultaneously or a one-by-one installation order. The aim of pre-loading is to ensure sufficient reserve capacity from the seabed for the footings under any extreme storm conditions. For the jack-up industry, punch-through failure, defined as unexpected rapid penetration of the footings, is one of the major concerns related to geotechnical/structural failures during the installation and preloading process. Excessive uncontrolled rapid leg plunge can lead to buckling of the leg, effectively decommissioning the platform or even toppling the jack-up unit ( Once the risk of punch-through failure is identified at a site, mitigation measures are required for allowing a safer installation of the rig. Conventionally, installation procedures (such as leg-by-leg preloading;  Penetration of spudcan foundations in sand-over-clay deposits has been addressed by a number of researchers, with particular interest on punch-through and development of corresponding design approaches for predicting the depth and the peak capacity at punch-through (e.g., The main aim of this study is to provide a systematic assessment of skirt length and its effect on mitigating punch-through failure in sites with sand-over-clay deposits. For this purpose. a series of three-dimensional (3D) large deformation finite element (LDFE) analyses carried out on skirted foundation penetrating sand-over-clay deposits are reported. An extensive parametric investigation was undertaken, varying the skirt length, thickness and relative density of the sand layer, and strength of the bottom clay layer. a conceptual analytical prediction model is proposed. It can be used to predict the punch-through load as well as the full load-penetration curve for skirted foundations. A saucer-shaped ‘generic spudcan’ was used as a reference for each case of analysis, similar to the spudcans of the ‘Keppel LeTourneau Design, Class 82-SDC’ jack-up rig, as illustrated by 3D LDFE analyses were carried out using the coupled Eulerian-Lagrangian (CEL) approach in the commercial package ABAQUS/Explicit ( Considering the symmetry of the problem, only a quarter spudcan and soil domain were modelled. A typical mesh is shown in It was reasonably assumed that the foundation penetrated in the sand layer under drained conditions, while in the clay layer under undrained conditions (e.g. For the clay layer, the Tresca soil model was extended following Eq. The soil-spudcan interface was modelled by the Coulomb friction law, with the coefficient of friction ( The LDFE results were first validated against centrifuge test data.  Overall, the LDFE result follows a similar trend of the centrifuge test data, although the peak resistance, To examine the effect of a skirted foundation on the mitigation of punch-through failure, an extensive parametric study was carried out varying the (a) skirt length (  In the sand layer, for the generic spudcan, the soil deformation is predominantly directed to the lower clay layer from the onset of penetration, leading to deformation of the layer interface ( In the clay layer ( To investigate the effect of the relative thickness of the sand layer, penetration resistance profiles are plotted in To demonstrate the effect of the relative density of the sand layer, penetration resistance profiles are plotted in The effect of the lower clay layer was investigated, varying the undrained shear strength at the interface ( To explore the influence of strength non-homogeneity on the form of the penetration resistance profile, the results of various non-homogeneity factors The influence of various parameters on   For generic spudcan and flat-based foundation penetration in sand-over-clay deposits, several deterministic prediction models have been developed in the last decade ( For developing a conceptual model for skirted foundations, a schematic diagram is drawn in The first term represents the bearing capacity of the clay layer at the base of the frustum plug at the sand-clay interface,   The values of For skirted foundations, the rapidly dropping trend of To assess the penetration resistance, In the right-hand side, the first term represents the bearing capacity of the clay layer at the base of the plug, the 3rd – 5th terms represent overburden pressure, taking away the weight of the collapsed, trapped and plugged sand, where The values of  Eq. A suggested prediction procedure is outlined here and also presented in Determine soil parameters such as Calculate the peak depth ( Calculate the penetration resistance at Calculate the penetration resistance at Calculate the penetration resistance on the layer interface ( Calculate the penetration resistance at the target depth ( Draw lines joining two neighbour points starting from the origin. As discussed previously, In this study, a spudcan penetration rate of 0.2 m/s was considered. In the field, spudcan penetration rate may be estimated to lie between 0.4 and 4 m/h ( The penetration of skirted foundations in sand-over-clay deposits was investigated with the aim being mitigating punch-through. Comparing the response of a generic spudcan, the punch-through trend due to different soil conditions and skirt length was reported, based on 3D large deformation finite element (LDFE) analyses using the CEL approach in ABAQUS/Explicit. A modified Mohr-Coulomb sand model was used along with the Extended Tresca clay model. The former enabled the consideration of sand behaviour varying depending on the deviatoric plastic strain. The latter was found to be useful to consider strain softening effects. LDFE analysis based on these models was found to be comparable to geotechnical centrifuge measurements. The following conclusions can be drawn from the presented results. The likelihood and severity of punch-through increased with (i) increasing the thickness of the sand layer, (ii) increasing the strength of the clay layer, and (iii) reducing the strength non-homogeneity of the clay layer. An expression (Eq. The degree of mitigation using the skirted foundations was increased with increasing the length of the skirt, reassuring the validity of the concept that the likelihood and severity of punch-through reduces with reducing the thickness of the effective sand layer by the skirt length. An optimised skirt length of 0.25 For assessing load-penetration profile of skirted foundations, a conceptual analytical model and corresponding calculating expressions were proposed calibrating against computed and measured data. The model was validated against measured centrifuge test results, with reasonable agreement achieved. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The research presented herein was undertaken with support from the The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at  area at largest section of foundation spudcan diameter at largest section distribution factor penetration depth of spudcan base (lowest point at largest section) depth of composite foundation from sand-clay interface depth of peak penetration resistance in sand layer Young's modulus parameter to simplify algebra trapped sand plug height punch-through distance relative density of sand dilatancy index shear strength gradient with depth coefficient of lateral earth pressure at rest skirt length bearing capacity factor value of natural logarithm of grain-crushing strength (in kPa) peak resistance penetration resistance in underlying clay frictional resistance around outer periphery of skirt frictional resistance around sand plug in clay layer penetration resistance when skirt tip reaching layer interface ultimate bearing pressure effective overburden pressure foundation radius soil sensitivity intact undrained shear strength of soil intact undrained shear strength at foundation base level intact undrained shear strength of soil at skirt tip depth current undrained shear strength after softening intact undrained shear strength of soil at sand-clay layer interface undrained shear strength of clay averaged over 0.5 thickness of sand layer thickness of sand layer beneath spudcan base (lowest point of largest section) or skirt tip thickness of skirt volume of the embedded skirted foundation including the shaft spudcan penetration rate depth below soil surface interface friction ratio effective unit weight of clay effective unit weight of sand maximum shear strain rate reference shear strain rate at which remoulded strength ratio dimensionless strength increasing parameter for non-homogeneous cohesive soils ratio between change of bearing pressure over normalised penetration depth and average undrained shear strength of clay rate parameter Poisson's ratio standard deviation confining stress friction angle critical state friction angle (constant volume friction angle) of sand initial friction angle peak friction angle accumulated absolute plastic shear strain threshold plastic shear strain corresponding to threshold plastic shear strain corresponding to softening parameter dilation angle peak dilation angle