The present work uses mean value coordinates to construct the shape functions of a hybrid ‘FE-Meshfree’ quadrilateral element, which is named as Quad4-MVC. This Quad4-MVC can be regarded as the development of the ‘FE-Meshfree’ quadrilateral element with radial-polynomial point interpolation (Quad4-RPIM). Similar to Quad4-RPIM, Quad4-MVC has Kronecker delta property on the boundaries of computational domain, so essential boundary conditions can be enforced as conveniently as in the finite element method (FEM). The novelty of the present work is to construct nodal approximations using mean value coordinates, instead of radial basis functions which are used in Quad4-RPIM. Compared to the radial basis functions, mean value coordinates does not utilize any uncertain parameters, which enhances stability of numerical results. Numerical tests in this paper show that the performance of Quad4-RPIM becomes even worse than four-node iso-parametric element (Quad4) when the parameters of radial basis functions are not chosen properly. However, the performance of Quad4-MVC is stably better than Quad4.The finite element method (FEM) To overcome the difficulty of FEM, a group of meshfree methods is developed during the past several decades. The first meshfree method was proposed in 1970s However, meshfree methods bring some new difficulties, such as the lack of Kronecker delta property in some of meshfree methods, in which extra operation is required to treat the essential boundary conditions Alternatively, to make full use of the advantages of both FEM and meshfree method, a set of hybrid finite element and meshfree methods are developed using the concepts of partition of unity In RPIM and QUAD4-RPIM, radial basis functions are successfully used to avoid singular problem of constructing approximations. However, some uncertain parameters are utilized in radial basis functions which include multi-quadrics (MQ) In this paper, mean value coordinates is introduced to replace radial-polynomial basis functions in the context of hybrid ‘FE-Meshfree’ method and proposed a novel hybrid ‘FE-Meshfree’ method with mean value coordinates (Quad4-MVC). This mean value coordinates does not use any uncertain parameters, which ensures the stability of simulation. In fact, mean value coordinates has been successfully used to construct polygonal finite element methods (PFEM) for many years The principle of partition of unity method (PUM) Mean value coordinates (MVC) As shown in Then, As an effective and stable interpolation, the weights of mean value coordinates, The The The Linear completeness: Consider a quadrilateral domain First, let us define the node patch of a node According to Eq. The formula of mean value coordinates (see Eq. The global approximation of Quad4-MVC, The element support domain Note that The present Quad4-MVC is lack of Kronecker-delta property at the nodes locating within the computational domain, however Quad4-MVC ensures the Kronecker-delta property at the nodes on the boundaries of computational domain, that is important in the imposing of essential boundary conditions. In the following, the detailed proof of this Kronecker-delta property is shown. Considering a point Consider a 2D solid mechanic problem defined in domain By discretizing the domain In this section, numerical tests are carried out to validate the performance of Quad4-MVC. The Quad4-MVC is compared to four-node iso-parametric quadrilateral element (Quad4), and other three hybrid ‘FE-Meshfree’ methods, including Quad4-DNS The physical units used in the present work are based on the international standard unit system. Here, For a numerical method, patch test is a useful test for correct implementation. As shown in A known problem of PUM is the linear dependence problem, which leads to the singularity of global (stiffness) matrices  Three different relative regular grids are used to investigate the convergence property of Quad4-MVC, as shown in Additionally, the relative errors of Quad4-MVC in the displacement norm and the energy norm are compared to those of Quad4 and Quad4-RPIM with different parameters of radial basis interpolation, The hybrid FEM-meshfree methods, including Quad4-MVC, are expected to be insensitive to the mesh distortion. As shown in A disk with an internal radius Four different regular grids are used to investigate the convergence property of Quad4-MVC, as shown in Additionally, the relative errors of Quad4-MVC in the displacement norm and energy norm are compared to those of Quad4 and Quad4-RPIM with different values of parameter As shown in Compared to Quad4 on the same mesh, Quad4-MVC is able to improve accuracy, however, it meanwhile increases computational time because of the increasing of the bandwidth of global stiffness matrix. It is critical to find a right balance between simulation speed and accuracy. The relative errors in energy norm versus the corresponding solution times for both Quad4 and Quad4-MVC are shown in Natural pre-existing fractures are widely observed in rock material, which have significant impact on the mechanical property of rock material. It is difficult to avoid distorted meshes in mesh generation when multiple cracks are considered. In this test, the deformation of a rock with multiple cracks, as shown in This paper presents a novel hybrid ‘FE-Meshfree’ method, which is a development of hybrid ‘FE-Meshfree’ quadrilateral element with radial-polynomial point interpolation (Quad4-RPIM) Even though Quad4-MVC does not have Kronecker-delta property at inner nodes, Quad4-MVC is able to ensure Kronecker-delta property at the nodes on the boundary of computational domain, which allows us to apply correct boundary condition directly. Quad4-MVC is free from the linear dependence problem which is the main drawback of methods based on partition of unity. Compared to four-node iso-parametric element (Quad4), Quad4-MVC presents significantly higher convergence rates and better accuracy. Furthermore, Quad4-MVC seems to be insensitive to mesh distortion. The Quad4-RPIM even becomes worse than Quad4, when the parameters of radial basis functions are not chosen properly. By inheriting advantages of hybrid FE-Meshless elements, Quad4-MVC provides an alternative approach to improve accuracy of FEM without increasing the number of nodes, meanwhile, it increases the bandwidth of the global stiffness matrix and increases the computational time. However, an assessment of computational efficiency (in This study is supported by the