This work deals with testing the possibilities for enriching with cobalt the waste sludge from the production of electrolytic zinc and cadmium. Cobalt is present in zinc concentrates, as accompanying metal, in low concentrations (0.001%–0.005%). During certain stages of hydrometallurgic zinc and cadmium production, cobalt is, however, concentrated up to commercially important values [D. Čižikov, Cadmium, Moskva (1972) 146–165; L. Baimakov, A Žurin, Electrolysis in hydrometallurgy (Moskva) 1977; 210–214, Project Z.6.0448, financed 1991–1992 by Ministry of science and technology of Serbia, Beograd, Annual Report, 1992, 132–137]. In the cadmium production process, which is technologically connected with zinc production, the so called “cobalt purification cake” precipitate presents such a resource of cobalt. This precipitate contains 0.6%–1% Co, 2%–6% Cd, 40%–55% Zn, 0.1%–0.6% Ni, 0.1%–0.7% Cu, 30%–35% H2O, etc. The metals present are leached from the fresh cobalt purification cake by a sulphuric acid solution (150 g/dm3), with strict pH control of the reaction pulp, and as a result of this, a precipitate with a cobalt concentration of 6%–12%, is obtained. Sulphates of the leached metals go back to the process, while precipitate with higher cobalt content (“cobalt concentrate”) can be used for various purposes. Starting from cobalt concentrate, CoO(OH), Co2O3, CoSO4·7H2O and ceramic pigments, etc, have been obtained.The raw material for cadmium production in “Zorka”-Šabac Chemical Works Electrolytic Zinc and Cadmium Plant is a zinc-sulphate solution purification cake from a Zinc-Calcine Leaching Plant. Purification of the zinc sulphate solution is done by zinc powder, whereby the metals that are electrically more positive than zinc fell as cement cake. The average composition of that cake is as follows: Zn=40%-60%, Cu=10%–16%, Cd=2%–10%, Co=0.1%, H A block diagram of cadmium production in “Zorka”-Šabac Chemical Works is shown in Obtaining cadmium from zinc–sulphate purification cake from Zinc-Calcine Leaching Plant consists of a few operations Copper, present in the cake, is not dissolved and is separated by filtration. Cadmium, in sponge form, is precipitated from cadmium solution by zinc powder: The spongy cadmium is leached by sulphuric acid from cadmium hot spent electrolyte: Cadmium sulphate solution is used to prepare cadmium electrolyte from which cathodic cadmium is obtained, while stoichiometric quantity of sulphuric acid remains in the electrolyte: In order to eliminate zinc, cathodic cadmium is treated by adding caustic soda: Cadmium, in contrast to zinc, has small affinity for NaOH Cadmium released from zinc is cast and yields a commercial product. The solution formed after the spongy cadmium precipitation contains cobalt, nickel and other metal cations, and is purified by adding zinc powder: In order to recover zinc, the solution released from cobalt and nickel sponges is included in Zinc Calcine Leaching Plant. The cake that consists of Co, Ni and following metals represents the so-called “cobalt purification cake”. The use of zinc concentrates of various origins and chemical compositions for zinc and cadmium production in Šabac results in variable compositions of the by-products obtained in the process. That is why the raw material for cobalt concentrate production (cobalt purification cake) contains different quantities of cobalt and accompanying metals. The most frequent composition of cobalt purification cake is as follows: Co=0.6%–1%, Cd=2%-6%, Zn=40%–55%, Ni=0.1%–0.6%, Cu=0.1%-0.7%, H According to mass balance studies in two Yugoslav zinc factories, in Šabac and Kosovska Mitrovica, the cobalt purification cake accumulates annually between 5 and 7 t of cobalt which means both are considerably cheap resource of cobalt Because of the high quantity of zinc in the cobalt purification cake, it has a remarkable commercial value, so some zinc producers return that cake in the process through Zinc Concentrate Roasting Plant, by mixing with zinc concentrate. Such a practice is, however, harmful because it leads to copper, cobalt and nickel recycling in the process. Cobalt, besides many other metals, as is already known, shows harmful effect on zinc electrolysis. All these metals (Cu, Co, Ni, Sb, etc.) have to be eliminated carefully from electrolyte solution by zinc powder cementation. According to the abovementioned method of recycling cobalt purification cake in process, it is additionally loaded, in a technological and economical way This paper shows a new method of cobalt recovery from cobalt purification cake where cobalt is extracted from the process through commercially valuable enriched cobalt cake–cobalt concentrate, while considerable parts of zinc and cadmium are returned in the process. The cobalt concentrate chemical treatment can yield many useful products based on cobalt The principle of obtaining cobalt concentrate from cobalt purification cake is based on selective dissolution of accompanying metals from this cake by sulphuric acid, with as little dissolved cobalt as possible. For this reason, fresh cobalt purification cake is used for the cobalt concentrate production in order to prevent cobalt oxidation by air. (Cobalt oxide is much easier to dissolve in sulphuric acid than metal cobalt Sulphuric acid solution in the leaching process reacts with cobalt purification cake. In that process, metals are leached in different ways. In cobalt purification cake metals are sponges, which originate from cementation reaction between corresponding ions and zinc powder The reactions: Which of the metal sponges should be much oxidized (dissolved), additionally depends on leaching process conditions: acidity, duration of leaching, solid-liquid ratio in reaction slurry, temperature, mixing intensity, etc. Zinc and cadmium have the highest contents (40%–50% Zn and 2%–6% Cd) as well as the most negative electrode potentials, respectively (−0.76 V/SHE, and −0.44 V/SHE) in the cobalt purification cake. Because of that, the reaction of sulphuric acid solution with cobalt purification cake could make Zn and Cd most intensively dissolved. At the same time, the reduction of hydrogen ions will take place on the sponge metal surface where the hydrogen overpotential is the least (Cu and Co) According to the above reactions (11–14), it follows that during the leaching process, low acidity and a low temperature should be maintained, as well as achieving an intensive mixing, limiting the process duration and preserving an aeration of the suspension. Generally, the reaction of sulphuric acid with fresh cobalt purification cake, (previously unoxidized), results in remarkable zinc and cadmium dissolution from the cake, followed by less Co dissolution, according to the main idea that cobalt is concentrated in the leaching cake Experimental work under the laboratory conditions is conducted in the following way: sulphuric acid solution is added to the suspension (slurry) of the weighed quantities of the cake and water, without additional heating. During the experiment, pH of the reaction slurry is monitored while the speed of adding acid solution is adjusted so that constant slurry acidity is maintained. The liquid phase then containing sulphates of metals is separated from the solid phase representing cobalt concentrate by filtration. In order to optimize the process, parameters have been varied, such as: duration of air influence upon fresh cobalt purification cake, the cake composition, solid phase content in the initial suspension, experiment duration, temperature, mixing intensity, pH value. These parameters have different influences on the process of metal dissolution from the purification cake. Results of several characteristic laboratory experiments are given in the In experiments shown in According to the Cobalt concentrate consists of all the metals present in cobalt purification cake precipitate. In cobalt concentrate, contents Co, Ni and Cu are remarkable increased, but Zn and Cd contents are mainly unchanged. A much better cobalt concentrate quality (with higher Co content), could be achieved if the raw material with more cobalt content is used. (In order to obtain a Co pigment, starting from the chosen raw material, according to the presented process, Co concentrate with 19% of Co was produced by the industrial method Results of selected laboratory experiments given in –to use fresh (unoxidized) cobalt purification cake, –to prepare reaction slurry with cobalt purification cake: water=1:0.5 –to maintain optimal acidity of reaction slurry, (pH≥3) –not to heat the reaction slurry additionally, –to use 150 g/dm –to limit leaching duration to 4 h. Based on the parameters determined in laboratory tests, an investigation of obtaining cobalt concentrate in Pilot Plant conditions was conducted, whereby all previously established parameters were confirmed. Cobalt concentrate procedure is further adjusted to industrial plant operation, with the application of previously established parameters. At the stage of industrial experiments, a portion of free capacity on the Cadmium Plant was used. Under these conditions, the specific electric energy consumption of cobalt concentrate production is about 70 kWh/t (calculated on the product with 4%–12% Co). Hot spent electrolyte from Zinc Electrowining Plant was successfully used as a medium for selective dissolution of metals. This electrolyte contains about 55 g/dm Based on laboratory studies, Pilot-Plant studies and industrial experiments, the procedure of cobalt recovery from cobalt purification cake is based on selective leaching of metals giving cobalt-enriched cake (cobalt concentrate). Industrial production of cobalt concentrate with cobalt contents ranging from 4% to 12% is possible by employing the described procedure. Economic effects of cobalt extraction from zinc and cadmium hydrometallurgical production process enable reaching optimum technical and economical parameters in zinc and cadmium production, having in mind that the well-known adverse effect of cobalt, nickel and copper on the electrolysis process is avoided; respectively, there are no harmful metals recycling in the process. Most zinc and cadmium contained in cobalt purification cake that would otherwise be lost by being disposed on the waste heap are returned to process in Zinc-Calcine Leaching Plant. Cobalt concentrate may be further processed into other cobalt compounds such CoO(OH), Co