Background
                  High blood glucose has been noted in case reports of acute thallium poisoning, however, effects of low-level exposure of thallium on risk of gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) has not been explored yet.
               
                  Objectives
                  We aimed to explore the association of serum thallium concentration (STC) in early pregnancy and risk of GDM.
               
                  Methods
                  Data of 3013 women from the Ma’anshan birth cohort study (MABC), China was used. STC was measured by inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS). Multivariate logistic regression was performed to the association of STC and risk of GDM. Stratified analysis was carried out according to maternal age and pre-pregnancy BMI.
               
                  Results
                  We documented 383 incident GDM (12.7%). The STC ranged from 0.011 to 0.232 μg/L with a median of 0.062 μg/L. Women with advanced age and higher pre-pregnancy BMI tended to have higher level of STC. Individuals in GDM-group have higher level of STC than that in non-GDM group (P =  0.007). Maternal STC in early pregnancy was associated with risk of GDM, but the association attenuated to non-significance after adjusted for pre-pregnancy BMI. In the advanced age (>30 years) group, STC was significantly associated with risk of GDM in a dose-response manner (P for trend <0.05). Compared with the Quintile 1, the odds ratios (ORs) (95% confidence interval, CI) of Quintile 2, Quintile 3, Quintile 4, and Quintile 5 were 1.48 (0.62–3.53), 2.70 (1.21–6.03), 2.85 (1.29–6.31), 2.30 (1.05–5.05) in the most adjusted model (including pre-pregnancy BMI).
               
                  Conclusions
                  Our study was the first study to demonstrate an association of maternal STC in early pregnancy and risk of GDM, and the association was partly mediated by pre-pregnancy BMI. This association exhibited as an age-dependent manner. Our study highlights even very low-level of thallium exposure could already pose a threat to human’s health.Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) is one of the most common complications during pregnancy. Its short-term [ Pregnant women are vulnerable to environmental toxicants and even low-exposure of metal and/or metalloid could cause harm to both mothers and their fetus [ Several published papers [ We used data from the Ma’anshan birth cohort study (MABC), China involving 3013 women first to reveal status of serum thallium concentration (STC) among pregnant women and second to assess the association of STC in early pregnancy and risk of GDM. The Ma’anshan-Anhui Birth Cohort Study (MABC) is a population-based prospective study aims to investigate the effects of prenatal exposures on adverse pregnant outcomes, child health and development. A total of 3474 pregnant women have been recruited when they came to maternal and child health care centers for their first prenatal visit in Ma’anshan city of Anhui province in China between May 2013 and September 2014. For the current study, eligible participants were the women had both clinical record of 75 g oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) for diagnosis for GDM and data of STC. Women who didn’t take the OGTT, had pre-pregnancy diabetes or had no serum samples in the first trimester were excluded. The flow chart of the excluding process was presented in Approximately at 28 weeks of gestation, these women were screened by a “one-step” standardized 75 g OGTT. Venous blood samples were collected at 0, 1, and 2 h after the glucose load. According to current guidelines from American Diabetes Association (ADA) [ Extensive data were collected using a structured self-report questionnaire supervised by trained interviewers. Detailed data collected included age, race, education, social-economic status, family diabetes history, smoking, alcohol consumption and anthropometric measures. Blood samples were collected in early pregnancy (before 14 weeks) when women visited for routine health-check. Fasting blood were withdrawn in the morning before 10am. Blood sample was rested for 30 min and serum was extracted and stored in metal-free polypropylene (PP) tubes in -80° for future use. STC was measured by inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) using Perkin Elmer NexION 350X ICP-MS instrument (Shelton, CT, USA) along with other 18 serum elements. The recovery rates of these 19 elements ranged from 79.54 to 107.90%. Individuals were randomly assayed and measured in a blinded manner. For quality control, standard substances from Beijing Bohui Innovation Optoelectronic Technology Co.Ltd. (GBW (E) 080,920) and seronorm corporation (Billingstad, Norway) were both determined using our method, which was proven to be reliable. The intra-assay and inter-assay coefficients of variation of serum thallium were both <5%. The recovery rate of thallium was 99.59%. All participants had STC above the detection limit. More detail information on our method can be reached out from our previously published paper [ Age in years was divided into four categories: <25, ≥25 to <30, ≥30 to <35, ≥35, and pre-pregnancy BMI (kg/m    To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study suggested that maternal STC in early pregnancy was associated with risk of GDM, and the association was partly mediated by pre-pregnancy BMI. Interestingly, we found thallium exposure exerts effect on risk of GDM in an age-dependent manner, only among women with advanced age was the STC significantly associated with risk of GDM (in the most adjusted model including pre-pregnancy BMI). Human health effects from thallium at low environmental exposures are unknown. Thallium minerals and mineralization are rare in nature, thus thallium is often not included in the list of metals to be analyzed despite its high toxicity. Because of recent rapid economic development in China, thallium emissions from mineral extraction and processing have been remarkably increasing. Comparing current data between China and other countries, we could see the level of Tl exposure among non-occupation population in China [ Exploring factors which determine an individual’s exposure to thallium is of critical importance. Of those factors, the most extensively studied are socioeconomic status and BMI. Using data from NHANES 2001–2010 [ The underlying mechanism of thallium toxicity remains unclear. The most well-known propose is the interference with the vital potassium-dependent processes [ The strengths and the novelty should be noted. First, our study is the first longitudinal study to reveal an association of higher level of serum thallium in early pregnancy and an increased risk of GDM. Second, the large sample size render us considerable statistical powder to identify effect size of low-level exposure of thallium. Third, age-dependent effect of thallium exposure on risk of GDM revealed in our study might have public significance, cause with China’s universal second-child policy implemented, the number of advanced age pregnant women will largely increase. Several limitations of our study need to be acknowledged. First, we used serum as the detection material, and its stability might be a concern. Thallium disappears from the blood with a half-life of several days, and distributes into other tissues. However, in our case we focused on the harmful effects of long term and low exposure, STC could be an appropriate proxy. Because researchers have already indicated that urinary and blood levels of thallium offer better matrices than hair when identifying people exposed chronically [ In conclusion, our current study demonstrated an association of maternal STC in early pregnancy and risk of GDM, and the association was partly mediated by pre-pregnancy BMI. More importantly, this association exhibited as an age-dependent manner. Our study highlights even very low-level of thallium exposure could already pose a threat to human’s health. Our exploration shed a light on the environmental risk factors related to GDM and shall have critical public significance. None. This work was supported by the