In this paper, a novel technique combining ion-imprinting and direct templating was applied to synthesize Au (III) imprinted epicholorohydrin/thiourea modified porous alginate adsorbent. The adsorbent has demonstrated outstanding selectivity towards Au (III) from multi-metallic solutions, and the porous structure generated from urea hydrolysis has provided fast adsorption kinetics. The maximum uptake capacity of Au (III) is 184.82 mg/g at 323 K, which is outstanding as a recyclable polysaccharide-based adsorbent. Photo-reduction of Au (III) to gold particles was observed in the adsorption process under UV light exposure, while visible light is not capable of stimulating electrons from the synthesized adsorbent. FT-IR, XPS, and DFT calculation have proved that hydroxyl, carboxyl, and NCS functional groups were involved in the adsorption-photoreduction of Au (III).The development of precious metals recovery technology has become attractive because of the growing demand for these precious metals in industrial processes and jewelry markets. Over past decades, due to the gradual depletion of high-grade ore resources and the passage of increasingly stringent environmental legislation, significant proportions of precious metals are obtained through secondary resources, such as electronic wastes and industrial effluents A research area that remains poorly understood is the real-life applications of these adsorbents. These adsorbents were synthesized generally in the form of powders or hydrogels, which have high metal uptake capacities and superior sorption kinetics due to their large specific areas Various attempts have been made to synthesis porous polymers including direct templating, block copolymer self-assembly, and direct synthesis methodologies Surface imprinting has attracted research attention in generating recognition adsorption sites, and has been applied to synthesize metal ion imprinted polymers through metal chelates or complexes Many studies indicate that Au (III) can be reduced to metallic gold by biomass-based adsorbents In this study, a simple and cost-effective pore generation method is applied by templating urea as sacrificial template for porous alginate microspheres. Ion-imprinting of Au (III) is applied in the synthesis to protect the adsorption sites. The synthesized adsorbent has shown fast adsorption kinetics compared to conventional alginate-based hydrogel adsorbent. Moreover, the adsorbent has good uptake capacity and can adsorb Au (III) without reduction under no light illumination, thus it can be completely regenerated, providing potential industrial applications. The FT-IR and XPS spectra indicate that hydroxyl, carboxyl, amino, and Low viscosity sodium alginate, urea, sodium hydroxide, thiourea, epicholorohydrin, hydrochloric acid, ethanol, calcium chloride, and metal chloride salts were purchased from Adamas-beta® (Shanghai Titan Scientific Co.). The deionized water was generated from Water Purifier system in the lab. All compounds were used as received. UA adsorbent was prepared by chemical modification of sodium alginate, followed by cross-linking in calcium chloride solution, and pore generation by urea decomposition. Firstly, 1.71 g thiourea was dissolved into 30 mL of 5% (w/v) sodium hydroxide solution, and 3.56 mL epicholorohydrin was added into the flask. The mixture was kept at 70 °C, shaking for 4 h in an incubator at 200 rpm. Then 4 g sodium alginate was then added to the mixture, and the reaction continued for 7 h under constant shaking Au (III) imprinting was used to protect surface functional groups from urea decomposition process. The procedure remains same as UA beads until the calcium cross-linking. The modified alginate beads were mixed with 2.0 mmol/L Au (III) hydrochloric acid solution at pH 1.0 and kept under shaking at 200 rpm for 12 h. The imprinted beads were soaked in urea ethanol solution for 12 h, followed by urea decomposition in 0.1 mol/L hydrochloric acid at 70 °C for 6 h. The purpose of using hydrochloric acid instead of distilled water is to prevent the formation of gold hydroxide or auric oxide precipitate. The adsorbed Au (III) was eluted by 1% (w/v) thiourea solution in 0.1 mol/L hydrochloric acid. The product was washed by ethanol/distilled water to remove residue chemicals, dried at room temperature and marked as IUA beads. The synthesize procedure for IUA adsorbent is illustrated in The selectivity of adsorbents toward metal ions is highly dependent on the pH values of the metal containing solutions. Therefore, an important factor that affects the surface charge of the adsorbent, the point of zero charge (pH The adsorption was conducted in a black box to evaluate the adsorption behavior of synthesized adsorbent. Adsorption isotherm tests were repeated for three times and experimental errors were recorded. To study the pH effect on the selective adsorption of Au (III) by the synthesized adsorbents, 15.0 mL multi-metallic solutions containing 0.5 mmol/L Au (III), Cu (II), Co (II), Ni (II), Pb (II) with different pH values were prepared and mixed with 20.0 mg UA beads or IUA beads under constant shaking at 150 rpm for 24 h at room temperature. Cu (II) and Pb (II) were selected because they are regularly found in gold ore tailings, and usually exhibit good affinity towards biomass derived materials The concentrations of metal ions were determined by ICP-OES. The amount of adsorption for each metal ion, The separation factor for two metal ions A and B, Adsorption isotherms of Au (III) by IUA beads were carried out at temperatures of 303, 313, and 323 K, respectively. The initial metal concentration varies from 0.25 to 4.0 mmol/L. 15 mL of Au (III) containing solutions were mixed with 20 mg IUA beads under constant shaking at 150 rpm. The equilibrium concentrations were measured by ICP-OES after 24 h. Adsorption kinetics of Au (III) by UA and IUA beads were studied batchwise at 303 K for 24 h. Then 100.0 mL of Au (III) solution with an initial concentration of 0.5, 1.0, 1.5, and 2.0 mmol/L were mixed with 100.0 mg UA or IUA, and the mixtures were shaken at 150 rpm in an incubator. Samples of 5 mL solution were taken at scheduled time interval and the metal concentrations were determined by ICP-OES. Reusability study was conducted by using 0.1 mol/L HCl solution containing 1% thiourea to desorb Au (III) ions on the metal-saturated IUA beads. The regenerated beads were used in the next cycle of adsorption experiments. Based on spin-polarized DFT, all calculations were carried out using DMol3 program module The binding energy ( To evaluate the effect on light on the Au (III) adsorption, UV mercury light and xenon light were set at 500 W and used as the light source, respectively. The adsorption test was conducted by adding 20 mg of IUA adsorbent into 15 mL of 4.0 mmol/L Au (III) solution, and the mixture was stirred at 200 rpm under light exposure for 24 h. The solution were filtered and analyzed by ICP-OES and the adsorbent were characterized by SEM, XPS, and FT-IR. Fourier transform infrared spectra (FT-IR) were recorded by Nicolet 6700 FT-IR spectrometer. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images and elemental energy dispersive X-Ray spectroscopy (EDS) were conducted by the Nova NanoSEM 430 scanning electron microscope system with EDAX Genesis software with a scanning time of 100 s. The concentrations of metal ions were determined by Shimadzu ICP-7510 inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES). For each measurement, 5 mL of solution were sampled by Finnipipette F2 pipette (Thermo Fisher, USA) and filtered before measurement. Calibration curves of 0, 1, 10, 100, and 1000 mg/L are checked to ensure the results lie within the range of calibration. UV–Vis Diffuse reflectance spectra was analyzed by Agilent CARY 300 UV–Visible spectrometer (Agilent, USA). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis of IUA before and after metal uptake was performed on Thermo ESCALAB 250XI X-ray photoelectron spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA).  Characteristic peaks of sodium alginate can be observed are 3000–3600 cm SEM images were taken on the surface of IUA beads and illustrated in From The selective adsorption of Au (III) from multi-metallic solutions was conducted for UA and IUA beads, respectively. Results in The multi-metallic solution in this experiment is highly acidic, in which Au (III) exists as gold chloride anionic complexes (AuCl The ammonia generated in this step can react with carboxyl groups on the alginate matrix, consuming adsorption sites for metal ions. Moreover, according to FT-IR results, UA adsorbent has significant peaks at 2360 and 2340 cm The temperature effect was studied for IUA adsorbent only due to its high metal uptake capacity. The uptake of base metals were negligible, therefore the experiment in this section was conducted in single metal solution and the results were demonstrated in Both Langmuir and Freundlich isotherm models were used to describe the uptake amount of Au (III) and its equilibrium concentrations in aqueous solution and illustrated in The enthalpy, Thermodynamic parameters were listed in The effect of contact time on the adsorption of Au (III) is demonstrated in Both pseudo-first-order and pseudo-second-order rate equations were used to analyze the kinetics results. The integral forms of these two kinetic equations are as follows Mass transfer in sphere would be a crucial factor in adsorption process in such an adsorbent size, therefore the simplified intraparticle diffusion equation proposed from Weber-Morris Model, can be presented as follows: Elovich’s equation, which can describe adsorption processes occurred on the heterogeneous surface, is presented as follows: Least square regression was used to derive the kinetic parameters by MATLAB software and the parameters were listed in   It is reported that alginate-based adsorbents are capable of reducing Au (III) to metallic gold However, in the experiment conducted in the black box we did not observe any gold particles in the equilibrium solution. Therefore we assumed that the illumination on the surface of adsorbent might be the reason for gold reduction. UV mercury light used in this experiment provides optical wavelength of 300, 340, 380, and 420 nm while xenon light provides optical wavelength of 505, 860, and 910 nm. The Au (III) uptake on IUA adsorbent under different illumination conditions were presented in As indicated in SEM images and the corresponding EDS mapping of Au were recorded for IUA adsorbent after adsorption under different illumination conditions and shown in To investigate the reduction mechanism of Au (III) on the surface of IUA adsorbent under UV mercury light exposure, EDS mapping of N, O, S, and Au were recorded on High resolution SEM image on IUA adsorbent after adsorption under UV mercury light exposure was taken, in which spherical gold nanoparticles can be observed as well as triangular and hexagonal gold agglomerates ( UV–Vis DRS results of sodium alginate and IUA adsorbent were recorded in XPS analysis of IUA adsorbent before and after adsorption under different illumination conditions was also employed to identify the interactions between functional groups of IUA and Au (III) ions. High resolution of XPS spectra of N1s, O1s, S2p, and Au4f as well as their deconvoluted fitting curves are demonstrated in The regeneration experiment of IUA adsorbent was conducted and illustrated in A facile alginate-based adsorbent was synthesized by combining ion-imprinting and direct templating method to selectively adsorb Au (III) from mixed metal solutions. Experimental results indicate that the maximum uptake capacity is 184.82 mg/g at 323 K and the IUA adsorbent has shown fast adsorption kinetics as the equilibrium was reached within 6 h due to the involvement of porous structures. The ion-imprinting of Au (III) can protect the sorption sites on the IUA adsorbent, resulting in exceptional uptake capacity as well as high Au (III) separation factors. Both non-linear Langmuir and Freundlich isotherm equations can be used to describe the adsorption isotherm while pseudo-first-order, pseudo-second-order, and Elovich’s equation model fitting have shown good agreement with kinetic experiments. We also discovered that the reduction of Au (III) is highly relevant to illumination conditions. UV mercury light is capable of catalyzing Au (III) to gold particles while the reduction did not occur under xenon light nor no light conditions. IR and XPS analyses reveal that oxygen, nitrogen, and sulfur functional groups were involved in the adsorption process while hydroxyl groups contributed to the Au (III) reduction. DFT calculation further confirmed the interaction of gold chloride complexes with the IUA adsorbent, which supports to elucidate the adsorption mechanism. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was support by