A number of M-Cu-ZSM-5 (M = La, Ni, La-Ni) samples were prepared via an aqueous solution ion-exchange method. The co-doping with Ni and La into a Cu-ZSM-5 catalyst enhanced the NO decomposition activity in a temperature range 350–550 °C. The characterization results indicate that doping with La effectively improved the dispersion of the Cu species forming more Cu2+ ions in the sample, while the effect of Ni is likely to facilitate the implantation of Cu2+ to form (Cu2+-O2–-Cu2+)2+ dimers. The synergistic effect of La and Ni contributes to the increased (Cu2+-O2−-Cu2+)2+ content in the co-doped sample, thus enhancing the NO decomposition activity.The abatement of nitrogen oxide in the exhaust gases, both of mobile and stationary sources, has received extensive research interest, and many technologies were developed such as selective catalytic reduction (SCR), lean NO Ion-exchanged ZSM-5, especially the copper ion-exchanged ZSM-5 (Cu-ZSM-5), has been reported active for NO decomposition in 300–600 °C, whereas the deNO In this work, both La and Ni are used as the promoters to improve the NO decomposition activity of a Cu-ZSM-5 catalyst. The promotion effect of La, Ni on the Cu-ZSM-5 catalyst in NO decomposition reaction will be discussed. Cupric nitrate (Cu(NO The H-ZSM-5 sample was ion-exchanged in ammonia sulfate solution (2.3 mol/L) at 80 °C for 2 h to form NH 1 g of NH The chemical composition of the catalysts was determined with an inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES, VISTA-MPX, Varian). The crystalline structure of the commercial zeolite was checked with a D/max-γ b-type X-ray diffractometer (Rigaku) using monochromatic Cu Kα radiation (at 40 kV and 100 mA), with a scan rate of 2°/min. The X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was performed on a PHI-1600 ESCA SYSTEM spectrometer using Mg Kα as X-ray source (1253.6 eV) under a residual pressure of 5 × 10 N The temperature-programmed desorption (TPD) was carried out in a home-built fixed-bed micro-reactor (10 mm in diameter) equipped with a thermal conductivity detector (TCD). For NO-TPD, 0.2 g of sample was loaded in the reactor and pretreated in He (50 ml/min) at 550 °C for 1 h and then cooled to 50 °C. Subsequently, the sample was exposed to 500 ppm NO/He (500 ml/min) at 50 °C for 1 h. The physical adsorption NO was removed by flushing with He until no NO was detected. Then, the catalyst was heated in He from 50 °C to 550 °C at a rate of 10 °C/min for the NO For the O The reducibility of copper in the catalyst was investigated with temperature-programmed reduction with H The catalysts samples were tested for the decomposition of NO in a fixed-bed reactor (10 mm in diameter) in a steady flow operation. Typically, 0.5 g sample (40–60 mesh) was loaded in the reactor. The sample was preheated in He (20 ml/min) at 500 °C for 2 h. After that, the reaction gas (2 vol.% NO/He) was fed with a flow rate of 20 ml/min (space velocity = 1200 h The TOF (turn over frequency: number of NO molecules converted to N ICP results show that all samples have the almost identical Cu content in As shown in Three desorption peaks were observed in the O The reduction of Cu As illustrated in NO-TPD plots in It is clear that all the NO XPS technique was used to characterize the La and Ni state on the surface. The NO decomposition activity in the space velocity of 1200 h For the samples with Cu loading, the NO conversion was 25% at 350 °C with Cu-ZSM-5, and then increased to 57% at 500 °C. The NO conversion decreased slightly to 55% with further increase of the temperature to 550 °C. The Ni-Cu-ZSM-5 sample shows enhanced NO decomposition performance as compared to that of the Cu-ZSM-5 sample in the temperature range of 350–550 °C. Meanwhile, the single doping of La (La-Cu-ZSM-5) caused slightly decrease of the NO conversion. Finally, La-Ni-Cu-ZSM-5 shows the best activity in 350-550 °C as compared to the Cu-ZSM-5 sample as well as to the single doped catalyst samples, showing 10% higher NO conversion than that in the Cu-ZSM-5 at 500 °C. As shown in the The N The XPS results in The O According to the XPS results in Higher amounts of (Cu Consequently, the doping of Ni may occupy the sites for copper ion-exchange, causing the increase of (Cu In short, La promotes the dispersion of the cupric species, whereas Ni promotes the formation of the (Cu As shown in This contribution shows different effect of La and Ni on Cu-ZSM-5 as structural and chemical promoters. La promotes the dispersion of the cupric species, resulting in high content of Cu This work was supported in part by the Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following is Supplementary data to this article: