The effect of cold-rolling strain on the evolution of microstructure and texture during annealing was studied in an equiatomic CoCrFeMnNi high entropy alloy. For this purpose the alloy was cold-rolled to 60%, 80% and 95% reduction in thickness. The three cold-rolled materials were isochronally annealed for 1h at temperatures ranging between 700°C and 1200 °C. With increasing rolling reduction, the texture transition from pure metal type (<60% reduction) to an alloy type texture (>80% reduction) was observed. The final recrystallized grain size was found to decrease systematically with increasing prior cold-rolling strain. However, the effect was much less pronounced below the annealing temperature of 1200°C due to sluggish diffusion in the HEA. The recrystallization texture of different deformed materials showed the presence of similar texture components indicating that prior deformation had only limited effect on the formation of annealing texture. The typical annealing texture components of low SFE materials, such as {236}<385> or {113}<332> were not the dominant components. The volume fractions of different texture components also did not reveal significant dependence on the annealing temperature. The evolution of annealing texture in the HEA could be adequately explained by the absence of strong preferential nucleation and growth.High entropy alloys (HEAs) are novel multicomponent alloys having five or more elements in equiatomic or near equi-atomic proportion but with simple crystal structures A number of studies on microstructure and properties of HEAs have been carried out using cast alloys It has been shown that recrystallization textures of FCC materials are strongly affected by the deformation textures which in turn are affected by the stacking fault energy (SFE) of the materials Previous investigations have focused on the recrystallization texture of HEA after heavy deformation The equiatomic CoCrFeMnNi alloy used in the present research work was prepared by vacuum arc melting. The as-cast alloy was subjected to a homogenization treatment at 1100 The microstructure and texture of the deformed and annealed specimens were analyzed by electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) system (Oxford instruments, UK) attached to a scanning electron microscope (Carl-Zeiss, Germany; Model: Supra 40) equipped with a field emission gun and operated at 20  The microstructure of the 60% cold-rolled material ( The evolution of texture during deformation is understood from the φ  The evolution of microstructure in the 80% (     The mechanism of recrystallization in low SFE alloys is described by the discontinuous recrystallization process which proceeds through the typical nucleation and growth of recrystallized grains The differences in average grain sizes of the 60%, 80% and 95% cold-rolled materials after annealing at lower temperatures for e.g. after annealing at 700 In contrast, after annealing at high temperatures e.g. 1200 The materials selected for annealing treatments (i.e. 60%, 80% and 95% deformed materials) have different deformation textures, mainly differentiated by the relative strength of the B In spite of the differences in the deformation texture, the main features of the annealing texture i.e. the development of the α-fiber and retention of deformation texture components (e.g. S component) are similar in all the three different cold-rolled and annealed materials. The retention of deformation texture components is possible in two ways. Firstly, in case of prolonged recovery. Secondly, primary or discontinuous recrystallization without any preferential orientation selection. Since discontinuous recrystallization is the primary softening mechanism in the HEA, therefore, the possibility of homogenous extended recovery as a mechanism can be firmly ruled out in case of HEAs. The evolution BR component in brass and conventional low SFE materials is explained by nucleation at shear bands followed by preferential growth. Formation of brass type shear bands and their contribution to texture development has been intensively investigated in different medium to low SFE materials The insignificant variation of different texture components with annealing temperature further indicates quite similar growth rate of different texture components. It may be noted that the preferential growth of texture components, proposed as a mechanism for the evolution of strong recrystallization texture, involves rapid migration of boundaries, which in turn, depends strongly on rapid diffusivity of atoms across the boundaries. As clarified recently, the present HEA shows remarkably sluggish diffusion behavior It may thus be apparent that even though the deformation texture of the three cold-rolled materials are different, the annealing textures consist of similar components are similar. Absence of preferential nucleation (due to more homogenous deformed microstructure) and preferential growth (due to sluggish diffusion in HEA) results in the formation of similar annealing texture components in HEA subjected to different cold-rolling strain. In other words, the prior cold-rolling strain affect the grain size after grain growth but has only limited effect on the formation of texture in the CoCrFeMnNi HEA.  The HEA shows fragmented microstructure and transition of texture from pure metal to brass type texture after 95% cold-rolling. The recrystallized grain size is not affected significantly by prior cold-rolling strain at lower annealing temperature which is attributed to sluggish diffusion in HEAs which restricts grain growth at low annealing temperatures. Remarkable effect of prior strain is observed only after significant grain growth. The recrystallization textures of different cold-rolled materials show the presence of similar texture components. BR or {113}<332 Absence of strong preferential nucleation or preferential growth of texture components in HEA is consistent with the development of characteristic recrystallization texture of the present HEA. The authors acknowledge the financial support of