Introduction
                  Lag screw position is one of the most important controllable factors in trochanteric fracture fixation. However, it is sometimes difficult to handle the lag screw guide pin during intramedullary hip nailing. In this study, causes of guide pin shift and correction of malposition were investigated.
               
                  Methods
                  The movements of guide pins during fracture fixation were traced fluoroscopically using 35 embalmed, mainly anteverted femora, angles were measured in the anteroposterior and lateral planes and necessary corrections calculated.
               
                  Results
                  In the proximal anteverted femur, posterior correction of an inappropriately placed guide pin in the lateral plane led to an inferior shift in the anteroposterior fluoroscopic view, and vice versa. Mean anteversion, α, β, and β′ angles were 13.1° (5–29°), 10.9° (4–18°), 4.6° (0–10°) and 4.4° (0–9°), respectively. The β′ angle was directly proportional to the anteversion angle only, i.e. Y
                     =0.27X
                     +0.65 (R
                     2
                     =0.79), p
                     <0.001.
               
                  Conclusions
                  In the proximal anteverted femur, guide pin shift in the anteroposterior fluoroscopic view occurred during correction of pin position in the lateral plane. The amount of shift was directly related to the amount of anteversion.Trochanteric fracture is a leading cause of morbidity and mortality in the orthopaedic field. Among prognostic factors, only a few such as reduction status, type of implant and surgical technique, are controlled by surgeons. Reported rates of lag screw cut-out among sliding hip screws (SHSs), first-generation intramedullary (IM) hip nails and second-generation IM hip nails have ranged from 1.1 to 8.1%, The purpose of this study was to elucidate the causes of the shift phenomenon and explore its clinical application in facilitating guide pin control. During IM hip nailing, we measured anteversion of the proximal femur before insertion of the nail targetting guide complex, and then inserted the guide pin from the lateral cortex of the femur (insertion point) through the femoral neck and head. We watched AP fluoroscopic images while the guide pin advanced to the femoral head. To correct the inappropriately placed guide pin in the lateral view (too anterior or too posterior), we had to withdraw the pin and rotate the nail targetting guide complex to attempt another trial to match the anteversion. Initially 38 femora were extracted from 19 embalmed cadavers of 8 females and 11 males. In view of previous fracture history and deformity, 3 femora were excluded, leaving a total of 35 femora to be used in this study. The starting point of the ITST nail (intertrochanteric–subtrochanteric nail, Zimmer, Indianapolis, IN, USA) was the tip of the greater trochanter, approximately at the junction of the anterior one third and posterior two thirds of the trochanter. A 3.2-m threaded guide wire was inserted at 10 We advanced the 3.2 The proximal targetting device was then rotated internally or externally by 5–15° so that the second pin could enter the middle third of the femoral head in the lateral view. Since we rotated only the nail targetting guide complex, both pin entry points remained at the same level below the greater trochanter ( After insertion of the two guide pins, the femoral specimens were placed supine on a flat radiolucent table. To maintain a constant position of the specimens during radiographic examination, we drew a frame on the table and placed the femora so that the posterior aspect of the femoral condyles and trochanter were kept in contact with the flat surface of the table. We also installed an image intensifier to obtain constant AP and lateral images without changing the position of the main body of the image intensifier ( Anteversion of the proximal femur was defined and measured as the angle between the line connecting the centres of the femoral head and neck and the line parallel to the flat surface of the table ( We used the intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC) for inter-observer reliability. The relationship between We observed that lateral plane guide pin correction changed the pin position in AP view. In other words, the anterior or posterior (arrow in Our experiment showed three types of shift phenomenon ( Mean anteversion, The shift phenomenon of the guide pin was seen during repeated trials when we followed the trail using a single-image intensifier. This phenomenon occurs because the course of the guide pin is evaluated in two-dimensional images, whereas the guide pin is inserted in a three-dimensional space. In our study, we detected three types of shift phenomenon. The amount of guide pin shift in the AP view induced by correction of the guide pin in the lateral plane was significantly related to femoral anteversion only. Femoral anteversion was responsible for about 80% of this shift phenomenon ( Therefore, in the presence of greater anteversion of the proximal femur (such as in unstable comminuted pertrochanteric and reverse oblique intertrochanteric fractures that require limb external rotation for reduction) How can we apply our study results to improve guide pin control in clinical practice? If first-pin insertion is slightly superior in the AP view and anterior in the lateral view when measured anteversion is 15°, we can imagine that final centre–centre pin placement can be obtained with lateral plane correction only without advancing the nail targetting device complex, because 10° of posterior correction of the guide pin drags (shifts) the pin position inferiorly towards the centre by about 4.4° in the AP view. On the other hand, if pin insertion is slightly superior in the AP view and posterior in the lateral view, anterior pin correction causes superior shift in the AP image, resulting in further superior pin placement (an unacceptable position). In this situation, it is necessary to further advance the nail proximal targetting device complex to set the starting pin level more distally before correction. It is important to place the guide pin and lag screw in the desired position. In general, the centre–centre position In conclusion, we have confirmed that the shift phenomenon of the guide pin observed in the AP view occurs during repeated trials of guide pin placement in the lateral plane, and the amount of shift is predominantly related to the amount of anteversion of the proximal femur. Understanding this phenomenon should facilitate guide pin control in the second trial. This is particularly so for unstable trochanteric fractures, which are usually operated on in external rotation, i.e. a situation similar to a high degree of anteversion of the proximal femur. None.