The deposition of TiCN and ZrCN layers on aluminium by radio frequency and pulsed-DC plasma assisted CVD technique using the metallo-organic compounds of the type tetrakis(diethyl)-amidometal (Me(N(C2H5)2)4) was investigated. The deposition temperature was below 160°C. The chemical composition of the deposited layers depends on the plasma source and on the process parameters, e.g. plasma power. The growth rate is increased by using RF plasma compared to the pulsed-DC plasma. The TiCN layers deposited by pulsed-DC plasma have a hardness of up to 1800 HK0.005 and are harder than the layers produced by RF plasma. The ion bombardment during the layer growth seems decisive for the hardness increase observed.Plasma assisted chemical vapour deposition (PACVD) is a technique which is well known for deposition of wear and corrosion resistant coatings. Using a metallo-organic precursor as the metal donor substance has decisive advantages compared to the halide precursor. A reduction of the deposition temperature down to 100°C is realised which enables the coating of temperature sensitive aluminium alloys. The process offers the coating of parts with complex shapes which is often used in industrial application. The layer property obtained can be controlled by the plasma parameter. The halogen-free precursor leads to a chlorine-free layer which improves the wear and corrosion resistance. Different sources are used for the plasma generation during the coating process. Most important techniques are the pulsed-DC plasma and the radio frequency plasma (RF plasma) generation In this study the coating of aluminium alloys with TiCN and ZrCN layers by the PACVD technique is investigated with metallo-organic precursors using pulsed-DC and RF plasma. The experiments were carried out in two different PACVD reactors using pulsed-DC and RF power supplies ( The layers deposited were analysed by various analytical methods. SEM is used for investigation of topography and morphology of the layers. WDS measurements were carried out for determination of the chemical composition of the layers. The GDOS is used for measurement of depth profiles of the chemical composition. The microstructure was investigated by XRD. The layer thickness is measured by a calotte grinding. A knoop hardness device is used for determination of the microhardness. The deposition of TiCN as well as ZrCN layers on an aluminium alloy were investigated using pulsed-DC and RF plasma. The deposition temperature was below 160°C for all parameter variations. The surface topography of the TiCN and ZrCN layers shows a domed appearance for both plasma sources ( The growth rate of the layers differs evidently between the pulsed-DC and the RF plasma. The growth rate for TiCN layers deposited by an RF plasma is more than twice compared to the layer deposited by pulsed-DC plasma ( The chemical composition of the layers is dependent on the process parameters for both plasma sources. An RF plasma allows a larger variation of the layer composition ( The analysis of the depth profile by glow discharge optical spectroscopy (GDOS) shows that the chemical composition of the layers is homogeneous over the layer thickness. It is found by this analysis that hydrogen is incorporated into the layers. A quantitative analysis of hydrogen content is the aim of further investigations. Similar results are obtained for the microstructure of the layers using the different plasma sources. The TiCN phase is identified by (111), (200), (220) and (311) peaks. The relative intensities of the identified peaks have nearly the same magnitude for both plasma sources indicating that the different plasma source does not influence the microstructure of the layer produced. The microhardness of the TiCN layers measured by a Knoop indentation depends strongly on the plasma excitation ( It can be concluded that the deposition of TiCN and ZrCN coatings by the PACVD technique at temperatures below 160°C is possible by pulsed-DC plasma as well as by RF plasma. Differences are found for the different plasma sources in the parameter range investigated. An optimisation of the properties of the coatings is possible by a parameter optimisation for both plasma sources. In this study TiCN and ZrCN layers are deposited on an aluminium alloy by plasma assisted chemical vapour deposition (PACVD) using pulsed-DC and RF plasma. Metallo-organic precursors are used as a metal source to realise a deposition temperature below 160°C. The results could be summarised as follows: The topography of the layers has a domed appearance. The RF plasma leads to a finer structure. The growth rate is increased by RF plasma by a factor of 2 compared to the pulsed-DC. The chemical composition depends on the process parameters. Layers with a ratio of Ti:C:N — 1:1:1 as well as layers with increased carbon content are deposited depending on the process parameters. The hardness of the TiCN layers deposited by pulsed-DC plasma reaches values of up to 1800 HK0.005, whereas layers deposited by RF plasma are much softer (825 HK0.005). The increased ion bombardment is responsible for the increased hardness using pulsed-DC plasma. The authors thank the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft for the financial support in the project Ge928/1-1.