Lactide-caprolactone copolymers have been synthetized employing two metallic catalysts, Ph3Bi and SnOct2. The analysis of the microstructure by NMR reveals that gradient like copolymers are obtained with SnOct2 catalyst, whereas for Ph3Bi based copolymers the gradient like character is less pronounced. The incorporation of caprolactone reduces the crystallinity degree and the glass transition temperature, leading to a slight increase of the free volume fraction. Thermal properties, free volume fraction and chemical nature of the penetrant are correlated with obtained oxygen and water vapour permeability. It is demonstrated that selecting adequate compositions of lactide-caprolactone copolymers it is possible to broaden the field of biodegradable polymers in packaging applications.Plastic production has increased from 15 MT in 1964 to 348 MT in 2017 and it is expected that it will continue increasing in the next years. According to the European plastics converter demand, packaging is the most important sector (39.9%), followed by building and construction and automotive industry [ Nowadays, the most employed materials in packaging are polyolefins and poly(ethylene terephthalate), which show a good barrier character to gases and vapours and good mechanical performance [ Poly(lactide) has gained considerable interest among biodegradable polymers, because it is biocompatible and can be obtained from renewable resources. These features, besides thermoplastic like processability and high thermal stability makes this material suitable for food packaging. However, its poor mechanical performance in regard to ductility can make it not the most appropriate for this application [ In order to improve its properties different strategies have been identified. One of them is the synthesis of copolymers choosing comonomers such as ε-caprolactone and other macrolactones leading to copolymers behaving ductile or elastomer thermoplastic [ In this work, lactide/caprolactone copolymers have been synthetized by ring opening polymerization employing two catalysts: stannous octoate (SnOct Air and moisture sensitive materials were synthetized and manipulated in an inert gas filled glovebox or on a high vacuum line. The general procedure for the reaction is described below. The copolymerizations for the kinetic analysis were performed at 150 °C and 500:1 monomer:catalyst ratio for 5 h. The reactions were carried out in 0.5 g scale in small glass vials. At adequate times aliquots were withdrawn and analysed by The polymerization and copolymerization large scale reactions (10 g) were carried out at 150 °C for 4 h and at 500:1 monomer:catalyst ratio, following a similar procedure reported by Fernández et al. [ Films of 50–100 μm thick were prepared by casting using chloroform as solvent (5% polymer weight concentration). The solution was poured into a Petri dish and after 24 h at room temperature it was dried in an oven at 70 °C for 5 days under vacuum and 2 more days at room temperature, also under vacuum. 1 mm thick sheets for rheological and free volume measurements were prepared by compression moulding at 190 °C and 100 bar. Proton and carbon nuclear spectra were recorded on a Bruker Avance DPX 300 spectrometer at 300.16 MHz and 75.5 MHz resonance frequency, respectively, employing 5 mm internal diameter tubes and at room temperature (30 °C). For The molar mass of the samples was determined employing size exclusion chromatography (SEC, Thermo Scientific) using a Waters 717 autosampler with a differential refractometer (Waters 2410), a pump (Dionex Ultimate 3000), a refractive index detector (RI, Refracg-to Max 521) and four Phenogel GPC columns (Phnenomenex) with 5 μm particle size and 10 In the case of the measurements performed in chloroform another equipment was employed: Waters 1515 GPC device with two Styragel columns (10 Thermal properties were determined by a differential scanning calorimeter (DSC) from TA Instruments, model Q2000 V24. Samples of approximately 5 mg were encapsulated in aluminium pans. First a scan from −80 to 200 °C at a heating rate of 10 °C min The crystallinity degree of the samples was calculated using the following equation: Thermal degradation was determined by thermal gravimetric analysis employing a TGA Q 500 equipment (TA Instruments). Approximately 3 mg samples were heated from room temperature to 800 °C at a rate of 10 °C min The rheological measurements were carried out employing an ARG2 rheometer (TA Instrument) with parallel plates under nitrogen atmosphere. Continuous shear flow experiments were performed for all the samples at the same temperature gap from the glass transition temperature, but well above their melting peak. Positron lifetime spectra were recorded employing a conventional fast-fast nuclear spectrometer with a time resolution of 230 ps at room temperature. For each sample three spectra with 2 × 10 The obtained spectra were fitted by employing three exponential decays and the longest component was associated with orthopositronium ( Employing PALS another parameter, the so-called relative intensity, Although some authors state in literature that Water vapour transmission rate was determined employing the permeation gravimetric cell. The cell is made of poly(tetrafluoroethylene) and it has two parts: the first one is a small container partially filled with water. The membrane is placed on top of the cell and the other part closes the cell. The water vapour permeates trough the membrane and evaporates into the air. The cell is placed in a Sartorius analytical balance with a readability of 10 Oxygen permeability has been measured employing a Mocon Ox-Tran 2/21 MH model equipment. The measurements were performed at 23 °C, 1 atm and under dry conditions [ The ring opening copolymerization of In  In the case of caprolactone, employing Ph In order to analyse better the differences between both catalysts in Lactide conversion achieves almost 100% after a reaction time of 50 min; after this period of time caprolactone is incorporated to the copolymer chains, forming “gradient” like structures. Therefore, the composition of the chains is richer in lactide at the beginning and richer in caprolactone at the end. The faster consumption of lactide monomer than caprolactone, which leads to the formation of gradient like or multiblock copolymers has been previously reported in literature [ The study of the chain microstructure of the copolymers over the whole reaction time sheds light on the evolution of the chain microstructure. To gain further insight into the chain microstructure of the copolymers, the average sequence lengths of LA and CL units have been calculated employing the following equations [ Another important parameter to characterize the chain microstructure of the copolymer is the randomness character, In literature there are some works determining the reactivity ratio of this set of comonomers, although other catalysts and/or simple methods such as Kelen-Tudos and Mayo-Lewis methods have been employed [  The reactivity ratios of each monomer employing different catalysts are shown in Overall, the copolymers obtained with Ph After studying the synthesis of copolymers employing different catalysts, they were prepared at larger scale, selecting for that the adequate conditions and fed composition. Three copolymers were prepared with Ph 93 LA 7 CL SnOct The molar mass was determined by Size Exclusion Chromatography and the data obtained are shown in Since the glass transition temperature and the crystallinity degree play a crucial role on the transport properties, thermal properties were analysed. The glass transition temperature has been analysed in the second DSC heating scan. All the samples show a broad glass transition temperature. Thermograms are shown in Supporting Information In all the cases a single glass transition temperature is observed. Taking into account that the copolymers show a gradient like structure two glass transition temperatures could be expected: one corresponding to the lactide segments and another one corresponding to the caprolactone segments. Although gradient like copolymers are obtained they are indeed rich in lactide, thus, even though caprolactone segments formed at the end of the polymerization should be larger than the average sequence lengths (1.1–1.7), it was not possible to detect the glass transition temperature corresponding to caprolactone segments. The decrease of the The glass transition temperature has been theoretically calculated employing the additive rule: Fox model [ The results obtained by the additive rule and the Fox model are depicted in In The crystallinity of the samples was determined from the first DSC heating scans, see The melting temperature of the copolymers can be predicted employing the following equation:  Noteworthy, the prediction of the glass transition temperature and melting temperature of the copolymers obtained with Ph As mentioned previously the characterization of the crystallinity is of great importance since the crystalline regions are considered impermeable to gas and vapours. Actually, in these regions the penetrants can not solubilize and, in addition they create a tortuous pathway decreasing the diffusion coefficient and the overall permeability. The crystallinity degree of PLLA is 34% and this value is decreased with the incorporation of caprolactone: crystallinity degrees of 21%, 10% and 11% are obtained for copolymers containing 4%, 17% and 27% of caprolactone, respectively. Considering the effect of the composition of the copolymer, the incorporation of caprolactone hinders the crystallization of lactide segments giving rise to values of 22%, 12% and 15% for the copolymers containing 4%, 17% and 27% of CL, respectively. The copolymer with the lowest content on caprolactone shows a high crystallinity degree since the glass transition temperature is lower and this could enhance the crystallization ability of the polymer. Regarding the copolymer obtained with the SnOct Furthermore, the rigid amorphous fraction of the samples has been estimated. For that, the specific heat change, The thermal stability during processing is of great importance taking into account that usually film blown extrusion is employed to obtain the films to be used for packaging applications. As shown in Considering that the studied copolymers have potential applications in packaging, it becomes necessary to determine the rheological properties that affect to the processing of the material. For that purpose, the rheological behaviour of PLLA and different copolymers has been studied under continuous shear flow. The obtained results are presented in As mentioned in the characterization section, the molar mass of the copolymers is reduced as the amount of CL is increased, except in the case of 93 LA 7 CL SnOct With the aim of separating the effect of the molar mass from the contribution of the amount of CL and microstructure, the viscosity of the copolymers has been theoretically calculated employing molecular characteristic parameters of both LA and CL monomers. For that purpose an analysis of the polymer chain entanglements is carried out. The entanglements plateau modulus is calculated employing two different equations, one derived from the theory of rubber elasticity and the other based on the chemical structure of the monomer, as it is explained in the following lines. When the theory of the entropic elasticity of crosslinked rubbers is considered, the following expression is obtained for the entanglement plateau modulus [ On the other hand, the study of a significant number of polymers by Fetters [ Combining both equations and the following values [ Above the critical molar mass for entanglements the Newtonian viscosity can be expressed in terms of the entanglements density To calculate the viscosity corresponding to each copolymer, the characteristic parameters of the copolymers are first calculated, assuming a linear variation with the amount of PCL. For that, the following values for PCL are considered [ Using the characteristic parameters, the corresponding entanglements moduli are obtained (Equation The experimental values of the viscosity of As it has been mentioned previously, in order to separate the effect of CL comonomer from the effect of the molar mass, the viscosity of the copolymers has been calculated considering the same molar mass as PLLA homopolymer. The values are shown in The importance of the free volume fraction on transport properties has been extensively reported in the literature [  Poly(lactide) shows the highest The relative intensity, The apparent fractional free volume, Other polyesters show a similar behaviour, for example in PBAT/PH blends [ These results indicate that the incorporation of caprolactone does not increase significantly the free volume fraction, which will be reflected in the permeability results shown below. Oxygen permeability has been measured for PLLA and LA-CL copolymers since oxygen can provoke physical and chemical changes deteriorating food [ The characterization of water vapour is of great importance since water can cause chemical and physical changes deteriorating food [ Neat PLLA shows a value of 4.9 g mm m Taking into account that the incorporation of caprolactone decreases the glass transition temperature as well as the crystallinity degree of copolymers and that PCL shows a higher water vapour transmission rate than PLLA, it would be expected that copolymers would show a higher permeability than neat PLLA. However, this is not the observed trend and permeability values are lower than the values obtained theoretically from additive rule. The different behaviour observed for water vapour compared to oxygen can be attributed to the nature of water: it can interact strongly through hydrogen bonds and dipole-dipole interactions, whereas oxygen can form only weak van der Waals interactions. Furthermore, water molecules tend to form clusters which decrease the diffusion coefficient and therefore the overall permeability. In fact clustering phenomena in PLLA has been reported before [ As compared to other commercial biodegradable polymers, these copolymers present a better barrier character than neat poly(caprolactone). The oxygen permeability of the copolymers is slightly higher than that of neat PLLA [ Overall, lactide-caprolactone copolymers present an interesting strategy to broaden the use of biodegradable materials in packaging. The ring opening copolymerization of lactide and caprolactone can be performed easily and the adequate selection of the composition allows obtaining materials with convenient thermal and barrier properties. Thus, depending on the application the most adequate composition can be selected.  It has been observed that SnOct The characterization of the physical properties of the copolymers shows that the incorporation of small amounts of caprolactone reduces considerably the glass transition temperature, the melting temperature and the crystallinity degree. Regarding the barrier character, in the case of oxygen permeability, the addition of CL increases gradually the permeability showing moderate values. On the other hand, water vapour transmission rate shows the opposite behaviour: the permeability is decreased with the content of CL for copolymers containing up to 17% CL. These results indicate that, in this case, the interactions between water and polymer play a more relevant role than the free volume and thermal properties. Overall, by selecting the adequate composition and catalyst it is possible to obtain materials  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors are grateful to the financial support from the The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at