A prediction model based on the principal component analysis (PCA) and back propagation (BP) neural network is proposed for BOF end-point phosphorus content, based on the characters of BOF metallurgical process and production data. PCA is used to reduce dimensionality of the factors influencing end-point phosphorus content, and eliminate the correlations among the factors, and then the obtained principal components are used as BP neural network input vectors. The combined PCA-BP neural network model is trained and tested by history data, and is further compared with multiple linear regression (MLR) model and BP neural network model. The results of the comparison show that the PCA-BP neural network model has the highest prediction accuracy and PCA improved the generalization capability. Finally, online prediction system of BOF end-point phosphorus content based on PCA and BP neural network is developed and applied in actual productive process. Field application results indicate that the hit rate of end-point phosphorus content is 96.67%, 93.33% and 86.67% respectively when prediction errors are within ±0.007%, ±0.005% and ±0.004%. The combined PCA-BP neural network model has achieved the effective prediction for end-point phosphorus content, and provided a good reference for end-point control and judgment of quick direct tapping of BOF.BOF (Basic Oxygen Furnace) steelmaking is a complicated physical and chemical change process with high temperature, which is in virtue of top blowing oxygen on hot metal pool to achieve the aims of decarburization, increasing temperature and changing components of liquid steel. Its ultimate goal is to obtain qualified molten steel temperature and composition. With the increase of user demand for low and ultra-low phosphorus steels, many steel plants at home and abroad have used high-efficient dephosphorization technology in converter [ At present, there are mainly two methods for controlling end-point phosphorus content in BOF. One is to directly measure end-point phosphorus content through converter sample, which needs long time analysis, and more importantly, the delay of data feedback affects production efficiency of converter. Sometimes, to meet the requirement of the steel grade for end-point phosphorus content, excessive dephosphorizing flux is simply charged in BOF, which increases the steelmaking cost. The other one is to predict end-point phosphorus content by mathematical model and intelligent model actively. Mathematical model is very important for prediction of end-point phosphorus content in BOF [ The intelligent models mentioned above have achieved higher prediction accuracy. However, there are too many influence factors for end-point phosphorus content in BOF and strong correlation between them. If the influence factors are used as input vectors of neural network directly, the network structure of prediction model will be very complicated, and its generalization ability will also become poor. In this study, to further improve prediction accuracy, a prediction model based on PCA and BP neural network is proposed for end-point phosphorus content in BOF. PCA is used to reduce dimension of the factors influencing end-point phosphorus content, and eliminate the correlation among the factors, and then the obtained principal components are used as input vectors of BP neural network. And the authors carried out some experiments of comparison with the combined PCA-BP neural network model, multiple linear regression (MLR) model and BP neural network model based on actual production data. Finally, online prediction system of end-point phosphorus content in BOF based on PCA-BP neural network model is developed and applied in actual productive process. Principal component analysis is a technique of data dimension reduction. It replaces a large number of original interrelated variables by a smaller number of uncorrelated principal components (namely derived variables), while retaining as much as possible of internal information present in data set of original variables [ Suppose that a data set has n samples, and each sample is denoted by p-dimensional variable, namely In order to eliminate the influence of different dimension, it is necessary to standardize the original variable, and do the transformation as formula Obtained standardized matrix is as follows. Then calculate the correlation coefficient matrix Calculate the eigenvalues of matrix Calculate contribution rate and cumulative contribution rate of principal components, and then extract m principal components according to cumulative contribution rate. Generally take the 1th, 2th, …, Calculate principal component loads and principal components. The load of original variable The m principal components of original samples are as follows: BP neural network is a kind of typical multilayer feed-forward neural network with the ability of approximating any continuous function and nonlinear mapping. Its topological structure includes input layer, hidden layer and output layer. Each neuron between adjacent layers is fully connected, but the neurons in the same layer have no connections. The principle of BP neural network is that the network studies and adjusts the connecting weight and threshold value among neurons according to the input and output of given samples, in order to make network approach the mapping relationship between the input and output. The training process is essentially information positive transmission and error back propagation [ Selection of model input and output variables is very important, which affects directly the prediction accuracy of prediction model of BOF end-point phosphorus content. For prediction model of BOF end-point phosphorus content, the output variable is BOF end-point phosphorus content and the input variables are determined by influence factors of BOF end-point phosphorus content. The study is carried out in the oxygen steelmaking converter with the sublance system in H steel plant in China. Based on metallurgical theory and actual production practice, for the whole steelmaking process from the raw material charging to the end-point of blowing, BOF end-point phosphorus content is determined by the 18 factors: scrap weight (such as steel skull, heavy scrap, medium scrap and pig iron), hot metal weight, hot metal [Si] content, hot metal [S] content, hot metal [P] content, hot metal [Mn] content, hot metal temperature, lime weight, dolomite weight, sinter weight, briquette weight (namely ash pressure ball), iron ore weight, TSC temperature, TSC [C] content, TSO temperature (namely BOF end-point temperature), TSO [C] content (namely BOF end-point carbon content), TSO [O] content (namely BOF end-point oxygen content), and total oxygen consumption. Descriptive statistics of these factors are obtained by actual production data, as shown in Meanwhile, correlation analysis of the 18 factors and BOF end-point phosphorus content has been carried out by SPSS statistical software, and the obtained correlation coefficients are shown in As can be seen from In this study, a large amount of actual production from the 260-ton converter in the H steel plant are collected and preprocessed. And then 1978 heats are obtained. Based on the actual production data, PCA is carried out for the 18 influence factors of BOF end-point phosphorus content. According to cumulative contribution rate of principal components, 7 principal components are obtained, as shown in formulas MLR is a multivariate statistical technology and has been used for model prediction early. In this study, based on the historical production data of 1978 heats mentioned before, MLR model is firstly established for prediction of BOF end-point phosphorus content. The obtained data set is divided into training set and test set. The data from 1600 heats are used as training set and the data from other 378 heats are used as test set. It is implemented on the SPSS software. The optimization algorithm is LM method. The maximum iteration is set to 1000. Based on the regression analysis of BOF end-point phosphorus content and its influence factors with the 1600 heats data, the MLR model are obtained, as shown in formula As illustrated in  Similar to the MLR model, the BP neural network model is used to predict BOF end-point phosphorus content. This model is designed as follows: three-layer BP neural network is adopted, and the transfer function in the hidden layer is sigmoid tangent function, and the transfer function in the output layer is linear transfer function, and the LM optimization algorithm is used for training the network. Through the analysis of Section As illustrated in  Similar to the BP neural network model, the same 1600 heats data are used to train the combined PCA-BP neural network model, and the same 378 heats data were used to test the model. Compared with the above BP neural network, the input variables of the BP neural network with PCA are the 7 principal components from the analysis of Section Meanwhile, the comparison of predicted values and actual values of end-point phosphorus content is illustrated in After the optimal neural network structure of PCA-BP model is determined, the weights and thresholds of the network are saved and used to on-line computation. Then online monitoring system for prediction of end-point phosphorus content in BOF is developed by Java language, as shown in The system is applied in the converters of H steel plant in China. 60 heats are tracked continuously and prediction results of end-point phosphorus content are shown in Given actual control requirements of BOF steelmaking process, a prediction model based on PCA and BP neural network is proposed for BOF end-point phosphorus content. Firstly, PCA is used to reduce dimension to 7 principal components for the factors influencing end-point phosphorus content, and eliminate the correlation between the factors. Then, the 7 principal components are seen as input vector of the BP neural network, and the end-point phosphorus content is seen as output vector of the neural network, and BP neural network model with 7 × 15 × 1 structure is established. Finally, an online prediction system based on PCA and BP neural network model is developed for the control of BOF end-point phosphorus content, and the system has been applied in actual productive process. The following are main conclusions drawn from this study. By analyzing the factors which affect end-point phosphorus content in BOF steelmaking process, a MLR model and pure BP neural network model for prediction of end-point phosphorus content are established respectively based on a large number of production data. The simulation experimental results show that predictive errors of a few heats for the two models are large and can’t meet the requirements of actual production. The PCA not only simplifies the structure of BP network, but also improves the network generalization ability. The simulation experimental results show that the hit ratios of end-point phosphorus content in the PCA-BP neural network model are higher than that in the MLR model and BP neural network model, when prediction errors are within ±0.007%, ±0.005% and ±0.004%. And the correlation coefficient between the actual value and predicted value of the PCA-BP model is 0.7911, while the MLR model and BP model are 0.5308 and 0.6199, respectively. Therefore, the PCA-BP neural network model could provide the most accurate prediction of the end-point phosphorus content among the three models. On the 60 heats of field application, the hit rate of end-point phosphorus content is respectively 96.67%, 93.33% and 86.67% when prediction errors are within ±0.007%, ±0.005% and ±0.004%. It also proves that in actual application the combined PCA-BP neural network model could achieve accurate prediction for BOF end-point phosphorus content and provide a good reference for judgment of quick direct tapping of BOF. The authors are grateful to the financial support for this project from the