Tibial plateau fractures can be a difficult to manage for even the most skilled orthopaedic surgeons. The soft tissue envelope and degree of comminution, in conjunction with the complex anatomy of the proximal tibia, pose challenges to obtaining and maintaining reduction, and in turn, to good functional outcomes. In this chapter, we will discuss how to tackle the numerous obstacles one may encounter when surgically treating these fractures and provide tips on how to achieve the best possible outcomes.Tibial plateau fractures make up approximately 1%-2% of all adult fractures. The first consideration a surgeon should have for the management of tibial plateau fractures is to understand the normal anatomy of the proximal tibia and the common patterns of injury. The tibial plateau is divided into medial and lateral parts. The medial plateau is concave in shape and much larger in surface area than the convex lateral plateau. The mechanical axis of the lower limb dictates that the proximal tibia is, on average, in 3° of varus. As a result of these anatomical differences, the lateral plateau appears higher than the medial on an anteroposterior (AP) x-ray. The normal posterior slope of the proximal tibia is between 7° and 9°. It is important to take into consideration that these are average values. Particularly in the more complex fracture patterns where displacement makes normal parameters difficult to gauge. The normal alignment and slope for each individual patient can be considered by comparing to their uninjured contralateral limb if possible. The most important factor when determining the appropriate management of proximal tibia fractures is arguably the state of the surrounding soft tissue envelope. As many of these injuries are associated with high-energy mechanisms, there is also a significant rate of soft tissue injuries including severe swelling, fracture blisters, open injuries, compartment syndrome, and neurovascular compromise. Failure to recognize these can lead to devastating outcomes. Careful inspection of skin and soft tissue envelope is a key step in the initial treatment of these fractures. Compartment syndrome is a surgical emergency and should be treated as such. Certain fracture patterns are particularly associated with the risk of compartment syndrome, such as Schatzker VI injuries and posteromedial plateau fractures where the knee has effectively subluxed or dislocated with the medial tibia. Any open fracture should be treated with standard protocols for compound fractures with adequate debridement and early administration of antibiotics, both of which are vital to prevent infections and provide the optimal setting for healing. Care should be taken to incorporate the traumatic wound in the incision, while extending in the needed directions for adequate exposure for definitive fixation. Depending on the level of contamination and state of the soft tissues, definitive fixation or provisional external fixation can be done at the time of initial debridement. Consider early involvement of plastic surgery colleagues if soft tissue coverage is needed as studies have shown a decrease in deep infection rates with early soft tissue coverage. In closed injuries with significant soft tissue compromise, a staged protocol is recommended to decrease rates of infection and wound complication. Occasionally, the soft tissue injury is so severe that standard open reduction techniques place the patient at an unacceptably high risk of infection or would complication. In such cases, alternative definitive fixation options should be considered. Circular thin wire frames and hybrid external fixators have been used with success in terms of both healing and functional outcomes. The primary goals when treating proximal tibial fractures are to obtain and maintain a stable knee joint and to re-establish anatomical alignment. Over-distraction of the knee joint with application of a varus force can initially be used when performing the submeniscal arthrotomy for easier access to intra-articular pathology and improved visualization of the articular surface. If a meniscal tear is noted, we recommend outside-in horizontal mattress sutures through the capsule. We prefer to tie these at the time of closure as they can be used as traction sutures to improve visualization throughout reduction and fixation. Restoration of the articular surface can be obtained through a number of techniques. In pure depression fractures, a bone window can be created distally in the metaphysis with a 3.5mm drill bit. Bone tamps can then be inserted through this window to tamp the depressed fragments backup to their appropriate position. This should be done in a controlled manner to prevent dislodging fragments or iatrogenic entry of the tamp through the intact articular surface. Curved tamps are preferred in this setting as the articular fragments can be elevated in a mushroom- or umbrella-like fashion. Reduction can be judged by direct visualization through the submeniscal arthrotomy, as well as fluoroscopic imaging on a plateau view. We would advocate the use of submeniscal arthrotomy as fluoroscopic imaging alone often underestimates the degree of articular depression. If a split fracture is present, the split can be booked open and used as a window to address the remainder of the articular fragments. A small laminar spreader is a useful instrument for this purpose. In this setting, we prefer to use osteotomes to elevate the articular fragments. The articular surface should be elevated with a large portion of subchondral and metaphyseal bone supporting it to allow for adequate screw fixation. In osteoporotic bone, hinging the osteotome can often cause further collapse of the distal bone. In this case, we find it useful to use a stacked-osteotome technique (see Kirschner wires are also a powerful tool for both obtaining and maintaining reduction of articular fragments. Partially threaded wires can be placed into individual fragments and used as joysticks, and fragments manipulated into their anatomical location. Often times, 1 k-wire can be placed to manipulate the fragments, and a second wire can be used to provisionally fix the fragment to intact bone. Long, smooth k-wires can also be used to hold the reduction of articular fragments. By advancing these wires across the plateau and exiting the medial skin, the blunt end can be brought flush with the end of the fragment. This is particularly useful for central fragments, to which additional fragments may be fixed. Alternatively, k-wires can be cut flush with the fragment with plans to retain the wire in the final construct. In bicondylar patterns, early application of a medial plate can assist in reduction, while also providing additional stability. The orientation of the plate, whether medial or posteromedial, should be determined by the fracture pattern and desired function of the plate. A plate placed more posteriorly can buttress a posteromedial fragment, while a plate positioned slightly more medially, while still acting as a buttress, can also prevent medial translation of the articular surface. In some instances both may be required. Additionally, a periarticular clamp can be positioned through a screw hole and allow for increased compression without penetrating the medial cortex. It may be useful to only place provisional Kirschner wires or short screws at this stage so that they do not prevent reduction of the lateral plateau, or interfere with future transcondylar screws. The order of stabilization of the medial and lateral plateaus is based on their complexity. The simpler side should be addressed first, and used as a template to adequately restore the more complex articular portion. This method in essence turns an Orthopaedic Trauma Association (OTA) C type fracture into a B type fracture, allowing you to fix the more complex side last to an “intact” column. After adequate elevation and reduction of the articular surface, fragments can be held in place with k-wires or subchondral rafting screws. Take caution to place these proximal to where the planned plate(s) will be positioned to prevent later interference. Unicondylar fracture patterns generally can be managed with a single buttress plate; however, bicondylar fractures require more scrutiny and at times more robust fixation. Careful evaluation of a preoperative computed tomography (CT) scan is vital in planning fixation. The position, size, and number of plates will be dictated by the specific pattern of any given fracture. Precontoured lateral plates are frequently used to re-establish the anatomical alignment of the lateral column. 3.5mm implants often provide adequate fixation; however, 4.5mm implants can be considered for fractures with significant diaphyseal involvement. The plate should be positioned proximal enough to allow for adequate fixation into the articular segment, and distal enough to prevent intra-articular screw trajectory. The sagittal position is more dependent on the articular fragment configuration, best seen on the axial CT cuts. If separate posterolateral fragments exist, positioning the plate slightly more posterior can aid in your ability to capture those fragments in the construct (see A medial buttress plate can be added to the construct in bicondylar fractures. This plate can be positioned posteromedially or along the medial face of the tibia, as the fracture necessitates. The presence of a separate posteromedial fragment frequently requires independent fixation with a buttress plate, as studies have shown increased failure rates if this fragment is not addressed. Several locking and nonlocking implants exist on the market, and either can be used successfully. Nonlocking implants cost less and can be used in conjunction with lag screws to compress the articular surface and provide absolute stability. We recommend use of nonlocking constructs when possible. Locking plates are more expensive, however, have been shown to be beneficial in osteoporotic bone and short metaphyseal segments. To prevent subsidence, bone graft, or graft substitutes, may also be used. Options include autologous bone graft, structural (see article on use of fibular graft) or cancellous allograft, or synthetic substitutes (calcium phosphate and calcium sulfate). Calcium phosphate has been shown to have a greater compressive strength when compared to cancellous bone graft The posterolateral corner is difficult to access using standard approaches to the knee and may require a different approach (see article on posterior approaches). Stacked osteotomes can be used for the reduction; however, it is important that the osteotomes are positioned far enough posterior to elevate the desired fragment. This should be done prior to reducing the anterior fragments, working from posterior to anterior. If large enough, positioning the lateral plate more posterior than usual may aid in capturing the fragment. Others have described a technique of an anteromedial to posterolateral screw. Independent tibial tubercle fragments have been seen in bicondylar tibial plateau fractures in approximately 20% of cases. Isolated tibial eminence fractures rarely seen in adults, but are not uncommon in the pediatric population; however, there is little information regarding treatment algorithms when associated with a tibial plateau fracture. Theses fractures pose a challenge, as they suggest anterior instability given the disruption in the function of the ACL. Often times, this individual fracture pattern is ignored, with no fragment specific fixation. However, it has been shown that the presence of a tibial eminence fracture is predictive of worse range of motion and functional scores. This fracture pattern is sometimes referred to as a Moore type 1 fracture Closure should be done in a layered fashion after irrigation of the surgical bed and adequate hemostasis has been obtained. To reduce the risk of postoperative hematoma and swelling, the tourniquet (if utilized) should be deflated and meticulous hemostasis achieved, prior to wound closure. Given the risk of compartment syndrome, it is our preference to perform a prophylactic fasciotomy of the anterior compartment prior to closure. To do this, we first close the prior fascial incision of the anterior compartment. A separate fasciotomy incision is then made into the fascia approximately 1.5-2cm lateral to the prior incision and carried distally with the use of metzenbaum scissors ( Postoperatively, a period of protected weight bearing is recommended to allow for healing of the fracture without subsidence. It is our practice to allow for 20 lbs of weight bearing, for easier mobilization. Early mobilization is also vital in restoring a functional range of motion and preventing knee contractures. There is also some evidence to support increase chondrocyte survival with gentle compressive loading as seen in range of motion exercises. It is our practice to allow free range of motion in a hinged knee brace, starting on postoperative day 1. The use of continuous passive motion devices is controversial. One study has demonstrated improved motion with the use of continuous passive motion in the early postoperative phase, but there were no long-term differences.