Zinc electrowinning is extremely sensitive to the presence of organic impurities in the electrolyte. In recent hydrometallurgical processes for zinc, where solvent extraction is employed for the purification of the leach liquor, it is essential to ensure that all trace organics are removed to levels of <1 ppm from the advance electrolyte.
                  This work compares the performance of activated carbon and CoMatrix filtration systems for the removal of organic entrainment (OE) from a zinc electrolyte. The CoMatrix pilot unit comprised a matrix packing in series with an anthracite/garnet dual media filtration system. The performance in the primary loading (lead) position of the CoMatrix combination was compared with a stand-alone carbon column. The performance of the CoMatrix system in series with a secondary (lag) carbon column was also assessed.
                  The organic-removal efficiency was dependent on the flowrate of electrolyte through the column for both CoMatrix and carbon in primary mode. The matrix packing alone provided very consistent organic removal to a concentration of 10 ppm, irrespective of the OE concentration of the feed solution, thereby acting as a reliable surge protector against periodic organic spikes in the system. The dual media performance was erratic, characterised by frequent breakthrough of the organic phase at all flowrates tested, and this packing contributed little to the overall organic removal.
                  In primary duty, a single carbon column was more reliable and produced better organic removal than the CoMatrix combination under appropriate operating conditions. The carbon column also demonstrated better ability to filter suspended solids from the electrolyte. The carbon column in secondary mode showed excellent lifetime, and the target output of <1 ppm OE was consistently produced under appropriate operating conditions.
                  It was concluded that the most suitable configuration for organic removal in this application was a matrix packing alone (acting as a surge protector), followed by activated carbon columns in both primary and secondary (lead and lag) positions.Some modern zinc hydrometallurgical processes purify the leach liquor by solvent extraction (SX), following which zinc is electrowon to produce special high grade (SHG) (> Several strategies, usually deployed in series, may be used to reduce the organic content of the AE leaving the SX circuit. The electrolyte typically reports to an after-settler, which allows additional settling time for phase separation. This could then be followed by flotation cells, coalescers, or both. For the final polishing stage, two options are available. Activated carbon is conventionally employed, both for its surface-active properties to remove dissolved organic material and as a coalescing agent to facilitate the removal of entrained organic material. An alternative is the so-called CoMatrix™ system, developed by Spintek Filtration, USA, for use in the copper industry. At Skorpion Zinc, Namibia, the zinc AE originates from an SX circuit. A pilot-plant trial was carried out to compare the organic-removal efficiency from this electrolyte and assess the general performance of activated carbon and CoMatrix filtration systems in various filtration configurations. Critical operating parameters were evaluated and an optimised configuration for this particular application identified. The objective of the trial was to achieve a residual organic content from the secondary column of less than 1 ppm at a linear flowrate of the feed through the column of 12 m/h. The SX organic phase comprised 40 vol.% D2EHPA (di(2-ethylhexyl)phosphoric acid) in Escaid 100 (a partially aromatic kerosene diluent). Organic phase can be carried over to the EW circuit by two main mechanisms. Organic can also be carried over to the EW circuit by chemical means. Both the extractant and diluent have finite solubilities in the aqueous phase. These are dependent on the acidity, temperature, and ionic strength of the electrolyte, as well as on the nature of the organics themselves. This chemical carryover of organic phase is referred to as The analytical technique employed in this study measures the total organic component of the aqueous phase, however, the DO component was demonstrated to be below the detection limit. The organic contamination in the electrolyte is therefore reported as OE values. A measurement of 1 ppm OE refers to one part per million of the organic phase as defined above (40 vol.% D2EHPA in Escaid 100). Although the different physical and chemical properties of the individual components of the organic phase imply that they will be transferred at differing rates through the circuit, for the purposes of this study, it was assumed that the organic phase is transferred without preferential loss or enhancement of one phase over the other. Quantification of the differential behaviour of the components of the organic phase is beyond the scope of this study. CoMatrix filtration is a concept developed by SpinTek Filtration ( CoMatrix packings have been used in several applications for organic removal ahead of electrowinning in the copper industry. Advantages claimed for their performance relative to carbon include ( Capability to process up to five times higher flowrates; Up to 65% reduction in cost as well as lower installation cost. Up to 70% reduction in volume of backwash liquor required; Solids' removal to less than 10 μm; Organic removal to less than 2 ppm. Activated carbon is widely used throughout the water-treatment industry for the removal of organic material from aqueous streams. Activated carbon can have surface areas up to 100 m The pilot trial was carried out on site at Skorpion Zinc, Namibia, over a period of 5 weeks. The pilot plant comprised four 0.3-m diameter columns, labelled as G, H, I, and J. A schematic arrangement of the flow configuration is shown in The AE feed to the pilot plant (typically comprising 100 g/l Zn and 110 g/l H Samples were collected from sampling ports into glass reagent bottles for analysis. The samples were analysed for OE content using a Horiba oil analyser, model OCA 310. Although laborious, this is the only routine analytical method capable of attaining the low detection limits required for this application (0.1 ppm OE). In this method, the electrolyte sample (approximately 1000 ml) was contacted by manual shaking for 3 min with a measured volume of a high-purity fluorochlorinated hydrocarbon solvent known as S-316. The entrained organic partitions from the aqueous phase into the freon phase, which is then separated off for analysis. The analytical method is based on the infrared detection of C–H bonds present in the entrained organic phase. The instruments were calibrated daily using standards of zero and 120 ppm organic (40% D2EHPA in Escaid 100), and checked every ten samples using a 20 ppm control standard. Although physical entrainment is the predominant cause of organic material reporting to the electrolyte, a small component is carried across by chemical means. Organic solubility is retarded under conditions of high acid strength, so this contribution is expected to be smaller in the case of the advance electrolyte than, for example, in the SX raffinate. An attempt was made to quantify the degree of organic carryover by chemical means. A series of ten duplicate samples was taken. One of each pair of samples was analysed in the normal manner for OE content; the other was first passed through fine hardened ashless filter paper (Whatman 542) before analysis in the conventional manner. Filtration through a hydrophilic medium allows removal of physically entrained organic material by the filter paper. In all ten samples, the DO values were found to be below the detection limit of the analytical technique (< Because of the non-homogeneity of OE samples and the well-known difficulties of achieving reproducible results in these types of measurements, considerable efforts were expended to ensure that rigorous sampling and analytical procedures were followed. There is considerable scatter in the results for apparently ‘identical’ samples, as well as significant variation in OE column outputs under constant flow conditions. The data shown in The pilot plant was started using a linear flowrate of 12 m/h (corresponding to a volumetric flowrate of 200 l/h). This was the benchmark under which the performance of the CoMatrix system (matrix packing combined with dual media filtration) was compared with a 2-m single column of new carbon (primary mode). To assess the impact that the expected improved performance of the CoMatrix system would have on the output of a secondary column, the filtrate from the CoMatrix was then passed through a single column of new carbon. The target OE content of the CoMatrix system (primary column) in series with carbon (secondary column) was less than 1 ppm: the target maximum permitted OE output for the primary column alone was 5 ppm.  As shown in One of the major advantages claimed for CoMatrix systems is that they can handle flowrates of up to four times those of conventional carbon columns. It was therefore important to test the performance of the CoMatrix system under higher flowrate conditions. The performance of the column at a linear flowrate of 24 m/h is shown in  An interesting insight is gained from As noted in The carbon column in the secondary position provided good performance throughout the campaign. The efficiency of organic removal by the carbon column was dependent on the flowrate. At the lower flowrate (6 m/h), far more consistent performance was observed for the carbon column, and the OE could be consistently maintained at < It is significant to note that the secondary carbon column (Column I) was not backwashed at all during the entire pilot-plant campaign (25 days). No adverse effect on the performance was observed, confirming the effectiveness of the matrix packing in protecting the subsequent columns. By limiting the incoming OE values to a carbon column, considerable advantage could be obtained in terms of extending the lifetime of the carbon.  During the first week of operation, the performance of this column was very erratic, and organic removal was poor. While very good OE values were occasionally obtained, there was high variability in the output and the levels achieved were unacceptable for EW operation. At this time, adequate performance was being measured on the CoMatrix system under similar conditions ( The pilot-plant backwash cycles had initially been carried out using a 2 min air scour of the bed prior to flushing the column with the backwash liquor. This is common practice in backwashing of many types of packed beds. Concerns existed, however, that this could generate fine organic aerosols or mists in the columns and that these may potentially be sources of ignition for a solvent fire. Furthermore, it was believed that the air scour may have been disrupting the bed, and thereby causing the poor performance of this column. On omitting the air scour step from the backwash procedure on Day 15, the performance did improve but the OE levels remained unacceptably high. The flowrate to Column J was then halved on Day 18 to 6 m/h. Under these conditions, there was an immediate improvement in performance and OE values ranged from 1 to 5 ppm despite the fact that the feed OE values were now considerably higher. This identified a relationship between the efficiency of organic removal and electrolyte flowrate through the column. When the backwash frequency was reduced (Days 22 to 25), the performance again deteriorated, confirming the importance of optimising this operating variable. Based on the data obtained during the initial periods of the pilot-plant campaign ( It was also clear that the claim of a CoMatrix system to be able to process higher flowrates than the corresponding carbon column was not validated for this system: at the higher flowrates (12 and 24 m/h), the dual media component of the CoMatrix was redundant and offered negligible benefit over the matrix packing alone, while at low flowrates (6 m/h) the dual media was characterised by frequent organic breakthroughs and stable flow could not be maintained. A secondary claim of the CoMatrix system is that it offers an effective filter for solids, as well as for organics. To validate this assertion, samples were taken twice daily from the feed solution and the filtrates from Columns H and J, and analysed for total suspended solids' (TSS) content. In all cases, the TSS output from the primary carbon column (average 245 mg/l) was lower than that from the CoMatrix system (average 414 mg/l). It was therefore concluded that the CoMatrix offers no particular advantage over carbon in terms of solids' filtration. During the initial period of the piloting campaign when the performance observed was not as originally expected, a backwash was carried out 24-hourly for both Column H (dual media) ( Optimisation of the backwash cycle could reduce the backwash time considerably, thereby limiting the time that the circuit is required to run with a reduced number of columns in forward mode. The overall effect should be to reduce the organic spikes that are often detected following backwash of a column, increase loading availability of the columns, and ultimately lower the average OE reporting to the AE. A pilot-plant trial was carried out to validate claims with respect to the efficiency of removal of entrained organic from a zinc electrolyte using a CoMatrix filtration system compared to activated carbon. The test configuration comprised a matrix packing in series with an anthracite/garnet dual media packing, followed by a conventional carbon column. The following conclusions were drawn under the range of conditions tested: The matrix packing alone provided very consistent organic removal to a concentration of 10 ppm OE, irrespective of the feed OE concentration or flowrate. The dual media component of the CoMatrix filter demonstrated limited utility: at 24 m/h linear flowrate of electrolyte, no organic removal was measured; at 12 m/h only ∼ While the carbon column in primary mode showed better stability and organic removal than the CoMatrix system under all conditions, only at flowrates ∼ Carbon demonstrated greater ability to filter suspended solids from solution, giving a lower solids' concentration in the filtrate than did the dual media packing. The lifetime of the carbon column in secondary mode was excellent: during four weeks of operation, this column was never backwashed and yet was able to readily recover from poor performance when required to process double the design flowrate. The secondary carbon column consistently produced < Using the design backwash flowrate (24 m/h), both the primary carbon column and dual media filter were completely backwashed within 10 min to residual OE levels < Use of an air scour during the backwash disrupted the packed beds and caused deterioration in subsequent performance. Based on the observations of this trial, it was recommended that the most appropriate organic filtration system would comprise a matrix packing, followed by carbon columns in both the primary and secondary positions. The dual media column demonstrated no benefit for this system. The matrix packing showed robust ability to prevent periodic organic surges from reaching the packed beds, while the carbon proved more reliable than the dual media in primary mode under fluctuating incoming OE concentrations. In secondary mode, carbon proved capable of consistently producing output values of < Sincere appreciation is extended to Thebe Mosisili and Selloane Lephakha (Anglo Research) and to Freddy Maklare and Betty Songo (seconded from Matomo Projects) for their outstanding efforts on this project. Bruce Martinson and Mark Langton (Roymec Technologies) designed and commissioned the pilot plant, and also provided valuable technical support. The management and metallurgical staff of Skorpion Zinc are thanked for their support, and the SCADA 4 operators, SX supervisors, and laboratory staff for their assistance and hospitality throughout the campaign. This paper is published by permission of Skorpion Zinc and Anglo Research.