With the depletion of high-grade magnesite mineral resources, improving the grade of magnesite obtained from gangue minerals such as dolomite has been attracting considerable attention from the industry. However, it is difficult to achieve the effective separation of magnesite from dolomite because of their similar chemical and crystal properties. In this study, 1, 2-bis (o-aminophenoxy) ethane-N,N,N′,N′-tetraacetic acid (BAPTA) was used as a depressant for dolomite to improve the separation of magnesite from dolomite. Microflotation tests of the single minerals and artificially mixed minerals using oleic acid as a collector were performed to evaluate the selective depression effect of BAPTA. The results indicated that the BAPTA depressant had a selective effect on dolomite, thereby suggesting that a magnesite grade of 87.5%, recovery of 95.8%, and CaO content of 3.8% can be achieved with a BAPTA dosage of 62.5 mg/L. The depression mechanism of BAPTA was investigated using zeta-potential measurements, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy, and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. The results indicated that BAPTA was selectively adsorbed on the surface of dolomite. The selective depression effect can be attributed to the selective chelating formation of BAPTA on Ca rather than Mg, which not only adsorbed BAPTA decreasing the adsorption sites of oleic acid on the dolomite surface, but also prevented the precipitation of Ca on the surface of the magnesite.Magnesite often contains carbonate minerals in the form of gangue because of its formation characteristics ( Therefore, various techniques have been employed to improve the selectivity of flotation of magnesite from dolomite; these techniques include flotation systems, using different types of reagents, and changing the addition order of the reagents. The contact angles of magnesite and dolomite were investigated in the presence of oleic acid and dodecylamine (DDA) as a collector without a depressant ( Some reagents such as carboxymethyl cellulose and sodium silicate can increase the difference between the contact angles of magnesite and dolomite ( Additionally, Acintol FA–1 tall oil and SH were used as a collector and a depressant, respectively, to achieve effective separation of magnesite ( Despite significant progress of research based on single minerals, flotation tests for the treatment of mixed minerals indicate an insufficient separation effect, and the reason behind it, has rarely been studied. The main cause of the insufficient separation of magnesite from dolomite was investigated by In this study, to achieve differential flotation selectivity between magnesite and dolomite using oleic acid as a collector, the Ca-ion selection chelate 1, 2-bis (o-aminophenoxy) ethane-N,N,N′,N′-tetraacetic acid (BAPTA) was employed as a depressant for improving the separation effect of magnesite. It is more selective for Ca than for Mg, and the selective action of the four carboxylic acid functional groups allows binding with Ca ions ( The samples of magnesite and dolomite used in this study were obtained from Haicheng magnesite mine, Liaoning Province, China. The phase compositions of the two minerals were determined via X-ray diffraction analysis (X’Pert Pro MPDDY2094, PANalytical B.V., Holland), and the chemical compositions were determined via X-ray fluorescence chemical analysis. The magnesite sample consisted of 45.80% MgO, 1.24% CaO, 0.14% Fe The samples were crushed, dried, ground by a porcelain ball mill, sieved, and classified to desired particle sizes. A particle size of −78 + 37 μm was selected for microflotation experiments and XPS, whereas finer particles of <37 μm were ground to <5 μm in an agate mortar for FTIR spectroscopy and zeta-potential measurements. BAPTA (depressant), sodium oleate (NaOL) (collector), and CaCl The pH was adjusted using NaOH and HCl solutions, and deionized water was used for all the experiments. Microflotation experiments involving single minerals and artificially mixed minerals were performed in a 30-mL microflotation cell of a laboratory XFG self-aeration flotation machine (Jilin Exploration Machinery Plant, China) at a stirring speed of 1800 rpm. Simple comparative experiments on the addition order of the reagents indicated that it was advantageous to inject the depressant before stirring the solution. Deionized water (20 mL) and the sample (2.0 g) were added to the microflotation cell, and after the addition of BAPTA, the microflotation was started. A flowsheet of the microflotation test is shown in In accordance with a previous report ( In single-mineral experiments, 2.0 g of single-mineral samples or artificially mixed minerals with a magnesite-to-dolomite mass ratio of 1:1 were used. The microflotation experiments were performed to examine the selectivity effect of BAPTA on the flotation of magnesite and dolomite with respect to the BAPTA concentration. The sodium oleate dosage was 120 mg/L, and the experiments were performed at 25 ± 1 °C. The recovery rates, grades, and CaO contents of the concentrate were evaluated at different BAPTA concentrations. To investigate the effect of BAPTA on the floatability of the magnesite single mineral in the presence of Ca, the amount of Ca ions in the solution was adjusted using CaCl Zeta-potential measurements of magnesite and dolomite were conducted using a Nano–ZS90 zeta-potential analyzer (Malvern Instruments Ltd., Britain). The 20 mg mineral sample was finely ground to −5 μm in an agate mortar, and 50 mL of deionized water was added. CaCl The single minerals were ground to −5 μm in an agate mortar. A 1.0 g sample was added to a 20 mL glass cell, followed by Ca ions and BAPTA. Then, the solution was stirred for 2 min, and the pH was adjusted to 11 for 3 min before the solids and liquids were separated. The solid phase was removed via filtration, washed three times with deionized water, and dried under vacuum conditions at 40 °C for 24 h. The infrared spectra of the samples were recorded using a Nicolet 380 FTIR spectrometer at 25 ± 2 °C in the range of 4000–500 cm The sample preparation for XPS was identical to that for FTIR spectroscopy. XPS spectra of samples treated with and without BAPTA were recorded using an America Thermo VG ESCALAB 250Xi spectrometer using Al α X-rays (1486.6 eV) as a sputtering source at a power of 150 W (15 kV, 10 mA). Based on a C1s peak from contaminations (around 284.8 eV), the binding energy scale was corrected in accordance with the internal binding-energy standard ( Single-mineral flotation tests were conducted to observe the effects of the BAPTA depressant dosage on the flotation of magnesite and dolomite. The results are shown in  The stable constant of the BAPTA chelator with Mg on the surface of magnesite was lower than that with Ca on the surface of dolomite. In the case of the addition of BAPTA followed by Ca, the recovery of magnesite was maintained, but when Ca was added prior to BAPTA, the recovery decreased rapidly ( The results are consistent with those reported by This tendency was also observed in the flotation tests of the artificially mixed minerals at a pH of 11 with oleic acid as a collector. As shown in To elucidate the depression mechanism of BAPTA on the surface of the minerals, the zeta potentials at different BAPTA dosages and a pH of 11 were measured. The results are shown in As shown in The effect of Ca on the zeta potential of magnesite in the presence of BAPTA is shown in FTIR spectroscopy was performed to elucidate the action mechanism of BAPTA on the surfaces of magnesite and dolomite for the flotation test using oleic acid as a collector. The results are shown in In the NaOL spectrum, bands corresponding to the stretching vibrations of the functional groups The main functional groups of BAPTA consisted of four carboxyl groups. As shown in For magnesite, the peaks at 1020.26, 886.01, and 748.04 cm As shown in However, as shown in To analyze the composition of the untreated magnesite surface and the magnesite surface treated with BAPTA, XPS was performed. The results are shown in As shown in For the binding-energy peaks of magnesite treated with Ca For the surfaces of magnesite and dolomite used in this study, the atomic distribution ratios of Mg1s were 8% and 4.6%, respectively. And the sum of Ca1s and Ca2p (8.73%) on the dolomite surface was about 10.3%. The comparison indicates that the distribution ratio of Ca adsorbed on the surface of magnesite not treated with BAPTA was similar to that of Ca adsorbed on the dolomite surface. In the aqueous solution, Ca species were adsorbed on the magnesite surface in the form of calcium carbonate; thus, the distributions of metal atoms on the magnesite surface were similar to those on the dolomite surface (  BAPTA exhibited selective depression for dolomite. A magnesite concentrate with recovery of 95.8% a grade of 87.5%, and a CaO content of 3.8%, was obtained using microflotation with oleic acid as a collector at a pH of 11 and a BAPTA dosage of 62.5 mg/L. FTIR and XPS results indicated that the depression mechanism of BAPTA included not only the formation of a chelate with Ca species in the pulp but also adsorption on the active sites of dolomite; consequently, oleic acid was not adsorbed on the surface of dolomite and produce an effective depression. BAPTA not only depressed the adsorption of oleic acid on the dolomite surface but also improved the activation of the magnesite surface. This work was supported by the General Program of the