Powder X-ray diffraction is increasingly being used for the characterization of iron ores, sinters, and pellets. This is the result of continuing developments in instrumentation and software that enabled scientists and engineers to quickly analyze and quantify minerals and phases in often nonhomogeneous materials. The method is briefly introduced and the various applications of the method are described together with its advantages and limitations. Typical applications in iron ore processing and in sinter production are discussed with practical examples.The iron and steel industry is confronted by decreasing grades and increased impurity levels and a buildup of lower-grade discard material that needs to be upgraded. In modern blast furnaces, stronger, more reactive sinters are required for a high productivity. To address these problems, knowledge of the phases and their impurity levels is necessary so that the most appropriate measures can be devised. X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) has a unique capability to distinguish between different phases on the basis of their crystal structure and their chemistry. This has been extensively utilized following the development of suitable instrumentation and has led to the characterization and examination of powdered or fine-grained materials for their phase composition. The compilation of the data into a database of known diffraction patterns has led to widespread acceptance of the X-ray powder diffraction method for phase identification. A major limitation however was the lack of quantitative capability. With the development of fast detectors, modern accurate instrumentation, and advanced software, X-ray diffraction analysis has undergone a revival. It is used increasingly in the field of mineral processing to characterize minerals, to track their behavior, and to optimize the performance of metallurgical processes. It is fast, requiring no special sample preparation, apart from fine grinding, and together with statistical methods such as cluster analysis, can provide valuable information to the process engineer. It is usually the first method, together with X-ray fluorescence and microanalysis, to be used for the characterization of iron ores and products arising from their processing. SEM methods used for mineral quantification are not well suited for the distinction of hematite and magnetite in ores and especially in sinters, so again, XRD is the method of choice for phase quantification. All mineral processing operations treat minerals (not elements), and as such, their identity, their properties, and their behavior in these processes are of importance. The minerals can also vary spatially across an ore body, and it is therefore necessary to characterize the ores and to measure their distribution in order to optimize mining and mineral processing operations. In high-temperature processes, the behavior of the feedstock is of importance in the calculation of phase equilibria, slag formation, and mass and energy balances. In all these calculations, the phase compositions and their quantities are important variables to be used in thermodynamic modeling of the processes. In iron ore sinters and pellets, the identity of the bonding phase is of importance, and this influences the strength and reducibility of the feedstock in the subsequent blast furnace operation. In this contribution, after a short theoretical analysis, the applications of the method will be discussed, followed by practical applications in iron ore processing. Powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis uses a monochromatic beam of X-rays to irradiate a sample with the X-ray source and detector making variable angles with normally a flat sample. The diffracted X-rays from the crystal planes in the powdered phases that will be measured by a detector will show up as peaks of variable intensities at specific diffraction angles. Each phase or mineral will have a unique diffraction pattern that is a function of its crystal structure, its crystallite size, and its lattice strain, if present. The intensity The structure factor is a function of the scattering power of the constituent atoms and their positions and is given by The temperature factor The diffraction peaks are further affected by instrumental and sample effects that cause broadening so that the combination of all these gives the peak profiles that are observed in the experimental diffraction pattern. This discussion on the theory of X-ray diffraction analysis is kept to a minimum, since this can be sourced from a number of excellent references by The diffraction patterns of a very large number of phases and minerals are tabulated in a database (Powder Diffraction File, issued by the International Centre for Diffraction Data (ICDD)) consisting mainly of interplanar d-spacings and intensities of the diffracting planes. The diffraction pattern of the phase being investigated can then be compared with those of the phases in the database to identify it and to get an approximation of its quantity in a mixture of phases. The output consists of a list of angles and their intensities collected from the sample being investigated. A typical XRD pattern of a goethitic iron ore is shown in With the advent of modern fast computers, the fitting of the experimental XRD pattern with that of the calculated one has become possible, and the method is being used for the structure refinement of unknown phases and for the quantification of phases or minerals in a mixture. The experimental XRD pattern is compared with the pattern calculated from the crystal structures of the constituent phases, and a measure of the goodness-of-fit and difference curve are calculated. This is done for every analysis step in the diffraction pattern. The least squares method then calculates a number of scale factors that are directly proportional to the relative amounts of the phases. A number of discrepancy factors are also calculated. A useful treatise of the method is given in the monograph edited by Necessary inputs for Rietveld analysis are the following: An aligned X-ray diffractometer, calibrated with an internal standard An experimental XRD pattern, measured in steps of at least 0.02 degrees 2 Accurate cell dimensions, space group, and atomic positions for each phase A sample, micronized to a particle size of approximately 10–15 Sample rotation, essential to lessen the effects of preferred orientation Suitable software for the analysis Rietveld software programs are designed to describe the peak profiles as accurate as possible. The XRD peaks can either be fitted to some analytic function describing the peaks (usually some variant of a Gaussian or Lorentzian distribution that has limited physical meaning) or be calculated using the so-called fundamental parameters. Normally, for software using the fundamental parameters approach, the instrumental parameters for the diffractometer must be determined using a suitable standard. This is shown pictorially in For quantitative analysis, If an amorphous phase is present and an internal standard was added, its mass fraction is given as In some investigations, the full crystal structures of one or more phases are not known, and The Rietveld method matches the XRD pattern calculated from the crystal structure data with the experimental pattern using a nonlinear least squares fitting technique. The fit minimizes the following function: The profile residual is given as Typical parameters that are obtained from a Rietveld refinement are the following: Crystallographic information of the phases, that is, the crystal structures can be refined. The lattice parameters of the phases. These can be used to calculate compositions in solid solutions. Relative quantities for the constituent phases. Amorphous content if an internal standard is used. Crystallite sizes of the phases. Lattice strain of the phases. This is a rather broad term that includes stacking disorder, dislocations, and strain. A typical Rietveld analysis of an iron ore sinter is shown in Mineral quantification is the most widely used application of Rietveld analysis, and it is applied to numerous cases, especially in geometallurgy and mineral processing. However, despite its successes, the method still suffers from the following shortcomings that can affect its accuracy and precision: Preferred orientation of minerals with a pronounced habit such as micas and amphiboles. The mineral grains orient themselves in the sample holder in response to their shape, and therefore, the diffraction peaks from the preferentially oriented planes are artificially enhanced. Methods have been devised to correct for this effect but are still inadequate in some cases. Microabsorption effects in samples containing phases with variable density. This effect is due to the absorption of the diffracted X-rays by the minerals with bigger mass absorption coefficients. This effect is especially prevalent if CuKα radiation is used for the examination of iron-containing minerals and phases. XRD cannot easily detect or quantify minerals with less than ~ Quantitative phase analysis by XRD can also be seriously in error because of the presence of undetected phases or minerals and the presence of amorphous material. These are by definition difficult to detect, and therefore, the results must always be validated by independent means such as microanalysis of the phases and chemical analysis. This will be discussed later. Cluster analysis is a statistical procedure that discriminates between sets of closely related XRD scans from different samples. It then separates the similar samples into different groups using statistical criteria. No information is given as to what the differences between groups entail: only that they are different. The procedure is especially useful in ore body evaluation to discriminate between different ore types and in sinter evaluation to examine differences between sinters prepared using different recipes or operational variables such as suction and cooling rates. Once the different clusters have been identified, they can then be examined in greater detail to establish what the differences are and what they mean in terms of ore quality or sinter properties such as tumble index or reduction disintegration indices. The principal components are combinations of features in the diffraction patterns, and no information is given regarding what these components represent in terms of mineral identities or quantities. This must be deduced by the investigator upon closer evaluation. For an example of the application of cluster analysis to iron ore evaluation and grade control, the reader is referred to the contribution by In sinters, ongoing studies have identified differences according to different recipes and also differences between size fractions, to be discussed later. The XRD method is not universally applicable to all minerals in ore deposits. This is true for all ores where the economic minerals occur as minor or trace phases. Due to their low signal to background ratio and the extensive overlap of the diffraction peaks, they show relatively high detection limits as compared to elemental analysis. However, for all ores where the economically important phases are the predominant ones, such as iron, aluminum, phosphate, and fluorite ores, XRD is widely used. Since the method is one of the few that detect and quantify minerals, it can be used to measure the different minerals in iron ores. This can lead to better classification of ores and eventually to causes of elemental variation in them. In iron ore sinters, the presence of different phases reflects differences in sinter constituent mixtures and different temperatures and reductant additions during sintering. This can be of use in the development of stronger, more reducible sinters of the desired basicity. Mass balancing is important in not only assessing the accuracy of XRD and mineral analysis but also evaluating the suitability of ores for upgrading and beneficiation. The bulk chemical composition is calculated from the XRD and mineral analyses (by microprobe or SEM analysis) and is compared with the actual chemical analysis (by XRF or ICP analysis). This shows the contribution that each mineral makes to the elemental abundances. A percentage deviation is calculated, which is an indication of the accuracy of the analysis. Smaller deviations indicate a higher likelihood that the XRD and phase compositions are correct. An example of such a calculation of a high-alumina iron ore is given in The minerals occurring in all major iron ores is given in In sinters, the main phases that form are listed in Variations in iron ores can be traced and mapped using cluster analysis and XRD quantification. For iron ore beneficiation, the mineral quantities in the ores is essential to establish the degree of upgrading that can be achieved. In a study of the removal of aluminum in goethitic iron ores, mass balance calculations assisted greatly to assess the maximum amount of Al that can be removed without appreciable iron loss, mainly from the goethite. This is shown graphically in Lattice constant refinement can be used to assess the substitution of impurity elements, especially in fine-grained goethite and hematite, as determined by The hematite unit cell parameters are affected by Al and OH substitution: OH substitution affects mainly the The goethite cell parameters are affected mainly by Al substitution: The procedure was elegantly included in the Rietveld refinement procedure by The use of XRD can therefore give a quick assessment of the extent of Al and OH substitution in hematite and the amount of Al substitution in goethite. This was done for five goethite-rich iron ores and is shown in Reliable quantification using Rietveld analysis rely critically on accurate crystal structures of minerals and sinter phases. Fortunately, the structures of the important binding phases SFCA, SFCA-I, and SFCA-II have been determined by Mumme and coworkers ( Important laboratory studies of reactions in sinter mixtures have been conducted at high temperature at controlled oxygen partial pressures using both laboratory and synchrotron X-ray sources by Reactions that take place during sintering and pelletizing can be easily followed by XRD. The extent of sintering can be assessed by the SFCA/hematite ratio; this is not possible by using chemical analysis. The redox conditions prevailing during sintering (reductant addition) can be assessed by the magnetite/hematite ratio. Presently, this is determined chemically using the FeO content. The relation between the XRD peak intensities and the FeO content was established by The reactions that occur during initial combustion, at maximum temperature, and during cooling can be established by interrupting the sinter reactions in a sinter box using water quenching.  The use of XRD and the Rietveld method have resulted in the development of fast and reliable methods of phase quantification in the iron ore industry. Compared with other methods, it is still the most reliable method for phase quantification, and it has the potential to make important contributions to our knowledge regarding the effect of phase relations on the properties of sinters. Several applications of the method have been discussed in some detail. New developments will necessarily attempt to relate phase composition to sinter strength and reducibility, and increased use of cluster analysis can identify important relations between these parameters.