Background
                  Comminuted tibial end bony avulsion of posterior cruciate ligament (PCL) is a challenging problem in terms of accurate reduction, fixation and union to provide a stable knee. Arthroscopic reduction or a screw fixation is good option for a large fragment but comminuted fragment reduction remains a challenge. Suture bridge technique using two anchors can provide an accurate reduction and stable fixation.
               
                  Method
                  10 patients of isolated comminuted PCL avulsion with a mean age of 30 years were fixed by standard posterior approach using suture bridge technique.
               
                  Results
                  Mean follow up was 12 months. All patients showed radiological union at 12 weeks with a mean Lysholm score of 92. Seven out of ten achieved IKDC grade A and remaining three had grade B. No complication of the procedure were noted.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Suture bridge technique is an excellent option to fix a comminuted PCL avulsion fracture where arthroscopic reduction or open single screw fixation is not a viable due option due to comminution.Injuries of the posterior cruciate ligament (PCL) represents about 20% of the knee ligament injuries. We described a suture bridge technique by using only two suture anchors to fix the comminuted avulsed PCL fragment and its results in ten patients. From May 2013 to April 2016, a total of 10 patients were operated for comminuted displaced bony avulsion of PCL from the tibial end by a standard posterior approach using suture anchors ‘suture bridge technique’. Nine were males and one female with mean age of 30 years (range, 21–42 years). The indication for surgery included; 1) isolated closed injury to the PCL and 2) displaced comminuted avulsion fracture of less than 2 The surgery was carried out under spinal or general anesthesia under tourniquet control. The patient was positioned in a prone position with knee flexion of 20–30 The plain radiograph confirms the accurate fixation in all the cases ( The mean follow-up period was 12 months (range, 8–36 months). All patients had shown the radiological union of avulsion fracture at 12 weeks postoperative radiograph. At the final follow-up, all patients have regained full range of motion as compared to the normal knee without any flexion or extension deficit. The mean Lysholm score was 92 (range, 82–100) which was excellent. Seven out of ten (70%) patient showed grade 0 posterior drawer and 3 patients had grade 1 posterior drawer on manual testing. On objective international knee documentation committee (IKDC) score, 70% (n This study with suture bridge fixation of comminuted PCL avulsion by the standard open posterior approach in ten patients reports excellent outcome in short term follow up. Both arthroscopic and open techniques have been used to fix the avulsed PCL fragment depending upon the expertise of the surgeon, but literature is limited suggesting the superiority of one method over the other. Albeit the biomechanical properties of open reduction and various arthroscopic techniques are comparable in the case of single large avulsed PCL fragment, literature is limited in a definitive fixation technique for comminuted PCL avulsion fracture. The technique of suture bridge fixation, which was initially described in rotator cuff injuries has been expanded to other orthopedic injuries. The significant advantage in the use of suture bridge technique is that it allows near anatomic reduction, even if the fragment is comminuted or small as it allows uniform compression. Since there is no drilling performed through the fragment and by taking the suture limb through the osseotendinous junction; there is no fear of further comminution of the fragment. This technique is a growth plate-sparing technique, as there is no drilling or passage of implant through the physis. In addition, the suture bridge technique can also be used to fix an old avulsion fracture where in the non-comminuted fragment may become osteoporotic and passage of a screw can fracture or fragment it further. Unlike cannulated screw, another advantage of this technique is that it does not require implant removal at a later date or does not interfere with any peri- or intraarticular knee reconstruction. There are not many biomechanical studies to confirm an advantage in using a specific method for fixation of the PCL fragment. Domnick et al. in compared the biomechanical properties of various fixation techniques in vitro and suggested cortical suspension button, retrograde screw fixation, and suture cerclage technique have ‘comparable’ structure properties to the direct screw fixation technique. Sawyer et al. compared three techniques of fixation; namely screw fixation, suture fixation, suture bridge technique fixation and reported superior results of suture bridge technique regarding ultimate failure load in porcine models. There is a disadvantage of suture bridge technique of increased cost incurred for this procedure given multiple suture anchors. However, we have used only two anchors as compared to four used by Zhang et al. which can keep the cost low. Conclusion: We find this technique to be useful and relevant in comminuted PCL avulsion fractures and can be extended to old avulsion fracture where the fragment might be osteoporotic. However, the influence of this technique on the functional and biomechanical outcomes of the knee has to be done in a large cohort of patients while comparing it with currently popular arthroscopic suture technique or open screw fixation. None. None. None.