The treatment of the effluent produced in the cyanidation of gold and silver ores is one of the main problems that the precious metals industry currently faces. These effluents contain variable amounts of free and complex cyanide (stable and unstable). Different methods for the cyanide elimination have been used; nevertheless, most of the times the consumption of reagents increases operating costs to prohibiting levels. As well, the process may give rise to by-products that are also toxic.
                  Ozone oxidation is a promising alternative for cyanide control that offers several advantages. In this work, the oxidation of cyanide in synthetic alkaline solutions by ozone was studied in a countercurrent bubble column. Dissolved ozone, cyanide and cyanate profiles were obtained along the column, demonstrating that the cyanide/ozone reaction may take place all along the reactor. This is found to occur when the mole of O3/mole of CN rate (specific ozone dose) is higher than one.
                  The oxidation efficiency depends mainly on the specific ozone dose (moles of ozone fed per mole of cyanide), leading to 90% efficiency when the specific ozone dose is 1.2mol O3/mol CN or higher. The ozone consumption obtained in these tests (steady-state flow pilot-scale column) was similar to that obtained at the laboratory scale in a semi-batch mechanically stirred reactor (1.2–1.4mol O3/mol CN), suggesting that the size of the reactor has no effect on ozone consumption.About 1.4 million tons of hydrogen cyanide is produced each year worldwide, 10% of which is converted into sodium cyanide and used in gold and silver extraction from their ores. Although waste reduction and recycling are preferable to the treatment and disposal of wastes, this is not always feasible and therefore typical raw cyanidation effluents may contain up to 2000 Ozone, with a standard redox potential of 1.24 It is known that cyanide oxidation with ozone is a two-step reaction ( It is also well accepted that the first reaction is extremely rapid while the cyanate oxidation by ozone is a slow reaction ( Two types of experiments were carried out. The first series was performed with ozone only (i.e., in the absence of chemical reaction with cyanide), to verify the availability of ozone along the column to react with cyanide. This set of experiments was carried out in triplicate for different ozone concentrations in the gas. The experimental conditions are given in A second set of experiments was performed in order to evaluate the effect of the specific ozone dose (moles of ozone fed per mole of cyanide, The specific ozone dose, The specific ozone dose was modified by changing the ozone concentration of the fed gas, the superficial liquid velocity and the superficial gas velocity. Oxidation efficiency was calculated with the cyanide concentration at the inlet and outlet of the column by using ( The initial cyanide concentration effect on the cyanide oxidation rate was not studied since the ozone-cyanide reaction is of zero order with respect to cyanide concentration in solution ( Ozone consumption All reagents used were of analytical grade. Experiments were carried out in a conventional bubble column reactor made of Plexiglas (0.094 Ozone was produced from industrial extra-dry oxygen in a laboratory ozone generator (Pacific Ozone Technology L22) which has a maximum ozone production of 30 For each test, the column was filled with the aqueous solution: distilled water at pH Ozone decomposes in the aqueous phase at a rate that depends on the temperature, the composition of the solution and, mainly, on the pH of the solution. The ozone decomposition is initiated by hydroxyl ions according to ( Since high pH values (e.g., 11) imply high concentration of hydroxyl ions, it is expected that at pH 11 there is no dissolved ozone remaining in the upper part of the bubble column. In order to evaluate the presence of dissolved ozone all along the length of the column in the absence of cyanide, some tests were conducted and samples were taken, once the steady state condition is reached, to obtain the dissolved ozone profile without chemical reaction.  Four tests were performed in order to evaluate the effect of the specific ozone dose (  The oxidation efficiency depends mainly on the specific ozone dose as shown in The ozone consumption Y(O Ozone is mainly consumed by the reaction with cyanide although for specific ozone doses above 1.5, a fraction of the ozone leaves the reactor without being reacted (see In Ozone is proposed for the cyanide oxidation in the treatment of cyanidation effluents. The oxidation of cyanide in synthetic alkaline solutions with an ozone/oxygen mixture was studied in a pilot scale bubble column and steady-state flow. We can conclude that: When bubbling ozone to the column in steady-state flow and in absence of cyanide, ozone can be present all along the column when the ozone concentration in gas is 85 The cyanide oxidation efficiency depends mainly on the specific ozone dose (moles of ozone fed per mole of cyanide). The higher specific ozone dose is, the higher is the oxidation efficiency. The maximum efficiency obtained is 93% for a specific ozone dose of 1.2 The ozone consumption obtained in this study (1.2–1.4 It was demonstrated that an alkaline cyanide solution can be efficiently treated with ozone in a steady-state bubble column. The ozone concentration in gas must be 85 The authors thank CONACYT for the financial support received through project 34402-U, and M.C. Juan Antonio Gonzalez Anaya for the help provided in the laboratory. F. Barriga-Ordonez thanks CONACYT for the PhD scholarship provided.