Bookshelf type mechanisms are commonly used to explain antithetic accommodation of deformations caused by direct shear. Stress analysis of such mechanisms have been proposed, mainly through the use of classic Mohr circle graphical constructions. The present work introduces an alternative framework for analysis, the mechanics of generalized Cosserat continua, although maintaining the same tools (Mohr circle construction). In this type of mechanics, kinematics of the material points incorporates independent rotational degrees of freedom besides the classic translational ones. In the equilibrium equations, quantities involving moments are generated and the stress tensor is in the general case non-symmetric. Such characteristics of generalized Cosserat continua make it suitable for the analysis of bookshelf mechanisms, as these are, in essence, rotational antithetic mechanisms induced by shear stresses having different magnitudes in perpendicular planes. The paper applies the mechanics of generalized continua to the analysis of a specific bookshelf mechanism, related to crustal extension. In the Appendices, a review of the generalized Cosserat continua and details of the graphical Mohr circle representation of stresses for such media are presented.The analogy with a bookshelf type mechanism (  Independent of style, the analogy, as originally proposed, corresponds to a bookshelf with books, vertically disposed, above which a horizontal rigid board is placed (  The authors argue therefore that one cannot interpret, in a theoretically consistent way, the bookshelf mechanism by using classic continuum mechanics, as it presupposes equal shear stresses in perpendicular planes, a fact that is incompatible with rotations. However, the generalized continuum mechanics of Cosserat ( independent rotational degrees of freedom in addition to the classic translational ones (see shear stresses on perpendicular planes which are not necessarily equal, but which are equilibrated through the introduction of new quantities, the so-called moment (or couple) stresses (see As a consequence, parameters with dimensions of length appear in the stress–strain relationships and/or strength criteria. This fact brings with it a scale dependency effect, which is a well-known factor for geological materials in general ( The pioneer work systematizing the generalized mechanics was made in France by  In the 1980s, a growing interest in generalized mechanics occurred, starting with the work of In relation to applications in geology, it appears that This work presents an analysis of the stresses involved in the bookshelf mechanism by using the graphical construction of the Mohr circle, as it has been done in the literature (see The problem to be analyzed here ( The decision to analyze this specific case instead of the direct shear cases treated by Mandl is because it has a well defined boundary condition: the free surface, represented by a horizontal plane, is the Earth's surface, where the tractions are identically zero. Such a boundary condition, with values known for both stress components, normal and shear, does not exist in the analyses presented by Mandl. The stress conditions at a point on the surface are illustrated on In the adopted notation, the first subscript for the stresses represents the direction and, the second, the plane of action of the component. Such ordering of subscripts is contrary to what is generally found in texts dedicated to the stress analysis in classical continua ( A schematic illustration of the rigid blocks (assumed to be rectangular) formed by antithetic faults is shown on This mechanism involves ‘rolling friction’ ( Eq. Additionally, a cohesive term could be added to both Eqs. The basic difference introduced by the Cosserat generalized formulation in relation to the graphical 2D representation, given by the Mohr's circle, is the fact that the circle can have its center located away from the normal stress axis. This is because shear stresses in perpendicular directions (plotted as diametrically opposite points on the circle) may have different magnitudes. As a consequence, the principal planes will be not necessarily perpendicular (and therefore not necessarily represented by diametrically opposite points). In addition, principal stresses will no longer be the maximum and minimum normal stress components at a point ( Regarding the analyzed problem, one can assume, in principle, that before failure, the medium can be considered as approximately homogeneous and, therefore, behaving as a classical continuum. This fact does not alter the final conclusions of the analysis (as will be explained in the sequence). It ultimately means that up to this point in the analysis it is not necessary to consider any intrinsic structure of the material. Such structure will appear later due to faulting. In this case, vertical and horizontal planes will be initially the principal planes, and a Mohr circle for a point on the surface would be plotted with its center on the normal stress axis (circle ‘a’ in  If the medium behaved as a classical continuum, the point would be taken initially to the state of stresses represented by circle (b). Failure occurs when the circle touches the tensile strength envelope, as does circle (c), and would generate vertical failure planes. For the stress path followed, there is no possibility of shear failure of the Mohr–Coulomb type. This is because the diameter of the circle decreases constantly whilst the principal stresses are compressive. The diameter of the circle is only able to increase under tension where such criterion is no longer valid because of the absence of friction, already pointed out previously ( There remains therefore no other alternative but to abandon the axiom of symmetry in the classical stress tensor and to allow It should be noted that In It is remarkable that for an antithetic failure to occur, a minimal decrease in There are very few planes under tension as a result of the proposed mechanism and even those that do experience tensile stresses, when compared with the classical values, are of very small magnitude. The only way to generate classical shear failure would be to increase the vertical stress, concomitant with horizontal extension. This is clearly not possible in the case under analysis, as a point on the surface is being considered. As a result It could be argued that faults are nucleated in the crust at depth, i.e. with a positive value of The present work analyzes the bookshelf mechanism by using Mohr circles for a generalized Cosserat continuum. This analysis takes into consideration distinct strength envelopes for the two possible failure mechanisms; one involving rotation (antithetic faulting) and the other sliding. The main features of the theory of the generalized Cosserat continuum have been described with particular reference to those pertinent to the problem of the bookshelf mechanism. The bookshelf mechanism can be interpreted in a simple way by using the mechanics of generalized Cosserat continua. By using this theory that takes into account rotations and the anti-symmetric portion of the stress tensor Several problems in structural geology can be investigated under the framework of the theory of Cosserat generalized continua. An example is the problem of folding of multilaminated media as presented initially by Part of this research work was carried out during the preparation of a Ph.D. thesis by the first author. PICD-CAPES-UFOP/Brazil is acknowledged for financial support. J. Cosgrove, an anonymous reviewer and the editor J. Hippertt are thanked for their valuable comments and suggestions. In its classic description, a continuum is a continuous distribution of particles, which are represented geometrically by a material point having cartesian coordinates In the Cosserat theory, the pioneer amongst the generalized theories, the material particle is rigid and has microrotations Through the Principle of Virtual Work ( With the above mentioned static-kinematic refinements, the Cosserat theory allows representation of flexural and torsional effects, which are not present in the classic continuum. In contrast, the dimensions of the material particle, here denominated characteristic length, introduce a dependence on its underlying basic structure in the constitutive description ( In the particular case of rock masses, the rigid material particles of the Cosserat continua are able to represent the blocks formed between pre-existing geological discontinuities. This is so because these blocks are in general more rigid than the entire rock mass, where the deformability is concentrated on the interfaces ( Consider a plan of deformations parallel to Cartesian orthogonal axes ( The strain quantities in a Cosserat continuum are One can demonstrate ( The particular case, in which the Cosserat microrotations coincide with the rigid body macrorotations, i.e. when A 2D Cosserat continuum contains six static quantities, energetically conjugate (through the Principle of Virtual Work) to the kinematic quantities defined in In a plan element of infinitesimal dimensions From In dynamic problems, inertia effects can be included in body forces and moments according to d'Alembert's principle ( Symmetry will occur in the static case if and only if couple stresses, although present, are self-equilibrated (body moments can generally be disregarded), or when they are identically zero as in classical continuum. In dynamic problems, the microinertial effects included in body moments in Eq. The force stresses can be split into their symmetric, It is remarkable that In mechanics, displacements are concrete quantities, having a physical existence, while forces (and stresses) are postulated and abstract. It is therefore instructive to introduce and define the latter through the virtual work they produce under given virtual displacements. The proposition, in a general way, consists of obtaining the statics of the medium from the kinematics, through the Principle of Virtual Work ( The application of the method starts by establishing the virtual work of the internal forces for the generalized medium. This virtual work has to be a quantity invariant with respect to rigid body motion (axiom of objectivity of the virtual work of internal forces;  By applying the Gauss–Ostrogradski divergence theorem ( The form of the expression of virtual work of the internal forces, extended to a Cosserat continuum (Eq. The following step is the application of the virtual work principle itself. It establishes that for statically admissible fields of stresses, i.e. those that satisfy the differential equations of equilibrium (Eqs. This is the direct statement of the principle. The inverse statement, which is used in the present work, establishes that, if for the static fields assumed, A mathematical statement of the principle ( As the variations of By reorganizing the terms, we obtain: These equations will only be satisfied for arbitrary variations if, simultaneously in each one of them, the integrands of the volume and surface integrals are zero. So the equilibrium equations To evaluate the integrals in the equations above, it is necessary to assume that boundary Γ is defined in complementary parts Γ The equations for the linear elastic isotropic behaviour of a 2D Cosserat continuum involve four parameters. They can be written as ( The stress–strain relations is stated as: Eq. Additional strength criteria must also be introduced for the definition of the Cosserat generalized continuum. These strength criteria represent the additional failure mechanisms induced by the anti-symmetric force stresses and by couple stresses. For the analysis of the bookshelf mechanism focused on in this paper, a criterion representing failure by rotation was given by Eq. In the generalized Cosserat continuum, like in the classical continuum, the force stresses in 2D can be represented graphically by a circle in the Mohr stress space, i.e. the space of normal stresses versus shear stresses (  By imposing an equilibrium of forces along the coordinate axes, it is possible to determine the respective components of the vector of force stresses, These expressions, in extended form, are:   Squaring both sides and adding Eqs.  All the elegant graphical solutions of structural geology problems obtained with the Mohr circle in the classical continuum (  For three-dimensional states of stresses, the graphical representation cannot be given by a combination of three circles in the plane  Some works (e.g. Consider rectangular blocks ABCD, with height By calling