Selecting the most suitable mineral processing equipment among feasible alternatives with respect to multiple conflicting criteria is considered a Multiple Criteria Decision Making (MCDM) problem. For example, a type of crusher that might allow a very high throughput is less likely to be used in a mobile plant, so trade-offs between these type of criteria need to be clearly defined in the decision making process. One of the most frequently used MCDM methods is the Analytical Hierarchy Process (AHP) method, which relies on judgements from decision makers that allow for comparisons to be made between alternatives (e.g. the type of equipment) or criteria (e.g. the characteristics of the equipment that are of interest). However, AHP is not able to capture the uncertainty associated with the various decision makers’ judgements and the lack of precise information. An integrated constrained fuzzy stochastic analytic hierarchy process (IC-FSAHP) is a new hybrid MCDM method that can be used to overcome the aforementioned limitations of AHP. In order to understand the robustness of AHP based methods, a sensitivity analysis of the decision making results is required. However, sensitivity analyses are not often carried out for fuzzy AHP methods, arguably because of the complexity of some of the procedures involved, the computation time required and the limited resources available to do so. The main objective of this paper is therefore to propose a new sensitivity analysis approach by applying an additional fuzzification factor and disagreement level of decision makers in order to model uncertainty. For this purpose, a case study for the selection of primary crushers was considered. Five types of primary crushers were evaluated with respect to six criteria to showcase the applicability of the proposed approach to assess IC-FSAHP. The results obtained showcase that the proposed sensitivity analysis approach is capable of providing extensive and useful “what-if” information on the decision making results.Mineral processing equipment selection is the task of examining various machinery alternatives being considered and choosing the most suitable equipment that involves multiple criteria such as technical, environmental, and socio-economic aspects ( However, it is often challenging to determine the most suitable equipment to use. Decision makers need to evaluate multiple alternatives under many criteria that are often in conflict with each other. For example, a type of crusher that might achieve very large throughput is less likely to be part of mobile plant, so trade-offs need to be clearly defined during the evaluation stage in the decision making process. Selecting the best equipment among the alternatives with respect to multiple conflicting criteria is considered a Multiple Criteria Decision Making (MCDM) problem. MCDM is an advanced subject of operations research that can be used to solve problems (e.g. a selection problem) when the feasible alternatives ( In recent years a number of MCDM methods have been effectively used for selecting the best mineral processing equipment, covering machinery used from the ore transportation stage to the concentration stage, such as the selection of ore transportation system, the selection of flotation machines, and the selection of primary crusher equipment. In addition, a great deal of attention has recently been given to applications of MCDM in mineral processing in which multiple decision makers are involved ( One of the most widely used MCDM methods is AHP. AHP involves a construction process of an MCDM problem into a hierarchy that frequently comprises three-level structures from the top to the bottom that define the goal, criteria, and alternatives, respectively. The main notion of AHP is in the pairwise comparison matrix (PCM) that is constructed from the pairwise comparison of each criterion to another criterion with respect to the goal and the comparison of each alternative to another alternative. The elements of the PCM have their reciprocity values, e.g. when the criterion Despite its popularity, the application of AHP has been often criticised when uncertainty caused by the lack of information and biased insights in various decision makers’ judgements is present. The extension of AHP by combining it with the fuzzy set theory is one of the most popular techniques to overcome the uncertainty problem caused by the lack of information. Furthermore, stochastic simulation can be combined with fuzzy AHP methods in order to capture uncertainty caused by various judgements and biased insights from multiple decision makers. An integrated constrained fuzzy stochastic analytic hierarchy process (IC-FSAHP), which has been developed by In order to understand the robustness of IC-FSAHP, the results that are obtained from IC-FSAHP need to be scrutinised further by performing a sensitivity analysis. The results that are obtained from the sensitivity analysis could be used to answer “what-if” questions that decision makers might have. In addition, a sensitivity analysis should be carried out because the importance of criteria and the preference of alternatives that are obtained from subjective insights of decision makers could affect the results. Their subjective insights and potential disparities may result in uncertainty. Furthermore, the results obtained from IC-FSAHP may not offer sufficient information and data to decision makers, and thus it might be difficult to make a final decision. A sensitivity analysis can therefore deliver more insights to decision makers to finalise the decision based on more comprehensive information. Various approaches have been developed for performing sensitivity analysis on AHP and its variants. In response to the aforementioned limitations, this study proposes a new comprehensive sensitivity analysis approach that takes into account the main notions of IC-FSAHP. By using the proposed approach, it was possible to assess the effects of changing the uncertainty levels of the judgements in the FPCMs. In addition, it was possible to examine the effects of disagreement among decision makers under the various uncertainty levels of the judgements. For the purpose of this work, a case study for the selection of mineral processing equipment using IC-FSAHP was considered, the results of which were used to perform the sensitivity analysis proposed. The contributions of this paper are: (1) a gap in sensitivity analysis methods is addressed and a new approach is proposed; (2) for the first time, a sensitivity analysis for the selection of mineral processing equipment by multiple decision makers under uncertainty is performed. It is worth mentioning that none of the aforementioned contributions have been presented in the literature. The remainder of the manuscript is organised as follows: Section Prior to performing the sensitivity analysis, the initial results obtained by from IC-FSAHP are required. There are five major steps in applying the IC-FSAHP method: defining the notions of a decision problem, determining the local fuzzy weights of the criteria and the local fuzzy priorities of the alternatives, determining the global priorities of the alternatives, synthesising the outcomes, ranking the order of the alternatives. A detailed description of these steps can be found in The judgement and preference of the criteria and alternatives over others are evaluated by using a scale of seven linguistic variables. In the case of evaluating the importance of the criteria, the following linguistic variables are applied: Extremely Unimportant (EU), Very Unimportant (VU), Unimportant (U), Fair (F), Important (I), Very Important (VI) and Extremely Important (EI). Furthermore, when evaluating the preference of the alternatives, the following linguistic variables are applied: Very Low (VL), Low (L), Medium Low (ML), Medium (M), Medium High (MH), High (H) and Very High (VH). For the purpose of this study, each element in the scale is valued by means of triangular fuzzy numbers (TFNs). Each TFN contains three ordered numbers (i.e. the lower, middle and upper values). For example, the ordered number of a TFN in describing EU or VL is 1,2,3; VU or L is 2, 3, 4; U or ML is 3, 4, 5; and so forth. The main aim of a sensitivity analysis is to understand when the input data (i.e. preference, judgements, degrees of fuzziness and disagreement between decision makers) are changed into new values, how the outcomes obtained from IC-FSAHP change or to ensure the consistency of the final results. The main notions of the sensitivity analysis approach proposed in this work are the variation in the uncertainty levels of the judgements and the change of disagreement level among decision makers under the various uncertainty levels of the judgements. Two main changes are therefore required to perform the sensitivity analysis: changes on fuzzification factor ( Based on the aforementioned concepts, it is very important to analyse the changes in the fuzzification factor ( This study proposes to extend the fuzzification factor in order to increase uncertainty. Eqs. In the second change required for the sensitivity analysis is the variation in the level of disagreement among decision makers when examining the pairwise comparisons. The level of disagreement is determined from the difference between the most unlikely and most likely judgements that are obtained from decision makers on each pairwise comparison. The variations were conducted by considering the judgement of the criteria and alternatives simultaneously in order to see how the extreme changes may affect the initial solutions that are obtained from IC-FSAHP. The initial judgements in the pairwise comparisons will be used as a basis of disagreement level among decision makers. There are two disagreement levels used in this study: 2 and 4. Each of the disagreement levels is carried out with the variations of the fuzzification factors. After the first change and the second change are conducted, random numbers are generated based on a probability distribution for each pairwise comparison matrix. It is worth highlighting that the proposed sensitivity analysis approach in this work could be applied as well to other types of hybrid fuzzy AHP methods. This could be done by generalising the algorithms of additional fuzzification factor in the lower and higher values of a TFN. For the purpose of this study, a decision problem for primary crusher selection in an iron mine is considered as a case study in order to show the initial solutions that are obtained from IC-FSAHP. This case study used data adapted from After the goal, criteria and alternatives are defined, the pairwise comparisons of the objects (i.e. criteria or alternatives) can be conducted. For the purpose of the implementation of IC-FSAHP, the scale of seven linguistic variables that is shown in In this study, violin plots were used to showcase the probability density of the fuzzy local weights of the criteria and the fuzzy global scores of the alternatives after 1000 iterations. As previously mentioned in Section  As previously mentioned in Section In addition, the gap between the lowest and highest judgement scales among DMs’ opinions in judging the preferences is represented by the level of disagreement among DMs. The disagreement levels indicate the uncertainty of the DMs’ judgement due to disparities among DMs, such as competencies and abilities. In this work, the results obtained when the level of disagreement among DMs increases are analysed. It is important to point out that, in this work, the level of disagreement among DMs in judging the preferences still reaches a most likely opinion. For a case in which no most likely opinion were reached, further discussions among DMs would be required in order to reach an agreement. The violin plots of the results show that the probability density of the weights of the criteria and alternatives’ scores were not affected by the variation of the additional fuzzification factors (   Furthermore, the violin plot displayed in   Based on the aforementioned explanations, the most important criterion and the most suitable crusher were not altered by varying the additional fuzzification factor not by increasing the disagreement level among decision makers. However, as the level of disagreement among decision makers increases, the density of higher probability decreases and thus the weight of each criterion becomes more scattered. Therefore, even though the most prioritised criterion and the most suitable crusher were never altered, the rank of other particular objects (criteria or alternatives) were not the same. A novel sensitivity analysis approach has been proposed to understand the robustness of an integrated constrained fuzzy stochastic analytic hierarchy process (IC-FSAHP) method that can be applied to the selection of the most suitable equipment in mineral processing, considering a primary crusher as a case study. The proposed approach allows decision makers to identify the effect of input data changes on the aggregated results for equipment ranking and takes into account the main notions of IC-FSAHP, i.e. preserving the reciprocity interactions among the elements in the fuzzy pairwise comparison matrices and checking the inconsistency ratios of the fuzzy pairwise comparison matrices. The proposed sensitivity analysis approach applies an additional fuzzification factor ( Since the level of uncertainty of the variables does not affect the final recommendation, the results obtained from the sensitivity analysis indicate that IC-FSAHP could be confidently used for the selection of mineral processing equipment. It was noted that the rank of the most suitable crusher, which was the high-speed roll crusher, remains the same irrespective of changes in the additional fuzzification factor ( Furthermore, the results have shown the usability of the proposed sensitivity analysis approach in a mineral processing equipment selection problem under uncertainty with multiple decision makers. This approach allows decision makers to define and calculate the uncertainty involved in a multiple criteria decision making problem with more flexibility and reliability. Moreover, it can be concluded from the results that the proposed sensitivity analysis approach is capable of providing extensive and useful “what-if” information on the decision making results.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Fernando Sitorus would like to acknowledge the funding support from