Accurate settling velocity predictions of differently shaped micro- or macroclasts are required in many branches of science and engineering. Here, a single, dimensionally correct equation is presented that yields a significant improvement on previous settling formulas for a wide range of clast shapes. For smooth or irregular clasts with known axial dimensions, a partially polynomial equation based on the logarithmic values of dimensionless sizes and settling velocities is presented, in which the values of only one coefficient and one exponent need to be adapted for different shapes, irrespective of the Reynolds number. For irregular, natural clasts with unknown axial dimensions, a polynomial equation of the same form is applied, but with different coefficients. Comparison of the predicted and measured settling velocities of 8 different shape classes as well as natural grains with unknown axial dimensions in liquids, representing a total of 390 experimental data points, shows a mean percentage error of −0.83% and a combined R2 value of 0.998. The settling data of 169 differently shaped particles of pumice, glass and feldspar falling in air were also analyzed, which demonstrates that the proposed equation is also valid for these conditions. Two additional shape classes were identified in the latter data set, although the resultant equations are less accurate than for liquids. An Excel spreadsheet is provided to facilitate the calculation of fall velocities for grains settling individually and in groups, or alternatively to determine the equivalent sieve size from the settling velocity, which can be used to calibrate settling tubes.The settling velocity of micro- and macroclasts has wide applications in science and engineering, including mineral processing ( In the geothermal energy field, the settling velocity of particles also has practical uses ( Here, a single equation is proposed that gives accurate results from the Stokes range (quartz spheres less than 0.005 Numerous papers have been written on the settling velocity of differently shaped clasts (e.g. In this paper, the settling equations of  According to For clasts of any size, shape, density and roundness, Dietrich proposed the following equation: For smooth clasts,   For smooth spheres, Water and air are both Newtonian fluids, i.e. they deform continuously and permanently when subjected to external forces. It is therefore convenient to use a non-dimensional approach, which means that dimensionally correct equations that are accurate for Newtonian liquids will also be accurate for Newtonian gases, provided that all the significant variables are taken into account ( In the same way, a dimensionless settling velocity can be defined for spheres by The settling of particles is controlled by shear stress and pressure exerted by the fluid on its surface, called the viscous drag and pressure or form drag, respectively ( The upper limit of Stokes' law of settling is not clear: there is a gradual deviation of the observed settling velocity from the latter, beginning at a Reynolds number which most have considered to be 1, although Eq. For higher Reynolds numbers, fluid accelerations, flow separation and turbulence produced by the settling particles also come into play, so that theoretical predictions are no longer practical. For example, Newton's impact law of settling, where A single settling equation for differently shaped, smooth clasts was proposed by To combine these different equations for The obtained value of log In order to evaluate the best values for First, this study focused on the settling velocities in liquids of individual spheres, spheroids, oblate and prolate spheroids, ellipsoids, discoidal ellipsoids, discs, and rods. For the total of 35 spheres studied by For ellipsoids, the experimental results of The nominal diameters of the pebbles used by Examining the two data sets, it was found that the same coefficient and exponent can be used for both smooth and irregular ellipsoids, namely Data extracted from  For natural grains with unknown axial dimensions where the sizes are derived from sieve analyses, a number of problems arise. First, it is not possible to know the This effect is clearly illustrated by the data of A second set of data employed here, that of As before, the grain sizes and settling velocities were here non-dimensionalized and their log Because the axial ratios of the individual grains are not known, only the left-hand bracket of Eq. Tables A–K, comparing the settling velocity predictions of In the case of settling spheres, the experimental data of As concerns the settling velocity of spheroids (Table B), the data sets of Experiments conducted by  For smooth and irregular ellipsoids (Table E1) the different equations were compared using the data sets of Data for discoidal ellipsoids (Table F1) were extracted from the experimental results of In Finally, the data sets of In summary, whereas Eq.  For natural grains,  As already mentioned in  Two additional clast shapes, for which no information could be obtained from liquids, are also represented in the  Many laboratories use settling tubes instead of sieves to determine sediment size distributions. Employing the data from Zhu and Cheng (1993) and The nominal grain size can be found by increasing the sieve size by 10% ( Eq. One of the advantages of using Eq. This paper was written under the auspices of CONICYT–FONDAP Project 15090013, “Andean Geothermal Center of Excellence (CEGA)”. The Editor of JVGR, Dr. Lionel Wilson, Dr. Guilhem Amin Douillet, and an anonymous reviewer are thanked for their valuable comments which greatly improved this paper.  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at