The ternary catalytic composites, ZnCl2 + FeCl3 + FeCl2, were prepared according to the mixture design methodology and successfully impregnated on walnut and almond shells by microwave-assisted technique followed by carbonization at 500 °C in different atmospheres. The efficiency of fabricated adsorbents was evaluated by decoloration of industrial corn syrup, and the optimum catalytic composites were determined to enhance the performance of activated carbon. The efficiency of adsorbent produced from walnut shell was intensively enhanced with loading 50.0% FeCl3 onto the starting bio-resource. The decoloration efficiency of activated carbon can be increased up to 98% if 16.7% FeCl3 and the same content of FeCl2 are loaded on the almond shell. Also, to achieve appropriate efficiency, the microwave power should be controlled at level of 600 W to produce tar-like materials, independent of agriculture waste composition. Moreover, the carbonization time should be controlled at 30 min to improve the performance of adsorbents. The magnetic activated carbons fabricated as above procedure can be easily separated from corn syrup effluent by applying an external magnetic field. The adsorption efficiency of adsorbents fabricated from bio-resources in the closed vessel is at least 30% higher than those prepared in nitrogen atmosphere which is due to formation of micropores, 2.4 nm, providing a large surface area, 1000 m2 g−1, for syrup decoloration.Fruit shells are one of the most emerging problems in agriculture industries due to deposition in the landfill ( Up to now, activated carbon has been widely applied in industrial scale as an efficient adsorbent due to the unique micro and mesoporous structure, large specific surface area and excellent adsorption capacity ( The disadvantage coming from the application of activated carbon in the treatment of industrial effluents is the difficulty of adsorbent separation which currently is carried out by screening and filtration. With the rapid development of nano-porous materials, a good choice seems to be magnetically separation of particles ( High fructose corn syrup (HFCS) is one of the starch-based sweeteners, which is used as an ingredient and also sold as a final product ( Though activated carbons produced from bioresources can remove impurities from liquors, the employment of these materials as adsorbent is limited in the industrial scale due to different problems in filtration, cake formation and pore blocking. The chemical activation of agriculture wastes by ZnCl The walnut and almond shells collected from local farms in Marand and Shabestar towns in East Azerbaijan Province of Iran. The raw materials were firstly washed with tap water to remove dust and dried in a laboratory oven at 80 °C overnight. The dried shells were crushed, and ground in an agate mortar to obtain the particles smaller than 300 μm by sieving. The low grade of industrial corn syrup with the color of yellow–brown was received from Faravari Fructose Nab Company, Nazarabad, Alborz Province of Iran which was maintained at room temperature. The mixture design methodology (MDM) applied in this investigation for mixing ZnCl A polynomial equation, which describes the property like decoloration efficiency, For preparing magnetic and none-magnetic activated carbon, 15 g of shells was dispersed in 100 ml of salt solutions in which the impregnation ratio was kept at the level of 1.5 and 1.0 (w/w) for walnut and almond shells, respectively. The prepared suspensions were kept for 24 h in room temperature and then were placed in a microwave to achieve the tar-like materials. The impregnated precursors were transferred to a LG microwave (Model MG4013, Korea) heating apparatus with a frequency of 2.45 GHz to carry out the chemical activation for 15 min in which the power and time are controllable. The applied heating apparatus was a domestic conventional microwave which was run in atmosphere condition to impregnate catalytic compositions and achieve tar like precursors. The power of the microwave apparatus, 200–1000 W, and time is changeable manually and is controllable by electronic devices of system. The impregnated precursors were placed in the closed and open ceramic vessels for the carbonization in the normal and nitrogen atmospheres, respectively. The vessels were transferred into an electric furnace in which the temperature was increased up to 500 °C with a rate of 10 °C min The performance of as-prepared activated carbons was investigated by monitoring the decoloration of the low grade of industrial corn syrup. Typically, different content of activated carbons, 25–100 mg, was blended with 20 ml of corn syrup in a glass backer. The adsorption–desorption equilibrium was obtained after the corn syrup was stirred for 4 h. A series of refined syrups were sampled using a magnet to remove the suspended activated carbons. For reliable separation of activated carbons, the syrups were centrifuged with a rate of 3500 rpm. The performance of activated carbons was evaluated using a single beam UV–vis spectrophotometer (Jenway, 6705, UK) by detecting absorbance variation of maximal UV–vis absorption peak at the wavelength of 297 nm, whose blank run was carried out with deionized water. The decoloration efficiency of adsorbents was calculated from the intensity of absorbance peaks of starting and refined syrups. Each experiment was repeated three times and the average of independent runs was reproducible in the error limit of ±2%. Adsorptive properties of activated carbons were measured by using iodine as the adsorbate. The iodine adsorption gives information about the surface activity of activated carbons. The iodine number is defined as the milligrams of iodine adsorbed by 1 g of carbon which was determined according to the standard test method ( The decoloration efficiency of as-prepared activated carbons was investigated by placing the adsorbents in low grade corn syrup for 4 h under mechanical stirring and the results are illustrated in MDM permits the validation of linear, quadratic and other polynomial models to understand the role of each factor on decoloration of corn syrup. Eqs. For activated carbons with walnut shell resource: For activated carbons with almond shell resource: To better evaluate the effect of magnetization of activated carbon on decoloration of corn syrup, the iodine number was determined as represented in Microwave irradiation power is one of the most important parameters in chemical activation because it is a key factor that contributes in impregnation of catalyst composite. The effect of carbonization time on the corn syrup decoloration is represented in  The effect of activated carbon quantity on decoloration of corn syrup was studied in the batch system by adding various dosages of adsorbents in the range of 25–100 mg into the baker containing 20 ml of syrup. The degrees Brix of liquor were fixed at 20, for all batch experiments. The results shown in FTIR spectra of starting shells and the activated carbons produced in optimum conditions by microwave processed technique show the chemical structure of adsorbents, The abroad peaks at 3480 cm   The nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherms of activated carbons obtained by impregnation of D catalytic composite on walnut and almond shells indicate a microporous structure, as plotted in The colorant agents like melanoidins adsorption onto activated carbon can be explained according to mass transfer or intra particle diffusion. The adsorption kinetics is controlled by different steps: (i) colorant agents transfer to the adsorbent particle surface, film diffusion. (ii) Transfer from the adsorbent surface to the intra particle active sites, particle diffusion. (iii) Retention on the active sites via adsorption. The common assumption is that the colorant agents lie on the activated carbon particle surface. The third step is assumed to be fast and can be overlooked. The slowest step is considered particle diffusion as a rate limiting step for adsorption. The rate of adsorption depends on structural properties of adsorbent, e.g., the number of active sites, specific surface area, agent size and the interactions between the activated carbon and colorant agent. The presented study described a novel microwave-assisted technique for impregnation of catalytic composite on agriculture waste shells to produce magnetic activated carbon for decoloration of a low grade of industrial corn syrup. The purification efficiency of adsorbents and structural characteristics were investigated systematically to demonstrate a strategy for fabrication of microporous activated carbon from walnut and almond shells. The obtained results can be summarized as follows: By careful determination of ZnCl The adsorption of colorant molecules from syrup is maximized under microwave irradiation power of 600 W in the impregnation process. The microwave irradiation time of 15 min and carbonization time of 30 min at 500 °C provide the rapid manufacture of magnetic activated carbon for treating corn syrup. Importantly, the carbonization of tar-like materials in closed vessel promises the thermochemical platform to convert impregnated waste residues to valuable adsorbents with high quality in syrup purification which is impossible to achieve the same yield by carbonization in the nitrogen atmosphere. In conclusion, the microporous activated carbon with high specific surface area, 1000 m The authors are very grateful to Faravari Fructose Nab Company, Nazarabad, Alborz Province, Iran, for kind cooperation in providing a condition for industrial sample preparation.