Numerous research studies have been made on the electrostatic separation of granular insulating materials, with many industrial applications in the area of waste electric and electronic equipment (WEEE) recycling. However, very few investigators have studied the separation of finely-ground matter (i.e., granule diameter < 1 mm), in relation with applications in mineral processing, or in food industry. The aim of this work is to evaluate the effect of particle size on the selective sorting of fine particles in a two-rotating-disks-type tribo-aero-electrostatic separator. The experiments are carried out on a synthetic mixture composed of 50% Acrylonitrile Butadiene Styrene (ABS) and 50% Polystyrene (PS) particles of size 250 to 2000 microns. The performance of this separator is evaluated by setting up a measurement system that enables the continuous and simultaneous recording of the charges and the masses of the separated products. The conclusions of this study will serve at the optimum design of an industrial electrostatic separator for the recycling of micronized plastics from WEEE.Waste electrical and electronic equipment (WEEE) recycling is presently part of an eco-design approach aimed at mastering the end-of-life of these products, which very often contain many valuable materials The last but not the least in the above list of physical process, the electrostatic separation is an environmental-friendly technique that makes use of the electric field forces exerted on charged or polarized bodies A wide variety of tribocharging devices have been described in the literature This drawback of the “standard” installations can be avoided by the simultaneous usage of the tribo-electric effect, the Coulomb force and the electric image force The performances of any of these electrostatic separation methods are related to the ratio between the electrical and gravitational forces. The smaller and lighter the granules are, the higher is this ratio and the better the results of the separation. Unfortunately WEEE shredding, grinding and micronizing generate granular mixtures that are characterized by highly-heterogeneous distribution of particle sizes. This heterogeneity severely affects the efficiency of the separation. The aim of the present work is to evaluate the effect of granule size on the selective sorting of finely-ground polymer mixtures in a two-rotating-disk-type tribo-aero-electrostatic separator. The study is carried out on three granule-size classes of two polymers that are representative for the WEEE: Acrylonitrile Butadiene Styrene (ABS) and Polystyrene (PS). The process control variables considered in the study are the fluidization air flow-rate and the high-voltage applied to the rotating-disk electrodes. Each granular sample employed in the experiments is composed of 150 g of ABS and 150 g of PS, belonging to one of the size-classes #1: The two-rotating-disk-type tribo-aéro-electrostatic separator designed by authors and built by the CITF Company, Saint Cybardeaux, France, used in the present study is presented in The electric field is generated between two rotating disk electrodes (stainless steel; diameter: 220 mm; thickness: 2 mm) which are located in the separation chamber, at 120 mm of each other. The disks are connected to reversible (positive or negative) high voltage power supplies, and entrained at The process is multifactorial, and the experimental analysis is carried out by considering the most influential factors: the high voltage A set of four experiments is performed, at a constant distance between the disks electrodes. Vary the air flow-rate φ between 7.9 m Vary the air flow rate φ between 6.4 m Vary the high voltage Vary the high voltage The results of the first set of experiments carried out with a 50% ABS +50% PS mixture composed of size-class #1granules show that separation improves with increasing the fluidization air flow-rate. The curves in In the case of size-class #1 samples, the somewhat flatter PS granules (see their aspect in As expected, fluidization of the coarser granules requires higher flow-rates. At φ = 7.9 m The analysis of the data reveals that the recovery of 2/3 of the PS granules necessitates about 40 s for the size-class #1, at φ = 8.9 m The total electric charge of the granules accumulated in the two compartments of the collector for various air flow-rates φ can be examined in The effect of the applied high-voltage The high-voltage The results of the last experiment, performed with a 50% ABS +50% PS granular mixture composed of 33% of each of the three size-classes, at φ = 7.9 m Most of the mass that remained in the fluidized bed (71.6%) was composed of size-class #1 granules ( The experiments pointed out the effect of granule size on the outcome of the electrostatic separation of granular polymer mixtures in two-rotating-disk-type devices. The continuous and simultaneous monitoring of the mass and charge of the granules collected at the two electrodes facilitates the study of the tribo-aero-electrostatic separation process. The increase of air-flow rate within the limits of the fluidized bed regime improves the tribocharging conditions of mixed granular polymers and enables the separation of larger quantities of materials per time unit. The collection of the tribocharged granules at the surface of the disk electrodes is favored by the increase of the applied high-voltage. However, this voltage should not exceed the threshold of corona discharge onset. The separation is better for more finely-ground materials (size classes #2: 500 μm < The design of the industrial tribo-aero-electrostatic separator should be adapted for the continuous processing of fine powders: perfect sealing of all machine parts in contact with the materials, fully-controllable product feed-rate, and fully-adjustable air flow-rate. This work was partially funded by the French Government program “