The change in the composite hardness with penetration depth derived from nanoindentation tests conducted on coated systems, which involve the deposition of multilayer coatings, in general exhibits a complex shape, as a consequence of the sequential contribution of each coating layer to the composite hardness during indentation loading. In spite that there are a number of models, which have been proposed for describing the change of the composite hardness with penetration depth for monolayer coatings, as well as for determining the coating and substrate hardness, very few research works have addressed the problem of describing this kind of data for multilayer coatings. In the present communication, a rational approach is proposed for extending two models widely used for the analysis of monolayer coatings, in order to describe the composite hardness data of multilayer coatings, as well as for determining the hardness of each individual layer and that of the substrate. Thus, a modified form of the models earlier advanced by Korsunsky et al. and Puchi-Cabrera, as well as their computational instrumentation, are proposed. The extension of both models to deal with multilayer coatings is conducted on the basis of the model developed by Iost et al., in order to adapt the Jönsson–Hogmark model to the analysis of indentation data of multilayer coatings. Such a methodology provides a means of computing the volume fraction of each individual layer in the coating, which contributes to the composite hardness. According to the results obtained, this scheme seems to be general enough to be applicable to different hardness models other than the Jönsson–Hogmark model. The proposed modified models are validated employing nanoindentation results obtained from a 2024-T6 aluminum alloy coated with a diamond-like carbon film, employing electroless NiP as intermediate layer. The advantages and disadvantages of the different models employed in the analysis are thoroughly discussed.volume fraction of the coating material volume fraction of the substrate material indentation size effect parameter for the coating, GPa indentation size effect parameter for the substrate, GPa constant in the Jönsson–Hogmark model penetration depth, nm hardness of the fully dense material, GPa composite hardness, GPa coating hardness, GPa intrinsic coating hardness, GPa intrinsic substrate hardness, GPa substrate hardness, GPa fraction of coating thickness number of experimental data points number of layers in the multilayer coating number of material parameters in the model constant in the Korsunsky et al. models constant in the Puchi-Cabrera model coating thickness, nm constant in the Luo et al. model constants in the Korsunsky et al. model constants in the Puchi-Cabrera model sum of squares, GPa In general, multilayer coatings exhibit better mechanical properties and higher chemical inertness than monolayer coatings and therefore, they are widely employed for the improvement of the surface properties of different parts and components subjected to diverse forms of surface damage, which include among others, wear, scratch, abrasion, corrosion and high temperature oxidation. In particular, the improvement in mechanical properties of multilayer coatings arises from the presence of different interlayers in their architecture, which makes possible the deflection of cracks, increasing their ability to reduce crack propagation and therefore, leading to a better performance of the coated system against damage by wear, scratch and abrasion. Due to their outstanding properties and therefore, to the exceptional capabilities provided to the coated system, multilayer coatings have attracted a great deal of attention and in the past few years have become an important research objective. Thus, a wide range of scientific and technological aspects concerning these coatings have been investigated, which include, among others, the correlation between microstructure, mechanical properties (hardness and elastic modulus), impact resistance and tribological performance of different systems As pointed out by Kataria et al. However, in order to accomplish this objective the influence of both the layers below and the substrate should be avoided. In the case of monolayer films deposited onto a given substrate, particularly for extracting the film intrinsic hardness, usually the rule of thumb of 10% of the coating thickness is applied. Nevertheless, this rule is not expected to be fulfilled strictly, since it depends significantly on the difference between the elastic and plastic properties of film and substrate (in the case of monolayer coatings) or between the properties of the different layers, which constitute the multilayer coating. Multilayer coatings are quite heterogeneous materials and therefore, nanoindentation testing techniques represent the most suitable means of evaluating their global response under indentation loading, as well as assessing the mechanical properties and damage mechanisms of the individual layers. However, given the heterogeneous nature of these materials, it is expected that under indentation a complex stress state develops, as a consequence of the difference in mechanical properties between the layers, as well as between the layers and substrate and that such complex stresses have in turn an influence on the indentation response of the coated system. Despite that a number of models have been developed for the description of the composite hardness of coatings systems, which involve the deposition of a monolayer coating The original model advanced by Jönsson and Hogmark Therefore, the present investigation has been conducted in order to develop a simple and systematic methodology leading to a similar modification of two other models widely employed in the description of the composite hardness of coated systems. These models include that advanced by Korsunsky et al. The detailed account of the modification of the model advanced Jönsson and Hogmark In the original model proposed by Jönsson and Hogmark In the above equation C represents a constant, which depends on the indentation behavior of the coating material and indenter geometry Since the volume fraction of the coating material should fulfill the condition that: 0 Thus, for a monolayer coating the composite hardness, H In the case of a multilayer coating composed of N Eq. The composite hardness of the multilayer coating would then be given by: If required, an indentation size effect (ISE) for the different layers and substrate can be considered, by assuming that Therefore, Eqs. In the above equations a According to the model originally advanced by Korsunsky et al. The above equation was subsequently generalized On the other hand, as far as the model advanced by Puchi-Cabrera In Eqs. The modification and computational implementation of both models, in order to describe the composite hardness of a coated system involving a multilayer coating, based on the ideas developed by Iost et al. For the jth layer of the coating: In the case of the model advanced by Puchi-Cabrera In Eqs. The illustration of the applicability of these modified versions of the models advanced by Korsunsky et al. The modified models presented in the previous section were validated employing the nanoindentation data obtained from a coated system consisting of a 2024-T6 aluminum alloy, which was plated with a NiP coating, as intermediate layer and subsequently coated with a hydrogenated a-C:H diamond-like carbon (DLC) film, commercially known as Dymon-iC The hardness versus penetration depth data was determined by means of nanoindentation tests using a MTS XP Nano Indenter under a continuous stiffness measurement mode and equipped with a Berkovich indenter. Prior to indentation tests, the calibration of the indenter tip was carried out employing a fused silica sample. 25 indentations were conducted on three different samples of the coated system and the hardness versus indentation depth was recorded continuously up to approximately 7000 Prior to the deposition of the DLC coating, a CrC intermediate layer was deposited onto the NiP plating. Therefore, in principle, the coated system encompasses a DLC coating and a CrC film, which together have a thickness of approximately 2.2 Therefore, as far as the validation of the proposed models is concerned, the multilayer coating will be considered as a first layer of DLC with a thickness of 900  The preliminary description of the experimental data by means of the modified JH model indicates, according to the different values determined for the constant C, that under indentation loading the DLC layer tends to fracture, whereas the CrC and CNiPCr layers tend to deform plastically. Therefore, by setting C As can be observed in As the penetration depth increases the CrC layer starts to contribute to the composite hardness and up to a penetration depth of approximately 300 The contribution of each layer to the evolution of the composite hardness with penetration depth, according to this model, can be clearly observed in The results concerning the use of the modified form of the Korsunsky et al. model (K) are shown in In order to compute the intrinsic hardness of the different layers by means of this model, the corresponding parameters K Regarding the modified model advanced by Puchi-Cabrera (PC), In the first place, the range interval for the β An interesting feature of the modified K and PC models is the prediction of a hardness value for the electroless NiP “substrate” in the range of approximately 7.5 The change in the volume fraction of each layer, which contributes to the composite hardness, according to the modified PC model, is shown in Thus, for each of the composite hardness models that have been presented, it is possible to envisage the way in which each of the layers of the multilayer coating contributes to the determination of the hardness response of the coated system, depending on its location, the behavior that it exhibits during indentation loading and the relative displacement of the indenter. Clearly, the quality of the theoretical description of the model depends on the number of parameters employed in the fit, which in turn determines the MSE associated to the model. In a recent paper, Iost et al. On the other hand, the modified K and PC models are able to describe more precisely the change in the composite hardness with indentation depth than the JH model, but at the expense of a significant increase in the number of parameters involved in the models. Both approaches also provide a reasonable estimate of the substrate hardness, indicated by the independent evaluation of the hardness of the latter. Regarding the intrinsic hardness value of the different layers involved in the coating, it is interesting to observe that the three models predict a hardness in the range of 6–7  The relatively low hardness value that has been found for the DLC film in the present work could be due to different reasons. In the first place, it is well known that the hardness of DLC films deposited by PVD processes depends significantly on the deposition conditions. The work conducted by Michler et al. However, not only deposition conditions could have a significant influence on this mechanical property, but also the intrinsic defects present in the film could play an important role. It is well known that porosity could give rise to a significant decrease in the mechanical properties of different materials. In this sense, Luo et al. In the above equation, H Besides its low hardness value, the DLC film analyzed in the present investigation also showed the trend of undergoing cracking during indentation, which was observed on the indentation curves as a sudden decrease in hardness with penetration depth, as shown in As far as the hardness of the CrC film predicted by the three models analyzed in the present work is concerned, as shown in In relation to the CNiPCr layer, given its diffusive nature and location close to the NiP substrate, both its hardness and mechanical behavior under indentation loading are expected to be very similar to the latter. This is effectively predicted by the three models under consideration, as shown in Finally, A further improvement of the modified form of the K and PC models would be a rational reduction in the number of parameters involved. For example, taking into consideration that for the modified K model the β Thus, The assumption of a constant value for the β In summary, it can be clearly observed that the description of the change in the composite hardness as a function of penetration depth for coated systems, which involve multilayer coatings, could be conducted by means of different models. As the number of parameters involved in the fitting procedure increases, the robustness of the particular model employed decreases, whereas the MSE also decreases. However, the quality of the description of the experimental data is expected to be significantly better. These features are clearly observed when the results of the modified JH model are compared with those of the modified forms of the K and PC models. Therefore, the advantages of the different models could be better exploited by making use of them in a combined form. Firstly, a preliminary evaluation of the intrinsic hardness of the different layers, as well as their behavior under indentation loading can be obtained by means of the JH model. Subsequently, this information can be further employed in order to carry out a more precise description of the change in the composite hardness with indentation depth by means of any of the other two models, which require the fit of a larger number of parameters. A rational modification of the models earlier advanced by Korsunsky et al. Professor E. S. Puchi-Cabrera gratefully acknowledges the financial support of the