On a worldwide basis there exist large stocks of by-products from the production of ferrous and non-ferrous metals. For example, in Scandinavia there is a site which currently has 60000tons of stainless steel trapped in slag waste. Even at current market prices this is a valuable resource. However, current technological approaches, such as ball milling, are uneconomic. High power ultrasound (HPU) is a novel approach to this problem to allow recovery of the stainless steel and a recycling path for the silicate slag as a building material. At the University of Strathclyde, pulsed power (the compression of electrical energy with time) has been used to generate HPU shock waves from spark discharges in water. Trials using a prototype HPU system have demonstrated that stainless steel metal can be separated from the slag waste by-product rapidly and with low power consumption. Glass may also be comminuted for recycling using the HPU system. The results of the trials are presented and proposed methods for industrial scale-up are discussed.Millions of tons of waste are generated as a direct consequence of new metal production. In the stainless steel making process for example, by-products take the form of a dense slag—in which is contained a percentage of stainless steel metal. Currently, there is no efficient processing method to extract the metal and hence the waste is stockpiled in landfill sites. For example, a site in Scandinavia currently holds three million tons of slag waste, of which approximately 60 The deployment of pulsed power to generate high power ultrasound (HPU) provides a novel approach to this problem, allowing the recovery of stainless steel and a recycling path for silicate slag used as a building material. Pulsed power is effectively the compression of electrical energy, with pulses being dissipated from source to load on a timescale of ns–μs. This compression means that high peak power output pulses in the range 10–100 HPU is generated when an electrical breakdown, induced by the application of a high voltage pulse with a sub-microsecond rise time, occurs between two electrodes immersed in a working fluid medium such as oil or water (see The electrical energy, initially stored capacitively, is released into the plasma over tens of microseconds resulting in peak powers of 10–100 The pressure in the plasma channel at the end of the spark discharge is much higher than the external pressure, As the gas-filled cavity generated by the spark discharge reaches its maximum radius,  The HPU spark generated pulse, with pressure amplitude of hundreds of MPa, impacts upon the material being processed (slag particles with inclusions) and causes their fracturing and fragmentation. Two main sorts of energy are realised during the spark generated “explosion”: energy of ionised hot gases (bubble energy) and strain energy transmitted into the surrounding media by the HPU pulse (acoustic wave energy). Reflection of the HPU pulse from the joint between the slag matrix and an inclusion (a stainless steel particle for example) with an acoustic impedance different from the impedance of the matrix, leads to an increase in the tensile stress along this boundary, causing interfacial spalling and the separation of the inclusion from the matrix. The tensile tail of the strain wave and tensile stresses arising upon the reflection of the shock wave from the interface of different components causes boundary shattering. With a homogeneous particle, the HPU pulse will induce compression, which causes fragmentation. This can be enhanced if flaws or inclusions are present where induced tensile stress can cause cracks to propagate in the material. When dealing with stainless steel slag, the system consists of two phases, stainless steel inclusions and surrounding silicate material. The shock waves therefore initially cause the stainless steel to become separated from the silicate matrix through the first process. The silicate is then affected by the second process causing this to fragment into smaller particles. This paper reports on tests performed to establish the relevance of the application of HPU to the processing and recycling of materials. The research has been funded jointly by the DTI and NRS Technologies Limited as a KTP programme between the company and the High Voltage Technologies Group at the University of Strathclyde. The results reported in this paper have been obtained using treatment chambers based round a point–point electrode gap submerged in water. The gap was broken down using pulses provided by an inverting HV pulsed power supply. The breakdown leads to the production of shock waves and HPU which cause fractures to occur in solids within the treatment chamber ( A total of three treatment chambers were used for comminution, the basic design being illustrated in The initial chamber used in proof of concept work has a diameter of 7 Two pulsed power supplies have been used in this work. In the initial tests on the stainless steel slag a supply based round three 100 The charging voltage used was 35 Analysis of The smallest chamber was used in a series of initial trials to test the suitability of using HPU as a method of treating stainless steel slag. In this work the high energy, low repetition rate power supply was used. A sample of stainless steel slag was sorted by hand to remove any large obvious pieces of metal. The appearance of the final sample is shown in The total mass of the sample was ≈240 It was clear from the results of the preliminary tests that electrical pulse induced HPU provides a suitable mechanism to free stainless steel from a slag matrix. However, from other work performed within the High Voltage Technologies group, it was clear that the efficiency of conversion of electrical energy into acoustic energy in the form of HPU pulses reduces at pulse energies above 50 In order to determine optimum electrical parameters, i.e. pulse energy and pulse repetition rate, to be used for the comminution process, a systematic testing schedule was performed using the 15.5 Charging voltages of 30, 32.5 and 35 The glass shards were obtained by shattering the glass through mechanical impact. Thicker pieces of glass, i.e. the neck and base, were removed before the sample was placed in the treatment chamber. The average size of the shards was of the order of 20 The material in the treatment chamber was then subjected to 60 After treatment the glass particle size had been reduced to less than 1.7 Various tests were performed to examine the influence of the electrical parameters of the impulses applied to the gap on the behaviour of the treatment process.  At the lowest pulse repetition rate, 5 The linear relationship between the mass of glass processed and time of treatment observed for the lower pulse rates suggest that the mass of glass processed depends purely on the number of pulses applied to the system, and consequently the number of HPU events which have occurred. The saturation effect observed at the higher pulse rates appears to occur when between 90% and 95% of the glass material originally in the chamber has been treated. At this point the chamber is mostly empty and the efficiency of the process decreases. There are two reasons why the decrease in the processing rate may be occurring. The internal structure and stresses present in the glass particles remaining in the chamber towards the end of the process may be such as to reduce the probability of the glass breaking under the influence of the shock waves. Secondly attrition may be taking place between the glass particles in the chamber as a result of agitation caused by the HPU pulses. As the quantity of the material in the chamber decreases, the probability of collisions occurring between glass particles also will decrease, leading to a reduction in the attrition occurring in the system. It is not clear at this point how significant collisions between glass particles are to the processing rate for the material. It is informative to plot the relationship between the mass of material treated and the total electrical energy input into the system. This has been done in From the graph it can be seen that independent of the pulse repetition rate used, the results all lie along a common curve. Again the curve saturates when the majority of the material in the chamber has been processed. The linear section of the curve, when less than 80% of the material has been treated, indicates that the mass of glass treated is independent of the pulse repetition rate and depends only on the amount of energy that has been input into the chamber. It is important to realise however, that although the mass of material processed is independent of the pulse repetition rate, the rate at which this mass is processed is affected by the pulse repetition rate. This can be clearly seen in As can be seen from From the gradients of these lines, together with the electrical energy of the pulses at the various voltages, it is possible to calculate the energy cost to treat one metric tonne of glass using the HPU system. These calculations indicate that the cost would be 32 The data presented in Plotting trend-lines through these sets of points in From the results obtained in these tests of the HPU treatment system on glass, the following general conclusions can be drawn. The total energy required to treat a given amount of waste seems independent of the pulse energy and the pulse repetition rate. However the speed at which glass can be treated seems to have a linear dependence on both pulse energy and pulse repetition rate. One area of concern in the use of HPU to treat waste material is that as the spherical shock wave propagates through the liquid its peak intensity will diminish, therefore it is expected that there will be a finite volume of material that can be treated with a single HPU source. A larger test chamber (24.5 Having tested the suitability of the lower pulse energies and higher repetition rates for the treatment of glass in the larger chambers, tests were then performed to process stainless steel slag under these conditions. The initial tests performed using the small chamber and the larger pulse energies have been repeated using lower pulse energies and higher repetition rates. These tests have been performed in the 15.5 A sample of stainless steel slag was placed in the 15.5 The system was pulsed at a voltage level of 35 The stainless steel was separated from the silicate material in the upper chamber and weighed. The results from this test are shown in The stainless steel recovered is shown in The results of this test indicate that the lower pulse energies are capable of separating the silicate material from the stainless steel and can also reduce the size of the silicate materials. The input energy required to process the 400 The application of HPU generated by the electrical breakdown of a water gap is capable of separating stainless steel from a silicate matrix as found in stainless steel slag. The electrical energy of the pulses required to generate the HPU can be relatively small, of the order of 35 HPU has also been shown to be an efficient method of reducing glass to a powder. This may be of significant interest to people involved in the glass industry, particularly in the area of recycling laminated glass from vehicles. At present, research is ongoing into characterising the behaviour of the treatment system with stainless steel slag to determine the optimum parameters for the electrical discharges. It is intended to develop a technology demonstration system within the next 18 months.