This research reports on an investigation of the performance of inorganic membranes for use in the percrystallisation of nickel sulphate hydrate. In this novel process, the separation of the solvent (water) and the crystallised solute (nickel sulphate hydrate) occurs continuously in a single-step, avoiding further downstream processing (crystal filtering and drying). The inorganic membranes were synthesised with sucrose solution followed by a post vacuum-assisted impregnation of the coated film on a α-alumina substrate and carbonisation under nitrogen atmosphere. The highest fluxes measured were 22 L m−2 h−1 and 1 kg m−2 h−1 (40 g L−1) for water and nickel respectively. Interestingly, the transport of solution through the membrane also affected the hydration state of the nickel sulphate, as well as the crystal type and shape. High water fluxes delivered pure nickel sulphate heptahydrate with elongated and laminar crystal particles (~200 μm). Lower water fluxes produced both heptahydrate and hexahydrate salts with approximately spherical particles (also ~200 μm). There a number of factors that influence the crystallisation reaction such as the rate of evaporation which affects water availability and the resultant temperature at the permeate side of the membrane. Finally, the activation energy for nickel sulphate crystallisation was estimated to be approximately 16 kJ mol−1 based on feed solution temperatures.Owing to its electrochemical and electric properties ( The crystallisation of solutes is an important industrial unit operation widely used for the production of a range of products such as sodium chloride ( Inorganic membrane technology has only recently been proposed for assisting crystallisation processes. In 2018, Motuzas and co-workers ( This work demonstrates for the first time the use of carbon membranes for the percrystallisation of nickel sulphate, where operation conditions affect the hydration state of the formed salt. This work also shows that membrane percrystallisation is an effective way of crystallising the solute whilst concomitantly separating the solvent (water) from the target salt in a single-step process. The effect of carbon content in the membrane and testing conditions on water and nickel fluxes were investigated. A number of characterisation techniques were used to analyse the membrane morphological features such as scanning electron microscopy and helium pycnometry. The formed crystals were also analysed by scanning electron microscopy, thermogravimetry and X-ray diffraction to determine the particle size, morphologies and the degree of hydration of the resultant salt. Membrane coating solutions were prepared by dissolving 20, 30, 40 and 50 wt% sucrose (>99.8% Chem-supply) into demineralised water. The solutions were mixed, followed by 30 min of sonication. Subsequently, the solutions were used to dip-coat tubular α − alumina substrates (Ceramic Oxide Fabricators, Australia). The substrates had a mean pore size of 0.1 μm, a total length of ~4 cm, external and internal diameters of 1 and 0.45 cm, respectively. Dip coating (built in house) was performed on the outer shell of the α − alumina support (Ceramic Oxide Fabricators (Aus.) Pty Ltd., Australia). Each tube was submerged in a solution for 3 min, with a submersion and withdrawal speed of ~31 cm min The morphology of the membranes were analysed by scanning electron microscope (SEM), using a Jeol JSM-7001F SEM with a hot (Schottky) electron gun and an acceleration voltage of 5 kV. As-prepared carbon membrane samples were crushed and annealed in air using thermogravetric analysis (TGA-DSC1 Mettler Toledo) to determine the carbon content. The heating rate was set to 10 °C min  Percrystallised nickel sulphate samples were subsequently removed from the crystal collection chamber for further characterisation using the SEM and TGA equipment above described. In this case, TGA analysis was used to quantify the mass of dry nickel sulphate by heating the powder up to 800 °C with a heating rate of 10 °C min The transport of solute and solvent in membrane percrystallisation is schematically idealized in In terms of chemical engineering and hydrometallurgical processes, there are many potential advantages of this novel membrane prescrystallisation process.  Contrary to the α-alumina substrate that has a white colour, the dark black colour of the membranes is associated with the carbonisation of the deposited sugar solution at high temperatures. It should be noted that the dark colour is uniform throughout the membrane tubes, as previous works using other carbon precursors such as P123 (triblock     The produced nickel sulphate particles were analysed by XRD, where the diffraction patterns of the obtained samples are given in The formation of different crystalline phases is related to the mechanism of membrane percrystallisation in Crystal morphological studies by SEM imaging show differences between the pure heptahydrate ( From a chemical equilibrium point of view, nickel sulphate heptahydrate is favoured over hexahydrate at temperatures below 28.5 °C considering Eq. 1 at standard conditions with data from HSC Chemistry Software v7.11 (2011). On the permeate side of the membrane, where nickel sulphate hydrate is being crystallised, the temperature is lowered due to the endothermic evaporation of water which favours heptahydrate. However, the presence of a strong vacuum would drive the reaction to the right and favour hexahydrate by promoting water evaporation based on Le Chatelier's principle. From these experiments, our results suggest that the percrystallisation mechanism based on the chemical equilibrium considerations alone as nickel sulphate heptahydrate may have formed preferentially due to the fast reaction kinetics at the wet thin-film interface. This work demonstrates how carbon membrane percrystallisation is a promising technology for hydrometallurgical applications. By tuning the carbon morphological features of the membrane and nickel process conditions, it was possible to attain products with differing hydration states and shapes. On one hand, pure nickel sulphate heptahydrate with elongated and laminar crystal particles (~200 μm) were obtained by using membranes generating high fluxes. On the other hand, a mix of heptahydrate and hexahydrate salts with approximate spherical particles (also ~200 μm) were produced by low flux membranes. Aspect of the reaction pathway, kinetic and equilibrium factors were discussed. The highest flux obtained for nickel was 1 kg m The authors acknowledge the financial support for this research from the