Background
                  Although there have been a small number of studies reporting single bone fixation of either radius or ulna as well as hybrid fixation, the paucity of data for the hybrid fixation method still remains.
               
                  Hypothesis
                  Hybrid fixation with plate and IM nailing would achieve good fixation and functional outcome, minimal damage to soft tissues and lower re-fracture risk.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  Forty cadavers (20 males, 20 females; mean age 68.06, SD 1.58years) were selected in biomechanical study under axial loading, bending loading, and torsional loading. Eighty-seven patients (47 males, 40 females; mean age 38.03±0.88years) were enrolled in the clinical study and randomly received different fixation: both-bone plate fixation or both-bone intramedullary nailing, plate fixation of ulna and intramedullary nailing of radius and intramedullary nailing of ulna and plate fixation of radius.
               
                  Results
                  In the biomechanical study, intramedullary nailing of ulna and plate fixation of radius had similar results with that using both-bone plate method under axial, bending and torsional loading (All P
                     >0.05), suggesting the more stable fixation compared with the other two groups (All P
                     <0.05). In clinical research, both-bone intramedullary nailing was related to shortest operative time, smallest wound size and periosteal stripping area compared with other three groups (P
                     <0.05). Patients receiving intramedullary nailing of ulna and plate fixation of radius showed the lowest incidence of postoperative complications and the best functional recovery outcome comparing with other three groups of patients (Both P
                     <0.05).
               
                  Conclusion
                  The hybrid fixation method of intramedullary nailing of ulna and plate fixation of radius showed good stability in biomechanics, fewer complications and better functional clinical outcomes.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  Level II, prospective randomised study.Forearm fractures are common skeletal injury and most occur in the childhood group. There is an increasing trend in the incidence worldwide It was hypothesized that hybrid fixation with plate and IM nailing would achieve good fixation and functional outcome, minimal damage to soft tissues and lower re-fracture. Although there have been a small number of studies reporting single bone fixation of either radius or ulna as well as hybrid fixation The aim of our study was to evaluate the differences in biomechanical stability and clinical outcomes of four different fixation methods for both-bone diaphyseal fracture: both-bone plate fixation, both-bone IM nailing fixation, plate fixation of ulna and IM nailing fixation of radius, and IM nailing of ulna and plate fixation of radius. We aim to determine which method of fixation is more feasible in the treatment of both-bone diaphyseal forearm fractures in clinical practice. This study included two parts: a cadaveric study to investigate biomechanical characteristics and a prospective study on patients to investigate clinical outcomes. The use of human cadaveric specimens and the clinical study were all approved by Regional Ethics Committee of our hospital and the clinical study was performed in accordance with the Helsinki Declaration. Informed consents were obtained from family members or legal guardians for inclusion of cadavers and parents for clinical research, respectively. For the cadaveric research, 40 fresh human cadaver forearms (20 males and 20 females; mean age 68.06, SD 1.58 For plate fixation, a 6-hole compression plate (Smith & Nephew Inc., London, UK) was placed after the reduction of fracture model. Then three screws (Smith & Nephew Inc., London, UK) were fixed at each end of the fracture line to obtain stability. For ulnar intramedullary nail fixation, a guide pin (Smith & Nephew Inc., London, UK) was inserted into the medullary cavity through olecroanon and the position was assured at the center of medullary cavity. Once the guide pin position had been accepted, a 6-mm hollowness reamer was introduced to expand the medullary cavity. Intramedullary reaming was then performed 1.0 All the biochemical experiments were conducted in a lab of Shanghai Biomechanical Engineering Institute. Testing was carried out using a universal testing device (HT-9102, Hung Ta Instrument Co., Ltd, China), whereby axial compression loads as well as bending and torsion loads were applied. Firstly, the prepared specimen of ulna and radius was placed on the device. Then the transducer, loading plate (HT-9102, Hung Ta Instrument Co., Ltd, China) and roller were fixed. The distal part of bone was also embedded in a tailor-made mold for fixation in the testing device. Following the adjustment for all the instruments, pre-experiment was conducted to eliminate the temporal effects of bone creeping and chalasis. Then formal test was carried out. The specimens were loaded (at a rate of 1.4 For the prospective study, a total of 87 consecutive patients (47 males and 40 females; mean age 38.03, SD 0.88 All the surgery procedures were performed by the same group of surgeons with at least 5 For IM nailing (Smith & Nephew Inc., London, UK), preoperative radiographs taken on the uninjured forearm confirmed the moulding of IM nail trial mode. For ulna, the incision was chosen at the top of olecroanon. For radius, the incision was chosen at the Lister's tubercle. The forearm was drafted and performed with closed reduction or limited open reduction under the C-arm fluoroscopy device. Then a guide pin was inserted into the medullary cavity and a 6 All patients received a routine postoperative regime using our integrated forearm fracture care pathway. The main difference was that patients in group A were allowed to take the flexion and abduction exercises as well as wrist and elbow range of motion exercises 24 The surgical trauma parameters, functional outcome and postoperative complications were recorded to assess the four fixation methods. The surgical trauma parameters included operative time, incision size and degree of periosteal stripping. The functional outcome was evaluated according to the Anderson scoring standard All the statistical analyses were performed with SPSS version 11.0 software (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). The measurement data were presented as mean There was no significant difference of the selected specimens in the four groups in the terms of age, gender, cadaveric weight, specimen height, specimen weight, as well as the cross size ( With the increase in axial loading, loading-strain of the four groups all showed proportional increase ( With the increase in bending loading, loading-strain and loading-radial degree of the four groups all showed proportional increase ( With the increase in torsional loading, loading-angle of the four groups all showed proportional increase ( The baseline characteristics of patients are shown in The follow-up rate was 100%, with a mean follow-up time of 23.4 In this study, we conducted two parts of researches on four different fixation methods: a cadaveric study on a total of 40 cadavers to investigate biomechanical stability under axial, bending and torsional loadings; and a prospective study on a total of 87 patients to investigate surgery-related trauma parameters, functional outcome and postoperative complications. Our present study aimed to propose a fixation method for treating adult both-bone diaphyseal forearm fractures with a better overall outcome. The results showed that both-bone IM nailing method presented with shorter operative time, smaller wound size and periosteal stripping area, that both-bone plate fixation method presented with better biomechanical stability, and that the hybrid fixation method with IM nailing of ulna and plate fixation of radius showed better biomechanical stability, fewer complications and well functional outcomes. Many studies have compared the IM nailing method with plate fixation method Most importantly, it was also found in our clinical study that the patients in group D (IM nailing fixation of ulna and plate fixation of radius) presented fewer complications and better functional outcomes compared with other three methods ( Steffner et al. has reported that the torsional stiffness with IM nailing was low compared with plate fixation for humeral shaft fractures Several limitations to this study must be addressed. First, the cases of patients with both-bone diaphyseal forearm fractures were insufficient, and it might affect the statistical accuracy. Second, the follow-up time was a little short. Hence, further research on a large adult's population for long follow-up time should be conducted to assess the clinical values of this fixation method in treating both-bone midshaft forearm fractures. Among the four different fixation methods for treating both-bone diaphyseal forearm fractures in adults, the hybrid fixation method with IM nailing of ulna and plate fixation of radius showed presented with good stability in biomechanics, the lowest complication rate and best functional recovery outcomes. Hence, it seemed that it was a more feasible treatment for both-bone diaphyseal forearm fractures in adults in clinical practice, but the type of fracture and the quality of plate reduction for the radius could also influence the clinical outcome. The authors declare that they have no competing interest. This study was supported by Shanghai City Health Bureau Youth Research Project (2008Y062). Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 