A spatial model for process properties allows for improved production planning in mining by considering the process variability of the deposit. Hitherto, machine-learning modelling methods have been underutilised for spatial modelling in geometallurgy. The goal of this project is to find an efficient way to integrate process properties (iron recovery and mass pull of the Davis tube, iron recovery and mass pull of the wet low intensity magnetic separation, liberation of iron oxides, and 
                        
                           
                              P
                              80
                           
                        
                     ) for an iron ore case study into a spatial model using machine-learning methods. The modelling was done in two steps. First, the process properties were deployed into a geological database by building non-spatial process models. Second, the process properties estimated in the geological database were extracted together with only their coordinates (x, y, z) and iron grades and spatial process models were built. Modelling methods were evaluated and compared in terms of relative standard deviation (RSD). The lower RSD for decision tree methods suggests that those methods may be preferential when modelling non-linear process properties.liberation of iron oxides mass pull in Davis tube mass pull in WLIMS Size passing fraction = 80% recovery in Davis tube recovery in WLIMS input variables to the spatial process model input variables to the non-spatial process model process model (spatial) process model (spatial) predicted for the testing subset process model (non-spatial) Classifier is an arithmetic average from EN, LR, SMO, IBk, K Davis tube Elastic Net geometallurgical comminution test Instance-bases learning with parameter k instance-based classifier Luossavaara-Kiirunavaara AB Linear regression Luleå University of Technology M5Rules lacks explanation in literature Classifier is a median estimated from EN, LR, SMO, IBk, K primary resource efficiency for enhanced prediction Quantitative Evaluation of Minerals by Scanning electron microscopy Random forest relative standard deviation Saturation Magnetization Analyser Sequential minimal optimization for support vector regression Waikato Environment for Knowledge Analysis developed at the University of Waikato, New Zealand. wet low intensity magnetic separation is mean of population is standard deviation one dimensional two dimensional three dimensional Geometallurgy is an interdisciplinary approach aimed at linking geological variability and variability in the beneficiation processes of the mining value chain by means of spatial and/or non-spatial predictive models ( Machine-learning is a part of computer science that focuses on studying mathematical models and algorithms to make predictions. Predictions are developed through the interpretation of data and patterns by connecting the data with the knowledge set and developing the learning algorithms ( Building reasonable predictive model using machine-learning methods requires a trial and error approach using either supervised or unsupervised learning algorithms. Supervised learning assigns points to the classes based on class labels (pre-defined) classes. Unsupervised learning deals with segmenting feature space into classes without any previous training ( The aim of this study is to develop a methodology for integrating process properties into a spatial model by using machine-learning methods and to compare performance of these machine-learning methods in terms of their precision. Precision here is expressed as relative standard deviation (RSD). The improvement of the machine-learning methods was not a part of the study, since machine-learning methods used here are well established. However, this study can be used as a guideline for selecting a suitable machine-learning tool for modelling process data. The study uses samples from the Leveäniemi iron ore mine in Sweden. Six process properties are tested integration into a spatial model using machine-learning methods: iron recovery, mass pull of Davis tube, wet low intensity magnetic separation, liberation of iron oxides, and The Leveäniemi iron ore mine ( The first data set is comprised of 13 ore sample. The selection of the samples is based on the geological variability of the ore body and controlled by the mine geologist. Each ore sample (feed) is subjected to metallurgical tests. As presented in Products of the tests and feed were subjected to mineral characterisation. The testing methods for the ore samples were selected based on the existing process in the Svappavaara processing plant for magnetite ore. The process includes comminution with primary rod mill, secondary pebble mill, and separation with wet low intensity magnetic separation ( The second dataset is comprised of spatial geological data, which is available as a production geological database and includes information from 82 drill cores divided into 5550 samples (positions in the database). Each sample in the database has a unique ID number and can be spatially identified with its orthogonal coordinates (x, y, z). Drill core samples, listed in the geological database, are assayed for 24 elements (Al, As, Ba, CaO, Cl, Co, Cr The spatial model of the process properties is built by the methodology illustrated in To the best of found knowledge, machine-learning has not been widely applied to the spatial modelling of process properties. The most common techniques to model process properties spatially till now have been regression models ( The inputs and outputs of models and how the process properties measured in ore samples are integrated into geological database and to the spatial model are shown in All the modelling is done with the WEKA software package ( Eight modelling methods (see The modelling results are assessed using Derived models are compared in terms of relative standard deviation (RSD) (Eq. where The selected method is also improved by applying selection of the significant variables, which is also known as feature selection or variable selection. The number of variables higher than optimal (subset of the variables at which accuracy of the classifier is maximal) may decrease the accuracy in machine-learning methods. The optimal number of variables can be reached by applying the significant variable (variables with low signal-to-noise ratio) selection ( The modelling methods (see The spatial process modelling results are assessed with verification by splitting the updated geological database into training and testing subsets. The testing subset is formed by selecting positions in the geological database, which correspond to a single drillhole. All other positions in the geological database, excluding the one selected for testing subset, form training subset. The spatial process modelling is performed on the training subset and then process properties are predicted for the testing subset ( The precision is measured with RSD ( Eight methods were used to build process models ( The RSD provided an advantage when comparing the obtained results for the modelled process properties with one another. The predictions for iron recoveries are better than mass pulls in WLIMS and DT for all eight methods. Good predictions were obtained for the iron oxides liberation, where all the methods except for Linear have shown RSD below or very close to 10%. No method gave reasonably good prediction for the Overall, the results suggest that the EN, M5, M5P, and SMO have the lowest average RSD. None of the methods had a better RSD for predicting all the process properties. SMO was randomly selected for populating the geological database with the process properties. The SMO method was improved before applying it for populating the geological database (reduced SMO). The reduced SMO model was obtained by selecting significant variables prior to modelling, therefore “reduced SMO = variable selection + SMO”. The significant variables selection was done by applying wrapper approach to feature subset selection (WAFSS) ( Eight machine-learning modelling methods and two additional meta-methods listed in Excellent results in terms of RSD (<5%) was achieved for modelling iron recovery in WLIMS and DT, and mass pull in DT (except for IBk for test dataset 13008) and the iron oxides liberation (<10% RSD), while higher than the other tests, still falls into the good range for RSD values (except for IBk for test dataset 13008). Deviations in prediction for the drillhole 13008 may be due to overrepresented number of composites with low iron grade (median and average iron grades are significantly lower than average in the deposit), ( The methodology for integrating process data into a spatial model enables geometallurgical spatial mapping, which is the ultimate product of a geometallurgical program. The results and discussions presented in this paper indicate that machine-learning methods are good for building spatial geometallurgical models for mass pulls, recoveries and iron oxides liberation ( Several limitations have to be highlighted when it comes to the application of the spatial process models to the population of the geometallurgial block model. When process properties are estimated in a block model, the machine-learning methods may be subjected to a higher uncertainty than if estimation of the process properties is done for the drill cores of the geological database. This is because the iron grades deployed in the block model are estimated from the geostatistical models (smoothed), while iron grades in geological database are measured. Difference in support may be another reason for difference between spatial process models used for block models and the geological database. Increase of support (e.g., increase of a composite size, increase of a block size in a block model) causes lower variance and induces a spatial smoothing effect ( Implementation of the results of this work into industrial production will require scaling-up. Scaling up of comminution models should consider change of milling conditions in larger mills and be based on relevant simulation models. It is worth noticing that during scale up (blending), ore behaviour in a grinding circuit may be disproportionally affected by harder material ( Prior to further implementation of machine learning models in mine production planning, the minimum sufficient number of samples and variables has to be defined. The general recommendations for number of samples are: samples should represent number of input variables into a model and variance of these parameter (e.g., high actinolite grade, strong iron oxide alteration); 20–30% of additional samples are required for cross-validation; non-linear algorithms require more samples than linear algorithms. For instance, predicting Fe-oxides liberation based on Davis tube measurements ( The main goal of this paper was to find an efficient way of building spatial models for metallurgical response using machine-learning tools by comparing ten machine-learning methods (eight individual and two meta methods). Using freeware, such as WEKA, allowed the production of fast and accurate models based on machine-learning methods for predicting process properties for different zones in an ore body. The process properties were measured for the composite samples collected at Leveäniemi iron ore mine in Sweden and included iron recovery and mass pull of DT and WLIMS, liberation of iron oxides and When building process models for populating the geological database, only iron recoveries for DT and WLIMS were predicted with RSD below 10%, iron oxides liberation, and mass pulls in DT and WLIMS had RSD below 20% (with slightly higher RSD for LR in iron oxides liberation and WLIMS mass pull and IBk in WLIMS mass pull). These results need to be interpreted with caution since a low number of samples implies that one significant outlier may have overwhelming impact on the model’s error estimation. When building process spatial models most of the process properties, except for mass pull in WLIMS and Spatial process models were developed as part of a geometallurgical program and can be used for geometallurgical mapping. The results contribute to understanding of how to build geometallurgical block models based on a limited number of ore samples with unknown location in 3D physical space, which are not additive in nature. The included process properties become spatial once they are deployed into a geological database and allow further spatial modelling and deployment into newly added drillholes to the geological database or in a geometallurgical block model. Tree methods tend to perform better than function methods in predicting non-additive variables (recoveries). Any uncertainties of the spatial model can be reduced if multiple estimates of the process properties obtained with different methods are aggregated (e.g., with AVE and MED methods) for each block, instead of trying to select the best modelling method. Literature reports that geostatistical methods may give biased estimates of the non-additive process properties. It remains for future studies to compare the difference between machine-learning and geostatistical methods in geometallurgical spatial modelling. Since the number of ore samples is small, the resulting models would be mostly suitable for visualising trends and understanding spatial properties of the modelled process properties. Future studies may help to define the minimum sufficient number of samples needed for deploying process properties in a production block model and to further apply those data in mine production planning. The machine-learning methods, especially trees, can benefit the non-spatial and spatial process modelling in geometallurgy. The usage of sparse data did not affect the results dramatically. We would like to express our gratitude for support and permission to publish to LKAB, particularly Mattias Gustafsson, Kari Niiranen, Therese Lindberg and Lewis Wild. Special acknowledgments are given to Pertti Lamberg and Bertil I Pålsson for their valuable ideas and proofreading. This research is a part of the PREP project and financed by VINNOVA project nr. 2014-01933, which is highly acknowledged.