Thanks to advances in geoelectrical resistivity method over the past two decades, researchers can now gather massive geophysical data sets encompassing long distances and depths, at reasonable cost. The enhanced resolution and spatial coverage of these techniques make them, now, very attractive for use in geological engineering applications, an area for which they were previously charged to be unsuitable. The study shows the capability of electrical resistivity imaging (ERI) to identify key subsoil features that might affect a future tailings dam slated for construction at the Zaruma-Portovelo Mining District, Ecuador. The ERI profiles were gathered and processed with the aim of obtaining resistivity images of a sufficiently resolution for geotechnical use. A geophysical model was created based on these images. The resistivity images were calibrated according to geomorphological, hydrogeological and geotechnical data in order to translate geophysical information into rational geological information. The ERI results, supported by the geomorphological and geotechnical work, suggested that the rock massif is composed of weathering horizons of different rock qualities, slopes are affected by sliding surfaces and these features exert a control on the groundwater flow. These results indicated that the original site selected to construct the dam dike was susceptible to land sliding and an alternative construction site was suggested. Based on the same results, a geomorphological–hydrogeological conceptual model for layered weathered granitic massif in mountainous areas was also proposed.Socioeconomic progress in emerging countries such as Ecuador relies heavily on hydrocarbons and mining resources. This circumstance has created a pressing need for strategic infrastructure constructing, which is often a critical issue for their sustainable development. These major construction projects require, in turn, large tracts of territory to be rapidly explored to obtain rigorous geotechnical data. Mining industry is extremely sensitive to changes in financial markets and, for example, due to the recent surge in demand for metallic minerals, mining sites that were closed 50 The work reported here was aimed at demonstrating the utility of electrical resistivity imaging (ERI) in subsoil explorations supporting geo-engineering projects, such as the planned tailings dam slated for construction in the ZPMD. The main targets for the ERI surveying were identifying key geotechnical features encompassing: the thickness of the topsoil and surficial quaternary deposits, weathered and highly fractured horizons affecting the rock massif, fractures related to landslide scars, faults, high-permeability pathways for groundwater flow and the groundwater flow pattern. Resistivity DC methods had frequently been considered to offer poor resolution and to generate major uncertainties ( ZPMD is located at the Cordillera Occidental, in the forearc of the Andean active margin in SW Ecuador. The main structural element in the area is the NW-trending Piñas regional fault (PF), which has been dated to the late Jurassic to early Cretaceos ( In terms of geomorphology, the studied area runs close to the watershed between the Amarillo River (to the N) and the Pindo River (to the S), at the Upper Puyango-Tumbes Basin ( The site planned for the construction of the dam occupies an area of ca. 200,000 ERI is a DC technique aimed to imaging the resistivity pattern of the subsurface using multi-electrode systems ( The ERI survey was conducted in June 2012. The apparent resistivity records were acquired along several profiles in order to check the most suitable array configuration; two of these profiles are presented here (see The apparent resistivity measurements were inverted using EarthImager2D software (Advanced Geosciences, Inc.). The inversion algorithm is based on the least-square smoothness-damping constrained method (Occam's inversion). It solves the nonlinear inversion problem by using the complete Gauss–Newton method, recalculating the sensitivity matrix at every iteration ( On the other hand, after any interpretation of inverted resistivity images, the quality of the geophysical model must be evaluated. Standardized errors, such as RMS or L2-norm defined as the sum of the squared weighted data errors, provide insight on the model misfit. Additionally, the relative sensitivity of the model and the depth of investigation (DOI index) ( In June 2013, six boreholes were drilled to characterize the geomechanical and hydrogeological parameters of the rock massif to a depths ranging 10 The landscape is dominated by dome-shaped hills that form a dense and near-orthogonally aligned drainage network. The slopes are moderate (25–35°) ( Aerial photographs revealed the drainage network arranges according to a complex pattern, with a structural control restricted to the main water course ( The local lithology comprises granodiorite/gneiss bedrock characterized by varying levels of metamorphism. Fractures and centimeter-thick quartz veins, related to fluid migration, are common. Well-developed arenaceous weathering mantles of decametric thickness were recognized in the study area. The top of these—Grus weathering mantles, according to Regarding the local hydrology, up to eight small valleys converge into the main El Tablón valley, which drains to the west. The water capacity of the drainage system was assessed infield yielding a runoff flow of ca. 1 m The resistivity images indicate that the subsoil has a background resistivity signature of 200–800 Given the close correlation between hydrogeological and geoelectrical parameters, ERI was expected to be, On the other hand, even if ERI achieves a geophysical model of reasonable quality, it must still be calibrated. Indeed, accurate calibration is probably the most important issue for translating geophysical data into reliable geological information and might be even more critical for geotechnical projects. A geophysical model can be calibrated by constraining with geomorphological information and borehole logs; thus, any geological interpretation of the model must be robustly compatible with these other data sets. The calibration of resistivity images circumvents the non-uniqueness problem and gives semi-quantitative information on the geometry of the imaged targets. After calibrating the geophysical model with the geomorphological information, the irregularities in the electrical contacts between the electro-layers pointed to a layered sequence of weathering horizons developed over a granitic rock massif. The low-resistivity sheets are interpreted as an arenaceous weathering mantle. The medium-resistivity background is interpreted as comprising highly fractured zones that affect the rock massif. The deeper high-resistivity area, depicted in image ERI01, is interpreted as the fresh granitic bedrock. Similar resistivity behavior has been reported in the literature (e.g The results obtained by the drilling program aided, A hard-rock massif, subjected to deep and surficial weathering processes, might lead to a layered morpho-hydrogeological system (e.g., Among the ERI-imaged features ( Based on the aforementioned findings, the location initially planned to construct the tailings dam—i.e., whose axis was over the trace of the profile ERI01 ( The change in construction site would imply a loss in the possible maximum height for the dam (40 ERI has been employed to assess the suitability of a site chosen for construction of a tailings dam in Zaruma-Portovelo Mining District, in El Oro province, Ecuador. Integration of geomorphological, hydrogeological and geophysical information allowed proposing a morpho-hydrogeological model and identification of critical subsoil features that might affect the planned dam. These features comprise weathered and intensely fracture horizons affecting the rock massif, sliding surfaces seated at significant depth affecting slopes and groundwater flows through weathered horizons and sliding surfaces, which act as preferential pathways. The results indicate that the slopes in ERI01 area, the site originally planned for the dam, are affected by complex landslides that might be reactivated. Conversely, an alternative site, located only about 100 The findings reported here illustrate the utility of ERI for supporting geological research, even for geotechnical purposes. This technique now enables researchers to cover broad areas, gathering of large data sets that encompass thousands of apparent resistivity records, at a reasonable cost. The application of a rigorous inversion process to geophysical data sets, according to QA/QC criteria and based on robust model calibration, yields resistivity images that meet geotechnical requirements. ERI survey may complement subsoil explorations without increasing its budget and even reducing it, and instead, it may provide valuable information rarely achievable only through boreholes. Therefore, albeit moderate resolution methods such as ERI cannot replace drilling programs in geological engineering projects, they aid to rationalize drilling costs. The authors are very grateful to the staff of the Instituto Nacional Geológico y Minero Metalúrgico del Ecuador INIGEMM for their assistance in the field work. This research was partially funded by the