In this work, the adsorption behavior of dodecylamine (DDA) on scheelite and calcite mineral surfaces were investigated by molecular dynamics (MD) simulation, zeta potential measurement, AFM observation, contact angle measurement, and flotation test. The results implied that, the different adsorption behavior of DDA on scheelite and calcite surfaces was mainly attributed to cationic species RNH3
                     + of DDA. The adsorption of neutral species RNH2 and complex precipitates produced by the reactions between RNH3
                     + and anionic species released by both mineral surfaces, also played important roles. In a DDA solution (1×10−4
                     mol/L, pH 7.5–8.0), a handful of RNH2 of DDA adsorbed on both scheelite and calcite surfaces through N–Ca bonding and hydrogen bonding between hydrogens of –NH2 group and mineral surface oxygens. On positively charged calcite surface, RNH3
                     + adsorbed on a moderate number of CO3
                     2
                     − sites through electrostatic attraction and hydrogen bonding, which caused a moderate zeta potential increase for calcite. On negatively charged scheelite surface, a large number of cationic species RNH3
                     + could easily adsorb on abundant WO4
                     2
                     − sites, which caused a significant increase of zeta potential for scheelite. The different adsorption behavior led to a heavier monolayer coverage of DDA species on scheelite surface, and thus a more hydrophobic surface and a better flotation recovery of scheelite. The present work helps propose a new adsorption model of DDA on scheelite and calcite.Dodecylamine (DDA), a charge-based physisorption collector, has been considered as a good candidate to achieve the selective flotation of scheelite from calcite. Hallimond tube flotation conducted using DDA as collector showed that calcite and scheelite minerals exhibited large difference in their flotation behavior, and the addition of calcium chloride could enhance the selectivity of amine between these two minerals ( More recently, some computational simulations were performed to study the adsorption mechanism of amine on these two minerals. Atomistic simulation technique was employed to investigate the interaction of methylamine (as a model for a range of longer chain amines) with different scheelite surfaces ( Up to now, the adsorption mechanism of DDA on various mineral surface, including electrostatic interaction ( Our latest investigation demonstrated that {1 In this work, we focused on the commonly exposed or cleavage surfaces of two minerals, namely {1 Pure single scheelite crystal was purchased from the JWFU, Shanghai, China; and calcite from the Mineral and Gem Market, Changsha, China. The crystallographic orientations, i.e. {1 Pure calcite was sourced from Xianghuapu Mine, Fujian, China; and scheelite from Muda Mine, Qinghai, China. X-ray powder diffraction data confirmed that scheelite and calcite minerals were 95% and 99% pure, respectively. The −74 Analytical grade DDA was purchased from the Guangfu, Tianjin, China. The pH was adjusted with NaOH or HCl stock solutions. Deionized water with a resistivity of more than 18 Zeta potential measurements were conducted at 20 A Nanoscope Mutimode IIIa AFM with software version 7.30r1 (Veeco, Santa Barbara, CA) was used for capturing and analyzing images of treated and untreated mineral surfaces. Tapping mode was employed to collect the images using phosphorus ( Advancing contact angle was commonly observed to be the most reproducible contact angle, and was approximated to the ideal Young contact angle for the purpose of surface characterization ( Single mineral flotation tests were carried out in an XFG flotation machine with a 40 All simulations were performed in Accelrys Material Studio 5.0 (MS) modeling package. The universal force field (UFF) was chosen in this study, since it could offer an approximate parameterization for calcium and tungsten atoms of interest to this study while other force fields could not. As was summarized in The modeling method of mineral-DDA complex, the MD simulation procedure and parameter settings were also elaborated in our previous work ( Previous literature reported scheelite particles were negatively charged in their saturated solution at a pH range of 3–12 ( The contact angle measurement results were presented in It should be noted that the nearly straight-line recovery curve for calcite, as shown in Firstly, the cumulative grain-size distribution of calcite samples used for flotation experiment was investigated. Secondly, the effect of flotation time on the recovery of three different fractions of calcite samples was studied, as shown in Thirdly, the effect of DDA concentration on the recovery of three different fractions of calcite samples was studied at flotation time of 2 It is obvious that entrainment might be a factor contributing to the recovery of fine calcite particles (−10 A range of mineral surface–DDA complexes were created with the help of molecular graphics tools, and then subject to geometry optimization and MD simulations. The most stable adsorption models of DDA molecule on scheelite surface and calcite surface were shown in For scheelite, the DDA molecule adsorbs with its nitrogen atom to surface calcium at a distance of 2.657 On the calcite surface, the nitrogen atom of DDA is 2.435 It could be concluded that the adsorption mode of DDA molecule on scheelite surface is very similar to that on calcite surface. The energies released upon the adsorption of DDA molecule on scheelite and calcite surfaces are −227.06 and −189.80 Since flotation systems are aqueous, the aqueous effect of water medium on mineral−reagent interactions was also simulated. Every Ca site on scheelite surface processes two broken (dangling) bonds. Two water molecules per calcium are anticipated to adsorb on scheelite surface to increase from sixfold coordination of calcium on the dry surface to eightfold coordination. Therefore, the interaction energy of two water molecules per Ca site on scheelite surface was computed. While for calcite, one water molecule per Ca on calcite surface was computed, since every Ca atom on calcite surface possesses only one dangling bond. The recent reports showed that this was a reasonable way to simulate the competitive adsorption of water and surfactant on mineral surface ( To illustrate the effect of the adsorption of DDA on electrokinetic behavior of scheelite and calcite minerals, zeta potentials of the two minerals as a function of pH were measured, as shown in Then, a concentration of 1 As shown in AFM observations were conducted in this study to investigate the topographies of scheelite and calcite surfaces untreated or treated in DDA solution at a concentration of 1   At the pH rang of 7.5–8.0, the negatively charged scheelite surfaces are overwhelmingly terminated by WO At pH 7.5–8.0, a handful of neutral species RNH The co-adsorbed cationic and neutral species of DDA on minerals surfaces could interact with each other through hydrophobic association of their hydrocarbon chains. It is obvious that the difference in adsorption behavior of RNH Based on the above analysis, we could derive a schematic diagram of the adsorption of DDA species on scheelite and calcite mineral surfaces as shown in There is another possible interaction between amine and two minerals. At pH 7.5–8.0, the main anionic species released by mineral surfaces are WO These hydrophobic complex precipitates could also absorb through physical adsorption on each mineral surface to enhance surface hydrophobicity and improve flotation response. To sum up, in a DDA solution (1 The adsorption behavior of DDA on scheelite and calcite minerals were investigated by MD simulation, zeta potential measurement, AFM observation, contact angle measurement, and flotation test in this work. The experimental results could be correlated together quite well. Based on the present results, a new adsorption model of DDA on scheelite and calcite surfaces was established. MD simulations showed that the driving force for the adsorption of neutral species RNH Zeta potential measurements implied that, the different adsorption behavior of DDA on scheelite and calcite surfaces was mainly attributed to cationic RNH The adsorption of neutral species RNH The DDA species were arranged more compactly on scheelite surface than on calcite surface, leading to a heavier monolayer coverage of DDA species on scheelite surface. Therefore, scheelite possessed a larger water contact angle, a more hydrophobic surface, and a better flotation recovery. This work is financially supported by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 