The objective of this work is to characterize the optical and thermal performance of a micro-scale cylindrical cavity solar receiver for the Brayton gas power cycle at various solar radiation levels through experimental and analytical investigation. A thermal receiver consisting of a 300 mm deep and 200 mm diameter cylindrical cavity equipped with an 8 mm diameter helical copper tube was studied. An advanced ray-tracing technique using OptisWorks software was used to predict the distribution of solar radiation inside the cavity. Also, computational fluid dynamics simulations were carried out using ANSYS CFD software to predict the temperature distributions of the coil surface and the compressed air outlet temperature. Having satisfying conformity between the numerical and the experimental results, the current results demonstrated that a competent flux and temperature distributions were directed on the receiver’s tube. Moreover, an outlet temperature up to 70 °C, based on the available compressed air flow rate. This point leads to the probability of operating a micro-scale dish concentrator for Concentrated Solar Power in a domestic application. The results of a parametric study indicated that a cavity’s receiver depth and width of 180 mm and 240 mm give the best thermal operation.Area, m Aperture, m Specific heat capacity, J/kgK Diameter, m View factor, – Gravity, m/s Grashof number, – Heat transfer coefficient, W/m Radiosity, – Thermal conductivity, W/mK Mass flow rate, kg/s Nusselt number, – Prandtl number, – Heat rate, W Velocity, m/s Temperature, K Coordinate, m Emittance, – Dynamic viscosity, kg/ms Inclination angle, ° Aperture Aspect ratio (=Width/Height) Cavity Conduction Convection Coordinate, inlet Fluid Outlet Radiation Aspect ratio Computation fluid dynamics Concentrating solar power Solar energy utilization is vital for producing clean energy and so to face important issues such as global warming Recently, Bashir et al. Some interesting studies on the optical and thermal analysis both; experimentally and numerically at various operating conditions and working fluids, of a spiral cavity receiver with a parabolic dish concentrator were conducted by Pavlovic et al. In order to enhance the heat transfer between the receiver surfaces and the working fluid, Ngo et al. The effect of the cavity receiver shape on the optical and thermal performance of a small scale solar powered Brayton cycle was investigated by Daabo et al. Recently, interesting work on designing and optimizing a cylindrical cavity receiver by improving a thermal model for the cavity shape has been published by Zou et al. This section describes the design of the cavity receiver and the parabolic reflector. They together, as shown in OptisWorks software is commercial software that has been employed to simulate the optical performance of various solar concentrator structures using ray-tracing. This tool has been extensively employed by many studies, for example In the current work, the cylindrical cavity receiver geometry as presented in The experimental work is aimed at evaluating optical and the thermal performance of the cylindrical shape cavity receiver. The detailed experimental results have been presented and parametrically compared with the numerical results of the relevant simulation through the designed models. The optical rig contained the following parts: The thermal cavity receiver was selected to be a cylindrical shape. The copper tube of an 8 mm diameter was helically assembled and inserted to shield the surface of the cylindrical shape internally. The heat source was selected to be a Halogen bulb which was placed at different distances concerning the receiver aperture, Ten sensors (three of them were flux sensors) were spread out longitudinally and circumferentially on the helical tube surface inside the cylindrical shape receiver to measure the received flux and the temperature values, The optical experimental work was conducted in the solar lab by employing the model and the instruments mentioned in section 5.1. That was established in order to determine the surface temperature and the flux distribution on the helical tube inside the cavity receiver. Experiments were carried out at various input irradiance of values i.e. 500, 600, 700, 800, 900 and 1000 W/m The input flux at the receiver aperture was evaluated by measuring the flux at 64 positions which were identified by plotting 64 equal squares on A4 paper placed on the receiver shown in A flux sensor was manually put on each of the 64 (6.76 cm   Flux and temperature sensors were distributed, longitudinally and circumferentially, on the helical tube to evaluate both; the flux and the surface temperature along all the helical tubes. The average experimental and analytical flux values were compared and the results are shown in   This was achieved on the model by introducing a model that is similar to the ruler and contains seven micro squares with the same size as the real sensor and inserted inside the cylindrical receiver. The comparison of the measured and simulated results are established and figured out in Thermal analysis was carried out on the receiver taking into account the three types of heat losses, convection, radiation and conduction as follows: The total heat losses and the heat balance are defined by Eqs. Whereas each; the conduction mode, convection mode and radiation, are defined in Eqs. Computing the h based on the Nusselt number requires certain factors to be taken into consideration. These parameters are the model characteristic length, working fluid temperature, acceleration, as a result of the gravity, receiver wall surface temperature and fluid dynamic viscosity, specific heat and thermal conductivity. In general, for laminar flow, Nusselt numbers can be calculated using correlations (6) and similarly, the turbulent free convection is computed using correlations (7) Many correlations are available for calculating Nusselt number, based on cavity receivers’ applications, which are recommended by many researchers, according to their experimented models and boundary conditions. Some of the most familiar correlation for calculating Nusselt number are those found in Ref. And Eq. An explicit model accounts for the merged effects of aperture size, operating temperature and tilt angles was derived in Where: And By contrast, the radiative mode of heat losses can be computed depending on the view factor, radiosity and the emissivity of the relevant shape. The receiver's inner surface is divided into a satisfying number of elements while each one of those elements has the same, or sometimes different, values of emissivity and temperature. In order to determine the radiosity of each element, Eq. The receiver geometry is then exported to the ANSYS CFD software Moreover, The energy, continuity and Navier-Stokes momentum Eqs. The tetrahedral type of element was employed with a smooth medium size; the essential quality of mesh was achieved The compressed air is the working fluid that was chosen as HTF and the solar irradiance is distributed uniformly on the internal surfaces filled in the helical tube of the cavity receiver Insulation material was added to shield the external walls of the cavity receivers The outlet condition was kept to be at atmospheric pressure. Moreover, as the natural convection heat loss was only evaluated ignoring the wind influence The model was at 90° only since this orientation achieves the lowest amount of convective heat losses As for the solution type, the surface to surface, S2S, radiation model which necessitates the calculation of the view-factors in order to calculate the radiation type of heat losses  Initially, the light source was switched on and the coil surfaces temperatures were monitored till reach to steady-state, without air flow. Then the compressed air delivered to the thermal system, at three flow rates, to evaluate its outlet temperatures. The exit air temperature and the surface temperature values were recorded until they reach steady-state conditions. The experiment was repeated with 7 cm, 3.5 cm and 0 cm distance between the receiver aperture and the source.  As the distance between the light source and receiver increased the surface and the exit air temperature values decreased. The main reason for that is the high energy scattered outside the aperture and as a result, not all the incoming energy from the source will be received by the receiver. The tube surface temperatures increased dramatically when there was no air supplied to the system and the transient state remained for about two hours while the maximum temperature achieved was strongly influenced by the distance between the light source and receiver. Once the air was supplied to the system, the surface temperature was decreased and at the same time, the exit air temperature was significantly enlarged and was continuing for around 7 min when both of the mentioned temperature values reached almost the steady values. Finally, with decreasing the mass flow rate to the system, both; the surface and the exit air temperature increased reaching the steady-state and achieve maximum values. The 3D model with its shape and dimensions was firstly drawn using SolidWorks and then exported to the fluent/ ANSYS in order to evaluate and validate the achieved thermal outcomes, in terms of the fluid outlet temperature. Similar mass flow rate and irradiance values to those obtained experimentally were used in the modeling and the predicted values were compared with the values attained experimentally.   In In this section, the validated numerical model was used to investigate the effect of receiver Aspect Ratio AR, which is defined as the ratio of the cylinder cavity length to its overall width. The investigation is dependent on the amount of the natural convection, which has been represented by (h) and translated by using the amount of received flux inside the receiver cavity. In this analysis, seven different values for the aperture diameter with six various values for the cavity depth were considered with the aim of finding their effect on the thermal performance and eventually the best shape of the cavity (based on its thermal behavior). This analysis has been achieved using a parametric study that was established using ANYS/Fluent when more than 45 separate design points were evaluated.  This paper is an experimental and theoretical study for a micro-scale cavity receiver. This paper included both; the optical and thermal studies and the achieved results were confirmed by using the relevant model where two different types of software were employed. Moreover, a 3D model was developed and used to simulate the experimental work in terms of both; the optical and the thermal performance and the achieved results were in good agreement. After that, the influence of the receiver aspect ratio AR was investigated with the aim of knowing its overall effect on the receiver performance. The micro-scale parabolic dish for CSP was successfully replaced with electrical light, halogen, a source with its frame and micro-scale cylindrical cavity receiver, which was designed and manufactured with its copper helical tube. So, a steel cylindrical receiver and a copper helical tube were assembled and experimented in a solar lab per the objective of figuring out its behavior in terms of temperature and flux distributions as well as the exit air temperature which was circulated over the receiver as a working fluid. The Aspect Ratio, at different aperture diameter values of the thermal receiver, has a significant role in the overall thermal performance, represented by the heat transfer coefficient. Moreover, the following conclusions can be summarized below: Each cavity depth and its width have a direct influence on the thermal accomplishment of the thermal receiver. There is no constant path or specific (direct) curve that can produce the relationships that connect the three parameters. For each receiver aperture (width) there is an optimum value or sometimes values for the depth which can produce the lowest amount of heat transfer coefficient. It has to be said that the lowest heat transfer coefficient leads to the minimization of the cavity thermal losses and thus this is the goal of this analysis. The best three configurations for the cavity were at 180 mm width and 0.75 AR, 200 mm width and 1 AR and 220 mm and around 0.43 AR. On the other hand, the worst three configurations were found to be at 200 mm and about 0.91, 280 mm and around 1.08 and finally 300 mm and 1.5 AR.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Funding and supporting of this work were received from the