The use of the strongly basic anion exchange resins, type 1 such as Lewatit MP-500 and Lewatit MP-500A for palladium(II) complexes adsorption has been investigated. The adsorption process was carried out from the chloride solutions with macrocomponent (sodium chloride) addition (x M HCl–1.0 M NaCl; x M HCl–2.0 M NaCl) where the concentration of hydrochloric acid was constant and equal to x
                     =0; 0.1; 0.5; 1.0; and 2.0 M, respectively. The breakthrough curves of Pd(II) were determined and the sorption parameters (weight and bed distribution coefficients, working anion exchange capacity) were calculated. The pseudo-second kinetic order was applied in kinetic studies as well as to calculate the kinetic parameters. The values of the working anion exchange capacities (0.029 g/cm3; 0.028 g/cm3) for Lewatit MP-500 and Lewatit MP-500A (0.028 g/cm3; 0.027 g/cm3) in the 1.0 M NaCl and 0.1 M HCl–1.0 M NaCl solutions, respectively are really close and in other solutions under discussion Lewatit MP-500 possess slightly higher values of capacities, and therefore is insignificantly more efficient in the adsorption process of palladium(II) ions than Lewatit MP-500A. The equilibrium adsorption capacities changed in the range 8.84–9.99 and 8.40–9.38 mg/g for Lewatit MP-500 as well as 8.12–9.57 and 7.26–8.85 mg/g for Lewatit MP-500A in the chloride x M HCl-1.0 M NaCl and x M HCl-2.0 M NaCl solutions, respectively. The adsorption process proceeds according to the pseudo-second kinetic order.Separation of precious metals (platinum group metals (PGMs), gold and silver) is possible with the use of ion exchange resins. Selective ion exchange resins (anion, chelating and cationic with chelating groups) are being prepared by industry for the chloride-complexes of precious metal ions. Strongly basic anion exchange resins of styrene and acrylic skeletons find wide applications in the recovery ( Literature data concerning the adsorption process of Pd(II) complexes onto the strongly basic anion exchange resins are limited and do not describe the behaviour of palladium(II) chloro-complex onto these resins, therefore the authors attempt to complete and develop knowledge about palladium(II) adsorption. This article takes into account possibilities of palladium(II) chloro-complex adsorption onto the strongly basic anion exchange resins, Lewatit MP-500 and Lewatit MP-500A (type 1) in the chloride (HCl-NaCl) solutions. The resins, type 1 possess the quaternary ammonium (threemethyl ammonium) functional groups whereas the resins, type 2 possess threemethyl ammonium functional groups in which one of the methyl groups was substituted by the hydroxyethyl group. The effects of the phases contact time, hydrochloric acid concentration and macrocomponent addition (NaCl) have been studied. The adsorption process mechanism was investigated, too. Literature data concerning palladium(II) sorption onto anion exchange resins are incomplete. In order to complement the data the two anion exchange resins such as Lewatit MP-500 and Lewatit MP-500A were applied. The resins are interesting and worth considering in sorption studies of palladium(II) complexes due to their properties. Lewatit MP-500 is a mono-dispersed resin having high chemical and osmotic stability. High monodispersity (uniformity coefficient: max 1.1) and low fines content result in low pressure losses when compared with the standard resins. Palladium(II) must be brought to the solutions before determination using digestion processes with different leaching mixtures. HCl, H Stock palladium(II) solution was prepared from solid palladium chloride (PdCl Aqueous chloride solutions ( All other reagents produced by POCh (Poland), were of analytical grade. The strongly basic anion exchange resins, type 1 Lewatit MP-500 and Lewatit MP-500A (producer: Bayer, Germany) were used in palladium(II) adsorption from chloride solutions. The properties of applied anion exchange resins are presented in The static and dynamic methods were applied in palladium(II) chloro-complex adsorption onto the strongly basic anion exchangers Lewatit MP-500 and Lewatit MP-500A from the chloride solutions. The thermostatic shaker, Elpin+, type 357, (Poland) was applied in Pd(II) adsorption using the static method. A dry anion exchange resin (0.5 In the dynamic method anion exchange resins after swelling were packed to the columns (amount of anionic resin: 10 cm After the adsorption process of palladium(II) chloro-complex onto Lewatit MP-500 and Lewatit MP-500A using the static and dynamic methods adsorption parameters such as adsorption capacities of palladium(II) chloro-complex ( the adsorption capacity,  the working anion exchange capacity,  the weight distribution coefficient,  the bed distribution coefficient,  The pseudo-second order kinetic expression was found to be successful in representing the kinetics of several sorption systems. The pseudo-second order kinetics can be given by Eq.  After taking into account the boundary conditions The values of kinetic parameters of the pseudo-second model can be determined from the slope and intercept of the plot The pseudo-second kinetic model has changed during the last 30 years. After the model by In many cases, the equilibrium adsorption capacity is unknown, chemisorption is very slow therefore it is non-measurable and the amount adsorbed is still significantly smaller than the equilibrium amount ( Spectrophotometric analysis for determining the amount of Pd(II) in solutions involves a reaction between iodide potassium and an analyte to form a coloured complex. The reaction can be used to determine analyte concentrations assuming the colour intensity and the absorbance are proportional to the analyte concentration, the complex is stable, and the reagent does not significantly react with other constituents thereby causing interferences. Palladium(II) content in the samples was determined using the iodide method (spectrophotometer Specord M 42; Carl Zeiss Jena, Germany). This method is based on the reaction between the palladium(II) chloro-complex and iodide potassium. [PdI The dynamic method was applied in order to determine the breakthrough curves of palladium(II) ions and to calculate the working ion exchange capacities as well as the weight and bed distribution coefficients. The breakthrough curves of palladium(II) ions for Lewatit MP-500 and Lewatit MP-500A are shown in The sorption parameters for the strongly basic anion exchange resins are depicted in The working ion exchange capacities are negligibly higher for Lewatit MP-500 than for Lewatit MP-500A. The highest values of working ion exchange capacities are achieved in the solutions without hydrochloric acid addition; 0.029 and 0.028 g/cm A similar dependence is observed for the weight and bed distribution coefficients ( Strongly basic anion exchange resins are composed of high-molecular-weight polyelectrolytes that can exchange their mobile ions for those of similar charge from the surrounding medium. Each resin has a distinct number of mobile ion sites that set the maximum quantity of exchanges per unit of resin. The binding mechanism of palladium(II) chloro-complex can be anion exchange, chelating or mixed. The anion exchange mechanism is predominant at high acidities whereas the chelating (coordinating) one at low acidities. Strong bases are protonated much more readily than weak bases. This means that they can behave as ion exchangers at relatively low acid concentration whereas weakly basic anion exchangers at high acid concentration ( Anion exchange mechanism results from the forms of anionic palladium(II) chloro-complex which are capable of undergoing ion exchange reaction onto anion exchangers. Chelating mechanism can be observed due to the presence of donor atoms in the functional groups of the resins under discussion. The possible chelating reactions between [PdCl Palladium can form stable chloro-complexes in the acidic chloride medium. At 0.1 M Cl The effect of contact time on the adsorption process of palladium(II) chloro-complex onto strongly basic anion exchangers was investigated. The adsorption capacities (amount of Pd(II) adsorbed onto resin) achieve very high values but higher adsorption capacities are observed for Lewatit MP-500 than for Lewatit MP-500A in all HCl–NaCl solutions. Hydrochloric acid and sodium chloride concentrations affect the adsorption parameters and efficiency of the adsorption process of Pd(II) complexes onto the strongly basic anion exchangers to a greater or smaller extent. Sorption parameters decrease with the increasing hydrochloric acid and sodium chloride concentrations. For high concentrations of hydrochloric acid and sodium chloride the efficiency of adsorpion process of palladium(II) chloro-complex is smaller than in the case of low concentrations. The first major challenge for the adsorption field is to select the most promising types of sorbent from an extremely large pool of readily available materials. The next real challenge is to identify the sorption mechanisms. In general, there are three main steps involved in the adsorption process of palladium(II) chloro-complex onto anion exchangers: (1) transport of the Pd(II) complex from the bulk solution to the strongly basic anion exchanger surface; (2) adsorption on the particle surface; and (3) transport within the anion exchanger particle. Adsorption studies, in particular kinetics provide information on the mechanism of Pd(II) sorption. This knowledge is essential for understanding the sorption process and for selecting the desorption strategy. The pseudo-second kinetic model was applied in order to investigate the mechanism of adsorption process of palladium(II) chloro-complex onto the strongly basic anion exchangers. The applicability of the pseudo-second order model is confirmed if a plot of The present study shows that the palladium(II) chloro-complex has high affinity for the strongly basic anion exchangers, type 1. The amount of palladium(II) uptake was found to increase with the increasing contact time. The increase of sodium chloride and hydrochloric acid concentration causes the decrease of palladium(II) uptake. Lewatit MP-500 is more promising towards palladium(II) complexes adsorption than Lewatit MP-500A. The equilibrium adsorption capacities changed in the range from 8.84 to 9.99 mg/g and from 8.40 to 9.38 mg/g for Lewatit MP-500 in the chloride solutions containing 1.0 or 2.0 M NaCl, respectively whereas for Lewatit MP-500A from 8.12 to 9.57 mg/g and from 7.26 to 8.85 mg/g in the same solutions. The values of the working anion exchange capacities (0.029 g/cm  initial concentration of Pd(II) complex (mg/dm working ion exchange capacity (g/cm equilibrium concentration of Pd(II) complex (mg/dm concentration of Pd(II) after time bed distribution coefficient, weight distribution coefficient, anion exchanger density, initial rate of the pseudo-second kinetic model (mg/g min), equilibrium rate constant of the pseudo-second kinetic model (g/mg min), dry anion exchanger weight (g), ( correlation coefficient of the pseudo-second kinetic model, adsorption capacity of Pd(II) after time adsorption capacity of Pd(II) at equilibrium, maximum adsorption capacity (mg/g), experimental, equilibrium adsorption capacity (mg/g), calculated values of the equilibrium adsorption capacity for the pseudo-second kinetic model (mg/g), phases contact time (min), effluent volume at dead volume in the column (cm volume of solution (0.05 dm speed of solution passed through the anion exchanger bed, 0.4 cm/min, volume of anion exchanger bed put into the column (10 cm collected volume of effluent between the first fraction and that to the breakthrough point (cm stirring speed phases, 180 гpm, void (inter-particle) anion exchanger bed volume (which amounts to ca. 0.4), weight of the dry anion exchanger (0.5 g).