After describing the history of coal washing both from a global and an Indian perspective, the objective of washing is discussed. The various factors involved in upgradation of coal quality are analysed taking into consideration the efficiencies of different processes. The existing system of beneficiation is highlighted, along with operational problems and suggestions for their resolution. A classical flotation unit is described to clarify its problem and prospects. To improve clean coal yield, the possibility of crushing middlings as well as an optimisation method are critically examined. To address problems of washing, the methodology of standardisation is explained as well as how to derive advantages through its adoption. A standard flowsheet has been developed and added. The burning issue of using lower-seam low volatile medium coking coal for steel making is discussed. A band of new washeries are underway. It is also explored how this type of coal can be washed in existing washeries.  The first Indian coal washery, known as West Bokaro washery 1, was set up in 1951 regardless of widespread doubts about the washability of Indian coals, followed by the second one installed at Jamadoba in 1952 – both by M/s Tata Iron and Steel Co. Ltd (TISCO). Two more washeries were added by 1959. The third washery was at the Lodna colliery set up by M/s Turner Morrison in 1955. The fourth washery in the public sector was commissioned at Kargali by NCDC (now CCL) in 1958.  In 1960, SAIL constructed a washery at Durgapur. Central Coal Washeries Organization (CCWO) set up four central washeries from 1961 to 1968. The Durgapur washery of DPL and Chasnalla washery of Indian Iron and Steel Co. (IISCO) were installed in 1967 and 1968, respectively. In 1969, Kathara washery (CCL) was built with a rated input capacity of 3  NCDC (now CCL) installed two washeries – Swang and Gidi – both in 1970 for the upgradation of medium coking coal.  Six more washeries came into being. West Bokaro washery 2 of raw coal throughput (1.8  Five more washeries came into existence, with one at Mahuda (BCCL) for medium coking coal in 1990. In the mid-1990s, two washeries were built by TISCO – West Bokar washery 3 and Bhelata washery. Kedla washery (CCL) was installed in 1997 to treat medium coking coal. In 1998, Madhuban washery (BCCL) was installed to treat prime coking coal. The West Bokaro washery 1 had become obsolete and was closed down. The West Bokaro washery 3 was a state-of-the-art plant befitting Tata Steel’s tradition. It could serve as an illustrious benchmark for the coal preparation industry of India. As the reserves of moderately easy washing coking coals are depleting continuously, the future requirement for coking coals will need to be met from seams with inferior or more difficult cleaning characteristics. As the coking coal reserves are limited, every effort should be made to develop new techniques for washing as well as blending of different types of coal properly. The advancements in the field of washing are one of the most important aspects by which the coking coal reserves can be conserved. The basic purpose of washing is to reduce the ash-forming impurities from raw coal so that better coal with less ash content can be produced. If these ash-forming constituents are not removed, and coal is directly charged to the coke-ovens, the ash content in coke will increase and subsequently more slag will be produced in the blast furnace, thereby lowering the efficiency of the blast furnace. The impurities associated with coals depend on two conditions, i.e., the nature of formation and the method of exploitation. The Indian coals are of ‘drift’ origin, so mineral dirt and mineral matters are intimately mixed with most coals. These impurities are mainly of an inherent type and have made the Indian coals very difficult to wash ( To meet the increasing demand for coal, mechanisation has been introduced both in mining and loading. As a result, selective mining is not possible and extraneous impurities get mixed up with raw coal produced from the mine. These impurities usually come from the floor, roof and intermediate dirt bands associated with coal seams. The impurities in coal generally consist of shale, sandstone, pyrites, siderites, calcites, etc., which form the noncombustible or ashy matter of coal. These impurities, when mixed as extraneous matter with coal, can be separated partly or wholly, but if these are present as intergrown consisting of inherent mineral matter then it becomes more difficult to wash. It is found in steel plants that a 1% increase in ash in coking coal results in the following deteriorating effects ( Increases the slag volume involving more expenses for slag dumping; Decreases production of blast furnaces by about 3%–6%; Increases coke consumption by about 4%–5%; Decreases the yield of carbon in coke, resulting in more coke ovens and higher expenditure; Increases limestone consumption by about 5%. Yield of tar and gas is reduced. The ease of separation depends on the amount of near density material ± 0.01 relative density present at the desired density of separation. It has been observed that the increasing amounts of near density materials have an adverse effect on washing efficiencies in general. In Indian coals, it is found that the percentage of near gravity material is very high, about 25% at the gravity of separation – which has been termed as formidable by Bird’s classification. As the proportion of NGM in coking coal is high, Bird’s classification does not hold good in the Indian context. The Indian coking coals can be broadly classified considering the primary cut for the recovery of clean coal as shown in The densimetric, characteristics ash and the ± relative density curves can only compare ash/yield or relative density/yield relationships depending on the quality of raw coals. They do not give a proper measure for comparison between coals. The concept of ‘washability number’ was developed by  The degree of cleaning may be expressed as, The degree of washability may be expressed as,  The degree of washability number ( To magnify the scale for convenience; the above expression can be multiplied by a factor of 10. The final formula becomes The ‘washability number’ and the results (yield and ash) which correspond to the optimum cut-off points for some coal samples from a number of countries around the world have been discussed ( The washability number significantly points to the differences in the case of washing far more clearly than a comparison of yields would do. Gondwana coals are very difficult to clean as compared to Northern Carboniferous coals. This number is a very useful tool for comparative measures of different types of coals. It can highlight the washing difficulties and establish a relative rating order for various coals. Using the knowledge of variability in the washability numbers, it may be possible for a coal process engineer to make decisions on the size of crushing, method of blending and even on designing specific cleaning operations for a particular coal ( As no commercial coal beneficiation is perfectly efficient, some indices are required to measure the efficiency of the process. The best way of indicating When, The shaded area in The ash error is the difference between the percentage ash in the clear coal and the percentage ash of the floats in a washability test giving the same yield. The yield error is the difference between the actual yield and the theoretical (washability test) yield giving the same percentage ash (or other measure of quality) in the clean coal. The efficiency at any relative density is defined as ( It may be noted that the most widely accepted measure of the efficiency with which a cleaning device separates coal from impurities is referred to as probable error ( The US Bureau of Mines has published detailed data on the generalised partition curves for five processes: dense medium cyclone, water-only cyclone, concentrating table, dense medium vessel, and Baum jig. The probable error generally increases with decreasing size of the coal feed. This is further illustrated in  The liberation size is a fundamental characteristic of the coal type ( Tree flotation is a technique, particularly applicable to hydrophobic coals, which can be used to estimate the ash value of most liberated coal particles present and this is related to particle-size distribution in a given sample ( Coal grain analysis is an optical microscopic imaging method that is used for routine coal petrography assessments (maceral composition and coal rank) and for obtaining compositional information on individual coal grains. This method determines the number of mineral inclusions within the particles and is a good complement to tree flotation and washability by size information techniques ( In any mineral beneficiation process, the usual practice is to first crush the material to liberate the different minerals from attachment to one another so that they can be separated in the subsequent methods of beneficiation. The separation of different minerals is possible because of differences in their physical or chemical properties. The efficiency of separation depends on the degree of liberation, i.e., freeing of gangue and valuable mineral Quantitative evaluation of minerals by scanning electron microscope and mineral liberation analysis are automated analytical systems provided by FEI Natural Resources to estimate detailed mineralogical information. Although they are specifically designed for metalliferous minerals, they can be used to determine the size of minerals present in a coal matrix. To plan the washing system of any coal, the petrological composition should be studied under a microscope. Under a microscope, various constituents, such as organic macerals of combustible matter and inorganic minerals of ashy matter, can be seen. The petrological texture of coal indicates the possibility of liberation of different constituents by crushing and grinding. The first step of washing is to crush or grind the coal to liberate the coaly matter from ashy matter, which can theoretically yield complete liberation. In the case of intergrown texture, finer grinding, up to a few microns, is necessary for complete liberation, whereas for free dirt ordinary crushing is sufficient ( The degree of liberation of a mineral can be defined as the percentage of that mineral occurring as free particles with respect to the total of that mineral present. This can be expressed as per    The liberation information can be obtained by release analysis and float and sink tests. For a binary mineral consisting of concentrate (1) and refuse (2), the composition can be expressed in terms of weight percentages. It is Microscopic examination of the polished section of a sample cannot give the correct information as to the optimum point of liberation but it can serve as a guide. Using this method, the degree of grinding required for maximum liberation can be roughly estimated. The evaluation of liberation involves comminution, study under microscope and/or beneficiation tests. From different float and sink data of coal crushed to different sizes, the degree of liberation can be calculated. For coal, the degree of liberation can be expressed as per    It is believed that finer crushing of coal will yield more coal in the cleaning process. But the increase in yield by finer crushing is offset by many factors. Thus, the degree of crushing has to be judiciously selected so that the total system becomes economical. In commercial coal washing practice, crushing the coal will bring many disadvantages. The efficiency of separation in conventional gravity washers is low in the case of fine coal. Further, a lot of slurry will be produced and it is difficult to dewater this slurry below 10% moisture content without resorting to thermal drying. The quantity of slurry or coal fines determines the total moisture content of washed coal. For the same throughput, the size of units treating small-size coal has to be much larger than those for coarse coal. The capital and operating costs will proportionately increase along with the added cost of slurry treatment. The most important implication of determining the liberation size is the impact of grind size on the yield/ash curve. For the general case of a The density distribution in Indian coals is characterised by a low proportion or complete lack of low relative density fractions below 1.3 or 1.4, which is evident from the density distribution curves in Some of the typical washability characteristics of Indian coals are: (1) low recovery of clean coal, (2) more yield of middlings, (3) poor elimination of dirt, and (4) higher content of neat-gravity materials. Due to these factors, it is rather impossible to bring down the ash content of clean coal below 10%, which is the limit of ash in coking coal as supplied to steel plants in other countries. Thus, Indian steel plants have been forced to adopt the technology of steel-making with coking coal of higher ash content (17%). It is observed that the quality of washed coal from different washeries is deteriorating because of an increase in the ash content of raw coal feed to washeries. So, the present system of washing will not hold good any more for coal beneficiation in the future. Until the Second World War, it was the common conviction that Indian coals were not amenable to washing. This belief led to selective mining of good-quality coking coals for different uses, even other than steel-making. It It is usually found in Indian coals that the specific gravity varies from 1.45 to 1.50 when the ash contents are 16%–18% and for specific gravity of 1.6–1.7, the ash contents are between 32% and 35%. This difference of property is utilised in gravity separation of coal. In coal washing, artificial suspension of the above-mentioned densities is produced and coals are subjected to float and sink. The coals which float at 1.5 specific gravity are called clean coal and the sinks are put into another suspension of specific gravity of 1.7. Floats of the second suspension are called middlings and the final sinks are rejects. Thus, three products are produced by this process. Clean coal is supplied to steel plants, the middlings to thermal power stations, and the rejects are usually dumped near the washery or utilised for power generation. There are at present 16 coal washeries in the coking coal sector with total raw coal input capacity of 29.7 Summing up, raw coal is usually crushed to 75 Although three levels of washing are considered in relevance to both earlier and present generations of washeries, the system of washing required for presently available coal resources falls under the category of level III. In the past, fine coal was not properly treated. The level of washing has climbed along with the deterioration of raw coal. As in The plant is designed with a throughput capacity of 100 The froth from the flotation cells is sent to three disc filters through a three-way pulp distributer, with one of the filters working as a standby. The filter cakes are discharged into the existing clean coal conveyor. The tailings of the flotation cells are thickened in two thickeners of 20 It has been observed that the flotation units are not performing well in India, clean concentrates of desired quality and quantity are not produced. Thus, it is necessary to impose proper operational and control measures to achieve the desired results. For that matter, all the parameters controlling the floatability of coal should be known, actually there are many but it is not possible to control all the parameters. As a minimum, the important parameters as enumerated below are to be taken care of assuming the other parameters are constant ( The coarser size fraction (>0.5 As the pulp density is one of the determining factors, this should be adjusted properly, and generally varies from 10% to 12%. Unless sufficient retention time is provided, the performance cannot be effective. The reagents should be added at the right places, all the reagents should not be added at one point, and they can be distributed throughout the bank of cells. Conditioners ahead of pulp-adjusting tanks should be there so that the coal particles are properly coated with collecting reagents. It is always advisable to keep watch on the proper performance of flotation cells. The pulp should flow freely from cell to cell. The aeration should be sufficient and froths should leave the cells as soon as they are formed. Oxidised coals are difficult to float, and in that case new reagents can be tried as well as the usual MIBC, diesel oil and kerosene oils, and along with other frothers. If these reagents are not properly dispersed, then some coal particles will be coated and others will starve and if more reagents are used to counteract this, a noncoal substance will be floated. If this oil can be broken into fine droplets, then the chances of mass transfer of oils onto coal surfaces increase and coal floatability will improve. Sufficient dispersion of oils is possible by emulsification of these oils. As beneficiation of coal fines containing enriched vitrinite is essential to maintain the quality of metallurgical coke, due attention needs to be paid to revamp/renovate the fine coal circuits. At least 60% recovery of clean coal at 18% ash from washery tailings is possible. Such a beneficiation project can be set up through an outsourcing mode by adopting a BOM/BOO model ( A coal preparation plant, even though very well designed, cannot give good results unless proper care is taken in running it with a well-planned operation and management schedule. The operational problems can be divided into two categories: those due to designed defects and those due to defective operation. The problems faced while operating the washeries and their remedies have been analysed. The objective is to achieve the rated capacity of the plant, thus, it is necessary to know how this can be achieved. The rated capacity of a washery is rarely attained due to nonavailability of essential spares and replacements, as well as lack of proper supervision and/or coordination. The quality of raw coal has changed since the washeries were installed. This has adversely affected the quality of washed products as well as the capacity utilisation of the plants. The scenario of coal preparation in India is quite different from that of many other countries. There are many constraints, which are briefly outlined here: The quality of raw coal to be treated is deteriorating gradually due to the depletion of better-quality reserves. A greater quantity of fines is generated because of greater mechanisation in the method of mining and handling. Because of low output from individual seams, generally a central washery is built. The size consist and washing characteristics of coal feed are divergent. It is difficult to wash mixed coals of different sources. Thus, proper blending facilities are required to be provided. For a central type of washery, raw coal is transported to the plant across long distances, meaning more cost is involved and size degradation takes place due to repeated handling. Because of continuous degradation of raw coal in terms of quality and size, an adequate facility becomes necessary in the capacity of individual circuits and units so that the rated throughput of the plant is achieved. Indian coals yield a large quantity of middlings and rejects, subsequently, disposal of these products poses problems because of their lower heat value. Corrective measures both during the design and operation of coal washeries need to be speedily implemented. Built-in capacity of the different sections of a plant should have extra allowance to take care of anticipated variation of size and washability characteristics of raw coal. All the equipment should be easily accessible for maintenance and overhaul to reduce downtime. Design deficiencies of existing washeries should be rectified as soon as possible. Appropriate modifications should also be done in existing washeries to accommodate the deteriorating quality of raw coal feed. The latest techniques of coal preparation should be adopted in future washeries and also in existing washeries in the form of modification schemes. In addition to this, the following major areas need special consideration. The performance of a washery is evaluated by an examination of the extent of fulfilment of different duties of the plant such as ( Handling the required hourly throughput capacity of the plant; Effective working hours over a shift or day; Efficiency parameter of individual processing and handling units; Yield and quality of washed products; Consumption of magnetite, reagents, water, power, spares for machinery, etc.; Cost of washing. While evaluating the performance study, the characteristics of raw coal feed to the washery has to be maintained within a reasonable degree of consistency. The actual quantity and quality of clean coal should be compared with those expected from theoretical assessment. In other words, the organic efficiency of the plant as an integrated unit should be determined. Periodic performance study and evaluation are essential for taking corrective steps. The performance of four washeries is presented in Except for raw coal shortage, the total downtime is generally attributed to inadequate maintenance. These breakdowns take place not only due to inadequacy of maintenance but also design defects. Breakdowns can be avoided by rectifying the designed defects as well as replacing the spares of affected items in time. Power failures cause spillage, jamming, system contamination and long start up times. Power failure can be avoided by some relatively simple low-cost methods in a short time basis. This may be In addition, there are other types of reasons for idle time, such as nonavailability of wagons for off-take of washed products, and subsequently, no adequate place for stocking the products. In the analysis of four washeries, it is observed that washeries B and C suffer greatly from lost periods. Linkage of raw coal to the washeries is a prerequisite for proper utilisation of the washeries. Similarly, for supply of wagons, proper coordination is necessary with the railway authority. The efficiency of washing units as expressed by imperfection value remains the same under normal duty ranges of size and quality of coal. The efficiency may go down in the event of faulty operating conditions. Thus, it is necessary to check the efficiency of all the washing units from time to time as it may be difficult to execute this on a daily routine basis. If any anomalies are found, necessary rectifications are to be taken by examination of root causes. Any deterioration in performance of the units will result in loss of clean coal. Thus, it is necessary to know the exact efficiency range of different washing units. This is not only required at the time of selection of the equipment but also during operation. The study of the efficiency of individual washing units plays an important role in the analysis of the performance of the washery. The cost of clean coal is a function of the expenditure on raw coal, wages, stores, power, interest on depreciation and capital. In addition, the cost is The performance of coal preparation plants can be properly controlled by taking recourse to the following measures: Control on the quality of raw coal feed; Blending of raw coal feed from different sources; Efficient operation of individual equipment and the whole system Proper maintenances and supply of spares and replaceable parts; Regular supply of power, water, magnetite and other consumable materials; Regular receipt of the required quantity of raw coal and despatch of washed products; Plant management, supervisory control and training of personnel Quality control of washed products by statistical control charts; Distributed control system of automation by PLC; Design of optimum flow sheet, selection of the right type of equipment and standardisation; Use of proper type of liners against abrasion; Provision for upgrading of raw magnetite in the plant and design of proper type of magnetite circuit; Protective measures against power tripping; Economic design of water circuit; Pollution control against dusts, slurry and noise; Proper disposal of rejects and their possible utilisation; Modification of existing washeries on feedback from research and development. In the composite washing system of coking coal in India, three types of products are usually obtained: clean coal, middlings and rejects. It is observed that the proportion of middlings is rising day by day on one hand, and on the other hand the yield of clean coal is decreasing in the washeries because This possibility has been established from tests. The middlings were crushed to 13 and 3 The recoverable weight of clean coal varies from 3.1% to 29.5% for middlings crushed to 13 It is anticipated that the proportion of middlings may further rise to as high as 35%–40% of total raw coal feed to the washery. This will mean less availability of washed metallurgical coal. This situation calls for immediate remedial measures. It is, however, believed that this scheme should hold good more or less for coals to be washed in the existing Indian washeries. This integrated approach will go a long way in solving the problem of the acute shortage of coking coal in the country. The main objective of coal washing is to recover the maximum amount of clean coal without exceeding the specified ash content. In the first instance, the optimum level of crushing for economic liberation of coal particles from dirt is established so that the crushed materials can be beneficiated efficiently in available washers. Then comes the question of optimisation of the yield of clean coal. The crushed coals are usually screened into different size fractions and then washed in different vessels. The different size fractions may have their own washability characteristics and these may again vary in the day to day operation of the plant. In most washeries, the different coal-washing equipment operates in parallel, the feed to each one of them being of different size. This type of system can be termed as composite washing ( It is known that the yield of clean coal will be maximised if each stream is washed to the same level of direct elementary ash content. Now, if the variation of elementary ash with specific gravity of separation is the same for each stream, then the yield of clean coal is at its maximum if each stream is washed at the same specific gravity of separation. This phenomenon can also be proved graphically by plotting the washability curves of each stream. The blending of two clean coal streams of different size fractions are considered here, as in From the float and sink data of the two size fractions, 75–25 In the Indian washeries, composite washing of the coal is done at different sp.gr. of cut. Since this practice cannot produce the maximum yield of clean coal at a particular ash content, the coals should be washed by the same sp.gr. of cut for proper optimisation of the plant, which in turn will reduce losses in the beneficiation process. Two new washeries in the private sector with details are indicated in Since the installation of the first washery in India in 1951, a number of washeries have been constructed and many are under construction. Standardisation of the process and equipment has however been lacking, largely due to the fact that all the washeries have been built by agencies of different foreign countries. This has resulted in an acute shortage of spares, especially for process equipment. This situation has been further aggravated by the restriction of foreign exchange and the delays in issuing of import licences. Thus, the idle hours in the washery due to mechanical breakdowns are increasing. The indigenous capability to manufacture washery equipment with foreign collaboration is slowly building up in the country. If the equipment as well as the circuits of coal preparation plants are standardised, the problems of spares can be solved by indigenous manufacturing. The modular concept of design should be adopted, by which standard circuits of equal capacity can be incorporated. In a modular system, if any breakdown takes place in a stream, the other stream can run effectively without affecting the production of the whole plant. The individual stream should be designed so that larger-capacity equipment can be accommodated to gain advantage of reduced floor space, capital cost and operating cost with lower power consumption as well as lower cost of spares. The adoption of standard flow sheets in comparison to diverse systems of washing as they prevail in India can offer many benefits ( Standardisation will help in the development of the manufacture of equipment and spares indigenously. Costs will reduce in the design, manufacture and installation of washeries. Stores inventory of spares will reduce as the demand will be limited to a few standard designs. Training of personnel for operation and maintenance of washery will be easier as they can be interchanged. Operation and maintenance of washeries will be easier due to ready availability of spares and equipment. Interchangeability of equipment and spares becomes possible. Time schedule for the construction of new washeries will be less. Unitised or modular construction is a current trend in advanced countries. Plants are preengineered and fabricated in the manufacturing shop and then transported to the site by trucks or rail as is convenient. Plants up to 400 Design cost of the modular plant is lowered; Modular plants can be built much faster than conventional plants once the site is ready; Capacity of the preparation plants can be increased by adding modules in parallel to an existing circuit; Modular plants can be easily dismantled and transported to a new place for reuse; Maintenance of circuits can be programmed alternatively without interruption of the whole plant; Modular units are flexible by providing matching capacity to the production programme of the mines; Higher utilisation of investment. The conventional method of washing the size range of 75–25 On examination of float and sink tests data of different coal samples, it has been established that the maximum yield of clean coal is attained when the level of crushing is brought down to the range of 13–6 A flow scheme as given in Crushing ROM coal down to 75 Deshaling of 75–0 Screening and desliming of deshaled coal at 13 and 0.5 Crushing of >13 Dewatering of rejects obtained from deshaler. Washing of 13–0.5 Rinsing and dewatering of clean coal, middlings and rejects produced from HM cyclones. Treating the dilute media pulp in two-stage magnetic separators for regeneration of magnetite. Upgradation of <0.5 Dewatering of flotation concentrates and tailings. Storage of cleans obtained from HM cyclones and flotation cells in clean coal bunker for despatch to steel plants. Storage of middlings obtained from HM cyclones in middlings bunker for despatch to power stations. Storage of rejects obtained from HM cyclones and flotation cells in a reject bin for disposal to dumping yard or other utilisation. Standardisation is the only rational approach and it should find its place in coal washing too. The standard flowsheet so selected will not only yield optimum recovery of clean coal and middlings but also simplify the layout, design, operation and maintenance of washeries. The benefits of standardisation can be reaped both for new and existing washeries. The diversity of design and capacity of different washery equipment and plant circuits offer limited scope for standardisation in existing plants vis-à-vis new ones. As a number of coal washeries are being planned in the coking coal sector, there is an urgent need for standardisation. A flowsheet of standard design has been formulated which is most suitable for maximising the recovery of clean coal and middlings at the desired ash levels. The existing washeries can also be modified in line with the proposed circuit. This will also go a long way in solving many problems through import substitution. The design and construction of complete washeries along with the timely supply of spares will be possible from indigenous sources. It is now widely accepted that one large unit should be preferred to two or more smaller capacity units for better process control and for economies of scale. Through large-capacity process units, modular design of plants can be made and in turn a higher degree of standardisation can be achieved. There is enough scope for simplification in the design of modular plants which will be economical to build. The modules will have provision for separate arrangement for raw coal handling and homogenisation, washing section and despatch of washed products. The modules can also be erected at a site according to the local conditions. As the reserves of good-quality coking coals of upper seams are almost depleted, low volatile medium coking (LVMC) coals of lower seams have become the alternative choice. These coals, being of lower seams are likely to be more mature ( These coals generally occur in the lower seams of Jharia Coalfield (combined seam V/VI/VII/VIII and individual seam II, III and IV) and Karo group of seams (seam VI to XI) in the eastern part of East Bokaro Coalfield of the Damodar Valley basin. These coals have at present not found entry into the steel industry. The laboratory and pilot plant investigations on these coals after washing at 10%, 15% and 17% ash levels have firmly demonstrated that the coals show good coking properties and can be blended in a proportion up to 20% to produce good-quality blast furnace coke ( The typical characteristics of LVMC coals with parametric feature range ( High ROM coal ash 35%–50%; High maturity Low volatile matter content 15%–16%; High inertinite content 60%–70%; Washability potentially poor to very poor; Crushing requirement fine to very fine (<13/ to <3 On the basis of various reports and washability data, the following observations can be made: Percentage of near gravity materials (NGM) at 1.45–1.65 cut density range are high, and thus the coals become difficult to wash ( Generally, washability of LVMC coal can be improved by crushing it to smaller size. The difficult washability characteristics of LVMC coals are due to fine dissemination of mineral particles with macerals. The ash % of marketable product can be further improved by blending with prime coking coal, so that this coal can be used in various steel plants. Crushing at lower size involves increased cost of size reduction, cost of beneficiation and handling cost of materials can be outweighed by an increase in the yield of the beneficiated coal. From the washability analyses, crushing of coal to less than 13 Coal India Ltd. has taken the initiative to set up six washeries with a total capacity of about 19 The proposed flowsheet developed for the 5 Crushing ROM coal down to 50 Screening of crushed coal at 13 Deshaling of 50–13 Crushing of floats (<50 >13 Washing of 13–0.5 Upgradation of <0.5 Storage of cleans obtained from HM cyclones and flotation cells in clean coal bunker for despatch to steel plants. Storage of middlings obtained from HM cyclones in middlings bunker for despatch to power stations.  There is no guarantee for supply of such a low raw coal ash (< 40%). In fact, there is every likelihood of an increase in the raw coal ash. It is not known how far the dilution effect has been considered. If the ash content of ROM coal increases by 3%–5%, the whole washing circuit will be imbalanced. The dilution effect has been discussed in A good amount of middlings will be produced; there is enough possibility of recovery of coking coal. Middlings are required to be crushed to 3 Deshaling at the lower top size of coal will lead to an increase in NGM and washing becomes more difficult. All the possibilities of crushing to lower top sizes must be explored. Hopefully, the mistakes and experience gained from this washery will lead to success. Eventually, an optimum design of washery circuit will evolve. Most coal washeries in India are not working properly, resulting in deterioration both in the quality and quantity of washed clean coal. The low performance of coal washeries causes a great deal of damage to the national economy because of increased import of coking coal. It is necessary to analyse the problems very critically so that the present situation can be improved. If the real causes of failures are identified, proper action can be taken, whether of a technical character or management techniques. The latest technology of management science should be introduced in this industry as is done in other industries. The present steel production in India is not very high compared to that of other countries around the world. However, there is a rising trend in steel consumption, accordingly the steel industry is trying to increase its production. Coking coal is used in steel plants in the form of hard coke for two purposes: as a reducing agent and for smelting. Deterioration in the quality of coal in any form, whether in relation to ash, moisture, volatile matter or coking propensities affects the operation of steel plants in one way or other. The high ash content in coal produces less heat value than what is required and at the same time gives rise to a greater quantity of slag. Thus, this situation warrants improvement in the system of coal washing not only from the angle of techniques of beneficiation but also for operational aspects. The smooth operation of the plant requires an efficient management system which should be supported by good organisation, maintenance management, material management, financial control, etc. Most washeries are 40–50 years old, characterised by technological obsolescence and aging equipment, suffer from loss of operational efficiency in terms of yield percentage and capacity utilisation, as shown in It is a fact that the size of coal generally influences its washability characteristics. It is expected that a reduction in the top size of a coal will increase the value of its washability number until the critical top size for the coal sample is reached, below which there is no release of clean coal. Keeping this in perspective, all the pros and cons should be explored to arrive at the optimum top size of crushing for future washeries, especially when dealing with LVMC coals. Liberation of coal substance is not complete unless coal is crushed to a certain level of top size. There is every likelihood of losing some combustibles along with rejects produced from the washery if the coaly matter is not made free before washing. It is suggested that the raw coals should be crushed to 6 This crushed fraction 6–0.5