Highly conducting p- and n-type poly-Si:H films were deposited by hot wire chemical vapor deposition (HWCVD) using SiH4+H2+B2H6 and SiH4+H2+PH3 gas mixtures, respectively. Conductivity of 1.2×102 (Ωcm)−1 for the p-type films and 2.25×102 (Ωcm)−1 for the n-type films was obtained. These are the highest values obtained so far by this technique. The increase in conductivity with substrate temperature (T
                     s) is attributed to the increase in grain size as reflected in the atomic force microscopy results. Interestingly conductivity of n-type films is higher than the p-type films deposited at the same T
                     s. To test the applicability of these films as gate contact Al/poly-Si/SiO2/Si capacitor structures with oxide thickness of 4 nm were fabricated on n-type c-Si wafers. Sputter etching of the poly-Si was optimized in order to fabricate the devices. The performance of the HWCVD poly-Si as gate material was monitored using C–V measurements on a MOS test device at different frequencies. The results reveal that as deposited poly-Si without annealing shows low series resistance.Thin film poly-Si is thought to yield stable solar cells and high current thin film transistors for flat panel displays. In present VLSI devices, poly-Si grown by conventional LPCVD at 650 °C is used as gate material rather than Al metal. The thermal budget of LPCVD is very high since it requires high substrate temperature >600 °C for poly-Si deposition. However, this material can be deposited by PECVD and hot wire chemical vapor deposition (HWCVD) at low substrate temperature ( Recently it was demonstrated that the HWCVD can be used for the deposition of doped μc-Si:H or poly-Si at low Doped poly-Si films were deposited using Matheson grade SiH Capacitors were fabricated on 〈1  In  As can be seen from Capacitors (0.75 mm diameter) having structure c-Si/SiO  Boron penetration is a reliability concern in dual gated CMOS technology. Boron penetration occurs during the high temperature cycle employed for activating the implanted boron atoms in a normal device fabrication process. Different procedures Highly conducting (σ∼10 Authors are grateful to Dr M. Scheib, IFOS, Kaiserslautern, Germany for the XRD data. Work was carried out with financial help under the project from University of Kaiserslautern. One of the authors (S.B.P.) acknowledges Council of Scientific Research (CSIR), Government of India for financial support.