The ability to co-deposit particulate matter in a matrix of electroless nickel has led to a new generation of composite coatings. Polycrystalline diamond is one of the many varieties of particulate matter that can be co-deposited. Composite diamond coating is a regenerative layer of diamond particles dispersed in a hard electroless nickel matrix. In this work, experiments have been carried out to study the effect of heat treatment on the wear characteristics of the electroless composite coating containing diamond particles. The results indicate substantial increase in wear resistance after heat treatment. For wear analysis, in order to overcome the difficulties in the most common ‘weight loss’ method, X-ray diffraction method is used. Also the concept of internal standard method of quantitative X-ray diffraction analysis with suitable modifications is employed for the study of removal of diamond particles from the matrix. Superior integrity of the diamond particles with the matrix of the coating is observed for the specimens when heat treated to around 350°C because of the formation of phosphides. But increasing the heat treatment to about 500°C affects the wear resistance.Electroless composite coatings containing occluded solid particles in metallic matrices have been developed in recent years for various engineering applications those need good wear resistance in industries like textile, gear, paper, molding, tool and die, automotive, etc. The first technology center for composite electroless plating was established in 1981. The diamond and carbides have generally superior wear resistance, particularly when the deposit is heat treated to increase the hardness.   In this work, mild steel discs of about 22 The step-by-step cleaning procedure employed prior to plating consists of Cleaning the substrate with soap. Rinsing with distilled water. Ultrasonic cleaning in methanol. Acid pickling for 1 Rinsing in distilled water followed by a methanol wash. Also just before coating, the diamond powder at around 80 Washing in nitric acid (1% HNO Rinse in distilled water. Immerse for 2 The plating bath constituents and the operating conditions employed are given below: Nickel chloride Diffractograms for all the deposits were obtained using a microprocessor-controlled Philips vertical diffractometer. The X-ray generator was operated at 30 Wear resistance of the deposits was estimated using a disc-on-disc type of unit. A schematic line drawing of the equipment showing its essential features is shown in The samples were held in position by appropriately placed bearings such that during the test, the samples were free to rotate about its own axis. The design ensures that the embedded diamond particles and the coating were subjected to lateral forces in all directions lying in the plane of the sample surfaces at various time intervals in a cyclic fashion. The test was interrupted at specific predetermined intervals and the weighed to estimate the weight loss. The intervals, designated as wear test time for electroless Ni–P/diamond composite coating were 5, 10, 20, 30 and 40 The weight loss estimated by the disc-on-disc type of test described above gives only a gross loss in weight which represents loss of diamond particles and the matrix material. The loss of diamond alone or that of matrix alone is not revealed by this method. To have an estimate of these individual weight losses on wear test, X-ray diffraction (XRD) techniques could be employed ( To overcome this difficulty to some extend, a standard had to be introduced. This was done in the form of a silver foil of 1 The ratio of the integrated intensity of the Bragg reflection from diamond particles in the matrix of the coatings to that from nickel could be considered as an indicator of the quantitative measure of diamond particles present in the matrix of electroless nickel (EN) coatings. The changes in the ratio of integrated intensity of diamond to that of nickel ( The gross wear resistance of electroless Ni–P/diamond coating was obtained by monitoring the reduction in the weight of the specimen during the wear test. The wear tests were conducted on three sets of specimen: (a) as coated, (b) after heat treatment at 350 The information obtained regarding the wear characteristics of composite coating using weight loss method (discussed above) is not complete in the sense that the weight loss does not discriminate between the loss of diamond particles and the loss of matrix material. This information is indeed of interest. Answer to this problem could be partly obtained using XRD techniques. The ratio of the integrated intensity of a suitable diffraction profile from diamond to that of nickel can be taken as an indicator of the relative abundance of the respective phases in the coating at any intermediate point of time during the wear test. Details of this technique have already been explained in Section The variation in the integrated intensity ratio But in this case also there is a lack of information about the quantity of diamond particles which are actually coming out from the deposits. To overcome this problem another method of XRD analysis was carried out and is presented in the following discussion. The analysis using the integrated intensity ratio ( For this purpose a silver foil of thickness 1 The percentage reduction in the ratio of integrated intensity of diamond to the integrated intensity of silver ( Based on the experimental results and analysis, the following conclusions have been drawn which clearly indicates the significant improvement of the wear performance on heat treatment. Superior integrity of the diamond particles with the matrix of the coating is observed for the specimens when heat treated to around 350 Increasing the temperature of heat treatment to 500 XRD analysis on wear test proves the removal of diamond particles during the initial stages. A novel approach on wear analysis by pasting silver foil on the specimen before XRD is introduced and analyzed.