In Vietnam, Dzung Quat Refinery disposes about 7300 tonnes of spent fluid catalytic cracking (SFCC) catalysts per year. The recovery of rare earth metals (La(III), Ce(III),…) contained in SFCC catalysts using acid leaching process has attracted much attention of scientific community. In this study, the effect of alkaline pre-treatment of spent catalysts prior to the acid leaching process on the leaching yield of La(III) was investigated. The results showed that alkaline pre-treatment caused zeolite destruction, which had a positive effect on the leaching of La(III). High leaching yields of La(III), 80% and 86%, were achieved when the SFCC catalysts were pre-treated with NaOH and NH3, respectively, before leaching with 2 M HNO3 solution at 50 °C. These results were comparable with the one obtained from the sample that was leached by 7 M HNO3 at 50 °C without the initial alkaline pre-treatment. NH3 pre-treatment significantly enhanced the zeolite destruction in the SFCC catalysts and increased La(III) leaching yield compared to the NaOH pre-treatment. It is likely due to NH3 interactions with contaminant metals (e.g. Ni, V, and Fe), which were deposited on catalysts during cracking process.Fluid catalytic cracking (FCC) is an important process in the refining industry to convert high boiling hydrocarbon fractions (FCC feedstock) to valuable commercial products such as light olefins, gasoline, diesel ( A very interesting way for the treatment of SFCC catalysts is the extraction of rare earth (RE) metals. Typically, SFCC catalysts contain from 0.5 wt% to more than 3 wt% of rare earth oxides (such as oxides of lanthanum, cerium, praseodymium, neodymium,…) ( FCC catalysts, having zeolite Y as the main component, operate under severe conditions, especially during the regeneration step with the presence of steam, air and high temperature (  According to The SFCC and fresh FCC (FFCC) catalysts samples were provided by Dzung Quat Refinery (June 2016). The received samples were dried at 140 °C for 48 h. Ammonia solution (28 wt%) and sodium hydroxide (≥96 wt%) were used for the pre-treatment of the SFCC catalysts prior to the leaching step. Nitric acid (68 wt%) was used as the leaching agent.    The metal quantities presented in fresh and SFCC catalysts were determined by X-ray fluorescence (XRF) using S4 Pioneer instrument (Bruker) based on the standard XRD patterns were recorded in the 5° ≤ 2θ ≤ 40° range on a Bruker D8 Advance diffractometer using CuKα radiation generated at 40 kV and 40 mA. The percentage of crystallinity was measured using N   Surprisingly, replacing NH To clarify this phenomenon, some additional alkaline treatments on the FFCC catalyst sample were also performed. Interestingly, the results summarized in To confirm this hypothesis, an introduction of nickel to fresh catalyst sample was performed using a procedure described in Since the amount of cerium oxide was only 0.18 wt%, which is negligible to that of lanthanum oxide (2.52 wt%), only lanthanum was chosen to discuss the effect of catalysts pre-treatment to the overall RE leaching yield. The leaching yields of La(III) and Al(III) obtained at different leaching conditions are summarized in Firstly, treating SFCC catalyst with alkaline solution prior to the leaching step resulted in a higher yield of La(III). Indeed, the La(III) yields after pre-treatment with NH For other metals leaching, the results are shown in Alkaline pre-treatment of spent FCC catalysts induced higher leaching yield of La(III) compared with direct acid leaching. The zeolite structure was destroyed during the alkaline pre-treatment as OH As the SFCC catalyst structure was substantially destroyed during NH This research was funded by the