Rare earth element (REE)-bearing carbonatite deposits commonly contain a wide range of different REE- and REE-bearing minerals associated with various gangue matrices. In order to select the most-suitable mineral processing technique for these deposits, it is essential to identify and quantify the minerals of interest, including their liberation, associations and grain size distribution, along with whole rock compositions. These data are also vital for ore feed optimisation and metallurgical troubleshooting during and after designing a mineral processing flowsheet. This paper summarises the key mineralogical parameters needed before conducting metallurgical beneficiation tests, using the Songwe Hill carbonatite deposit as an example. This REE ore deposit consists of poorly-liberated synchysite-(Ce), which hosts the light rare earth elements including Nd plus some heavy rare earths and well-liberated apatite, which hosts 50% of Gd, 63% of Dy and 71% of Y (heavy rare earth elements) in the deposit. For all REE heavier than Gd, apatite is the most important REE host, however, for the two REE where data are available in both synchysite-(Ce) and apatite (Dy and Y), synchysite-(Ce) still accommodates >25% of the whole-rock HREE content. Both of these ore minerals are associated with ankerite, calcite, and to a lesser extent with iron oxides/carbonates, K-feldspar, strontianite and baryte. According to the quantitative mineralogical data, the possibility of using gravity separation, magnetic separation, froth flotation and leaching to process Songwe Hill carbonatite ore is discussed and a potential beneficiation flowsheet is presented.Characterising mineralogical textures in an ore body is a powerful and integrated tool for designing processing routes and improving separation performance ( Carbonatite deposits are the largest and highest grade sources for the REE ( The rare earth minerals commercially extracted from carbonatites are bastnäsite-(Ce), the Ca-free end-member of the REE fluorcarbonate group, and monazite-(Ce). Xenotime has also been processed from other REE deposit types ( The Songwe Hill carbonatite deposit, Malawi, is an advanced rare earth project, licensed to Mkango Resources Ltd., and is the case study of this article. It is interpreted as a circular volcanic vent approximately 800 m in diameter and comprises a multi-phase intrusion composed of carbonatite, fenite and breccia ( Apatite is anomalously enriched in the heavy rare earth elements (HREE: Eu–Lu + Y), compared to apatite in most carbonatite deposits ( Preparation and analysis of whole-rock powders was carried out by Intertek-Genalysis Laboratory Services Pty Ltd. in Johannesburg, South Africa, and Perth, Australia. All other analytical work was carried out at Camborne School of Mines, University of Exeter. In total, fifteen carbonatite rock samples of different size fractions were analysed for their bulk chemical and mineralogical composition, and for particle size distribution. These samples consist of eight crushed drill core samples representing eight drill holes from Songwe Hill with a P The crushed samples with P Crushed drill core samples were analysed for REE, Mg, Al, Si, P, S, K, Ca, Mn, Fe, Sr, Zr, Nb, Th and U contents. The samples were milled and pulverised to 80% passing size P Samples were disaggregated with an agate mortar and pestle and then analysed using a Siemens D5000 X-ray diffractometer. Analyses were carried out using a Cu Kα source operated with a tube voltage of 40 kV and current of 30 mA. The profile produced by the scan was interpreted using the JCPDS PDF-2 (2004) database and Bruker EVA software V.10.0.1.0. Initial mineral identification was first undertaken by SEM-EDS using a JEOL JSM-5400LV Low Vacuum SEM, equipped with Oxford Instruments EDS system. Following this, mineral compositions were determined using a JEOL JXA-8200 EPMA, operated with a 15 kV accelerating voltage, 20 nA beam current, and 5 µm beam diameter. The peak counting times were 10 s for La and Ce; 20 s for Pr, Nd, Sm, Eu, Gd, Dy, Er, Y, Th, and U; and 30 s for Ca, P, and F. The REE were calibrated using synthetic silicate glasses from the Edinburgh Ion Probe Facility, while the other elements were calibrated against a combination of natural and synthetic minerals and metals. A manual correction was applied to the REE data to account for X-ray peak overlaps, such as those of Ce on Sm and Gd. Automated mineralogical analyses were carried out using QEMSCAN® ( Using automated mineralogical techniques to determine different REE minerals is challenging (e.g., A Malvern Mastersizer MAF500 laser-sizer was used to determine the particle size distribution of the composite samples with P The ground composite sample P Identifying and quantifying minerals of interest, including their liberation, association, and grain size distribution, is a fundamental component of the process mineralogy. It improves understanding of the ore body and provides insight into the target minerals and optimum grind size of the feed before conducting any mineral processing testwork. It is also vital information for ore feed optimisation and metallurgical troubleshooting during and after the design of a mineral processing flowsheet ( Observations from SEM images, combined with XRD and automated mineralogy data, indicate that all the drill core samples have a similar mineralogical composition, but vary slightly in their relative proportions. The main gangue minerals are calcite, ankerite and K-feldspar along with traces of strontianite, baryte, hematite, goethite and siderite ( Automated mineralogical analyses show that the carbonatite at Songwe Hill contains about 7–10 wt% apatite, synchysite-(Ce) and florencite-(Ce), as well as trace amounts of bastnäsite and monazite ( From back-scattered electron imagery, it is evident that the valuable minerals are typically fine-grained, and commonly between 5 and 50 µm in size. Between samples they vary in their proportions and crystal shapes, particularly synchysite-(Ce). In addition, they are associated with all gangue minerals, indicative of a complex ore deposit. Apatite commonly occurs as subhedral to anhedral grains in patchy or vein-like textures, with a grain size up to 100 µm. It is mostly associated with ankerite followed by calcite and to a lesser extent with K-feldspar and Fe/Mn oxides ( Synchysite-(Ce) commonly occurs as fine to very fine anhedral to subhedral grains, <25 µm diameter, as assemblages of fibro-radial crystals which form nest-like microstructures or individual platy (acicular cross-section) crystals ( Crystal shape and size are important parameters for processing an ore deposit as both can affect the degree of liberation. Where synchysite occurs as very thin platy (needle-like) crystals, liberation may be challenging because of their small size. Conversely, granular crystals of synchysite would be easier to liberate and subsequently recover. Similarly, agglomerations of ‘needle-like’ crystals would behave as a large particle and should also be easier to recover. No crystals of synchysite >150 µm diameter have been seen by the authors, at Songwe Hill, or in published work on samples containing synchysite from other localities and rock types. Even samples labelled ‘synchysite’ in which the crystals look to be cm-size, are intergrowths of different REE fluorcarbonates (Daniel Atencio pers comm.) and there seems to be a general rule that synchysite forms small platy crystals that will be difficult to liberate during processing. This means that in addition to the properties of synchysite, the properties of the host mineral (for example, magnetic behaviour, electrical conductivity or specific gravity) will also need to be considered when processing this ore deposit. Florencite-(Ce), the least common REE mineral, occurs as anhedral vein-like grains or as individual fine patches ( Gangue minerals make up 90–93 wt% of the modal mineralogy. There are no significant variations in the proportion of the valuable and gangue minerals in the crushed samples P The liberation parameter is a key indicator for successful process separation ( While the results of the crushed drill core samples reveal that all the minerals of interest are not well liberated, the ground composite samples P Based on QEMSCAN® measurements, a maximum liberation degree of 50% for synchysite-(Ce) and 72% for apatite is achieved after fine grinding to P The distribution of the valuable mineral mass based on the liberation degree is presented in The composition of the crushed drill core samples is listed in The samples are rich in REE with total rare earth oxide (TREO) contents of 1.2–2.1 wt%. Overall, Ce As demonstrated by The compositions of apatite, synchysite-(Ce), parisite-(Ce) and florencite-(Ce) from Songwe Hill, as analysed by EPMA, are listed in The predominant phosphate minerals are apatite and florencite-(Ce). Apatite hosts REE, ranging from trace levels (see The average TREO concentration in synchysite-(Ce) and parisite-(Ce) is 50 wt% and 58 wt%, respectively ( The species of synchysite determines the elemental deportment of different ore minerals, as well as its magnetic susceptibility and magnetic behaviour. Synchysite-(Ce) is a diamagnetic mineral ( As previously noted, Owing to the low concentration of HREE in synchysite-(Ce), the presented mass-balance data become unavoidably less reliable for the heavier REE. Indeed, Eu, Tb, Ho, Er, Tm, Yb, and Lu are not included in Synchysite-(Ce) hosts most of the LREE containing 88% of the available Ce in the rock, with florencite-(Ce) predominantly accounting for 11% and apatite about 1%. The importance of synchysite-(Ce) as a REE host decreases for heavier REE as apatite becomes the dominant REE-bearing mineral. For all REE heavier than Gd, apatite is the most important REE host. Interestingly, however, for the two REE where data are available in both synchysite-(Ce) and apatite (Dy and Y), synchysite-(Ce) still accommodates >25% of the whole-rock HREE content. Thus, while apatite is an important phase for hosting the REE, synchysite-(Ce) remains an important valuable mineral. Gangue phases such as calcite and fluorite contain a negligible amount of LREE, and only amount to ~5% of the Y contents. For the purposes of tracking synchysite-(Ce) and apatite contents during mineral processing tests, the respective contents of Ce and Y are sufficiently robust proxies. Characterising the modal mineralogy, liberation, mineral associations, average grain size, and mass-size distribution are key parameters to improve the mineralogical understanding of an ore deposit. They are also key parameters for identifying the potential metallurgical beneficiation route and to optimise recovery of the target minerals. Herein we discuss how these mineralogical characteristics can be utilised to predict behaviour in mineral processing and present a possible flowsheet option to process the Songwe Hill deposit. Gravity concentration is widely used due to low capital and operating costs, an absence of chemical reagents and a lack of excessive heating requirements (  Examination of mineral density alone is not sufficient to fully evaluate the potential for gravity separation as it does not account for the size or density of the particles in which the minerals of interest are contained. Using quantitative mineralogical data, it is possible to examine the distribution of particles by both size and density (  For gravity separation to be effective there must be a large difference in density between the minerals of interest and gangue minerals, within size ranges which are suitable for gravity separation processes. The modest density differences shown in In In  Overall, the quantitative mineralogical data indicates that gravity separation would be unlikely to be an effective means of processing the ore to upgrade REE-bearing minerals. Grinding is the most energy-consuming operation in a mineral processing flowsheet, particularly for a complex and fine-grained deposit ( The mineral liberation analyses of Songwe Hill samples ( Particle size analysis, classification and desliming of an ore deposit prior to undertaking a mineral processing test may be required to enhance separation efficiency. Particle size analysis is important for determining the size range of particles after the grinding step. A classification step may be required to split the bulk ore sample into different products based on particle size (e.g. fine, medium and coarse products) or grade (e.g. high-grade and low-grade products), to be processed separately using the same or different methods and conditions. Desliming may be applied to remove ultrafine and very fine fractions from the ore sample to increase the efficiency of the beneficiation process. The particle size distribution at Songwe Hill show that the amounts of classified sample slightly vary from one size fraction to another, between 10 and 21%, except the <10 µm size fraction which contains a notable proportion (~36 wt%) of the whole ground composite sample P Automated mineralogical data indicate that valuable minerals are equally distributed between all size fractions. Adding a desliming step (i.e. removing the <10 µm fraction), prior to conducting a processing test, will adversely affect the recovery of the whole process. Such a step would result in a loss of approximately 23% and 26% of the total apatite and synchysite-(Ce) contents, respectively. However, it may be possible to classify the ore deposit into different products based on the particle size, and separately process the very fine size fraction product (i.e. <10 µm). Magnetic separation is widely used to beneficiate REE deposits by separating minerals with different magnetic properties ( The Songwe Hill carbonatite deposit consists of a considerable amount of paramagnetic/ferromagnetic gangue minerals including ankerite (30 wt%) and iron oxides/carbonates (13 wt%), ( The identity of the REE fluorcarbonate is important when considering magnetic separation because although synchysite is diamagnetic, parisite and bastnäsite, with their increasing proportions of REE are more magnetic and will respond differently during magnetic separation. Mineralogical characteristics, such as mineral grain size, liberation and association need to be taken into account when considering magnetic separation. For instance, large and well liberated synchysite-(Ce) grains are easy to separate from paramagnetic minerals such as ankerite ( A further consideration regarding the magnetic properties of the REE fluorcarbonates is the effect of syntaxial intergrowths. Syntaxial intergrowths are a common feature among REE fluorcarbonate minerals. When synchysite is syntaxially intergrown with parisite and/or bastnäsite, it may behave as a paramagnetic particle. An example of synchysite-(Ce) associated with paramagnetic minerals is the Springer Lavergne carbonatite deposit in Ontario, Canada ( Froth flotation has found prominence as a selective process which can separate chemically-similar minerals such as apatite and calcite in complex and low-grade ore bodies ( Froth flotation has been widely employed for the beneficiation of igneous phosphates due to the well-crystallised nature and inherent low porosity of apatite compared to apatite in sedimentary phosphates ( Different reagent schemes can be employed to beneficiate ore from Songwe Hill. One such possibility is a fatty acid collector, which is typically a mixture of oleic and linoleic acid, at around pH ~ 10 ( To evaluate the feasibility of applying flotation as a processing technique for this material the surface area of exposed REE-bearing minerals for flotation was estimated from quantitative mineralogical data. Specifically, the false colour PMA mineral map images generated by QEMSCAN® were analysed using a custom MATLAB® R2020a script to calculate the distribution of minerals on the boundary of particles. As the sample used for QEMSCAN® is a cut section, pixels on the boundary can be considered to be exposed for the purposes of flotation analysis. Using the boundary mineral distribution data, a number of theoretical grade recovery (TGR) curves were generated. These TGR curves represent the predicted recovery for two flotation scenarios. In the first scenario, synchysite-(Ce) and bastnäsite are the target minerals. Though, as the ratio of synchysite-(Ce):bastnäsite by mineral mass abundance is 215:1, it can assumed that synchysite-(Ce) is the only target mineral. The second scenario was to assume targeting of all REE-bearing minerals (principally, synchysite-(Ce) and apatite). The TGRs focus on LREO and HREO which were calculated from EPMA data as in Extract particle data from QEMSCAN® generated PMA mineral map false colour images and generate database of particles. Calculate abundance of minerals on individual particle surfaces using MATLAB® R2020a script. Sort particles from high to low surface grade of either synchysite-(Ce)/bastnäsite or all REE-bearing minerals. Use mineral masses and LREO and HREO mineral content estimated from EPMA data to determine grade of LREO and HREO of individual particles. Calculate average grade and cumulative recovery using cumulative mass data of individual particles.  LREO are more effectively recovered than HREO when targeting synchysite-(Ce) which is expected given the dominance of LREO in synchysite-(Ce) ( The trend in The trend in   The general trends of these charts follow a similar pattern to those shown in Comparing Mineralogy, liberation and mineral association are the most important parameters to be taken into account when assessing the leachability of the ore under investigation. A chemical treatment can be applied either to the whole rock or to a specific ore concentrate, obtained by physical beneficiation. It can also be applied to specific size fractions, for example the very fine particles of <20 µm that form about 50% of the ore deposit which may consider difficult to be processed using physical processing methods. The major gangue minerals at Songwe Hill are ankerite and calcite, respectively comprising about 30% and 27% of the ore deposit. Thus, acid leaching could be an appropriate process to reduce the major gangue minerals but such a process would result in excessive acid consumption. Regeneration of HCl from a leach solution has been developed for treating REE-bearing carbonate and apatite minerals ( In order to separate REE-bearing minerals form their gangue matrices at Songwe Hill the following flowsheet may be a potential processing option. The first step comprises crushing and grinding the composite sample to P  At the Songwe Hill carbonatite deposit, apatite hosts HREE including 50% of Gd, 63% of Dy and 71% of Y, while synchysite-(Ce) with much less common syntaxially intergrown parisite-(Ce), mainly hosts LREE (including Nd) and the remaining Gd, Dy and Y, whereas the less common florencite-(Ce), accommodates the rest of LREE. Although the ore mineralogy is complex, it is consistent throughout the deposit so that one metallurgical approach may be applied. Successful separation of REE ore deposits not only depends on the differences in the physical and chemical properties between the valuable and gangue minerals, but also on the detailed determination of mineralogical parameters such as mineral chemistry, liberation, association and grain size distribution. For example, the main REE fluorcarbonates, bastnäsite, parisite and synchysite have very different magnetic properties, and each mineral has further discrete species depending on the predominant REE, for example, synchysite-(Ce), synchysite-(Y), and synchysite-(Nd). All of these species will vary in their properties in terms of magnetism and density and each species needs a different way to be separated. The quantitative mineralogical data based on the mass distribution of REE-bearing minerals within size-density classes indicates that gravity separation would be unlikely to be an effective means of processing the ore to upgrade REE-bearing minerals due to the narrow density difference between REE-bearing minerals and the overall sample. A potential pre-concentrate of the >500 µm size fraction could be achieved using dense medium separation, but with a limited level of upgrade. The quantitative mineralogical data based on the surface area of exposed REE-bearing minerals reveals that targeting both apatite and synchysite-(Ce) instead of only synchysite-(Ce) using flotation technique would be a reasonable processing route to recover LREO and HREO and maximise processing efficiency as indicated from the TGR curves. Synchysite-(Ce), at Songwe Hill, is strongly associated with other gangue minerals and separation would involve fine grinding. The deposit consists of a considerable amount (~43 wt%) of paramagnetic gangue minerals including ankerite and iron oxides/carbonates which could be removed using magnetic separation. Apatite and synchysite-(Ce) could be separated using froth flotation as they have similar surface properties towards the same collectors such as fatty acids. Thus, a potential processing flowsheet would apply a combination of fine grinding along with magnetic separation and froth flotation.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors would like to thank Mkango Resources Ltd including Dr. Paul Armitage for provision of drill core samples and corresponding data for the Songwe Hill carbonatite deposit, Malawi. This study was funded by the