Froth flotation process requires the use of frothers. These important flotation agents are commonly characterized as either “selective” or “powerful” and are chosen following general guidelines and verification by laboratory and/or pilot plant tests.
                  Fundamental properties of the flotation frothers have been extensively studied over the last few years. These studies have led to the development of standardised procedures to characterise frothers in terms of their ability to reduce bubble size and to increase foam stability.
                  In this research project, the performance of five frothers in flotation of coal is evaluated and related to the fundamental properties of these agents. Since the recovery of water in the concentrate is closely related to the non-selective transport of solid particles by entrainment, the tested frothers are also assessed in terms of their ability to promote the transport of water towards the froth collection zone, both in absence and in presence of solids.The research projects of the latest decade clearly demonstrated that the first-order flotation rate constant is linearly related to Mineral particles report to the froth product either via selective attachment of hydrophobic particles to bubbles which carry them to the froth, or via the entrainment with the pulp water which is carried out to the froth by a swarm of bubbles, or via entrapment between particles in the froth attached to air bubbles ( Foams are classified as unstable or metastable ( Pure liquids do not foam. For a liquid to foam, it must be able to form a shell around the gas bubble that opposes the thinning of the lamellae. Foaming does not occur in pure liquids because there exist no such mechanism ( It is worth pointing out that what The three-phase flotation froth contains not only hydrophobic particles attached to bubbles, but also hydrophilic particles in the inter-bubble water. The entrainment was identified to be linked to the amount of water carried in the froth ( The froth, as opposed to a foam, is stabilized not only by a frother but also by the presence of solid particles. Therefore, while simple tests carried out with two-phase systems have been recently developed to characterize flotation frothers, it is still not clear how such indices developed to characterize the frothers could be used to predict the properties of a three-phase flotation froth. These issues are further studied in this paper. Five different frothers were tested in this research ( The effect of frothers on bubble size has recently been extensively studied ( The DFI values for α-terpineol and diacetone alcohol were determined using a well known procedure ( Two samples of bituminous metallurgical coal were obtained from the Fording mine in south-eastern BC. These samples were crushed and pulverized to produce a feed of about 80–90% passing 150 The proximate analyses for these samples are set out in Since ash content of sample 1 was low, in order to increase it up to 30% this sample was blended with coarse silica ( All the tests were carried out at a solids content of 10% by weight in a 3 The concentrates were collected every 1 All the tests were carried out at natural pH using frothers at four concentrations: 3.3 Three hundred and ten gram batches of coal were mixed with 2 These tests were also conducted in a 3 Weigh out 5 containers and number them from 1 to 5. Fill flotation cell with tap water to approximately 2900 Set the agitator to 1200 Add the required volume of frother from a stock solution (1 Condition for 5 Open the air valve and set the air flow rate to 4 “Float” water for 5 Weigh out each tray (tray All the tests were conducted adjusting the foam height to 1 Surface tension measurements were conducted using a Du Nouy ring tension meter. All the solutions were prepared at room temperature and stirred for 5 As  The semi-logarithmic plots were fitted to two straight lines that represent flotation of the fast floating component and flotation of the slowly floating component using the following equation ( The same procedure was used to determine the flotation rate constants for water in the flotation experiments with aqueous solutions of the tested frothers. In this case it was not necessary to split the curves into the fast and slowly floating components. As The reasoning adopted in this paper rests principally on the assumption that since coarse silica was added as a gangue to sample 1, fine coal particles will be reporting to the froth product during the first few minutes (fast floating component) while only coarser coal particles will be floating over the subsequent period of time, and that the behaviour of the fast floating component should strongly depend on the recovery of water in the froth. As this figure reveals, All previous publications indicate that the flotation of fine particles should strongly depend on the content of water carried to the froth. It is obvious that the correlation between the water rate constants measured in a two-phase system and DFI is quite good ( The most surface active (DF-1012) and the least surface active (diacetone alcohol) frothers (see Since sample 1 included only added coarse silica, in the experiments involving sample 1 there was practically no entrainment. Low ash contents in the froth product in To compare the effect of the tested frothers on the flotation rate of the fast floating component, the As the experiments described in this paper indicate the flotation rate constants obtained from the “flotation” experiments in which aqueous solutions were only utilized correlate very well with the DFI values. Frothers characterized by higher DFI values, that means the frothers that give more stable two-phase foams, produce higher water flotation rates. It is of interest to point out that in the presence of hydrophobic particles of bituminous coal, used here as a model of a hydrophobic solid, the water flotation rates were different. This clearly indicates that amount of water recovered with the froth product depends not only on the properties of frother but also on the solid particles. While the flotation rate constants for water in a two-phase experiment gave the lowest values for diacetone alcohol and MIBC (in accordance with their lowest surface activity) ( The effect of coal rank (wettability) on flotation was extensively studied.  The flotation rate constants for water determined from the flotation experiments with aqueous solutions of frothers (a two-phase flotation experiment) correlate very well with the CCC and DFI values for the frothers. The flotation rate constants determined for the coal fast floating component correlate very well with the water flotation rate constants obtained from the water recovered with coal into the froth product. Two frothers, diacetone alcohol and MIBC, which gave the lowest water recoveries in the two-phase flotation experiments, generated the highest water flotation rate constants and the highest coal flotation rate constants in the flotation experiments with coal. DF-1012, the most surface active frother of the tested suite, which gave the highest water recoveries in the two-phase flotation experiments, provided very low flotation rates for water in the flotation experiments with coal and turned out to be the worst agent for the flotation of the tested bituminous coal. The presence of fine silica in the feed increased significantly the flotation rate of water and the entrainment of this silica in the froth product. The authors wish to thank Miss Denise Nunes and Dr. Feridun Boylu for assistance in some flotation tests. The authors acknowledge the financial support of the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada under the NSERC Strategic Grant program.