The transport of gold from hydrochloric acid solutions by the phosphine oxide Cyanex 921 has been studied. The transport of the metal is investigated as a function of various experimental variables: hydrodynamic conditions, concentrations of gold(III) and HCl in the source phase and carrier concentration in the membrane. The selectivity of the system towards different base metals is presented. Mass transfer coefficients and the thickness of the source phase boundary layer were estimated from the experimental data.Gold is a metal that together with its use in jewelry also has a wide use in various industries due to its chemical and physical properties. Thus, the recovery of this metal from the various wastes generated by these industries is also of growing interest. Using hydrometallurgical operations for the recovery of gold, various physicochemical separations, have been investigated, e.g. precipitation, ion exchange, solvent extraction, and if membrane technologies have not yet shown their potential in this particular field of interest, they are widely used in many other applications The capacities of performing selective metal extraction and treating dilute solutions make the liquid membrane techniques an alternative to solvent extraction in that they combine the steps of extraction, stripping and regeneration of the organic phase in a single one. Liquid membranes may be divided into two categories: nonsupported liquid membranes (emulsion liquid membranes and bulk liquid membranes) and supported liquid membranes with common configurations that include flat-sheet, hollow fiber and spiral wound. Though not for industrial use, flat-sheet supported liquid membranes are an important tool to obtain first laboratory data about the performance of a given system (metal carrier), before scaling-up to the hollow fiber or spiral wound configurations that provide high surface area to volume ratio. Referring to gold transport with not a wide literature, during the last 10 years, supported liquid membranes have been used in the separation of this metal from various aqueous media Cyanex 921 was supplied by Cytec, its active group being tri- Membrane preparation and transport experiments were conducted using the same procedure and transport cell as described in a previous work The percentage of metal transported was determined by analyzing metal concentration by AAS in the source phase as a function of time and obtained by: A series of preliminary investigations was carried out to establish adequate hydrodynamic conditions. The percentage of gold transported was studied as a function of the stirring speed on the source phase side. The agitation of the receiving phase was kept constant at 650/min. Results obtained are shown in On the other hand, the variation of the stirring speed in the receiving phase in the 600–1000/min range (the agitation of the source phase was kept constant at 1200/min and other experimental variables are given in In this case, the membrane phase consisted of Cyanex 921, 20% (w/v) in xylene, and the source phase contained various concentrations of gold in different HCl concentrations. The results The effect of changing the extractant concentration on gold transport was investigated using source phases that contained 0.015 g/l gold at various HCl concentrations and membrane phases of different Cyanex 921 concentrations in xylene. The results The experiments were carried out with a membrane phase of Cyanex 921, 5% (w/v) in xylene, and source phases that contained 0.015 g/l gold in 1 M LiCl or 1 M HCl; the receiving phases were water. It can be deduced that under the experimental conditions used, the presence of the lithium salt decreases the percentage of gold transported, e.g. metal transport decreases to 36% (1 h) vs. 78% (1 h) when LiCl and HCl were present in the source phase, respectively. There is no appreciable difference in this behaviour with regards to different chloride salts present in the source phase. Probably, this different behaviour (salt or acid in the source phase) can be related to the presence of H It is known that different metals accompanied gold in the aqueous hydrochloric acid medium; however, it is difficult to give an approximate composition of these solutions because they often change from one process to another To evaluate the diffusional parameters, it is considered that the mass transfer of gold(III) across the membrane is described only by these parameters. The interfacial flux due to the chemical reaction is neglected, as the chemical reactions seem to take place at the interface source phase/membrane and membrane/receiving phase interfaces, and it has been suggested that chemical reactions can be considered as occurring instantaneously relative to the diffusion process The extraction of gold(III) by Cyanex 921 dissolved in xylene has been studied and described elsewhere The gold(III) transport rate is determined by the rate of diffusion of gold-containing species through the source phase diffusion layer and the rate of diffusion of HAuCl The distribution coefficient of gold(III) between the membrane phase and the receiving phase is lower than that between the source phase and the membrane; hence, the concentration of the gold-extracted complex in the membrane phase at the receiving phase side may be negligible compared with that at the source phase side, then, If the chemical reaction expressed by This expression combines the equilibrium and diffusion parameters involved in the gold(III) transport process through a supported liquid membrane containing Cyanex 921 in xylene as carrier. From experimental data, the permeation coefficient was computed using By plotting 1/ The diffusion coefficient of the gold complex in the bulk organic phase can be estimated from the diffusivity in the membrane by the following expression Cyanex 921 dissolved in xylene is an effective carrier for gold(III) from hydrochloric acid solutions. Metal transport is influenced by a number of variables of the source phase: stirring speed and HCl concentration, and of the membrane phase: carrier concentration. From experimental data, it is inferred that metal permeation can be described by a time-independent permeability coefficient, this situation being representative of an aqueous diffusion film controlled permeation process. Mass transfer coefficients were calculated as 0.003 and 59 μm/s for the organic and aqueous phases, respectively, whereas the thickness of the source phase boundary layer was estimated as 17 μm. The system presented good selectivity against the presence of various base metals in the source phase and is convenient in using water as receiving solution. The author thanks the CSIC for support and to Mr. J.L. Bascones and Mr. M. López for their technical assistance.