Tunnel excavation in squeezing ground is very challenging due to the difficulty in making reliable predictions at the preliminary design stage. Tunnel response in squeezing ground is made possible by employing creep constitutive models. However, literature outlines the limitations of the conventional creep constitutive models in estimating delayed deformations due to the squeezing mechanism. Hence this paper presents, a fractional-order derivative viscoelastic viscoplastic (FDVP) constitutive model capable of estimating delayed deformations characterized by squeezing. The FDVP constitutive equations are derived as an extension to the Burgers model and adjusted Perzyna overstress function with an associated viscoplastic flow rule. The constitutive model validation and verification are conducted by using the experimental data obtained from literature and monitored tunnel convergence data, respectively. Thereafter, the constitutive equations are implemented in FLAC3D and applied to simulate deformations responsible for squeezing within a tunnel employing in-built constitutive models for verification purposes. The constitutive model shows very good agreement with experimental data and yields close results with monitored tunnel convergence data. The model can be successfully used in numerical code for tunnel stability analysis in squeezing ground.Excavation of tunnels in squeezing ground is very challenging because it is difficult in making reliable estimation of the squeezing mechanism at the preliminary design stage. Throughout excavation, this phenomenon is not predicted, the experience is only gained on the squeezing problems encountered. This makes the selection and design of the most appropriate excavations in squeezing conditions more cumbersome This entails consideration of the viscoplastic (VP) creep behaviour and most importantly that exhibited in the accelerated creep stage responsible for squeezing related delayed deformations. To describe the 3-stage creep behaviour, researchers suggested rheological model combinations. The Burgers model connected in series with a VP component is one such combination proposed to predict the VP irreversible deformation Hence, the focus of this study is to improve the functionality of the Burgers and CVISC models to account for the TD delayed deformations. The improvement is conducted by developing a constitutive model applicable in the estimation of delayed tunnel deformation in squeezing ground. To achieve this task, the FDVP constitutive model is presented by coupling the Burgers model and the VP component. Additionally, contribution to the understanding of tunnel response in squeezing ground through formulating a constitutive model requires presentation of simple constitutive laws applicable in research and design practice. However, the mathematical theory and constitutive laws employed in the existing non-linear creep models are not adequate to satisfactorily describe the TD behaviour most prominently the accelerated creep stage. The commonly used differential constitutive equations to describe TD behaviour in these models employs integral calculus based on integer-order derivatives. In this regard, it is important to propose a creep model for squeezing ground governed by fractional-order derivative capable of describing the power-law mechanism of geomaterials. Fractional-order calculus is a concept of integrals and derivatives of random real and even complex numbers As an intensively developing area of calculus during the last couple of decades, it offers new features for research and other applications such as rheological models. Some classic creep models such as Maxwell and Kelvin models have been improved by using fractional-order derivatives Besides, the FDVP constitutive model presented in this paper takes advantage of the Perzyna The FDVP constitutive model presented in this paper comprises of the following features and assumptions: The model adopts an adjusted Perzyna The model ignores the viscoplastic flow rule assumption that governs the conventional overstress constitutive models as such addresses their limitation. The model is governed and restricted to the associated viscoplastic flow rule in which the potential function is given as the yield function. The model ignores the assumption of the conventional creep constitutive models governed by the integer-order derivatives as such addresses their limitation. The model assumes ideal viscoplasticity in that it overlooks the isotropic and kinematic hardening constitutive laws. Hence, a not exceedingly complicated creep constitutive model capable of describing the power-law mechanism of geomaterials is proposed with the intent of estimating delayed deformations in squeezing ground. The constitutive model is derived as an extension to the Burgers model and Perzyna The viability of employing fractional-order derivatives to describe the EVP behaviour of rocks stems from its application to represent viscoelasticity and elastoplasticity which include The spring-pot represent the element that obeys the fractional-order derivative amid Eqs. (1) and (2), and it is represented by the fractional relation (Eq. (3)). The relation is defined by the fractional-order derivative coefficient ( Fractional-order calculus is a branch of mathematics that investigates the likelihood of considering power-law of the differential and integral operators of real or complex numbers The In this relation, the gamma function characterizes a continuous extension of the factorial function. It is defined for non-negative numbers and displays a concave response for positive real numbers as illustrated in Fractional-order derivative is an exceptional mathematical tool for modelling viscoelastic behaviour and especially appropriate for building the EVP constitutive models. In the following section, a brief derivation of the stress–strain constitutive equations in an EVP medium is conducted which utilizes the fractional-order derivatives. Thereafter, the FDVP constitutive model is proposed and employs the fractional-order derivative function which incorporates an adjusted Perzyna In  The constitutive relation employs the gamma function and its effect on the spring-pot response over several time scales are illustrated in Substitution of the Newtonian element with a spring-pot in the Maxwell component and coupling a VP component which consists of a spring-pot and MC plastic slider, a new model is constructed. The model is constructed to estimate the TD strains related to the 3-stage creep behaviour. The stress–strain partition in the model is expressed by: where where When where Substituting Eq. (14) into Eq. (A7) ( As mentioned earlier in It is important to emphasize that the results presented in this section represent the fractional-order derivative viscoplasticity formulation based on Perzyna Based on Hooke’s law the When In this case, the viscoplastic strains initiate as such the viscoplastic potential function A full description of the viscoplastic strain rates requires comprehensive clarification. Hence, in classical viscoplasticity, it is hypothesized that the rate of viscoplastic strains is obtainable from Perzyna In time-independent plasticity when the state stress lies above the yield surface the scalar multiplier is obtained from the consistency condition. In viscoplasticity when the state stress is above the failure surface the constitutive relation (Eq. (28)) is used to obtain the scalar multiplier. It has been argued that during viscoplasticity stress correction the consistency condition is not pertinent as such certain state stress conditions are irrelevant. However, the fact that the overstress theory postulates that the stress state always lies above the yield surface. This signifies a consistency condition that needs to be satisfied for viscoplastic strains to occur. Additionally, the plastic stress return mapping computation is similar to the viscoplastic return mapping procedure. This numerical framework of the viscoplastic return mapping can be described as:  If Set: Else  where the viscoplastic scalar multiplier Hence we solve Eq. (31) for the stress and strain update As outlined above the stress return mapping procedure is similar only that Eq. (32) is employed to account for the viscous time effect as opposed to the time-independent plasticity. In the viscoplastic correction procedure, the failure surface is considered just like in time-independent plasticity In this section, the viscoplastic constitutive equation a product of an adjusted Perzyna The overstress function exemplifies the state of overstressing inside the rock mass defined by the yield surface and it is reliant on the time-independent yield surface In Eq. (36), the overstress function is substituted with the time-independent yield surface and the fractional-order derivative function to address the limitation of the conventional overstress models. Hence, the presented viscoplastic constitutive equation (Eq. (36)) act as an extended Perzyna Whereas In this procedure, the hyperbolic surface lies within the MC yield surface at all stress states as such it underestimates the strength of geomaterials as compared to the original MC yield surface. However, the hyperbolic approximation has been implemented in the commercial finite volume code (FLAC In this section, the procedure to calibrate the FDVP constitutive model is presented conferring to the experimental data achieved from salt rock and Jinping marble sample creep tests. The experimental data of the rock salt sample is attained from literature provided by Zhou et al. It is worthing mentioning that damage evolution in this model attained either under low or high-stress levels is neglected. Therefore, the salt rock and Jinping marble merely exhibit the transient, steady-state and part of the accelerated creep stages. Even though, the accelerated creep stage is not fully captured the viscoplastic strains characterised by the TD delayed deformations in squeezing ground are described by the FDVP constitutive equations. The constitutive model parameters are calibrated by curve comparison with experimental data over 1256 days using Eq. (16). Additionally, the experimental data of the salt rock and compared curves assume ideal viscoplasticity as well as neglect damage evolution under uniaxial stress load Calibration of the parameters using marble is employed by experimental data attained from a series of creep tests conducted by Chen et al. The validation results indicate that the constitutive equations of the model can satisfactorily replicate the TD behaviour. Even though the constitutive model can describe the creep behaviour which is associated with the TD deformation experienced by rocks or rock masses. It does not fully describe the 3-stage creep behaviour especially the accelerated creep stage responsible for the long-term deformation herein referred to as squeezing. Hence, this indicates that this preliminary constitutive model will require further development to explicitly capture the 3-stage creep behaviour. This analysis is conducted to identify the most sensitive and critical parameters in the creep curve description. It is observed that the TD strain of salt rock and Jinping marble depends on these parameters such as The effect of the critical parameters These results indicate the importance of selecting an appropriate value of The evaluation of the stress level effect on the creep strain rates is conducted by letting the other parameters be constant while changing the stress levels. The stress level applied on the salt rock ranged between 14.1 MPa and 26 MPa and it is observed that a rise in its level had an incremental effect on the strain rates ( The numerical implementation of the FDVP constitutive model in FLAC     In FLAC Real tunnel verification of the proposed model is conducted through field deformation estimated in the Jinping underground tunnel  In this section, the applicability of the FDVP constitutive model in estimating delayed tunnel deformations is conducted within a FLAC The numerical simulation aims to compare the FDVP constitutive model’s functionality with the time-independent and creep constitutive models. The in-built creep constitutive model (CVISC) selected for comparison can compute both instantaneous strains as well as the TD strains. It is composed of a plastic slider and Burgers model coupled in series that enables it to estimate instantaneous strains and to some extent delayed deformations characterized by TD behaviour In the numerical simulation, the tunnel employed for the analysis is excavated in stages. After stress was initialized during simulation, the excavation of the tunnel was conducted in stages of 5 m every advance (length of excavation at each step). The tunnel advance simulation commenced with an EP analysis and after 200 steps the simulation reached an equilibrium of which the creep model was activated. The creep period employed in the creep simulation was equivalent to 5 days (4.32E5 s).  In this paper, the four rheological elements of the Kelvin and Maxwell components of the Burgers model are utilized to describe the viscoelastic strains whereas the two elements of the VP component are used to replicate the viscoplastic strains. This combination of components gives the FDVP constitutive model its rheological structure. It is presented to describe the TD behaviour related to creep that occurs during tunnel excavation in squeezing ground. Its mathematical derivation has been elucidated to address the shortfall of the existing constitutive laws that describe the TD behavioural feature. Attention is focused on the major issue of the existing constitutive law based on integer-order derivatives incapability of describing the power-law mechanism of geomaterials. The constitutive equations based on the FDVP rheological structure are derived in 1D then further transformed to 3D by the integration of an adjusted Perzyna The validation procedure conducted which involves the experimental data of salt rock by Zhou et al. The constitutive parameters can be obtained directly from the conventional mechanical and creep tests whereas the After the validation with experimental data, the constitutive model proved to be robust for numerical implementation within FLAC The FDVP constitutive equations presented are straightforward as such can simply be executed in any numerical code especially ITASCA code (FLAC However, the FDVP constitutive model assumes ideal viscoplasticity in which the isotropic and kinematic hardening constitutive laws are ignored. Hardening viscoplasticity is characterized by the transient creep, ideal viscoplasticity by the steady-state creep and softening viscoplasticity by the accelerated creep. Hence, incorporating their constitutive laws and effects is very important for the accurate description of the 3-stage creep mechanism. Although it lacks the consideration of these constitutive laws and the capability to explicitly capture the 3-stage creep mechanism. The constitutive model can be employed with confidence in estimating delayed deformations associated with squeezing ground. Nevertheless, the presented constitutive equations are relatively straightforward to allow for further implementation. As such they have the potential for further integrating the hardening and softening viscoplasticity laws. The proposed constitutive model applies fractional-order derivatives to realistically describe the creep behaviour characterised by the power-law mechanism. In addition to that, it employs an adjusted associated viscoplastic flow rule based on the overstress theory which establishes the onset of the delayed deformations. Its mathematical formulation, experimental validation and in-situ verification draw that it can describe the most significant features characterised by the squeezing related TD behaviour. This includes the transient, the steady-state and the accelerated creep stage to some extent. It is shown from this study that: The validation results indicate that the model yield close results with experimental data attained from salt rock and marble. Whereas the in-situ verification draws a closer match to the mean tunnel monitored deformation as compared to the FVP constitutive model. As such it describes the TD behaviour associated with squeezing ground more realistically. The sensitivity parameter analysis performed shows that The FDVP constitutive equations are written in code using C++ for FLAC The FDVP constitutive equations are not complex as they are readily applicable in research and engineering practice. This allows them to be used with confidence in describing the creep behaviour responsible for delayed deformations in squeezing ground. However, the full explicit description of the 3-stage creep mechanism is a limitation that needs to be addressed. As such further enhancement on the constitutive equations is considered to aid in the explicit 3-stage creep description and currently in progress to include: the isotropic and kinematic hardening viscoplasticity and creep damage effect. the softening viscoplasticity characterised by the explicit accelerated creep description. the dynamic effects governed by the material forces and time-dependent properties. the temperature dependency and its effect on the squeezing mechanism. The written user-defined constitutive model source code in the object-oriented C++ implemented in a finite difference code (FLAC Name: FDVP-model Author: Eugie Kabwe, Year: 2019 Software required: Eclipse, Visual Studio Code, Microsoft Visual Studio and FLAC Language: C++  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Owen and Hilton Substituting Eq. (A1) into Eq. (A2) and differentiating for The total strain VP model without hardening assumes that the material behaves elastically below the yield stress Combining the Burgers viscoelastic formulation The constitutive equations of the proposed model are calculated by coupling the VP component with the classic Maxwell and Kelvin components. As a notation convention, Alternatively, the strain rate acting in the VP component plastic slider and spring-pot can be expressed in one relation: The strain rate of the VP component is represented by the rock yield function The plastic slider is represented by Eqs. (B31), (B32) & (B33) below. The model is implemented in FLAC The stress and strain rates in the Kelvin, Maxwell and VP components are expressed in the central difference form as follows: Solving for Which is reduced to: Therefore: The volumetric deformation is given by: The MC yield surface (Eq. (C14)) considering tension cut-off is employed and it is worth noting that the compression stresses are positive whereas the principal stresses are ordered in the form: The MC yield surface is depicted on the 3D principal stress space (deviatoric plane) as an irregular six-sided pyramid (hexagonal pyramid) whose central axis is hydrostatic. The implementation of this criterion in numerical programs is ambiguous due to the occurrence of vertices on the sides of its six-sided shape. The yield surface is discontinuous at these vertices, and it is imperative to address these singularities because stress state at the vertices is always encountered in practice The function is expressed as; where The conditions that apply are that if the state of stress lies in the first domain shear failure initiates and this state is represented by the shear failure Implementation of the model requires the new stress components where The elastic strain increments can be expressed as the total increments minus the VP increments and incorporating the flow rule the elastic laws become; Therefore, Eq. (C37) and (C38) are expressed in the form of trial stresses as: Combining Eq. (C52) and (C53) yields Eq. (C55) further expressed in principal axes yields Eqs. (C56)–(C58) below: Considering tensile failure, the flow rule is expressed by: Repeating the same rules that applied for the shear failure above we have; Then: