The drilling rate index (DRI) is the most important input parameter of a commonly used performance prediction model for drilling and rock excavation. In this paper, the hybrid artificial neural network (ANN) with back propagation (BP) algorithm, simulated annealing algorithm (SAA), firefly algorithm (FA), invasive weed optimization algorithm (IWO) and shuffled frog leaping algorithm (SFLA) were used to build a prediction model for the indirect estimation of DRI. The estimation abilities offered using five ANN models (ANN-BP, ANN-SAA, ANN-FA, ANN-IWO and ANN-SFLA) were presented by using available data given in open source literature. In these models, strengths (Uniaxial Compressive Strength (UCS) and Brazilian Tensile Strength (BTS)) and indexes properties (Shore Scleroscope Hardness (SSH), diametral point load strength index (Is(50) →) and axial point load strength index (Is(50)↓)) were utilized as the input parameters, while the DRI was the output parameter. Various statistical performance indexes were utilized to compare the performance of those estimation models. The comparative results revealed that hybrid of SAA and ANN yield robust model which outperform other models in term of higher squared correlation coefficient (R2), variance account for (VAF) and lower mean square error (MSE), root mean squared error (RMSE) and mean absolute percentage error (MAPE).Accurate prediction of drillability that defined as the rate of penetration have been one of the most important issues in planning, design and construction underground spaces and related projects over the past years. For example, rate of penetration of tunneling boring machine (TBM) has been studied by many researchers ( ANN training has traditionally been carried out using a BP algorithm (ANN-BP model). However, this approach has some drawbacks, such as local minimum trapping, over-fitting, and weight interference, which have complicated ANN training. In contrast, the optimization algorithms have balanced exploration and exploitation capabilities; therefore, it does not get stuck in local minima ( In this section, first the literature review relevant to the ANN is presented and then, there are some descriptions about the optimization algorithms. Artificial neural networks (ANNs) are parallel information processing methods, which can express nonlinear relationship and complex use number of input–output training patterns from the experimental data. ANNs provide a nonlinear mapping between outputs and inputs by its intrinsic ability ( The BP neural network developed by The Net input to the  Output of the  Net input to the  The output of the   SA is a general stochastic search algorithm used for solving several types of optimization problems with nonlinear functions and multiple local optima ( FA is one of the recent swarm intelligence methods developed by All fireflies are unisex so that one firefly will be attracted to other fireflies regardless of their sex. Attractiveness is proportional to their light intensities. The less bright will be moving toward the brighter one. It will move randomly if there is no brighter one. The brightness of a firefly is affected or determined by the landscape of the objective function. The light intensity and attractiveness are in some way synonymous. While the intensity is referred to as an absolute measure of emitted light by the firefly, the attractiveness is a relative measure of the light that should be seen in the eyes of the beholders and judged by other fireflies. The attractiveness In 2006, Mehrabian and Lucas proposed the IWO ( Initialization: A population of initial solutions is being dispread over the d dimensional problem space with random positions. Reproduction: Each member of the population is allowed to produce seeds depending on its own, as well as the colony’s lowest and highest fitness, such that, the number of seeds produced by a weed increases linearly from lowest possible seed for a weed with worst fitness to the maximum no. of seeds for a plant with best fitness. Spatial distribution: The generated seeds are being randomly distributed over the d dimensional search space by normally distributed random numbers with mean equal to zero; but varying variance. This step ensures that the produced seeds will be generated around the parent weed, leading to a local search around each plant. However, the standard deviation (sd) of the random function is made to decrease over the iterations. If This step ensures that the probability of dropping a seed in a distant area decreases nonlinearly with iterations, which results in grouping fitter plants and elimination of inappropriate plants. Therefore, this is a selection mechanism of IWO. Competitive Exclusion: If a plant leaves no offspring then it would go extinct, otherwise they would take over the world. Thus, there is a need of some kind of competition between plants for limiting maximum number of plants in a colony. A flowchart of the whole optimization process has been shown in The SFLA is another heuristic search algorithm. It attempts to balance between a wide scan of a large solution space and also a deep search of promising locations for a global optimum ( To prediction of DRI, all relevant parameters should be determined, due to the fact that ANNs work based on given data and do not have previous knowledge about the subject of prediction. Following sections describe the inputs and output parameters and prediction of DRI using ANN models. Knowledge of rocks drillability in projects is very important to determine drilling costs. In drilling operations, so many parameters such as the properties of rock and the drilling equipment affect the drilling performance. Although the parameters of drilling equipment can be controlled, change to the rock parameters cannot be ( Various rock parameters have been used to predict the performance of drilling rigs. For many researchers, uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) of rock is the most widely used parameter for rock drillability ( In this paper, to establish an intelligence-based method for prediction of the DRI, providing dataset which includes a wide geographic distribution is the most important requirement. To achieve this, datasets given in previous paper is borrowed ( Since the DRI is dependent on all parameters discussed above, a correlation sensitivity analysis was carried out for the identification of those parameters that have most effect on this factor. In this analysis, the STATISTICA software package (version 10.0.1011) was employed to explore the rank-order correlations achieved from the simulated results that were related to the models inputs and output. Relationships between two datasets can be examined using rank-order correlation and making comparison between the ranks of each value in a dataset. Note that the rank-order values for correlation, which are obtained through the use of STATISTICA software package, can be in a range between −1 and +1. For computation of the rank values, data were sorted from smallest to largest; then, the numbers were assigned to the rank values depending on their position in the order (inspired by the works carried out ( In data-driven system modeling methods, some pre-processing steps are commonly implemented prior to any calculations, to eliminate any outliers, missing values or bad data. This step ensures that the raw data retrieved from database is perfectly suitable for modeling. In order to softening the training procedure and improving the accuracy of prediction, all data samples are normalized to adapt to the interval [−1, 1] according to the following linear mapping function: To verify the performance of the models (ANN-BP, ANN-SAA, ANN-FA, ANN-IWO and ANN-SFLA), four statistical criteria viz. mean squared error (MSE), variance account for (VAF), root mean squared error (RMSE), squared correlation coefficient (R Although ANNs are able to map input to output patterns directly and use all influential parameters in model prediction, they still have some shortcomings such as a slow rate of learning and getting trapped in local minima. To overcome these problems, the use of optimization algorithms such as SAA, FA, IWO and SFLA to train ANNs is of advantage. In this study, the SAA, FA, IWO and SFLA were used in an effort to formalize a systematic approach to training the ANN, and to insure creation of a valid model. The control parameters used for running the SAA, FA, IWO and SFLA are presented in In this paper, after building several ANN-BP, ANN-SAA, ANN-FA, ANN-IWO and ANN-SFLA models based on trial and error, the best result of each model, listed in Furthermore, a comparison between predicted values of DRI by the improved ANN models and measured values for training and testing phases is shown in In addition, we compared our results with the results obtained by As can be seen, the ANN models indicate better results relative to previously published model. As presented in As it was mentioned, it seems that ANN-SAA is a more accurate method in prediction of DRI during testing and training steps. However, this strong statement needs more approvals. As a matter of fact, there is one question which is yet required to be answered in this section: whether different fractions of training and testing data may change the performance of the models? This question would require many attempts with different fractions of data to show how the performance of the models may change with different numbers of training and testing data ( According to In this study, ANN models were proposed for indirect prediction of the DRI. Optimization implementation increases the efficiency of ANN models. Optimization algorithm in which employed for improving ANN models efficiency were SAA, FA, IWO and SFLA. The following conclusions were obtained: Among the different algorithms employed for training ANN, SAA showed better performance. All the models proposed in this study are able to successfully predict the DRI. According to the error values of the testing and training datasets, the improved ANN models (ANN-SAA, ANN-FA, ANN-IWO and ANN-SFLA) performed better than the classical BP-trained ANN model. It is evident that the prediction model constructed in this research is open for more development if more data are available. Comparison between the developed models and previously presented models reveals the superiority of the improved ANN in prediction of DRI. Application of evolutionary algorithms significantly increases the speed and accuracy of finding optimal values of the ANN weights. Implementation of the improved ANN combined with evolutionary techniques can be applied as a powerful tool for modeling of non-linear problems encountered in in drilling and rock excavation.