This technical note summarizes the results from a mineralogical analysis of limonite and the solids produced during sulfuric acid pressure leaching, using transmission electron microscopy. The elemental composition was revealed by means of X-ray analysis while the crystallographic characterization was obtained using electron diffraction. Iron in the form of goethite (α-FeOOH) was the dominant phase of limonite forming needle-shape particles rich in nickel while aluminum existed mainly in gibbsite (Al(OH)3) particles. Cobalt was found to be associated with a manganese phase rich also in nickel. No structural changes were observed during heating the limonite slurry up to 270 °C and before acid injection. Both Ni and Co were highly leachable in the manganese phase during sulfuric acid pressure leaching of the limonite. Ni was also highly leachable in the magnesium silicate structures that were present in minor amounts. Hematite was the only precipitation phase of iron forming spherical particles of a size of 0.1–0.3 μm while; alunite was the only precipitation phase of aluminum.Nickel and cobalt extraction using sulfuric acid pressure leaching of limonitic laterites has become increasingly important the recent years. In depth mineralogical analysis of limonitic laterite and the solids formed during leaching is crucial to the understanding of the physicochemical nature of leaching and the derivation of nickel and cobalt dissolution kinetic models. Transmission electron microscopy proved a very useful tool for the implementation of the above purpose. A limonitic laterite was utilized with the following elemental analysis: 47.7% Fe, 3.13% Al, 1.47% Ni, 0.12% Co and 0.67% Mg. Leaching tests were performed using an acid leaching pilot-plant that employed continuously agitated reactors in the form of a multi-compartment horizontal autoclave. The leaching conditions were pulp density: 30%, temperature: 270 °C and acid to ore ratio: 0.2. Samples from the solids during heating of the slurry and before acid injection were withdrawn at 165, 225 and 270 °C. Following acid injection, solids were also withdrawn from the first compartment of the autoclave. Analysis of the samples took place utilizing a Transmission Electron Microscope (Philips EM 430) operating at 100 kV. High magnification and resolution photos of the solids were obtained by the use of the above technique. The elemental composition of the solids was revealed using X-ray analysis while the mineralogical composition was obtained using electron diffraction analysis. The iron phase of goethite was found to be the dominant phase of limonite. Images of goethite at low and high magnification are shown in Aluminum exists mainly in the form of relatively big gibbsite particles while cobalt was found to be associated only with a manganese phase of a poor crystallinity. The latter phase was also rich in Fe and Ni; Al also existed in minor amount. Electron diffraction analysis also revealed the presence of silica in significant amounts, chromite rich in aluminum, amorphous magnesium silicate structures rich in Fe and Ni in minor amounts and finally, magnetite also in minor amounts. Solids were withdrawn during heating of the slurry at 165, 225 and 270 °C. All the above mineralogical phases were also found in these samples. No elemental or structural change was observed in any mineralogical phase during heating of the limonitic slurry. A sample from the first compartment of the autoclave was withdrawn during leaching. The dominant phases of this sample were goethite and hematite, which was the only precipitation phase of iron. A low and a high magnification photo of a mixture of goethite with hematite particles are shown in Alunite was the only precipitation phase of aluminum. Alunite was found to form big structures as the ones shown in Chromite and silica particles were found unchanged however, magnesium iron silicate structures were found depleted of Ni; nickel in this phase proved highly leachable. Finally, nickel and cobalt also proved highly leachable in the manganese phase too; manganese structures were identified depleted of both Ni and Co. In depth mineralogical analysis of limonitic laterite and the solids formed during sulfuric acid pressure leaching was obtained using transmission electron microscopy. Goethite (α-FeOOH) was the dominant phase of limonite forming needle-shape particles rich in nickel while; Al existed mainly in gibbsite particles. Co was found to be associated only with a manganese phase that was also rich in Ni. Both Ni and Co were highly leachable in the latter phase during sulfuric acid pressure leaching. Ni was also highly leachable in the magnesium silicate structures that were present in minor amounts. Hematite was the only precipitation phase of Fe forming spherical particles of a size of 0.1–0.3 μm while; alunite was the only precipitation phase of Al. The above analysis proved crucial to the understanding of the physicochemical nature of leaching and the derivation of Ni and Co dissolution kinetic models. The J. Roy Gordon Research Laboratory of INCO Ltd. and the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) are gratefully acknowledged for their financial support.