In this issue of A modern combat casualty unit in Afghanistan and a civilian trauma center in Cambodia have little in common. Yet the descriptor “resource-limited setting” may be applied to both. Examining the broader issue of availability of spinal implants in lower- and middle-income countries and some of the ways used to manage this issue may be helpful. Consider, for instance, a country like the Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK), where implants are carried in through surgical volunteers. As far as we are aware, DPRK does not import any implants: economic conditions and current international sanctions being most important barriers. This means when the supply of implants is depleted, the surgeries come to a halt until the supply is replenished. Because all these implants are donated, a sustained supply of implants is untenable. As a result, DPRK is attempting to manufacture implants domestically. A logical approach would be to first manufacture low-cost, simple yet effective and proven implants such as stainless steel Luque rectangles and surgical-grade stainless steel wires. Next, they can proceed to more complex implants such as plates and screws. Undoubtedly, they have the technology to manufacture such implants. In 2005, Ethiopia had 3 neurosurgeons serving 90 million people. Of the 3, only 1 performed spinal instrumentation surgery, and this was usually in conjunction with visiting spine surgeons. Similar to DPRK, the implants were brought in by surgeons. As more Ethiopian surgeons became trained in spinal instrumentation, the number of cases has increased dramatically. Currently, there are 11 trained neurosurgeons and 32 residents. It is estimated that up to 40–50 cases of instrumentation are needed each month (personal communication). The demand from patients who are financially able to pay for these implants is sufficient to support a steady supply of implants at private hospitals; about a third of the patients are in this category. The remaining two thirds still must rely on sporadically donated implants at government hospitals from multiple vendors from multiple countries. Problems will arise when this cohort of patients who received donated implants from many different companies starts to experience adjacent-level disease. Trying to identify the brand of the implant so that appropriate removal instruments are available will be a huge challenge; in anticipation, having a universal spinal implant removal set would be wise. In Cambodia, our public institution initially relied on 100% donated implants but now buys some implants from various sources in India and South Korea and passes on the cost to the patients who can pay. For the many patients who are unable to pay, we still provide them with donated implants as indicated. We always approach fracture-dislocations in the cervical spine anteriorly for reduction and stabilize using a cervical plate from an Indian company. The cost of plate and screw is 20 U.S. dollars. Rarely, when additional posterior stabilization is required, we use interspinous wiring provided the posterior elements are intact. We routinely use wiring techniques to treat C1-2 instabilty, In the thoracolumbar spine, our goal is to fuse as few levels as possible without increasing the risk of failure. This approach not only reduces cost but also decreases morbidity by reducing the number of fused segments and it shortens the incision and operative time. The McCormack Load-Sharing Classification is helpful in assessing the integrity of the anterior column by evaluating the degree of comminution, angulation, and displacement of the vertebral body. Points are added up from these 3 criteria for a final maximum score of 9 to decide if a short-segment posterior fixation will be sufficient. When the spine is grossly unstable e.g. AO (Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Osteosynthesefragen) type C fracture dislocations or the McCormack Load Sharing score is 7 or higher, short-segment fixation has a high risk of failure. In such situations long lever arms with multiple fixation points are recommended. Here we choose between Luque rectangle with sublaminar wires or pedicle screws with rods. Although Luque instrumentation provides excellent stabilization in-situ, All these procedures are currently being performed without having any form of intraoperative imaging, viz. portable x-ray or fluoroscope. Such pricey and maintenance sensitive equipment is not a requirement in providing spine trauma care in resource-limited settings. With careful cross-referencing of anatomic landmarks with pathology visible on preoperative images, correct levels can be identified with certainty and hardware placed safely. In resource-limited settings, all options should be on the table. We take the approach “do the best with what we have” to provide rational, safe, and effective treatment. Just because a technique is not in vogue does not necessarily mean it is a poor procedure; Luque rectangles secured with sublaminar wiring were used widely to treat thoracolumbar fractures and scoliosis until pedicle screw systems became more popular for its versatility and safety, albeit at a much higher cost. When able, dependence on donated implants should be gradually replaced by a system of purchasing implants from low-cost manufacturing countries such as India, China or South Korea. This model is sustainable and can be scaled up as needed. The quality and efficacy of the Indian medical devices such as the Chhabra Ventriculo-Peritoneal Shunt is well established, A possible game changer would be to replicate a program run by SIGN Fracture Care International, or simply “Sign Nail.” This organization provides free implants for long bone and hip fractures to 290 hospitals in 52 countries. The implants are funded through donations from corporations, associations, nongovernmental organizations, charities, and foundations. In high-income countries where In resource-limited settings, asking the question “what can we do safely with what we have?” can be a starting point. The range of conditions that can be treated with only the World Federation of Neurosurgical Societies Basic Spine Set The goal of this article was not to introduce new techniques or innovations but to provide a fresh perspective free from the allure of the new and the latest. Surgeons working in resource-constrained settings have learned to creatively combine safety and quality with low cost. Starting with a clean slate and adding what is essential will be not only refreshing in its simplicity but also rewarding to know that patients are receiving safe and effective spine surgeries despite adversities.