This short note describes the relevant details of formulating and implementing general bilinear quantity–quality balances found in industrial processes when data reconciliation is applied. The modeling also allows for the straightforward generation of analytical first-order derivatives. Quantity–quality balance problems are those that involve both extensive and intensive stream variables such as flows and compositions, respectively and are related through laws of conservation of material, energy and momentum. The balance equations involve both linear and bilinear terms (multi-linear) of quantity and quality where quantity times quantity and quality times quality are not germane although they can be included easily. Two numerical examples are provided to demonstrate the new formulation technique.The process industries that typically require some form of data reconciliation of their aggregated and real-time process data include mineral processing, oil and gas recovery, petroleum refining and petrochemical manufacturing. These industries use data reconciliation to verify custody transfer and field flowmeters, field analyzers and laboratory instruments including automatic tank gauging systems. The resulting data from data reconciliation are then used to monitor the effectiveness and efficiency of the manufacturing process and to benchmark its performance against other plants consuming and producing similar feedstocks and productstocks. Obviously in order to have data reconciliation we need some level of redundancy in the system or network. This is achieved through the existence of independent measuring devices and laws of conservation of material, energy and momentum which allow us to relate one measurement to another through the topology of the integrated process. Unfortunately, these relationships are nonlinear in the sense that there may exist a product of one variable times another, as we shall see further, thus requiring iterative or successive substitution solving techniques. Fortunately, for the types of data reconciliation problems found in the process industries, these problems are relatively well studied with some recent and relevant literature available in In the quantity–quality problem, we hierarchically class the variables into two sub-classes called quantity variables and quality variables. Quantity variables are flows and inventories of mass, moles, volume, energy and momentum. Quality variables are compositions, properties and conditions such as concentrations, densities, temperatures, pressures and velocity. Quantities are known as In this section we show how the quantity–quality bilinear problem can be formulated generically. The nomenclature may be somewhat daunting at first however it can be easily programmed directly into commercial matrix programming languages such as M The six incidence matrices found in In order to update the bilinear vectors such as A major driving force to model the process industries’ data reconciliation problem in a structured quantity–quality framework is the ability to easily generate analytical Jacobian or the matrix of first-order derivatives. Knowing that the underlying data reconciliation is a bilinear problem, the Jacobian can be easily evaluated at each iteration simply by inserting one of the extensive or intensive variable iterates into the appropriate location. For our purposes, the matrix definitions of the derivatives for the reconciled variables are The two numerical examples described below have been hitherto solved in Of the nine sets of possible bilinear term combinations, only three have any elements which is consistent with the observation that the number of extensive measured variables and the number of intensive fixed variables is zero. Due to space limitations we do not show the 15 possible incidence matrices (i.e., The second example’s problem size can be found in Notice appropriately from Presented in this short note are the fine points of formulating and implementing quantity–quality bilinear data reconciliation problems found in the process industries. The contribution of this work is that the formulation is completely extensible to both small and large bilinear quantity–quality problems given that either dense or sparse matrix implementations can be employed and that first-order derivative information can be easily calculated in the form of the Jacobian matrix explicitly. The formulation can also be straightforwardly modified to handle other multi-linear terms (i.e., trilinear and quadlinear) either by creating extra variables and constraints or by extending the formulation with new incidence matrices and index sets. For example, adding a trilinear product term for a volume flow times a density times a sulfur concentration can he achieved by creating a calculated extensive variable to represent the bilinear product of volume flow times the density and an extra function to enforce that the calculated extensive variable equals the volume flow times the density.