This paper reports an account of study conducted on optimization of the process parameters for electro-winning of cobalt from cobalt sulphate solution. Effect of parameters such as bath composition, temperature, current density, agitation etc. on the voltage requirement, current efficiency and power efficiency of cobalt electro-deposition was explored. A maximum current efficiency of 97% was attained with an electrolyte composition of 60 g/L Co, 15 g/L Na2SO4, at a temperature of 60 °C, a pH of 4.0 and a cathode current density of 400 A/m2. The energy consumption was 3.0 kWh/kg of Co deposited. The optimum conditions so established were test examined for recovery of cobalt values from leach liquors generated on processing of Alnico magnet scrap, cemented carbide tool scrap and spent hydrogenation catalyst. The cathode current efficiency ranged from 86% to 94% due to lower concentration (25 to 40 g/L) of cobalt concentration in the processed leach liquor.Cobalt is a strategic metal finding use in diverse commercial, industrial, medical, and military applications. As a metal, its largest use is in superalloys for critical applications in defense and industry. Other uses include additions in HSLA steels, cemented carbide tools, magnetic alloys, battery electrodes, preparation of Co Cobalt occurs in nature in a widespread but dispersed form, almost exclusively in admixtures with ores of other metals. It is essentially extracted as a byproduct of Cu, Ni and Zn processing and as such cannot adjust to demand fluctuations. Recovery of Co from secondary resources is increasing but the associated technology is hardly documented for proprietary and commercial reasons. About 70% of the world's total cobalt production is obtained from pure cobalt sulphate solutions through hydrometallurgical routes ( India has a cobalt production of 140 tonnes/annum; the balance requirement is met through imports. Several Indian laboratories have developed flow-sheets to effectively deal with selected secondary sources for recovering cobalt values ( During the electrolysis of CoSO At the cathode   At the anode  The reduction of H However, other reactions do take place at the electrodes, the prominent amongst these being ( Most of the Co This paper present detailed studies on optimization of electrolysis parameters. Experiments were carried out on pure synthetic cobalt sulphate solutions to establish the optimum conditions for electrolysis. These conditions were then used on solutions derived from leaching of secondary resources. It was aimed to prepare a cobalt plate of 1 mm thickness to enable subsequent processing to a slug of 1 mm dia and 1 mm height for conversion to Co The synthetic electrolyte solutions were prepared by dissolving analytical grade cobalt sulphate and sodium sulphate in distilled water. Analytical grade sodium hydroxide was used to prepare cobalt hydroxide slurry from cobalt sulphate solution. The purified leach liquors were prepared by processing secondary resources of cobalt such as alnico scrap, cemented carbide tool bits and spent catalyst, the solutions were also subjected to electro-winning studies. Electro-winning experiments were conducted using a Pyrex glass laboratory cell. This cell, having a volume of 500 mL, consisted of an inlet for pH adjusted cobalt solution (regenerated electrolyte feed) and an outlet from where the spent acidic electrolyte overflowed into the regeneration tank. Cobalt hydroxide slurry was pumped at a fixed rate into the regeneration tank to replenish the depleted electrolyte with cobalt and adjust the pH to the desired level. The regenerated electrolyte was next transferred to a buffer tank from where it was fed back to the electro-winning cell at a metered rate. This procedure ensured that the bath composition, particularly the bath pH, was maintained constant throughout the experiment, unlike in some of the earlier studies ( A solution of cobalt sulphate and sodium sulphate of known strength was filled in both electrolytic and regeneration tanks. Both the anode and the un-lacquered face of the cathode were polished with fine silicon carbide paper, rinsed with distilled water and acetone. Voltage was applied across the electrodes to achieve the desired current density. After electrolysis, the cathode was removed, washed thoroughly with distilled water, dried in an oven and the deposited plate was scraped off carefully from the cathode surface and weighed. From the weight gain, current efficiency was calculated. The thin powder coating at the anode was also scraped off and analysed. The effect of the following parameters on the current efficiency, power efficiency and quality of deposit were studied: Co All the electro-deposition tests were conducted for a minimum period of 3 h in pure cobalt sulphate solutions. This was followed by electrolysis of purified leach liquors obtained from various secondary sources. Electrolysis was conducted by varying the cobalt concentration from 20 g/L to 70 g/L in the presence of 15 g/L of sodium sulphate, at a temperature of 60 °C, pH 4 and a current density of 400 A/m The energy required to deposit cobalt also drops as the Co concentration increases, as can be seen from The incorporation of alkaline sulphate into the electrolyte increases the conductivity of the solution. Experiments were performed by the addition of different alkaline sulphates such as potassium, sodium, ammonium and magnesium. Of these, a small amount of sodium sulphate addition resulted in adherent and good quality deposit. The effect of sodium sulphate concentration on the current efficiency is depicted in  The higher current efficiency is obviously due to increased ionic mobilities at higher temperatures. This is reflected in  The effect of Cathode Current Density (CCD) on the current efficiency is depicted in Initial electro-winning trials at low current density (< Based on these studies, the optimum conditions for electro-deposition of cobalt from a sulphate solution were fixed as follows: Co 60 g/L, Na Alnico scrap: Alnico scrap used in this investigation analysed to contain 8.5%–10% Ni, 11%–12% Co, 32%–50% Fe, 10%–11% Al and balance SiO Cemented carbide sludge: The average composition of a typical cemented carbide sludge was found to be 37% Co, 10% Ta, 0.78% Nb, 5% Ti and 12.37% W. Processing of the sludge involved fusion with soda ash in the presence of sodium nitrate followed by acid leaching. The leach liquor analysed 25–30 g/L Co with less than 1% Fe. A solvent extraction step resulted in a 99.99% pure solution of strength 35–40 g/L. Spent ammonia cracker catalyst: The typical analysis of the spent catalyst revealed 36.5% Al The Co solution from each of the above secondary sources was first purified from organic solvents by adsorption on activated charcoal and then subjected to electro-winning without upgrading with respect to cobalt concentration under the optimum conditions established for the synthetic solutions. A good quality plate was obtained in each case. The current efficiencies were however lower, ranging from 86% to 94%, because of the lower Co concentration values.  The optimum conditions for the electro-deposition were found to be as follows: Co concentration The feasibility for recovering Co metal values from a variety of secondary sources like Alnico scrap, Carbide sludge, heavy water spent catalyst, etc. by leaching, solvent extraction and electro-deposition has been established. The authors wish to thank Shri S.K. Tangri, Head, Solvent Extraction Section, M.P.D., B.A.R.C., for providing the purified liquors and Shri P.K. Maity for conducting some of the work as part of his training project.