Active vitamin D drugs are used for the treatment of osteoporosis in a number of countries, including Japan. However, their use is controversial. Here, we briefly discuss two issues that are important for understanding the role of active vitamin D (rather than plain vitamin D) in the treatment of osteoporosis: (1) whether or not its skeletal effects are mediated solely through its effects on intestinal calcium absorption in calcium- and vitamin D-replete states, and (2) how it modulates the bone remodeling process.Osteoporosis is “a systemic disease characterized by low bone mass and microarchitectural deterioration of bone tissue, leading to enhanced bone fragility and a consequent increase in fracture risk” ( Active vitamin D drugs are used for the treatment of osteoporosis in certain countries, including Japan, but have not been approved in the United States because of their relatively low effectiveness, and the risk of their causing hypercalciuria/hypercalcemia ( In this review, we discuss two issues that seem important for understanding the role of active vitamin D drugs in the management of osteoporosis. The first is whether or not the skeletal action of active vitamin D is mediated solely through its effect on calcium absorption. In other words, are there any skeletal actions of active vitamin D that are independent of its effects on calcium absorption? The second is concerned with how active vitamin D modulates bone cell function in vivo in calcium- and vitamin D-replete conditions. Vitamin D 1α,25(OH) The effects of vitamin D in bone in vivo are inferred from vitamin D-deficient phenotypes, which show hypocalcemia, increased PTH, hypophosphatemia, and defects in bone formation, especially in the mineralization process. It is generally agreed that in these cases, vitamin D stimulates bone formation mainly through increasing serum calcium, since infusion of calcium and phosphate corrects the phenotypes’ bone problems, as well as their abnormalities of mineral metabolism ( The best-known skeletal action of 1α,25(OH) In order to obtain a clue as to how active vitamin D drugs affect osteoclastic bone resorption in vivo, we examined the effects of small pharmacological doses of alfacalcidol, which do not cause hypercalcemia, in ovariectomized (OVX) rats ( Our experiments using OVX animals yielded another surprise regarding striking differences between the skeletal actions of alfacalcidol and estrogen. Since bone resorption is coupled to bone formation, it is natural that when bone resorption is inhibited, bone formation is also depressed. This is exactly what we observed when OVX animals were treated with 17β-estradiol ( As already mentioned, it has long been believed that the primary action of active vitamin D is to increase intestinal calcium absorption, and that its bone (especially anabolic) effects are the indirect consequences of increasing calcium influx, not due to the direct effects on bone. In order to address the important question of whether the therapeutic effects of active vitamin D drugs in osteoporotic patients are mediated solely through their effects on intestinal calcium absorption (if so, much less expensive, plain vitamin D could replace active drugs), we treated OVX rats with plain vitamin D Another question arises: are the skeletal effects of vitamin D related to suppression of PTH? When active vitamin D is given to patients or animals, PTH levels decrease, due to increased serum calcium and VDR-mediated repression of PTH gene transcription. What, then, is the role of the suppression of endogenous PTH in vitamin D action in bone? In order to address this question directly, we generated ‘PTH-clamp’ rats by continuously infusing PTH into parathyroidectomized rats (i.e. no endogenous PTH). In these animals with fixed PTH levels, we were able to demonstrate the anabolic effects of alfacalcidol in bone (  We would like to thank Dr Ayako Shira-ishi, Dr Satoshi Takeda, Dr Toshimi Masaki, Dr Yoshi-nobu Higuchi, Dr Yasushi Uchiyama, Dr Noboru Kubodera, Dr Katsu-hiko Sato (Fuji Gotemba Research Laboratory, Product Research Laboratory, Department of Product Planning, Chugai Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Shizuoka and Tokyo), Dr Toshitaka Nakamura (Department of Orthopedic Surgery, University of Occupational and Environmental Health School of Medicine, Fukuoka), and Dr Toshio Matsumoto (First Department of Internal Medicine, University of Tokushima School of Medicine, Tokushima) for their contribution to this work, Kumi Tsutsumi (Department of Geriatric Research, NILS) for making the table and figures, and Dr. Richard Thornhill (Chugai Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) for editing the manuscript. This work was supported in part by a grant for Comprehensive Research on Aging and Health from the Ministry of Health and Welfare of Japan (K.I.).