A series of compression tests were conducted at various temperatures and strain rates to experimentally investigate the hot-deformation characteristics and dynamic softening of an as-cast FeCrAl alloy. There is no evident decline in stress after the peak point of a flow curve despite the occurrence of dynamic recrystallization (DRX). This phenomenon pointed out that the occurrence of DRX in the alloy could not be identified depending only on flow curves. The constitutive equation for peak stress was constructed following the determination of hot-working parameters. The predicted results correlated well with the experimental data. The dynamic softening behavior was classified depending on the analysis of microstructure evolutions at different temperatures. The softening process was dominated by dynamic recovery (DRV) at 850 and 950°C. The higher temperature could elevate the level of dynamic softening. The softening mechanisms at 1050°C included DRV and continuous dynamic recrystallization (CDRX) characterized by the rotation of sub-grains from low-angle boundaries to high-angle boundaries. The rotation of sub-grains during the CDRX process was unlikely to affect the strong intensity of texture after the hot-deformation process.FeCrAl alloys are materials for use in metallic catalytic substrates because of their excellent performance associated with high-temperature oxidation resistance and heat conductance FeCrAl alloys are typical ferritic Fe-based materials with a body-centered cubic (BCC) structure. During the hot-deformation process, ferritic grain coarsening may result in the deterioration of mechanical properties, which are substantially related to the deformability As a part of the ongoing project to investigate the solidification characteristics and high-temperature properties of FeCrAl alloys for automobile exhaust gas purifying systems, this work aims to examine the hot-deformation characteristics and dynamic softening of an as-cast FeCrAl alloy by conducting a series of compression tests under different temperatures and strain rates. The hot deformed microstructures are available for detail observations because the studied alloy has no phase transformation during quenching. The obtained results are expected to be informative for the development of mechanical processing techniques during the manufacturing process of as-cast FeCrAl alloys as well as other ferritic alloys with similar solidification structures. A 25 In preparation for observing the deformed microstructures, the longitudinal surfaces of compressed specimens were first mechanically polished, then electro-polished in the solution containing 15  The peak stress ( The constitutive equation for By using the natural logarithm, Eq. The value of As shown in   The effects of strain rate and temperature on the hot deformation characteristics of alloys are usually described by the Zener-Hollomon parameter ( Combined with Eq. By using the natural logarithm, Eq. Eq. Substituting the obtained values of As shown in     The distribution of misorientation angles between neighboring crystallites can provide evidence for the occurrence of DRX in a quantitative way. Generally, 15° misorientation is considered as the critical value for the transition from LABs (or SGBs) to HABs (or GBs). The DRX process of the FeCrAl alloy can be summarized as follows: the progressive accumulation of dislocations results in the formation of LABs; the migration and coalescence of LABs contribute to the rotation of sub-grains; the increase of boundary angular misorientation achieves the transition from LABs to HABs; recrystallized grains eventually form when they are enclosed by HABs. Different from DDRX characterized by the apparent nucleation and growth stages of recrystallized grains, this DRX process should correspond to CDRX, of which the common mechanism is the continuous rotation of sub-grains. Overall, the dynamic softening mechanisms of the FeCrAl alloy at 1050 Before the hot-compression tests, the original grains in the specimens should have the preferred orientation between <100> and <110> directions because the CA direction is roughly vertical to the long axis of columnar grains.  Although the flow curves of the FeCrAl alloy are almost flat after the work hardening stage, the peak followed by a slight decline in stress can be observed. The flow curve with dynamic recrystallization (DRX) softening for the ferritic alloy is different from that for most austenitic alloys. Thus, the occurrence of DRX in the FeCrAl alloy should not be identified only by flow behavior. The activation energy for the deformation over the experimental range is determined to be 267.4 The predicted results correlate well with the experimental data. The dynamic softening of the FeCrAl alloy is promoted under the condition of a smaller The level of dynamic softening in the deformed microstructures obviously elevates when the temperature increases to 1050 The authors declare no conflicts of interest. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support for this research provided by the