This work presents the effect of the most important parameters, the precipitation temperature, the sodium hydroxide concentration and the initial seed ratio (SR) in the solution, on the boehmite precipitation from supersaturated sodium aluminate solutions. A kinetic model that describes the experimental data was developed. According to that model, boehmite precipitation follows second order reaction kinetics and has activation energy of 89 kJ/mol. The orders of the precipitation reaction with respect to the initial sodium hydroxide concentration and the initial seed ratio are estimated to be −1.8 and 0.54, respectively. The most important result is that the boehmite precipitation reaches an apparent equilibrium stage at which the alumina concentration is much higher compared to the value of the boehmite solubility under the same experimental conditions. The results reveal that the boehmite precipitation is a self-decelerated process and the observed kinetic inhibitions are related to the sodium hydroxide concentration in the supersaturated solution. Finally, a mechanistic interpretation of the experimental data is presented based on the concept of the surface precipitation of boehmite on the active sites of the boehmite seed.Boehmite (α-AlOOH) is one of the well-known aluminium oxide–hydroxides. It usually occurs in nature as a constituent of bauxitic ores that are almost exclusively used for the production of smelter grade alumina by the Bayer process and primary aluminium by the Hall–Heroult process. Boehmite is the base for the production of various activated aluminas Boehmite can be produced A new process for producing boehmite In the present work, the effect of the most important parameters, such as temperature, sodium hydroxide concentration and initial boehmite seed ratio on boehmite precipitation is studied and a model describing the kinetics of boehmite precipitation from supersaturated sodium aluminate solutions is presented. The kinetic experiments were performed in an Inconel autoclave. The experimental apparatus consisted of the following items: the reactor that is a pressure vessel with a maximum capacity of 600 mL, the head of the pressure vessel equipped with a safety valve, a gas inlet, a cooling loop, a magnetic drive for the mechanical stirrer and a Pt thermocouple for the temperature control, the electrical furnace for the heating of the pressure vessel, the proportional temperature controller. The apparatus was additionally equipped with a specially designed tube sampler that permitted the sampling from the reactor. The tube sampler was installed at the head of the pressure vessel and had a ceramic microfilter at its bottom, with the ability to filter all solid particles with size higher than 1 μm. A constant overpressure was created artificially in the reaction vessel with the insertion of pure nitrogen in order to allow sampling under the experimental conditions. The autoclave was loaded with 420 mL supersaturated sodium aluminate solution with pre-adjusted Al The alumina content of the liquid samples was determined according to the following procedure. The aluminate solution, which contained 10–100 mg of aluminium, was boiled with 50 mL of 0.1 M EDTA solution for an approximate time of 5 min. After cooling, 0.2 g of xylenol orange-indicator and drops of HCl 1 M solution were added up to the point where the solution became yellow. In the next stage, the solution pH was adjusted with ammonium acetate/acetic acid buffer solution to a value of about 5–6 and the excess of EDTA was titrated with 0.1 M zinc sulfate solution up to the point where the color changed from yellow to red. According to the reaction stoichiometry, 2.698 mg of dissolved Al was complexed with 1 mL of 0.1 M EDTA solution. The crystalline boehmite seed was produced according to the following procedure. A volume of 400 mL of pulp, with an alumina trihydrate concentration of 375 g/L, was heated in the autoclave at 300 °C for 4 h with an agitation rate of 600 min The supersaturated sodium aluminate solutions were prepared according to the following procedure. Weighed amounts of pure alumina trihydrate and sodium hydroxide were inserted into an Inconel autoclave that contained 300 mL of distilled water. The pulp was heated to 160 °C for 1 h and the solids were totally dissolved. After rapid cooling, the liquor was diluted to a final volume of 500 mL. The chemicals that were used for the production of the boehmite seed and the preparation of the supersaturated sodium aluminate solutions were pure hydrargillite (Al The most important parameters that affect the boehmite precipitation from the supersaturated sodium aluminate solutions are the precipitation temperature, the initial sodium hydroxide concentration in the solution and the initial boehmite seed ratio in the solution. The effect of temperature on the boehmite precipitation was studied in the temperature range of 90–120 °C. In the present work, the sodium hydroxide concentration in the solution was expressed as Na As shown in The values of boehmite solubility shown in The effect of the initial sodium hydroxide concentration on the boehmite precipitation was studied in the range of 70–120 g/L Na The results reveal again the strong kinetic inhibitions that take place as pure crystalline boehmite is precipitated from the supersaturated sodium aluminate solutions. The system has reached an apparent equilibrium stage at which the alumina concentration is far away from the real value of boehmite solubility under the same conditions. Moreover, it is observed that the achieved apparent equilibrium shifts closer to the real equilibrium as the initial sodium hydroxide concentration decreases from 120 to 70 g/L. Indeed, the %yield of the boehmite precipitation process, which is defined as the percent amount of the maximum alumina that could be precipitated from the aluminate solution, decreases from 67.14% to 60.26% when the sodium hydroxide concentration increases from 70 to 120 g/L. The above results show that there is a strong interrelation between the observed kinetic inhibitions and the sodium hydroxide concentration in the solution. The rate of boehmite precipitation process is accelerated by the presence of boehmite seed material in the aluminate solution. Moreover, the addition of seed is absolutely essential in the case that the precipitation of boehmite is performed under atmospheric conditions, namely temperatures lower than 100 °C and atmospheric pressure, otherwise, boehmite cannot be precipitated from the solution. Therefore, the study of the effect of seed ratio on the rate of boehmite precipitation process is crucial in order to understand the phenomena related to the boehmite precipitation mechanism. The experiments were performed at 110 °C with an aluminate solution that contained 100 g/L Na The results confirm the positive effect of the seed ratio on the boehmite precipitation rate and once again reveal the strong kinetic inhibitions that occur as pure crystalline boehmite precipitates. The most important observation is that the attained apparent equilibrium shifts closer to the real equilibrium as the initial seed ratio increases. This result indicates that the boehmite seed plays a critical role during the boehmite precipitation from supersaturated sodium aluminate solutions, thus directly affecting the precipitation mechanism. The rate of boehmite precipitation from the supersaturated sodium aluminate solutions depends on the reaction's “driving force” and the rate constant as in the case of any chemical reaction. The driving force of any precipitation reaction is the supersaturation degree ( The amount of precipitated boehmite ( In The rate constant ( where, The pre-exponential factor ( The values of the above parameters The model parameters can be estimated from the slope and the intercept of the 1/ The plots of 1/ From The Arrhenius plot given in The plots of 1/ Furthermore, from The rate constant of the precipitation reaction is given in It is concluded from The plots of 1/ Once again the experimental data confirm the linearity of the relation between 1/ In this experimental series, the initial sodium hydroxide concentration and the precipitation temperature were kept constant. Therefore, the logarithm of As observed from The estimated value of the exponential parameter The constant parameter As shown in By combining all the previous results, the rate of boehmite precipitation from supersaturated sodium aluminate solutions can be described by the following equation: In The experimental results prove that pure crystalline boehmite can be precipitated from pure supersaturated sodium aluminate solutions at temperatures as low as 90 °C in the presence of boehmite seed. The results are in opposition to the current practice according to which crystalline boehmite is formed at temperatures higher than 100 °C The kinetic analysis reveals that the activation energy of boehmite precipitation from supersaturated sodium aluminate solutions is 89 kJ/mol. The activation energy of the boehmite precipitation is much higher compared to that of the gibbsite precipitation, which typically varies between 50 and 59 kJ/mol The kinetic analysis reveals also that the boehmite precipitation reaches an apparent equilibrium stage at which the alumina concentration in the solution is 1.7–1.9 times higher than the value of boehmite solubility under the same experimental conditions as shown in The boehmite precipitation reaction rate and the process efficiency are improved when the seed ratio, the amount of initially added boehmite seed, is increased. The order of reaction with respect to the seed ratio (SR) is plus 0.54. The system reaches closer to the real equilibrium as the SR increases. As observed in This is an unusual result as long as the seed ratio is known to affect the rate at which the precipitation reaction reaches equilibrium and not the equilibrium level. This result indicates that the boehmite seed plays an important role during precipitation and also affects the phenomena that are responsible for the self-deceleration of the precipitation process.  For that reason, strong repulsive forces are developed between the negatively charged aluminate ions and the negatively charged surface of the boehmite seed particles. Thus, the energy that is necessary for an aluminate ion to approach the surface of the seed increases and therefore the self-deceleration of the precipitation process takes place and finally the precipitation process is totally inhibited. An increase of the seed ratio in the solution has as a direct result, the increase of the number of the surface aluminol groups, and thus, the decrease of the negative surface charge. The kinetic inhibitions are attenuated from an energetic point of view and the boehmite precipitation process is accelerated. The phenomena that are responsible for the self-deceleration of the precipitation process will appear again as the precipitation proceeds and the free sodium hydroxide concentration increases. The process will be inevitably inhibited but in this case, the attained equilibrium will be closer to the real equilibrium, and thus, the process efficiency will be higher. As a conclusion, the kinetic analysis of boehmite precipitation from supersaturated sodium aluminate solutions shows that the precipitation reaction has high activation energy and follows second order kinetics. Moreover, this work proves that serious kinetic inhibitions take place during the boehmite precipitation and reveals the role of the sodium hydroxide as a process inhibitor as well as the role of the boehmite seed ratio as a process accelerator. The financial support of the European Commission within the frameworks of the Non-Nuclear Energy Programme JOULE III (Contract No. JOE3/CT95/0003) and Industrial and Materials Technologies Programme Brite-Euram III (Contract No.BRPR/CT98/0728) is gratefully acknowledged.