The refractory used in the pyrometallurgical furnaces is periodically replaced because of wear. Refractory wear is determined by contact with the molten phases that interact with the refractory, in which chemical reactions are significant. Molten phases penetrate the refractory structure through the open porosity, this condition often being the first step in the complex phenomena of wear in these materials.
                  In this work, the infiltration of Mg–Cr–O and Al–Cr–O industrial refractories by the molten phases in the copper-making process has been studied by adapting the sessile drop technique usually associated with wetting studies. An evaluation of the volume of liquid infiltration and the time needed to reach the maximum level were compared for three types of industrial refractories and three types of molten phases: fayalitic slag, matte and copper. An experimental analysis of the wetting behavior of those molten phases on the principal constituents of the refractories tested was developed to better understand the results.Copper is produced by hydrometallurgy (18%) and pyrometallurgy (82%) The furnaces used in this process are lined with refractories. The most widely used in the copper-making industry is the magnesia–chromite refractory The wear mechanism is a complex succession and superposition of phenomena; each can be analyzed independently, and in some cases, it is possible to identify the one responsible for the global degradation. Refractory materials are polyphasic with a defined chemical and crystalline structure for each constituent. The grains of these constituents remain cohesive thanks to the binder, in which the third constituent element to describe the refractory microstructure is the open porosity that forms during manufacture. The molten phases infiltrate the open porosity in accordance with certain physicochemical characteristics and, when this phenomenon occurs, it is the first step in the degradation of the lining across a range of furnaces and processes The infiltration of the refractory and its chemical interaction with the molten phases increases refractory wear in the vicinity of the liquid–solid interface. Both processes are influenced by the chemical composition and microstructure of the refractory. According to the literature In the copper-making process by pyrometallurgy, a reaction layer is formed on the hot face of the refractory, acting as a shield against additional infiltration; this reaction layer contains high Mg# olivine and iron-enriched spinel as a consequence of the reaction between the refractory constituents and the fayalitic slags. This reaction layer has physical properties that differ from the as-delivered refractory (mainly in density and thermal conductivity), so the spallation of this layer occurs during operation as a result of thermal and mechanical shocks The post-mortem analyses carried out on the refractory lining of Peirce Smith Converters and a Submerged Arc Furnace by these authors, accompanied by thermochemical calculations and simulations The channels of porous refractories are braided, their sections vary along any given channel, and their internal surfaces are rough The equilibrium value of the rise in liquid in the capillary can be calculated by minimizing the variation in total free energy as a function of the rise, from the border of the pore to the maximum distance in the capillary. The total free energy depends on three components (Eq. (1)) The force required to overcome gravitational forces when the distance changes from zero to the final infiltration point. The work done by the pressure applied when the front rises from the border to the final infiltration point. The change in the surface energy. Eq. 1: Variation in free energy from the border ( At the equilibrium, the variation of the free energy for a differential infiltrated distance is zero [ Eq. 1: Equilibrium state of Eq. (1). Ph is the hydrostatic pressure and If the contact angle is Deviations from the ideal conditions must be considered for theoretical calculations. The roughness (even some microns) and heterogeneities on the surface (and pores), and the size distribution and non-cylindrical shape of the pores, are examples of non-ideal conditions. Empirical methods are used to evaluate the deviation from ideality The infiltration of the refractory by a molten phase can be accompanied by reactions which modify the chemistry of the liquid (viscosity, surface tension), the geometry of the pores and the formation of new phases Sessile drop experiments on refractory substrates have been carried out in his work. The sessile drop technique is based on the measurement of the contact angle ( After the experiment, the data collected, on the evolution in the time of The contact angle is determined by software that uses the analysis of the image projected by the system studied (a molten phase over a refractory). This software determines the shape and contour of the image and different geometrical parameters of the liquid. The evaluation of the gray scale values of the recorded image allows the detection of the so-called baseline (the contact between droplet and solid) and the drop outline. The industrial refractory substrates used in this work were designated by their industrial names: magnesia–chromite (electrofused “ Standard equipment was used in the experimental study: an EM301 heating microscope ( The preparation of the substrate started with the cutting of a sample from an as-delivered industrial brick. The shape and size were square, measuring about 10 The molten phase was taken from a bulk solid sample previously ground and provided by the Atlantic Copper Smelter. A representative sample was obtained and then pulverized to 100% under 0.149 The various liquid samples were placed over the substrate in the furnace and heated in a purified N The contour images of the molten phase – substrate systems were recorded online, and their evolution were saved to a video file. The software for image analysis delivers geometric parameters of the shape of the projected image against time: baseline, height, and left and right contact angles. Furthermore, based on this information, the software estimates the characteristic temperatures defined in the standard pyrometric cone test. An example of the images of the evolution of the system from room temperature to the end of the experiment are shown in The geometric parameters obtained from the image analysis software allow the evaluation of the liquid infiltration by comparing the volume of the melted sample at the beginning ( This approximation is appropriate for the evaluation of the volume because all the liquids tend to wet oxides, so a condition in which the liquid volume will always be represented by a semi-sphere skullcap is to be expected. A microstructural characterization of these commercial refractories was carried out using Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) and EPMA. With the BSE images obtained, the porosity values were determined and compared with the values given by the supplier. For this purpose, the ImageJ 1.50i scientific imaging software was used to set the porosity of the refractories. ImageJ is an open source Java image processing program that can display, edit, analyze and process images The heterogeneous systems led to a response according to the relative size of the liquid sample and the elements of the microstructure: grain size of the constituents and pore size. In this case, when a sample of a few grams (5–10 The experimental dynamic evolution of the infiltrating volume on a substrate, as a function of the values measured as To calculate a final value for each molten phase/substrate couple, a minimum of five repetitions were carried out to produce a smooth curve, such as in the examples given ( To generate more information on the fundamentals that drive the infiltration phenomena, and to explain the dispersion of the results, the apparent contact angle between the molten phases and the main pure phase constituents of the refractories were measured. The apparent contact angle is thus named because the system is not ideal when the surface properties can be determined. In this case, the substrates were three “pure” and dense constituents of the base materials used in the manufacturing of the refractories: mineral MgO and mineral chromite, and electrofused Mg–Cr–O. None of these materials, even the polycrystalline without porosity, are pure compounds, so the measurement is the determination of The methodology used for these experiments was the same as that in the infiltration experiments, but in this case the result was the contact angle between the each of the same three molten phases and these substrates. The heating rate was 20 Two types of behavior were clearly identified regarding the spreading kinetic: a stable contact angle was first obtained with good concordance between A summary of these results is shown in Microstructural characterization was carried out for better support of the results. The BSE images of the microstructural characterization ( In the case of the Al–Cr–O and Mg–Cr–O From the BSE images, we conclude that in the case of the Al–Cr–O refractory ( In the case of the Mg–Cr–O refractories ( As shown in Eq. (1) the contact angle is a driving force that boosts, or halts, the infiltration process. From this consideration, the slag is the molten phase most likely to infiltrate the refractory microstructure, as the contact angles with the pure compound constituents of the refractory represent an extended wetting behavior. These conditions are widely reported in the literature: liquid oxides tend to wet solid oxides It was expected that Cu would have the fewest wetting conditions on the oxides as Cu-oxide systems are not wetting systems ( The infiltration results of the molten phases on refractories have a wide dispersion ( As explained, the fayalitic slag from the PSC has an almost complete wetting behavior on the mineral MgO and mineral chromite. This condition clearly explains the complete and faster infiltration on the industrial refractories that have these main constituents. The same direct relation between the wetting behavior and the infiltration results can be identified in the metallic copper: less wetting behavior on the main constituents led to lower infiltration on the industrial refractories. Based on the qualitative results obtained in this work, the three different refractories can be classified according to the ease (or difficulty) of infiltration by the molten phases used in this study. The classification proposed is the following: electrofused Al–Cr–O is the most resistant to infiltration, followed by electrofused Mg–Cr–O and finally, direct bonded Mg–Cr–O as the refractory with the lowest performance. The dispersion of the results on the level of infiltration and the time needed to reach this condition can be related to the heterogeneous microstructure that each of the refractories tested. Due to the size of the infiltration test (sessile drop technique), the extension of the liquid can lead to interaction, preferably with one of the constituents of the refractory, which varied in each test according to a random condition. This experimental characteristic, even though far from the real conditions of infiltration phenomena at industrial scale, allows us to make a precise and quantitative analysis of the phenomena of the fundamentals that drive the infiltration. At industrial scale, more factors must be considered: for example, the metallostatic pressure the boosts the infiltration of the phases located in the bottom of the furnaces (Cu-rich phases) or the formation (or not formation) of new phases from the chemical interaction molten phase-refractory that could for a protective layer avoiding additional infiltrations (in the case of fayalitic slags) The infiltration behavior of molten phases of interest for the copper-making has been analyzed on three types of industrial refractory that line the reactors used in this process for primary Cu production. The infiltration tests were performed on industrial materials, and also included industrial molten phases. The choice of non-synthetic phases or more ideal materials was to generate representative conditions to enable us to simulate at laboratory scale the early stage of the complex wear and corrosion phenomena that take place on linings of the Cu pyrometallurgical reactors (found in previous works of the authors). The adaption of the sessile drop technique is a good option for analyzing the fundamental mechanism of the infiltration phenomena, combining the quantification of the molten phase infiltration through the open porosity of an industrial refractory and analysis of the wetting behavior of the same molten phases on the pure main constituents of the refractories tested. Based on this proposed methodology, the fundamental infiltration formalism was qualitatively verified for the systems analyzed, allowing us to propose a classification of the materials based on the wetting characteristics of their individual constituents: For microstructure characteristics, electrofused materials perform better than direct bonded. The replacement of MgO by Al Finally, the results analyzed for industrial conditions report a non-negligible dispersion; the explanation for this dispersion relates to the size of the experiment, in which the drop of the molten phase used in the “sessile drop technique” is close to the order of magnitude of the microstructure constituents of the industrial refractories. None.