The use of polar aqueous solvents, such as acetone, methanol and ethylene glycol, together with hydrogen peroxide and sulfuric acid solutions, have been shown to increase chalcopyrite dissolution. However, the reason for this improvement is not clear, especially in the case of ethylene glycol. The objective of the present study is to investigate the nature of chalcopyrite leaching, with and without the presence of ethylene glycol (EG), and to understand the role of this polar solvent in the modification of the characteristic behavior involved. For this purpose, a relatively pure chalcopyrite concentrate was leached at 20°C and atmospheric pressure (79kPa, México City) with hydrogen peroxide in aqueous sulfuric acid solutions, with and without EG. The results showed that, in the absence of EG, the decomposition of 99% of the initial hydrogen peroxide in 24h, was catalyzed by the Fe2+, Fe3+ and Cu2+ ions (Fenton reagents) present as a consequence of the leach itself. Furthermore, after the first six hours, the copper and iron dissolution effectively ceased (44 and 37%, respectively). In contrast, in the presence of EG, the H2O2 consumption was minimal (~16%) in the same time period and mostly due to the oxidation reactions. The final extractions for copper and iron were 90 and 71%, with an ascendant tendency. It was suggested that hydroxyradicals, product of the Fenton-type reactions, are the driving force for peroxide decomposition and, these were shown to be absent in solutions containing ethylene glycol.
                  Chalcopyrite dissolution kinetics in the presence of ethylene glycol, are well described by the reaction-controlled shrinking particle model. The kinetic expression is a first order function of the hydrogen peroxide concentration and is not dependent on the H+ concentration, although peroxide decomposition slightly increased at higher pH values. The reaction controlling the dissolution process was determined to be the conversion of the chalcopyritic sulfide to elemental sulfur; this was followed by its oxidation to sulfate, although apparently did not affect the leaching kinetics.Chalcopyrite (CuFeS One of hydrometallurgy's advantages is that low grade ores or concentrates may be economically processed and generally allows easier handling of the generated waste. Although current day hydrometallurgical routes cannot completely substitute the smelting/conversion sequence, several hydrometallurgical processes, such as the high-pressure CESL process developed by Teck Resources Limited, have proven to be technically sound, transforming chalcopyrite into cupric sulfate, hematite and elemental sulfur ( As has been observed by numerous research teams, chalcopyrite is highly refractory in acid media due to superficial chemical transformations, which generate compact, stable and electrically resistive products ( Chalcopyrite dissolution in aqueous acid media takes place through solid transformations into different intermediaries, such as bornite (Cu Among the less toxic oxidants, hydrogen peroxide has received the most attention since it satisfies the oxidation potential criterion (E° Several investigations have been undertaken to evaluate the ability of hydrogen peroxide to leach chalcopyrite in sulfuric acid media. For instance, Excessive peroxide depletion by the metallic cations, and the subsequent termination of chalcopyrite dissolution after 60 The explanation of the aforementioned behavior can be found in the nature of the resulting solutions. The Fenton reactions, discovered over 100 Fenton-type reactions, and their effect on the decomposition of hydrogen peroxide, have been the subject of much research ( And in the presence of Cu The problem of hydrogen peroxide decomposition changed considerably when Neither The chalcopyrite used in this study originated from Kidd's Creek, Ontario, Canada and was provided by Excalibur Mineral Corporation. The as-received sample was hand-ground in an agate mortar and dry-sieved. Samples (0.1 The reaction unit consisted in a jacketed reactor (1 The leaching experiments were carried out at 20 Three types of experiments were performed. The first set of tests were designed to measure the copper and iron leaching kinetics and the leach liquor ORP. Each experiment used 224 The procedure for each leaching experiment was the following: The sulfuric acid solution was placed in the reactor and once the temperature was stable at 20 The copper and iron concentrations in the liquid samples as well as the digestions were determined by atomic absorption spectrometry (AAS, Varian SpectrAA220fs). The initial mineral and leach residues were analyzed by X-ray diffraction (D8 Advance) to identify the crystal phases present. The average particle size before and after leaching was measured in an optical microscope (BX45 Olympus) with a camera (Axiocam ERc5s ZEISS) using a 10 The second type of experiment, performed in an identical manner, was carried out to quantify the acid and peroxide concentrations in the leach liquor. For these, 0.2 To determine the stoichiometry of the reactions involved, the sulfuric acid (0.007, 0.07 and 0.7 The third set of experiments were performed to evaluate the hydrogen peroxide destruction due solely to the presence of ferrous, ferric and cupric ions in the leach liquor (no mineral present) with and without ethylene glycol (EG). For this study, the cations were added as their sulfate salts: Fe The copper and iron contents (25% and 32%, respectively) and mineralogy in the different size fractions were very similar. The Fe/Cu mass ratio was 1.3, superior to the value of 0.88 in pure chalcopyrite. This value corresponds to approximately 65% chalcopyrite. The additional iron content was shown to reside mostly in pyrrhotite-type phases (  Furthermore, more moles of iron were extracted relative to those of copper, in both cases, which confirms, on one hand, the presence of other iron sulfides and, on the other, their oxidation, since if only chalcopyrite reacted, the molar ratio would be 1:1. The differences between the moles of copper and iron leached for each case are marked in the figure as n The diffractograms of the solid residues processed in ethylene glycol solutions at different leach times are shown in In In contrast, with EG the dissolution of chalcopyrite persists because the hydrogen peroxide concentration is essentially constant. The ORP continuously increases, in part due to the rise in the copper and iron concentrations. After 24 Acid concentration profiles with respect to time are not shown here, however, in both cases, they remained essentially constant at 0.7 The hydrogen peroxide concentration remaining in solution as a function of time is plotted in The aforementioned behavior confirms On the other hand, In order to complement this argument, a more detailed investigation into catalytic decomposition of hydrogen peroxide by the redox pair Fe The leaching experiments without ethylene glycol at lower acid concentrations showed yet inferior extractions to those at 0.7 The fact that less acid can be used when ethylene glycol is present could impact favorably on an industrial process, since a smaller amount of alkali would be necessary to neutralize the leach residues ( At 0.007 For zone The following reaction describes Zone In Zone The moles of dissolved copper and iron that originated from chalcopyrite, as well as the moles of non-chalcopyritic iron from pyrrhotite are compared with the experimental moles of peroxide consumed and plotted as a function of time for the leach experiment with 0.007 Theoretically, according to  The residues after the 24-h leach, as well as the original concentrate, were subjected to a visual inspection under a microscope to determine their average size. The average diameter of the residues leached with and without ethylene glycol were particles were 20.7 The shrinking particle model with chemical reaction control may be represented by the following equation: One of the assumptions of the shrinking particle model, as presented in the above equation, is that the oxidant concentration remains constant during the leach process. Since this condition was not sustained throughout the experiment without ethylene glycol, the model is not applicable. On the other hand, in the tests with ethylene glycol, the peroxide concentration was approximately the same after 12 The slopes obtained from In summary, the kinetics of copper extraction in ethylene glycol solutions is reasonably described by the shrinking particle model with chemical reaction control, implying that the peroxide concentration is relatively constant. Since the peroxide decomposition was found to be low for acid concentrations between 0.035 and 0.7 Ethylene glycol plays an important role in increasing the acidic hydrogen peroxide leaching of chalcopyrite, by inhibiting H Regarding the chalcopyrite dissolution kinetics, these are well described by the reaction-controlled shrinking particle model. The kinetic expression is a function of the hydrogen peroxide concentration with an order of 1.0 and not dependent on the H The authors are grateful to the