On 2nd May 1998, a sudden and rapid collapse occurred in an area of abandoned metal ore mines in La Unión (SE Spain). Due to this event, surface subsidence occurred at “Lo Tacón” industrial park resulting in extensive damage to buildings in the affected area.
                  This mine collapse coincided with an earthquake of magnitude 2.4
                     M
                     w recorded by seismic stations near the National Geographic Institute of Spain (Spanish acronym, IGN) that situate the epicentre in the town of Torre Pacheco, about 20km northeast of the city of La Union, at a depth of 2.6km. The lack of coverage of seismic stations east of Torre Pacheco created uncertainty regarding the precise location of the epicentre which we believe to be reasonable.
                  In this paper, we consider the hypothesis that it was the failure in the mine that triggered the collapse and induced a seismic energy of M
                     w magnitude equal to the earthquake at Torre Pacheco. The seismic energy of the earthquake came from a percentage of the strain energy stored within the rock (massive grey dolomite) that was released by rupture of a rock volume due to the increase in the roof span when a pillar failed, thus triggering cascading pillar failure (CPF).
                  The results of the study prove that the energy recorded at the Spanish National Geographic Institute (IGN) seismic stations is consistent with the calculated released seismic energy for the mining collapse at Lo Tacón.Historically, earthquakes have caused damage to underground structures such as natural caves, tunnels and underground mines. The data available indicate that these effects are significant only when earthquakes have a magnitude greater than 5.5 Aydan and Kawamoto Lenhardt Dowding and Rozen On 2nd May 1998, seismic stations belonging to the National Geographic Institute of Spain (Spanish acronym, IGN) registered a 2.4 The IGN stated in Ref. However, there are some questions that must be taken into account. The Torre Pacheco earthquake was only registered by seismic stations located far away from the epicentre. This, in adition to the lack of coverage of seismic stations east of Torre Pacheco led to uncertainty regarding the location of the earthquake’s epicentre. The seismic stations had only one channel, so it may be difficult to distinguish between If we compare the seismic record from this “earthquake” with other occurred in the same zone, near in time and with similar intensity (Mula earthquake, situated in the West of Murcia City, occurred the 9th of April 1999), we can see that are some differences that led to believe that the Torre Pacheco event cańt be classified as a typical earthquake. We therefore decided to conduct a research study on the relationship between the Torre Pacheco earthquake and the Lo Tacón mine collapse. The study begins with a brief review of articles on earthquakes related to mine collapses. We then collect geologic, geotechnical and subsidence information on the documented mine workings and on undocumented mine workings provided by personnel from the different mines. The hypothesis that we consider most plausible for the Lo Tacón collapse is that of a cascading pillar failure (CPF) event which released seismic energy equivalent to the energy released in the Torre Pacheco earthquake. We believe that the seismic energy of the earthquake originated from a percentage of the strain energy stored within the rock (massive grey dolomite) released by rupture of a rock volume due to the increase in roof span when a pillar failed progressively. The equation from Ref.  Zinc and lead ore deposits mainly associated with mantle and seam structures have been mined since Roman times in the former mining area of the city of La Unión, nowadays Lo Tacón industrial estate ( As a result of this history of mining, a high concentration of abandoned underground mining galleries is to be found in this mining area around the city of La Unión. Some mines were exploited irrationally and, before being abandoned, the system of retreat workings consisted in removing or minimizing the cross-section of the pillars. This strategy meant that the reduction in the safety factors of pillars favouring the cascading pillar failure (Ref. On 2nd May 1998, a rapid and sudden collapse of several underground mining cavities occurred in the industrial area of Lo Tacón. The problem began with the appearance of cracks in buildings and in the surface of the ground, coinciding in time with the seismic event of Torre Pacheco, which triggered considerable public alarm. Given these events, a topographic levelling network was set up in June 1998 which was used to measure the maximum settlement within the subsidence basin. These data were used to monitor the phenomenon of subsidence, which has continued up to the present day (see Refs.  At a regional level, the study area is characterised as comprising a series of stacked thrust sheets affected by an upward decreasing metamorphic grade. After a phase of significant erosion, this mantle structure was covered by a late-Orogenic Neogen series, after which came a phase of significant faulting followed by volcanic phenomena and the uplifting of the Sierra de Cartagena. At a more local level, the underground mining area subject of this study is located on a fallen block of the Sierra de Cartagena mountain range (Ref. South of the Cartagena-La Unión fault, the materials belong to the Paleozoic base, as the covering stratigraphic series has disappeared due to erosion, with the exception of more recent deposits. Among these, Miocene outcroppings, located in the southern part of the “La Cierva” mine, reach a thickness of 30 In order to obtain reliable stratigraphic information on the site, three boreholes were drilled ( The cores from the A-1 borehole, which went down to a depth of 200 Some studies have revealed that the percentage of mined underground volume versus total underground volume has an average value of 67% (Ref. We next carry out a study of the collapse of the underground metal ore mines La Cierva and Lo Veremos located in the former mining area worked by the room-and-pillar method. This study focuses on the analysis of the pillars in the areas adjacent to these mines, as these are the mining concessions which are just below the area of maximum subsidence. There is extensive documentation related to the behaviour of pillars, such as rock mass quality, pillar conditions, dimensions of excavation and intact rock strength. There are also several documented cases of room-and-pillar collapses in metal ore and non-metal ore mines Refs. The strength of a pillar can be defined as its maximum resistance to uniaxial compression. In a deposit with horizontal stratification, the compression of a pillar is caused by the weight of the rock mass overlying the pillar. Empirical evidence suggests that the strength of a pillar is related to its volume and shape. Numerous empirical equations have thus been developed to estimate pillar strength in hard rock mines (Refs. Eq. Lunder and Pakalnis The “ Taking the combined data from the aforementioned sources, Lunder represented his “ Pillar dimension data from the La Cierva and Lo Veremos mines (see These calculations employed a pillar width of 10 To compare these results with similar cases worldwide, we provide a review of published data of general characteristics of rock pillar failure. Ref. The strength of pillars with a width-to-height ratio below 1 is highly variable. This variability increases as the width-to-height ratio decreases. The variability in the strength of failed pillars may be caused by several factors, such as uncertainty regarding the actual rock strength, uncertainty regarding the actual rock stress, variations in the degree and severity of joints, variation in the stratification characteristics and the presence of weak stratified veins in the pillars. The results of failed pillars listed by the NIOSH provide us with an initial approximation of the characteristics of the failed pillars in the area adjacent to the La Cierva and Lo Veremos mines, where the Lo Tacón collapse was felt more intensely. The 1–1′ geological section of the study area ( To complete the analysis of the characteristics of the pillars most likely to fail in the area adjacent to the La Cierva and Lo Veremos mines, the safety factor (FS) is calculated at different depths. The pillar stress, The safety factor (FS) is calculated by dividing the strength of the pillar (Sp) by the stress ( We end this analysis of pillar stability using the pillar stability classification method developed in Ref. In accordance with the graph in Stable pillars exist up to a depth of 100 Pillars with a height above 10 Pillars at depths of between 100 and 180 Pillars at depths of between 180 and 300 Pillars at depths of between 180 and 220 Pillars at depths of between 160 and 220 Pillars with a width-to-height ratio between 0.7 and 1 and safety factor greater than 1 (FS Pillars at depths of between 160 and 220 From observations of actual cases, progressive stress-induced failure of a pillar is known to lead to the cracking of plates of rock, which become separated from the surface of the pillar. This process continues towards the core of the intact rock. This progressive failure mode is also called “hourglass formation” due to the outer shape the pillar assumes. During the process of progressive pillar failure, the reduction in pillar size causes a redistribution of the confining stress in the intact rock pillar. If the process progresses, the average stress in the core of the pillar can exceed its strength limit, resulting in violent failure. Violent pillar failure is generally found to occur when the following two conditions are met (Refs. Numerous researches (Refs.    In the third part of this paper, we estimate the amount of seismic energy released by the 2nd May 1998 collapse at Lo Tacón. A review of the available literature and published information allows us to obtain results that we validate by means of the method of comparison. When weak pillars fail and roof supports are removed, a strong roof becomes highly strained. If the span of the unsupported roof increases, it becomes more highly strained and finally collapses (Ref. The strain energy stored per unit volume of collapsed rock can be estimated by means of Eq. The principal stresses, Ortlepp Introducing in Formula The  For the sake of comparison, we include the following facts on five potash mine collapses selected for review by Ref. The major Retsof Salt mine collapse, New York, occurred at the 2YS panel on 12th March 1994, produced a seismic event of magnitude 3.6 as a 150 by 150 The Solikamsk potash mine collapse, Verkhnekamsky deposit, in the Upper Kama district of western Ural, Russia, resulted in a 4.7 magnitude seismic event on 5th January 1994, and 4.5 The Teutschental potash mine collapse, Germany, on 11th September 1996, involved failure of 700 long pillars over an area of 2 The roughly 1 by 2 The 13th March 1989 collapse of the Merkers mine, 750–900 A strong correlation between these dynamic collapse events and the presence of strong brittle strata bridging above the bed being mined is the most relevant observation of this review. Two collapse mechanisms have been evoked: (1) cascading pillar failure, and (2) sudden shared failure of strong brittle overburden strata. Sudden strong strata failure was found to occur on near-vertical shears and generally associated with sudden subsidence events. The seismic event created by sudden collapse carries information on the source mechanism of the event. A comprehensive seismic analysis conducted for the Solvay case includes two important findings: The first motion of the ground registered by the seismographs is downward, indicating a collapse or implosion often described as a horizontal crack closure motion. The potential energy released through subsidence is sufficient to produce the observed seismic event. Estimates of the relative change in potential energy, based on the volume and displacement of collapsing overburden were made for several large collapses and compared to reported seismic energy. The linearity of these results ( The crack closure (implosional) character of seismic records of these events does not provide good information on whether the event was trigged by failure of a pillar or strata. The short duration and broad extent of these events suggest that strata failure occurred first as either the initiator or immediately after the initiating failure, providing a shock load that rapidly drove failure throughout the collapse area. These results compared with those of the represent study thus lead us to think that the Lo Tacón collapse of 2nd May 1998 belongs to the latter case. A chain reaction failure of mine pillars occurred and not sudden vertical shear failure of strong brittle overburden strata. This study researches the possible relationship between a seismic event of a shallow earthquake with a sudden collapse in a shallow abandoned metal ore mine worked by means of the room-and-pillar method. It is found that, when faced with the collapse of inaccessible abandoned underground mines, a wide-ranging collection of histories of related cases supplemented by information available from the site of the collapse constitutes a good basis for initiating a study to ascertain the characteristics of the collapse. A review of cases of underground collapses recorded by local and regional seismic stations indicates that it is unlikely that a natural earthquake was the cause of a collapse of a shallow underground mine due to earthquake magnitudes below 6 This study provides information on the most likely causes that led to the collapse at Lo Tacón. That is, it was due to a cascading pillar failure process that probably started with the total failure of a slender pillar at a depth of 180–200 A good relationship of proportionality was found between the seismic energy released in the collapse and the seismic energy of the earthquake recorded at local and regional seismic stations. Comparative analysis of compiled results from other events of underground mine collapse shows a strong correlation between the potential change in energy released through subsidence and the seismic magnitude. Further studies of seismic records are required in order to discriminate the event of the collapse from the event of a naturally occurring earthquake.