This work reports the rheological characterization of hammer- and knife-milled lodgepole pine materials as a function of grind size and moisture content (MC). Characterizations included particle size and shape distributions, bulk density, compressibility at 10kPa uniaxial pressure, elastic recovery from 10kPa uniaxial pressure, shear strength, effective angle of internal friction, arching in a custom hopper, and feeding performance in an auger feeder operating separately in volumetric and gravimetric feeding modes. Compressibility and elastic recovery increased as much as 15% and 4%, respectively with increasing MC. Adding 3kPa of pressure increased the minimum hopper outlet width needed to ensure consistent flow (i.e. the critical arching width) for all hopper arching tests, except for the pellets. Interestingly, for materials with smaller particle sizes, the volumetric feed rate tends to decrease as MC increases even though the density of the material increases with MC. Time variability of volumetric feed rate increased dramatically with increasing particle size but the impact of MC was not as clear. For nearly all tests, gravimetric auger feeding resulted in better feeding control and substantially decreased time variability in the material feed rate. Shear tests indicate that material strength generally decreased with increasing particle size; while the impact of MC was not as obvious. Agreement between experiments and predictions of the critical arching width were best for 1.6mm and 6mm grinds and worst for the 13mm grinds. This work also shows that the correlation between experiments and predictions of the critical arching width can be improved in terms of the coefficient of determination (R
                     2) from 0.56 to 0.84 by correlating the respective upper limits of the 95% confidence intervals rather than the mean values.Considerable research in utilizing lignocellulosic biomass as a feedstock for renewable fuels and chemicals has been driven by energy and environmental concerns over petroleum consumption Biomass material flow properties can be characterized as irregular due to cohesion or inter-particle mechanical interference causing problems in feeding behavior This variability in biomass properties affects not only the specific conversion process but also the supply of biomass to the conversion systems. Kenny et al. described that the handling and feeding system performance of lignocellulosic biomass feedstocks is determined by many factors including: particle size and shape distributions, bulk density, chemical composition of particles, moisture content, temperature, presence of trapped gases and the unique stress (i.e., compaction) history of the material Currently, the data required to solve biomass handling problems are scarce and much more information on flow properties of lignocellulosic biomass is needed to reduce the risk of process shutdowns in biorefineries and improve the cost-competitiveness of biofuel production In this work, the feeding performance of a range of clean hammer- and knife-milled lodgepole pine samples with varying moisture contents and grind sizes are evaluated in a custom wedge-shaped hopper and a screw feeder equipped with three different screw configurations. Results from feeding tests were compared to measured rheological properties of the samples, including bulk density, compressibility, elastic recovery, cohesive strength/unconfined yield strength, and angle of internal friction. These properties are used to predict the minimum hopper opening that is required to ensure reliable flow, and these predictions are compared to values measured using the custom wedge-shaped hopper. The comparison between experiments and predictions offers insights into the suitability of current methods to understand the feeding behavior of biomass materials as well as future work that is needed to improve the state of technology. Chipped lodgepole pine ( Samples with particle sizes smaller than 13 Sieve classification of the materials was performed in duplicate according to ASAE S319.3 using a standard Ro-Tap separator (W.S. Tyler model RX-29). The sieves used included U.S.A. standard sieve sizes of 15.0, 9.5, 6.3, 4.75, 3.35, 2.0, 1.7, 1.18, 0.425, 0.3, 0.25, 0.18, and 0 The size and shape properties of the particles in each grind size were determined using a Clemex digital image analysis system (Clemex Technologies Inc., QC, Canada) at 48 Similar to the sieve analysis, CPDs and PDDs were determined for primary particle parameters measured by the digital imaging method and were used to estimate 10%, 50%, and 90% cumulative passing values. The tests for each sample material were performed separately three times in order to estimate repeatability. An average of > The bulk densities of the samples were measured by following a modified version of ASTM E873-82 for densified particulate biomass fuels After the specimens were packed by dropping from a fixed height, the container was loaded into a universal load frame (Instron 5982 Dual Column Floor Frame) that had a cylindrical lid attached to its crosshead. The diameter of the lid was slightly smaller than that of the container to minimize potential friction effects between the lid and the container. The Instron universal testing machine was then used to slowly lower the cylindrical lid to compress the sample to 10 A custom hopper, with an adjustable outlet, was used to study the arching tendency of lodgepole pine subjected to different comminution methods (hammer mill vs. knife mill) and at multiple moisture contents. The unique feature of this custom hopper is that the size of the outlet can be continuously altered while maintaining symmetry and without disturbing the material through friction forces due to a moving gate. The details of the hopper and its operation have been described in a previous open-access publication Auger feeding tests were conducted using an Acrison Bin Weight Screw Feeder (model 402X-250-75-BDF1.5-E/2) equipped with either a small or a large screw auger with diameters of 45 Shear strength measurements were performed using an automated Schulze ring shear tester (Dietmar Schulze Schüttgutmesstechnik, Wolfenbüttel, Germany) in accordance with ASTM D6773-08 using a size M shear cell (outer diameter of 20 A minimum of four points were measured on each IYL, with points corresponding to the smallest pressure being tested first and then repeated at the end of the test to verify that the material strength had not changed > Material flow functions, MFFs, are curves that plot The critical applied stress The second method to estimate Particle cumulative passing distributions (CPDs) based upon the width and sieve analyses are presented in In the analysis of the woody samples, the camera image method reports slightly larger particle widths for the 13  In general, materials that are more compressible and have greater elastic recovery exhibit more severe feeding and handling problems. For example, in wedge or conical shaped hoppers, as the material descends through the narrowing portion of the hopper, the walls carry more of the weight of material overhead, such that the compressive pressure decreases toward the hopper outlet, where it essentially becomes zero when the gate is open (the hopper opening is a free surface). For incompressible materials, the decreasing compressive force as material moves down the hopper reduces interparticle friction forces to make the material more flowable at the hopper outlet. However, highly compressible materials can expand in the hopper nozzle, which maintains the compressive pressure and material strength, and potentially causes the material to become wedged above the hopper gate  For the unweighted tests, only the 25 As described above, auger feeder tests were conducted separately using different sizes of augers operating at approximately 20% and 40% of the maximum rotational velocity (labeled Vol-low and Vol-high, respectively). After the volumetric flow tests were completed, gravimetric tests were also performed that attempted to match the volumetric feed rates (in kg/h). Panels A and B in Panels C and D display the time variation in the feed rate Appendix A Fig. A.9 shows similar feed rate and power consumption data for experiments that employed the 63 Instantaneous yield loci (IYL) of the materials were measured using preshear compression stresses of 0.5  The hopper flow factors Recently, Barletta and Poletto Barletta and Poletto also report well-behaved material flow function curves for Oginni et al. Wu et al.  In order to identify patterns in the ability to reliably use shear test data to estimate The limitations of the shear tester are likely a factor in the large discrepancies between predictions and measured values in Other hopper flow theories have been developed based upon continuum mechanics to predict the flow of material in hoppers starting with a vertical stress distribution As noted above, it is typically assumed that the critical applied stress in hoppers ( This work has reported rheological characterization of hammer- and knife-milled lodge pole pine as a function of grind size and moisture content. Characterizations included particle size and shape distributions, bulk density, compressibility at 10 The shear tests indicate that material strength generally decreased with increasing particle size, although the impact of MC was not entirely consistent. Predictions of the minimum hopper outlet width required to ensure flow This manuscript has been authored by  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at