Solid waste tailings from acid leaching of Gattar mineralized ore material contain economic and valuable minerals were processed to obtain some economic products. Firstly, these tailings were upgraded to a high‐‑titanium concentrate, which was then roasted with newly used (NaOH/Na2CO3) flux, for which the most suitable conditions for roasting were established. Then, the roasted masses were leached with hot water to selectively dissolve vanadium, silica and alumina leaving titanium in the leach residue (Ti-slag). Vanadium was recovered from the water leachate as a pure by-product. Thereafter, the Ti-slag was subjected to H2SO4 leaching to dissolve Ti, Fe, Mn and Zr. The effects of different parameters for H2SO4 leaching on the dissolution of Ti were determined. Titanium was separated as a pure TiO2 product in a single extraction stage with purity 99.9 wt%. The crystallographic transformations that occurred through the different processes were examined using XRD.Titanium is an economic element usually found in igneous rocks, metamorphic rocks and beach sand placers as ilmenite (FeTiO In Egypt, under the supervision of the Nuclear Materials Authority (NMA), the Gattar mineralized ore was treated using sulfuric acid leaching to extract uranium. However, the extraction of uranium is always associated with huge quantities of solid waste tailings. These tailings are characterized by the valued presence of Ti, Mn, Fe and noticeable amounts of V, Si, and Zr and represent an environmental hazard. In this work, the main issues are; The roasted masses produced from upgraded rutile were leached by water to remove V, Si, and Al impurities producing a residue containing about 85% TiO The solid waste tailings produced after sulfuric acid leaching of Gattar ore material were firstly subjected to physical upgrading using the Gravity Concentration method “Tabling” at NMA Labs; Egypt. The used table was “Wilfley” shaking table (No.13) ( The physical and chemical processing of the prepared Ti-concentrates and the analysis experiments were performed utilizing pure chemicals; NaOH, Na Bulk samples of the prepared Ti-concentrates were subjected to mineralogical investigation to determine their composing minerals by identification under a binuclear stereo microscope (transmitted polarized light microscope, model Olympus BX41 attached with Sony digital camera). Then, the selected grains were analyzed by the X-ray diffraction (XRD) technique using Philips X-ray model PW-3710 unit equipped with a PW-1830 generator; Netherlands. The X-ray radiation used was from a Cu-target tube operated at 40 kV and 30 mA with Ni filter. This instrument was connected to a computer system using the X-40 diffraction program and ASTM cards for minerals identification. Complete chemical analyses for the prepared Ti-concentrates were done using Atomic Absorption Spectrometry (AAS, Unicam 969; England) and Microwave Induced Plasma Atomic Emission Spectroscopy (MP-AES, Model 4200, Agilent Technologies, Australia). The ESEM analyses were performed by Environmental Scanning Electron Microscope (ESEM, Model EXL 30, Netherlands) supported by EDX unit for semi-quantitative analysis. The Inductively Coupled Plasma Optical Emission Spectrometry (ICP-OES) analysis for the TiO In order to remove vanadium, silica and alumina, three sequential processes were performed. The first process is the alkaline roasting of the 2 For the water leaching process, the leaching parameters were fixed for all experimental tests as; leaching temperature 70 °C, leaching time 10 min, liquid/solid ratio 60 (mL/g) and 200 rpm agitation speed. The roasted masses were leached with hot water in a closed system using a hotplate-magnetic stirrer (Stuart hotplate/magnetic stirrer model SB 162–3, USA). The final volume of all water agitation leaching experiments was kept constant. The leaching efficiency (%) of element (X) was calculated using the following Eq. To study the recovery process of V, Si and Al, the alkaline water leach liquor was subjected to acid neutralization using H The water leach residue was digested using sulfuric acid with different concentrations and at different leaching temperatures to dissolve Ti, Fe, Mn and Zr and determine the most suitable acid leaching conditions. Afterwards, the titanyl sulfate leach liquor produced was used to selectively precipitate Ti. The parameters studied and their operational conditions are shown in The experimental test at 150 °C was performed in a custom-made reactor due to the special conditions for leaching reaction. This reactor was a 100 mL capacity Teflon-lined stainless steel autoclave system. The titanyl sulfate leach liquor containing Ti, Fe, Zr, Ca and Mn was treated with ascorbic acid to reduce Fe(III) ions to Fe(II). Aqueous NaOH solutions were then added to the sulfate solution to selectively precipitate and separate Ti from the accompanying impurities. The TiO The structural transformations that occurred for the samples after alkaline roasting, and for the water leach and sulfuric acid leach residues were studied using the XRD technique to reveal the crystal phases for the compounds formed in each stage of the technology. In summary, the technology for producing anatase TiO The overall technology for the treatment of the solid waste tailings of Gattar ore material to remove V, Si and Al and produce TiO The first upgrading process using the Gravity Concentration method “Tabling” of the solid waste tailings of Gattar ore material produced the 1 The data regarding the minerals identified and products obtained in this study are summarized in The 2 From the chemical characterization shown in As was reported elsewhere ( It was found that, the dissolution of V, Si and Al in hot water is directly proportional to the roasting temperature. As the roasting temperature increases up to 550 °C; Ti, Fe, Mn and Zr dissolved minimally in hot water. Increasing the roasting temperature above 550 °C was found in experiments to enhance the dissolution of Ti, Fe, Mn and Zr. The most suitable roasting temperature was 550 °C at which the dissolution efficiencies of V, Si and Al were 94.0%, 89.0% and 83.0%, respectively, with (≤ 0.01%) for co-dissolution of Ti, Fe, Mn and Zr. This most suitable roasting temperature is low compared to other roasting temperatures that exceed the current value by two or three fold ( It was found that as the roasting time increases, the dissolution of V, Si and Al increases. Increasing the roasting time over 40 min had no additional impact but caused the undesired dissolution of Ti, Fe, Mn and Zr to a detectable concentration (< 100 mg/L). So, the most suitable roasting time was 40 min with dissolution efficiencies of 93.0%, 90.0% and 89.0% for V, Si and Al, respectively. This roasting time is relatively short compared to some other studies ( It is clear from The roasting reactions for Ti and V are thought to occur as follows ( The alkaline water leachate of high pH <13. It was composed of (22 g/L, 0.8 M) Si, (3.2 g/L, 0.12 M) Al and (0.8 g/L, 0.016 M) V while Ti, Fe, Mn and Zr were not detected. It was neutralized with H The filtrate containing V was left to stand overnight to allow the crystallization of sodium sulfate. This by-product was characterized by XRD, as shown in The water leach residue was digested using sulfuric acid with different conditions to dissolve Ti, Fe, Zr and Mn. The most suitable sulfuric acid leaching conditions were determined with respect to Ti dissolution efficiency using Eq. The effect of sulfuric acid concentration is shown in In this study, the dissolution reaction of the water leach residue in sulfuric acid is somewhat complicated where the starting reactant “Na The effect of (L/S) ratio is shown in The effect of agitation speed is shown in The effect of leaching temperature and time was studied and is shown in About 80.0% of Ti dissolved at 30 °C after 30 min which indicates high dissolution of the rutile transformation product at low temperature and relatively short time. With increase in leaching temperature to 40 °C and 50 °C, dissolution of Ti increased within 30 min leaching time to maximum values of 86.5% and 98.5%, respectively, which indicates a moderate effect of increasing the leaching temperature on the enhancement of Ti dissolution. After more than 30 min leaching time at 40 °C, 50 °C and 100 °C, the concentration of dissolved Ti in the leach solution began to decrease. This may be attributed to the hydrolysis reaction of Ti to form hydrated Ti-oxides as reported by ( For a leaching temperature of 150 °C, Ti dissolved to about 70% within 10 min. After 10 min, Ti hydrolyzed rapidly and decreased in solution for 60 min leaching time to about 27.0%. For leaching time more than 120 min, the hydrolyzed Ti began to redissolve in the sulfuric acid which increased the dissolved Ti in solution to about 60.0%. This behavior for titanium dissolution, precipitation and redissolution is somewhat unusual. It may be supported by the fact that sulfuric acid is a suitable leaching agent used to dissolve titanium minerals, but this needs concentrated acid at elevated temperature for long time ( From the previous results for leaching time and leaching temperature it is possible to conclude that: Ti dissolution was highest for short leaching time (≤ 30 min) at low leaching temperatures (≤ 50 °C). Therefore, the most suitable leaching temperature was chosen to be 50 °C with most suitable leaching time 30 min where Ti dissolution reached 98.5% and remained in solution. The titanyl sulfate leach liquor which contained about (5 g/L Ti; 1.4 g/L Fe; 0.8 g/L Mn; 200 mg/L Zr and 80 mg/L Ca) was heated with continuous stirring for 30 min until the solution temperature reached 100 °C. Then, the Fe(III) ions were reduced to Fe(II) using a suitable amount of ascorbic acid. Afterwards, Ti was separated from Fe and Mn by direct precipitation using a single treatment using 1 M NaOH solution at pH ≤ 1.7; this also resulted in co-precipitation of most of the Zr and Ca. The mixture was kept for settling and centrifugation to isolate the precipitated TiO The precipitation reaction may be expressed by Eq. According to the literature, Ti may be precipitated from acidic media in the form of titanic acids Ti(OH) The prepared TiO The average crystallite size and zeta potential of the prepared TiO The crystallography and structural transformations of: the 2  Rutile containing solid waste tailings from Gabal Gattar ore material in Egypt was successfully processed for both economic and environmental reasons. These were upgraded to increase their Ti-content to 79% TiO This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors None.