This paper presents a new environmentally sustainable technology for chemical recycling of PVC waste. The new technology transforms PVC waste into completely new chemical products/raw materials. The process is based on a combined thermal and chemical degradation of PVC in a reactor. In the reactor, the chlorine from the PVC reacts with fillers producing calcium chloride. The metal stabilisers (lead, cadmium, zinc and/or barium) are converted to metal chlorides. Exploiting the influence of pH, temperature, liquid to solid ratio and comminution on the metal solubility, metals and calcium chloride are sequentially extracted from the reaction product. This occurs in a downstream multi-stage extraction-filtration procedure. The products from the process are: (1) calcium chloride, which satisfies the specifications as thaw-salt, (2) lead (metal) product, which may be further purified and re-used, (3) coke and (4) organic condensate, which may be used as energy resources for the process. This paper presents the basis of the technology in terms of reaction and separation principles, selected process equipment and process design. Further the economy of the process, environmental issues and product purities/applications are addressed.The estimated annual PVC world production is at present more than 22 million tonnes. In addition to the PVC homopolymer, PVC products consist of metal stabilisers, plasticisers and fillers. Most of the PVC production waste is recycled mechanically. In Denmark around 10–15% of the collected post-consumed PVC waste can be recycled mechanically. The main fraction of collected PVC waste is disposed in landfills. The Danish EPA has characterised PVC waste as non-combustible waste that should be avoided in incinerators. This results in large amounts of PVC waste that needs to be disposed in landfills. The process investigated in this work deals with a complement to mechanical recycling, often named chemical or feedstock recycling. By exploiting the thermal instability of the PVC molecules at elevated temperature, new components are formed, and these may be used as raw materials in other applications. Hence waste is transformed into new products. The most important techniques for chemical recycling of PVC waste streams are hydrogenation, pyrolysis, gasification and incineration NKT Research Center A/S (NRC) has developed an environmentally sustainable process for the treatment of PVC waste. The process removes chlorine, plasticisers and metal stabilisers (lead, cadmium, zinc etc.) from the PVC waste and transforms the PVC waste into new products. The process developed at NRC ( The process consists of units for pre-treatment, reactor treatment and a downstream separation process for separation and purification of products ( Collected PVC waste may be contaminated with light plastics (such as polyethylene and polypropylene), metals (iron, aluminium and copper), concrete, soil and other components. These fractions may be removed by pre-treatment before the PVC waste is fed to the reactor. The existing pre-treatment plant consists of a shredder, 2-stage sink-float equipment for removal of light plastics, a herd for removal of non-ferrous metals and a magnetic separator for removal of iron. The herd is a wet shaking table. The metals (aluminium, copper) leave the pre-treatment as a metal concentrate. The pre-treatment reduces the contamination of the PVC material, and thereby the purity of the process products is increased. It is desired to keep out high amounts of other plastics from the reactor process. However, other plastics can be accepted in the reactor process in lower amounts. A 10–15 % “light plastic“ content of the PVC-feed stream to the reactor has been rutinely processed. The pyrolysis of commercial PVC has been studied at atmospheric conditions in the temperature range of 270–500°C The new process developed in this work, is based on a thermal degradation of the PVC followed by chemical conversion between the hydrogen chloride, fillers and metal stabilisers. The evolved hydrogen chloride reacts with the fillers (lime or limestone) from the PVC waste. According to reactions (2) and (3) the new products are calcium chloride, water and carbon dioxide: The metal stabilisers (lead, cadmium, zinc and/or barium) are converted to metal chlorides according to the following reactions: In the NRC process, the thermal degradation of the PVC waste takes place in a reactor at low pressure (2–3 bar) and at moderate temperature (maximum 375°C). If the PVC waste to be treated is lean in fillers, lime or limestone may be added to the reactor to neutralise the formed hydrogen chloride. After reaction (3) main products are formed: (1) a solid coke which is rich in metal and chlorine in the form of calcium chloride, (2) a condensate which consists of an aqueous phase and an organic phase, and (3) a gas phase consisting mainly of carbon dioxide and light hydrocarbons. Calcium chloride and metal chlorides are separated from the coke in a downstream separation procedure. The organic condensate consists mainly of degraded plasticisers and organic material originating from the PVC. This condensate may be used as fuel for the process. The aqueous condensate is rich in hydrogen chloride, and is re-used in the downstream separation procedure. The light gases are released after absorption of small amounts of hydrogen chloride in water. The concentration of halogenated hydrocarbons is around 12 μg/l in the gas phase. In the downstream separation process, calcium chloride and metal chlorides are extracted sequentially from the coke in a multi-stage extraction-filtration procedure. The separation of calcium chloride and metal chlorides is based on differences in solubility between these components. Calcium chloride is highly soluble in water, but the metal chlorides are soluble in water under specific conditions only. Important parameters for the solubility of metals in water are: pH, temperature, residence time, concentration of chlorine (which depends on the material in question and on the liquid to solid ratio), amount and type of solvent and particle size This work has focused on the treatment of PVC building waste mixtures consisting of flooring material, cables, windows, packaging, artificial leather, roofing material etc. In addition to the mixed building waste, pure fractions of cables, unplasticised cable trays and old (10–30 years) flooring PVC material have been processed. The materials are listed in Reactor experiments have been done in the laboratory scale reactor “Reactor 2” (4 litres) and in the reactor of semi-technical scale, “Reactor 3” (50 litres). The process currently operates as a batch process, in which Reactors 2 and 3 may operate with 1 kg and 10–15 kg PVC respectively. The conditions of operation are listed in The distribution of the reaction products is illustrated in Calcium chloride and metals are sequentially extracted from the coke product in the multi-stage extraction-filtration procedure. After dry comminution of the coke, the metals are precipitated in water and calcium chloride is extracted from the coke. The calcium chloride filtrate is concentrated to a desired purity by means of evaporation. The coke product is further treated to extract the metals. The metals are extracted from the coke at acidic conditions. The metal concentrate is precipitated and filtered. The final coke product is now lean in chlorine and metals. The concentration of lead and chlorine in the coke product from treatment of mixed building waste is 0.08 and 0.2–0.3 wt% respectively. This satisfies the specifications of fuel in a cement kiln. The coke product and organic condensate have the energy values of 35 and 40 MJ/kg. Both these products may be used as fuel for the process. The precipitated metal product consists of around 60 wt% of lead. This product can be sold and further re-used. No toxic dioxins have been found in the products. The recovery of final products and the concentration of metals and chlorine are given in Based on a study for treatment of 15,000 tons/year PVC building waste, the energy content in the organic condensate covers the energy consumed by the reactor process and by the evaporation of calcium chloride to 36 wt%. Electricity of 70 kWh/ton PVC is used in the pre-treatment and in the downstream separation system. Note that the coke product also may be used as process fuel. The estimated process cost excluding product values is around 50% of the price for incineration of PVC waste in Denmark. A new process has been developed for the treatment of PVC building waste. The process has been operated with feed mixtures consisting of flooring material, cables, cable pipes and trays, roofing, artificial leather, packaging, windows and drainage pipes. The final products are: (1) calcium chloride product, (2) metal concentrate, (3) organic condensate and (4) coke product. These products can be re-used for other purposes; for example calcium chloride may be used as thaw salt, coke and organic condensate as energy-rich fuel and lead concentrate for production of “new” lead metal. The process can be used as a complement to mechanical recycling, and it can treat a wide range of PVC building products with varying composition. Compared to incineration the environmental advantages of the process are: a substantial reduction of the amount of slag and flue gas cleaning products for landfill; a reduction in the total amount of waste to around 2 wt% of the initial amount. No toxic dioxins have been detected in the process products. The concentration of halogenated hydrocarbons in gas and in the liquid organic product is low. Further, the process is characterised by low consumption of chemicals and energy. A pilot plant for the treatment of 200 tonnes/year of PVC waste is currently being established. The process will be tested with other halogen containing materials, for example with electronic waste. Funding for the work has been granted by the Danish Environmental Protection Agency, the European Council of Vinyl Manufacturers (ECVM) and Norsk Hydro.