Purpose of review
                  This article reviews current best practice for the diagnosis and treatment of comminuted patellar fractures.
               
                  Recent findings
                  Patellar fractures make up about 1% of all fractures. As a rule, fractures of the patella are caused by direct trauma to the knee. A transverse fracture is the most common fracture type.
                  Open reduction and internal fixation is the treatment of choice for the majority of displaced patellar fractures. Treatment must achieve anatomic reduction of the articular surface and reestablish the continuity of the extensor mechanism. Tension-band wiring, interfragmentary screw fixation and a combination of cerclage wiring and screw fixation are the most accepted techniques for stabilisation. Partial or total patellectomy is generally indicated when the patella is so severely comminuted that an accurate reduction and reconstruction of the retropatellar joint surface cannot be achieved.
               
                  Summary
                  Different methods of stabilisation for patellar fractures are used, depending mainly on the fracture pattern and the amount of displacement. The aims of operative treatment are basically accurate reduction and stable fixation that allows early mobilisation.Lag srew+tension-band wire or cerclage Transosseous suture+cerclage Non-displaced Displaced, simple-multifragmentary Non-operative Transverse lag screw+cerclage Circumferential cerclage+tension band + Third fragment Four or more fragments Comminuted fracture K-wire+tension-band wire Lag screw or K-wire+tension-band wire K-wires, screws+tension-band Partial or total patellectomy The patella is the largest sesamoid bone of the human skeleton. It is integrated into the extensor apparatus and with its articular surface, it is also a component of the patellofemoral joint. The patella serves as the fulcrum for the extensor mechanism between the quadriceps tendon and the patellar tendon. Forces transmitted across the femoropatellar joint can reach up to three to seven times body weight. Patellar fractures represent 0.5–1.5% of all skeletal injuries. There are different classification systems for patellar fractures: based on the trauma mechanism in direct or indirect injuries, on the grade of displacement in displaced or non-displaced fractures and on the basis of the configuration of the fracture lines in transverse, vertical, marginal, osteochondral or comminuted fractures. These systems are too imprecise for scientific use. The OTA classification, similarly to the AO classification, extra-articular, extensor mechanism disrupted, partial articular, extensor mechanism intact, for example, often vertical fractures, complete articular, disrupted extensor mechanism. The classification of Speck and Regazzoni The medical history is the first step of the diagnostic work-up. Information on the mechanism of trauma helps for estimation of the severity of injury and the fracture pattern. The activity level of the patient and his/her current medical problems are also important for decision making on further treatment. The clinical examination should include an inspection of the whole extremity. Clinical signs of a patellar fracture are swelling and pain in the knee joint. Fracture blisters, skin lacerations, abrasions or contusions are signs of direct trauma and should be documented. Wounds should be checked to confirm whether the fracture is open or closed. In displaced patellar fractures, a defect zone between the fragments may be palpable. Often there is a hemarthrosis of the knee. Flexion and extension in the knee joint is limited and painful. Active extension and lifting of the leg is ususally impossible. However, the ability to extend the knee does not rule out a patellar fracture, because the medial and lateral retinacula may be still intact. For radiographic examinations, a standard X-ray of the knee in two planes as well as a 30° tangential view of the patella should be performed. In the anteroposterior (AP) view, the patella is normally centred on the medullary axis of the femur. In the lateral view, the patellar fracture is best visible: displacement, intra-articular involvement and degree of comminution can be assessed. Vertical patellar fractures are best seen on the axial view. With the Insall Evaluation of the true degree of damage of the patellar fracture in the conventional radiographic examinations is not always possible due to the cancellous bone structure of the patella. An additional CT-scan is seldom necessary. However, a CT-scan can be helpful for the evaluation of articular incongruity in cases of non-union, malunion and patellofemoral alignment disorders. Special attention should be paid to bipartite or tripartite patellae, which occur due to a lack of convergence of the bone during growth. Bipartite and tripartite patellae have characteristic signs on the radiographs, with rounded, sclerotic lines in contrast to the sharply edged lines of a fractured patella. For differentiation it can be helpful to compare the radiographs with the contralateral side. Magnet resonance imaging is only recommended in special cases, for example in stress fractures. Differential diagnoses for patellar fractures are contusion of the knee, tendon ruptures (rupture of the quadriceps tendon or the patellar ligament), injuries of the capsular ligament of the knee and patellar dislocation or growth abnormalities. Operative management is the treatment of choice for the majority of patellar fractures, especially those with displacement and intra-articular involvement. The AO recommends the following treatment method, depending on the fracture type Displacement of more than 3 Contraindications and relative contraindications for surgical treatment include non-displaced or minimally displaced stable fractures. These fractures can be treated non-operatively. Contused or injured skin areas, which preclude a safe surgical approach to the fracture, active infection on the extremity or medical conditions of the patient, which do not permit safe surgical intervention, are contraindications. Open fractures of the patella are treated as other open joint injuries. Open fractures are surgical emergencies; other lesions are best treated as soon as possible, depending on the condition of the local soft tissues. The aim of the therapy is an anatomic reduction and stable fixation of the fracture, which allows early mobilisation. Stable fractures without dislocation or minimally displaced stable fractures can be treated conservatively. We prefer immobilisation in a semicircular plaster cast, with the knee extended. In longitudinal fractures, full weight bearing is allowed. In transverse fractures, in the first 4 or 6 weeks, only half weight bearing is allowed because of the risk of secondary loss of reduction. Physiotherapy should be performed out of the plaster cast. Active and passive knee mobilisation are limited in the beginning up to 60° of flexion, later on up to 90° of flexion. After 6 weeks, increased weight bearing and free knee motion are allowed. The immobilisation in the plaster cast should be not longer than 6 weeks. The patient is positioned supine on a radiolucent operation table. To avoid external rotation of the leg, a cushion is used under the ipsilateral hip. With cushioning below the lower leg, a knee flexion of 30–40° is achieved. This is the optimal position for Kirschner-wire drilling. A tourniquet can be placed high around the involved thigh and inflated to about 300 The incision can either be longitudinal or transverse. We prefer the longitudinal incision over the patella, because, if necessary, it can be enlarged distally and proximally and does not interfere in case of later revision. For the best cosmetic result, the transverse incision is preferable because it lies within the Langer's lines. However, one should consider that this approach may injure the infrapatellar branch of the saphenous nerve. Care should also be taken of the vessels of the geniculate arteries, and an en-bloc preparation of the fasciocutaneous layers under the bursa prepatellaris should follow. Under direct vision, an anatomical reconstruction is performed with the aid of one or several bone reduction forceps. By reducing smaller fracture fragments to each other, we convert a complex fracture pattern into a simple one. The most common osteosynthesis technique is tension-band wiring. The principle of this technique is to transform distraction forces into compression forces. Two different techniques of tension-band wiring are in use: the outside-in technique and the inside-out technique. In the outside-in technique, the fracture is first reduced and then fixed with two Kirschner wires (1.6 Before wound closure, the tourniquet is deflated and haemostasis is achieved with electrocoagulation. A suction drain is placed into the knee joint and closure of the wound can be performed in layers. First, closure of the prepatellar bursa with 2–0 resorbable sutures is performed. Then the subcutaneous tissues are closured with simple inverted 2–0 resorbable sutures, and finally skin closure is performed. With the tension-band wiring technique even comminuted fractures can be reduced and stabilised. In vertical patellar fractures, transverse lag screw fixation in combination with a cerclage wire is a sufficient fixation technique (see Another variation of the tension band technique in combination with screws is the use of 4.0 Burvant et al. Fortis et al. Osteochondral fragments can be fixed with biodegradable pins. There are implants of polyglycolic acid (PGA), polydioxanone (PDS) or polylactic acid (PLA). These implants are only recommended for adaptation of unloaded fragments and not in areas of high mechanical stress. Their advantage is that implant removal is not necessary. A new stabilisation technique for comminuted patellar fractures is described by Yammis et al. With a comminuted patellar fracture, a partial patellectomy may be necessary if adequate anatomic reduction of the displaced fragments is not possible. Whenever possible, partial patellectomy is preferred to total patellectomy because it keeps the fulcrum function of the patella intact. A comminuted upper or lower pole or a comminuted zone in the middle of the patella can be managed by removing the small fragments. Non-resorbable transosseous sutures have to be used after resection of the upper pole for fixation of the quadriceps tendon and after lower pole resection for fixation of the patellar tendon, securing the suture with a tension-band wire. A tilt of the remaining patella should be avoided in all cases. In cases of severe comminution and extended cartilage damage a patellectomy may be the only option. However, one should be aware that this always means a decrease in muscle strength of the quadriceps muscle. All bony fragments and the damaged tissue should be removed leaving as much extensor apparatus as possible. If the defect zone is more than 4 The postoperative treatment depends on the fracture type and the stability of surgical fixation. In patients with stable fractures, knee motion exercises begin immediately. Knee flexion is most important for transforming distraction forces into compression forces, and this supports bone healing. Continuous passive motion (CPM) is helpful in the early days after surgery. Drains are removed on the second postoperative day or depending on the amount of wound drainage. The patient begins with isometric exercises and out of bed mobilisation with the help of a physiotherapist. For protection of the osteosynthesis, we prefer mobilisation with a semicircular plaster cast. Normally, full weight bearing is allowed. Walking exercises begin with partial weight bearing of 15–20 Feared complications are disturbed wound healing and deep infection. Careful soft tissue debridement, spared resection and secondary wound closure are recommended to reduce wound healing disturbances. In cases of larger skin defects, split skin grafting or gastrocnemius rotation flaps covered with split skin grafts may be necessary. Infection should be treated aggressively with radical debridement with drainage and with antibiotics. Bowing of the Kirschner wires or failure of the figure-zero or figure-of-eight fashion wire may happen in patients who perform unlimited and aggressive early active mobilisation. When fracture displacement occurs in relation to the above, re-osteosynthesis is mandatory. Sometimes, rupture of the wire is discovered later on. There is no need for intervention when the patellar fracture is already healed. Another possible complication after surgical treatment of patellar fractures is loss of fixation and reduction. If there is a loss of fixation without loss of reduction, the leg should temporarily be immobilised. If there are signs of loss of fixation and reduction, a revision of internal fixation should be performed. Delayed union and non-union are usually the result of a failure of fixation or inadequate initial reduction. This can be avoided by anatomical reduction and good fixation techniques during primary surgery as well as close postoperative follow-up. If there is a delayed union, it can be treated with repeated cerclage-wire techniques. Significant mal-unions may require revision osteosynthesis or patellectomy. Klassen and Trousdale Especially in comminuted fractures, arthrofibrosis and loss of knee function are relatively common complications. An aggressive and persistent physical therapy regimen is necessary to avoid these complications or to treat them. For arthrofibrosis, an arthroscopic debridement may be beneficial. Post-traumatic osteoarthrosis is the consequence of traumatic cartilage damage or suboptimal surgery with remaining steps or gaps. Nevertheless, an unsatisfactory outcome is also possible when the radiographic examination shows an anatomical healing. As with other articular lesions, there is evidence that optimal reduction will give the best long-time results. Steps and gaps in the articular surface will be responsible for knee complaints such as swelling, pain and diminution of movement.