The principles of meat preservation are mainly associated with preventing or delaying microbial spoilage and chemical action, and avoiding as far as possible weight loss and any change in taste or texture. Methods of preservation are based on control by low or high temperature, reducing available water (water activity), or by the application of chemical additives. In developed countries the shelf-life of meat and meat products is, in the main, controlled by refrigeration or by a combination of refrigeration and other methods of preservation, such as modified-atmosphere packaging, curing or high pressure. Whereas other techniques result in some changes to color, taste, and texture, refrigeration and high pressure are distinct in that their effect on appearance and taste is minimal. ( Refrigerated meats are generally classified as chilled or frozen. However, there may be several steps involved in reducing a hot product to chill or frozen storage temperature, with several additional links before final consumption. The design and operation of equipment to perform these functions require an understanding of the thermal properties of foods and an appreciation of their complexity and that of prevailing legislation. Immediately after heat treatment or cooking, it will be necessary to commence cooling under controlled conditions. Filtered ambient air or mains water are suitable media for cooling the product temperature to about 35°C. Naturally, the latter would only be used where there is a hermetically sealed skin packaging. These represent cheaper energy sources than mechanical refrigeration or expendable refrigerants, which are required for achieving the statutory temperatures, which lie below 10°C. The rate of evaporation of moisture from an exposed surface is a function of the temperature difference between the surface and the air and is influenced, to a lesser extent, by its relative humidity. The air velocity over the surface has a marked effect, at least in the initial stages of cooling. A similar set of conditions prevails if the cooling medium is a gas other than air, e.g., carbon dioxide or nitrogen. By lowering the applied temperature and increasing the velocity, the initially high rate of evaporation is offset by a reduced surface cooling time. This results, overall, in reduced weight loss. Hence different modes of refrigerated chilling may be employed: Rapid chilling in which chilling is applied at the maximum rate possible (without freezing the surface of the product) with the objective of minimizing evaporative loss. Where air is the cooling medium, the applied temperature would be below 0 Conventional chilling at a rate sufficient to meet production requirements without undue regard to evaporative weight loss. In this case the applied temperature and velocity would be greater than 0 In exceptional circumstances, the product may be frozen from an initial temperature of about 35 The heat capacity of foods containing water is virtually halved once the temperature is reduced below −2.0 The low-temperature store will be designed to accommodate the maximum quantity of a product within a given volume. The store will maintain a temperature of about 1 In theory there should be few problems in the storage or transport of chilled or frozen products, especially in the case of meat or meat-based products, since: Cooling, chilling and, where applicable, freezing and tempering have been completed so that refrigerated transport equipment has merely to insulate the product from sources of ambient heat The product is insulated by primary and secondary packaging There is no respiratory heat load such as occurs with some fruits and vegetables. With the introduction of the European Community (EC) Food Hygiene Regulations, the temperature of chilled foods in the EC has to be kept at or below 5 Similar conditions apply to frozen foods, but these are more likely to be cartoned in opaque material with entrapped air, which acts as an insulator. It is also a fact that it is much more difficult to check and hence legislate on the temperature of frozen foods. As with retail display cabinets, domestic refrigerators have minimal reserve capacity for chilling, freezing, or tempering. Therefore the addition of substantial amounts of a product which is above the set storage temperature will affect that of the existing contents. An awareness of the necessity to maintain the cold chain from the retailer to domestic refrigerator is paramount. While it has been demonstrated that meat which has been repeatedly frozen and thawed under controlled conditions suffers minimal deterioration, such a practice cannot be recommended wherever precise control cannot be guaranteed. The first priority in plant selection is to quantify the refrigeration duty. To do so requires a knowledge of the thermal properties of the product under consideration, such as: (1) initial and final temperatures; (2) heat capacity above and below freezing; (3) latent heat of freezing; and (4) effective chilling or freezing time between specified initial and final temperatures. ( Recognition has to be taken of the fact that the maximum rate of product heat output (which occurs in the early stage of chilling or freezing) may be two or three times the average. To the load is added the heat due to: (1) leakage through insulation into the refrigerated space; (2) leakage of ambient air through door openings; (3) electrical input such as lights, fans, or fork-lift trucks; (4) metabolic heat from personnel. Having estimated the total refrigeration load, a decision is taken on the type of refrigeration equipment to be installed. In the majority of cases this will be mechanical refrigeration using ammonia or a fluorocarbon as the refrigerant. Where production is seasonal, it may be more economical to use an expendable refrigerant such as liquid nitrogen or carbon dioxide. Freezing Salting as a means of meat preservation has been practiced for 3000 years and contamination of salt by potassium nitrate probably led to the development of modern cured meats, since it led to characteristic and acceptable effects on color and flavor. Thus, although heavily salted products are not now available, having been supplanted by more acceptable preservation procedures, cured pork and to some extent poultry, beef, and fish products have established niches in the marketplace, though the relatively low levels of salt now present (usually < To cure meat, salt (sodium chloride) and nitrite must be present and other ingredients may be used during processing to accelerate curing, stabilize color (e.g., ascorbic acid), modify flavor (e.g., sugars) and texture, and reduce shrinkage (e.g., polyphosphates). Several methods may be used to incorporate the curing ingredients into the meat, the object being to achieve uniform distribution. In comminuted products, such as sausages, the cure ingredients (in the dry form or as a concentrated solution) are incorporated into the product during mixing or comminution. For whole sides or muscles the oldest technique is dry-curing. Here, the dry-curing agents (salts) were rubbed over the surface of the meat, the meat then being placed on a shelf or in a box to cure. For large muscles or cuts the process needed to be repeated several times and it may have taken up to 80 days to get uniform distribution in, for example, the top of the hind leg. Another method which is still practiced for a few specialty products involves immersing the cuts or sides in concentrated brine, usually at 3–7 The curing procedure can be considerably shortened by injection of brine into the meat to achieve rapid, uniform distribution. Three such methods are: (1) artery pumping, in which brine is pumped directly into the intact vascular system; (2) stitch pumping, in which brine is injected (through a hollow needle) into various parts of the meat, especially the thickest parts and those near to joints; and (3) multiple injection, in which brine is injected simultaneously and automatically through a series of hollow needles which have a number of evenly spaced holes along their length. Another modern method is the ‘tumbling’ or ‘massaging’ of meat pieces in rotating drums. In the presence of about 0–6% of their weight of salt the physical interactions of the meat pieces draw out salt-soluble protein which, on subsequent heating, gels to bind the pieces together in ‘reformed’ hams. Tumbling can shorten the curing period to 24 A typical traditional brine contains 25–30% sodium chloride and 3–4% sodium or potassium nitrate and specific salt-tolerant bacteria capable of reducing the nitrate to nitrite. In modern cures, nitrite may be added directly at a concentration of 200 That dehydration can preserve meat has been known for over 5000 years and simple drying procedures are still used today in some parts of the world. In these processes, strips of lean meat are exposed to the sun, e.g. pemmican manufactured by North American Indians, or a combination of light salting and drying is used as in the preparation of charqui (South America) or biltong (South Africa). ( Hot-air drying has been used in the past to prepare dehydrated meat for the armed forces, but has not been manufactured successfully for domestic consumption. Due to case hardening, raw meat cannot be successfully dehydrated and the need for a high surface-area-to-volume ratio has limited its use to cooked, minced meat. A typical procedure involves cooking the meat in thin slices, mincing (0.3–0.8 Dehydrated meats need to be rehydrated prior to consumption and, to address this step, with all its attendant problems, and evolve a technology suitable for developing countries, intermediate-moisture meats have been formulated. With intermediate-moisture foods the object is to lower the water activity to a level at which bacteria will not grow, but without lowering the water content to a point where the product becomes unpalatable. This involves mixing the meat with suitable humectants, such as sugars, salts, polyols, and amino acids, to lower the water activity to about 0.85 whilst keeping the moisture content at 20–50%. Under these conditions bacteria will be inhibited, but molds and yeasts may proliferate and thus an antimycotic such as sorbate or propionate is often incorporated at a concentration of 0.1–0.3%. ( For minced products, such as semimoist pet foods and Chinese pork, the equilibration is easily achieved by batch-mixing. In the production of semimoist pet food, the mixture is subsequently shaped and formed in a cooker-extruder. For whole meats two techniques are available: (1) desorption processing, in which the meat pieces are soaked in an infusing solution of high osmotic pressure so that, after equilibration, the meat has the desired water activity (equilibration is normally aided by heating, which has the additional benefit of inactivating enzymes); and (2) absorption processing, in which freeze-dried meat is equilibrated with the infusing solution to the appropriate water activity. Though this latter method allows close control of water activity, the cost is prohibitive for all but the most specialized uses (e.g., space flights). Although temperature reduction and moisture control are the most commercially important methods of meat preservation, other techniques may have important niches in the marketplace. For example, fermented meat products, in which specific bacteria, such as selected The use of chemical preservatives in meat is not widely practiced (except for cured/fermented products), but sulfur dioxide is permitted in some countries for certain products. Thus ‘English’-style sausages may contain up to 450 High-temperature preservation (canning) of meat and meat products is also well established and, although certain cured products may only require a pasteurization regime, others are heated under the more severe regimes necessary for low-acid foods. ( In the 1940s, ionizing radiation was advocated as a method of meat preservation and after very extensive trials it was permitted in most countries under certain conditions. Thus, in 1991 in the EC pasteurizing doses of γ-rays up to 5 The physical dimensions of postrigor meat are unaffected by both chilling and freezing but fluid (drip) is exuded from both chilled and frozen products. The amount expressed is far greater in frozen-thawed meat and some evidence suggests the amount increases as the freezing rate decreases. In frozen meat, bacterial growth usually ceases, but yeasts and molds may continue to grow down to about −5 Chemical changes take place during storage of fresh meat and some, such as those due to enzymatic proteolysis, may be favorable, leading as they do to increased tenderness. The major deteriorative changes are oxidative in nature, leading to the formation of the undesirable brown methemoproteins and rancidity. The formation of methemoproteins is important in both chilled and frozen meat but lipid oxidation leading to rancidity is usually only important in frozen meats. This oxidation is responsible for recommending maximum shelf-lives of 4 months for pork and poultry and 6 months for beef and lamb at −18 Nitrite is essential for the development of the pink-red color of cured meats and has the further important attribute of being a very effective inhibitor of Hot-air-dried meats are invariably shriveled and are virtually impossible to rehydrate to typical ‘full- moisture’ products. Freeze-dried meats retain the shape and color of the original meat pieces and the porous structure does rehydrate more satisfactorily than hot-air-dried products. Intermediate-moisture meats have the physical characteristics of their fresh-meat counterparts. Unless partial rehydration inadvertently occurs, dehydrated meats are not susceptible to microbial spoilage and can be kept for several weeks at elevated temperatures. The factors limiting their shelf-life are chemical in nature, mainly lipid (or sorbate) oxidation, and/or nonenzymatic browning. With freeze-dried meats, nonenzymatic browning involving glucose and glucose-6-phosphate (with protein) occurs, as also, in the presence of oxygen, does oxidation of the hemoproteins to yellow bile pigments. Some fat oxidation due to residual lipolytic activity may also occur. In intermediate-moisture meats, browning involving reactions between sorbate or lipid oxidation products and protein occurs, as also does oxidation of the hemoproteins. However, a reaction occurring in intermediate-moisture meats, but not fully dried meats, is hydrolytic degradation of collagen. Anaerobic storage of intermediate-moisture meats inhibits all these reactions, except for the breakdown (hydrolysis) of collagen. ( 