A series of ligands with triazole ring were synthesized via a facile, safe, high yielding Cu(I)-catalysed click reaction, which was used for the first time to recovery Pd(II) from HNO3 medium, wherein ligands 2-[1-(Pyridin-2-ylmethyl)-1H-1,2,3-triazol-4-yl]pyridine (Tz1) and 1,1′-Bis(pyridin-2-ylmethyl)-1H,1′H-4,4′-bi-1,2,3-triazole (Tz2) had excellent extraction efficiency and selectivity. Extraction performance of such two ligands in ionic liquid vs. a classical solvent (chloroform) was compared. Their extraction ability in ionic liquid was four times better than that in chloroform. The mechanism of extraction was investigated by exploring the effects of different parameters such as HNO3, NaNO3 and ligand concentrations on extraction efficiency. It revealed the nature of the extracted species was [Pd(NO3)2·Tz)] confirmed by Electrospray Ionization Mass Spectrometry data. The coordination properties between palladium and the ligand were examined by the structure-activity relationship and the Fourier transform infrared spectra. More than 95% of palladium could be obtained after three times stripping. The Tz/ionic liquid system showed remarkable separation efficiency towards palladium in a simulated mixed metal solution.Palladium is one of the platinum group metals, which occurs in very small concentration in the earth's crust (~10 Separation and recovery of palladium from high-level radioactive waste liquor is of great significance for saving raw materials and solving some problems in the management of high-level radioactive waste liquor ( The target metal palladium is soft acids, its selective extraction can be realized with soft donor based extractants containing N/S atoms ( Nowadays, efficient green extraction systems emerged and have gained a long-run development. A study on solvent extraction of palladium from ionic liquids has been reported ( In this present work, a series of ligands with triazole ring were synthesized and used to extract Pd(II) from HNO All chemicals used in the present study were analytical grade. Arsenazo(III), Li[NTf Syntheses of 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium bromide ([C Syntheses of ligand was conducted as described in the previous report ( A simulated mixed metal solution containing various metal ions [Pd(NO An organic phase was prepared by dissolving Tz in [C The 1 mL loaded organic phase after extraction of the metal solution was mixed with 4 mL 0.01 mol/L nitric acid or acidic thiourea solution. The mixture was shaken at 298 ± 1 K on a thermostat oscillator for 1 h. Then the aqueous solution was separated from the organic phase and the metal concentrations were quantified to evaluate the stripping ratio, The organic phase of 0.5 mL was mixed with a 5 mL solution of mixture metal and shaken on a shaker (at 500 rpm), at 298 K for 1 h to attain equilibrium. The mixture was then centrifuged for 5 min to promote phase separation. After each phase was separated, the concentration of metal in the aqueous phase was determined by ICP-AES, which then allowed calculation of the distribution coefficient ( In order to obtain the information of palladium extraction equilibrium, the extraction kinetics of Pd To compare the extraction efficiency of Tz in ionic liquid and in chloroform, the extraction equilibrium of palladium with Tz In order to compare the extraction capability of different ligand in ILs, the extraction equilibrium of Pd To assess the partitioning behavior of palladium into IL or chloroform, the extraction equilibrium of Pd In order to obtain whether nitrate ion is involved in the extraction process, the effect of nitrate concentration on the distribution coefficient of palladium was analyzed when the concentration of nitrate was changed by adjusting the concentration of sodium nitrate in aqueous phase (as shown in To determine the fundamental stoichimoetry of the Pd After extracting palladium with TZ According to previous literature, there are several nitrate complexes, such as [Pd(NO In order to confirm if the anion-exchange exist, the effect of the concentration of [NTf In view of the above observations, the extraction of Pd(II) using Tz can be represented by the following equations. In the case of CHCl The coordination properties of palladium with the ligands were determined by infrared spectroscopy ( In the case with Tz Based on the IR data and the structure-activity relationship, it is presumed that palladium is mainly coordinated with the nitrogen atom of the triazole ring or pyridine ring to form a five-membered ring or a six-membered ring complex. The coordination ability of triazole ring is stronger than that of pyridine ring, for example the pyridine rings in Tz The effect of temperature on the extraction of Pd Stripping is an important feature for evaluating an extraction system. The efficiency of Pd The remarkable selectivity of the Tz A solvent extraction system based on combination of polydentate pyridyl-1,2,3-triazole ligand and [C We gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the