We have developed a new method of extracorporeal lithotripsy that uses focused, sinusoidal ultrasound bursts rather than shock waves to rapidly disintegrate stones into small fragments. The purpose of this study was to 1) determine the feasibility of stone fragmentation with burst wave lithotripsy Treatments were performed in 55-60 kg pigs (n=6). Struvite and calcium oxalate monohydrate stones 5 to 10 mm were inserted into the bladder. A 200 kHz focused ultrasound transducer was acoustically coupled to the bladder. The focus was aligned with the stone using an in-line US imaging probe. Treatment was administered under US imaging and cystoscopic surveillance, applying bursts with pressure amplitude (p) of 4.9 to 5.5 MPa for durations between 1.5 to 23 minutes. Stone fragments were removed for measurement after exposure. In a separate study, injury was evaluated by exposing kidneys without stones to burst waves. The transducer focus was aligned with the kidney collecting system in either the upper or lower pole, and treatment was administered for a set duration (10 or 25 minutes). The exposure parameters were the same as those used to treat stones, but with pressures between p = 4.9 to 6.5 MPa. Kidneys were subsequently perfusion-fixed with glutaraldehyde for gross and histological sectioning for injury analysis. During exposure of stones, cystoscopy showed small fragments breaking off from the stone surface. All stones treated were at least partially fragmented, with 3 of 6 stones reduced to fragments < 3 mm. Kidneys exposed to the same parameters and pressure levels as those used to treat stones showed no gross thermal or mechanical injury. Exposures at higher pressure amplitude (6.5 MPa) resulted in localized subcapsular hematoma and parenchymal hemorrhage. The occurrence and location of injury was coincident with well-defined echogenicities observed with US imaging feedback during treatment, indicating the presence of cavitation. The results indicate that burst wave lithotripsy can effectively fragment stones with exposures that do not cause significant tissue injury. Injury observed at high power levels may result from cavitation, which could be identified with real-time US imaging. Such feedback may be useful to monitor and prevent tissue injury during treatment.