Indium and zinc extraction from an indium-bearing zinc residue were investigated using sphalerite concentrate as a reductant in sulfuric acid medium. The effects of amount of sphalerite concentrate, sulfuric acid concentration, particle size, leaching time as well as temperature were discussed. The results showed that high indium and zinc extraction yield as well as high Fe2+/Fe3+ molar ratio could be obtained by reduction leaching of zinc residue with addition of sphalerite concentrate as a reductant. The optimal leaching condition was determined as 150g/L H2SO4, 0.95 times of theoretic amount of sphalerite concentrate for 4h at 90°C while using particles in the range of 74–58μm. The leaching efficiencies were 94.8% of indium, 96.1% of zinc and 92.8% of iron, respectively, and a Fe2+/Fe3+ molar ratio of 7.5 in the leach solution was also obtained. The process above was a viable method that effectively extracted zinc and indium and converted Fe3+ into Fe2+ at the same time.Indium is a valuable metal used in electrical industry extensively, which used mainly as indium tin oxide-films in liquid crystal displays ( In the leach residue, a significant portion of the zinc and iron is in the form of zinc ferrite (ZnFe Besides hot acid leaching process, the reductive leaching is an effective method to extract zinc and indium from zinc residue. It was reported that the reducing conditions in the leaching process resulted in enhanced dissolution rates of zinc from zinc ferrite ( The reduction leaching processes is an effective method for minerals containing oxide of iron, nickel, cobalt and manganese ( The indium-bearing zinc residue and sphalerite concentrate used in this work were obtained from Yunnan Province of China. The compositions of the materials were listed in A five-necked, round-bottomed flask (1 Zinc was analyzed by complex titration with EDTA. Indium concentration was determined by ICP with mass spectrometric detection (ICP-MS). The concentrations of ferrous ion were analyzed by complex titration with potassium dichromate. The concentrations of ferric ion were determined by finding the difference between overall iron and ferrous ion concentrations. X-ray powder diffraction was carried out using Rigaku D/MAX 2500v diffractometer (Japan). The potential of solution was measured by a platinum electrode and an Ag/AgCl electrode used as the reference electrode.  By dissolving of zinc ferrite, Fe By simultaneously dissolving ZnFe  It was shown in The results ( It was shown from  Reductive leach residue, obtained under conditions of the amount of sphalerite concentrate of 0.95, 150 A typical XRD pattern of reductive leach residue was given in The compositions of leachate, obtained under at same conditions, were presented in The indium-bearing zinc residue was leached by sulfuric acid solution in the presence of sphalerite concentrate for reduction of ferric ion. Experiments data indicated that under the conditions 150 This research was financially supported by the