OBJECTIVE
                  To evaluate the effects of the petroleum ether extract of Cissus quadrangularis on the proliferation rate of bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells, the differentiation of marrow mesenchymal stem cells into osteoblasts (osteoblastogenesis) and extracellular matrix calcification. This study also aimed to determine the additive effect of osteogenic media and Cissus quadrangularis on proliferation, differentiation and calcification.
               
                  METHODS
                  MSCs were cultured in media with or without Cissus quadrangularis for 4 weeks and were then stained for alkaline phosphatase. Extracellular matrix calcification was confirmed by Von Kossa staining. marrow mesenchymal stem cells cultures in control media and osteogenic media supplemented with Cissus quadrangularis extract (100, 200, 300 μg/mL) were also subjected to a cell proliferation assay (MTT).
               
                  RESULTS
                  Treatment with 100, 200 or 300 μg/mL petroleum ether extract of Cissus quadrangularis enhanced the differentiation of marrow mesenchymal stem cells into ALP-positive osteoblasts and increased extracellular matrix calcification. Treatment with 300 μg/mL petroleum ether extract of Cissus quadrangularis also enhanced the proliferation rate of the marrow mesenchymal stem cells. Cells grown in osteogenic media containing Cissus quadrangularis exhibited higher proliferation, differentiation and calcification rates than did control cells.
               
                  CONCLUSION
                  The results suggest that Cissus quadrangularis stimulates osteoblastogenesis and can be used as preventive/ alternative natural medicine for bone diseases such as osteoporosis.The repair of bone defects secondary to trauma, osteoporosis, osteomyelitis and nonunion fracture poses a significant problem for many clinicians, particularly orthopedic, head and neck, and plastic surgeons. Several strategies have been employed to promote the bone-healing process. Bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) have recently received widespread attention due to their potential use in tissue engineering applications. MSCs are defined as self-renewable, multipotent progenitor cells with the capacity to differentiate into several distinct mesenchymal lineages and are thus excellent candidates for tissue engineering. As a part of our continuing search for biologically active natural anti-osteoporotic agents, we have extensively evaluated the efficacy of petroleum ether extract of Phytochemical analyses of CQ have revealed high contents of ascorbic acid, carotene, anabolic steroidal substances and calcium. Although different uses of CQ have been investigated, the exact mechanism of its bone-healing properties has not been evaluated. Therefore, in the present study, we aimed to evaluate the effects of petroleum ether extract of CQ on bone marrow mesenchymal stem cell proliferation and osteogenic differentiation. The stems of Three-month-old male Wistar rats weighing approximately 225 g (n=30) were housed in the central animal research facility of Manipal University. The rats were housed in sanitized polypropylene cages containing sterile paddy husks as bedding. The animals were maintained under controlled temperature (23 ± 2°C) and humidity (50 ± 5%) conditions and a 12-hour light-dark cycle. All animals were allowed free access to distilled water and commercial diet. The studies were approved by the Institutional Animal Ethical Committee of Kasturba Medical College, Manipal, according to guidelines prescribed by the Committee for the Purpose of Control and Supervision of Experiments on Animals (CPCSEA), Government of India. Three male Wistar rats of the albino strain were anesthetized with ether. The tibia and femur bones were collected under sterile conditions and placed in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium (DMEM) supplemented with 0.2% antibiotics. The bones were cut at both ends, and the bone marrow was flushed with 5 mL of media. Bone marrow cells were collected separately from three different animal bones. The cells were mixed gently and filtered through a membrane filter to remove debris. The filtrate was centrifuged at 3,000 rpm for 5 min, and the cells were washed with DMEM and used to seed cultures. After three days, the floating cells were discarded; the media were changed every third day thereafter. These three cell lines were independently subjected to all of the assays in this project. The isolated bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells were cultured in 6-well Corning polystyrene cell culture plates (50,000 cells/well for staining purposes and 10,000 cells/well for the MTT assay), in two different culture media: basal medium (DMEM with 15% fetal bovine serum, 100 U/mL penicillin and 100 μg/mL streptomycin) and osteogenic medium (DMEM with 10% fetal bovine serum (Gibco), 1 μM dexamethasone (Sigma), 10 mM glycerol phosphate (Sigma), 0.05 mM ascorbic acid (Sigma), 100 U/mL penicillin and 100 μg/mL streptomycin (Gibco)). The cells were incubated at 37ºC in a 5% CO About 50,000 MSCs were plated in 6-well dishes. The MSCs were washed twice with PBS and fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde at 4ºC for 30 min. After fixation, cells were washed three times with distilled water and then air-dried for 10 min. The cells were then stained with ALP for 30 min with fresh naphthol AS-MX phosphatase solution (0.2 g/L) (Sigma) containing fast red violet B salt (0.42 g/L) (Sigma) in 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 0.9) (Sigma) at room temperature. ALP-positive cells were stained pink. Cells were rinsed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 30 min. The cells were incubated in 5% silver nitrate in the dark and then exposed to ultraviolet light for 1 hr. Cells were then washed with distilled water, treated with 2.5% sodium thiosulfate for 5 min, washed again with distilled water and counterstained with methyl green. The calcified extracellular matrix appeared as black nodules. The MSCs were seeded in four 96-well plates at a density of 1×10 The addition of 300 μg/mL petroleum ether extract of CQ to undifferentiated MSCs increased their proliferation rate significantly (by 2-fold) in comparison with that of cells grown in basal media alone ( MSCs grown in basal media (DMEM) did not differentiate into osteoblasts and did not show ALP activity even after 28 days ( However, our results show a dose-dependent increase in ALP activity in cells grown in osteogenic media with 100, 200 and 300 μg/mL of CQ extract ( MSCs grown in basal media alone did not show any signs of mineralization in the extracellular matrix ( Human bone is composed of a mineralized organic matrix and bone cells. Osteoblasts are active mature bone cells that synthesize the organic matrix and regulate the mineralization process. Osteogenesis begins with osteoblast formation and secretion of type I collagen, which makes up about 90% of the organic bone matrix, or the osteoid. Bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells are the source of bone-forming osteoblasts. Our results clearly show that the CQ plant extract enhances the proliferation and differentiation ability of MSCs into osteoblasts. ALP activity, the most widely recognized biomarker for osteoblast activity, The exact molecular mechanism involved in CQ-promoted osteogenesis remains to be explored. However, some evidence suggests that Wnt signaling may be involved. This pathway has been shown to play a significant role in the control of osteoblastogenesis and bone formation. Mutations in these signaling molecules are strongly associated with changes in bone mineral density and fractures. Loss-of-function mutations in LRP5 (low-density lipoprotein receptor–related protein) receptors cause osteoporosis-pseudoglioma syndrome, while gain-of-function mutations in the same group lead to high bone mass phenotypes. Using knockout and transgenic mouse models for Wnt pathway components, it has been established that this signaling pathway regulates many aspects of osteoblast physiology including commitment, differentiation, bone matrix formation/mineralization and apoptosis as well as its coupling with osteoclastogenesis and bone resorption. Our We sincerely thank Dr. Satyamoorthy, Director of Manipal Life Science Centre, Manipal, and Dr. Narga Nair, Head of Anatomy Department, KMC, Manipal, for their help and support. We thank Ms. Rekha Nayak for her technical help during this project.