In this experimental investigation aluminium hybrid metal matrix composites (MMCs) is fabricated through stir casting process by varying the Zirconium oxide (ZrO2) (2%, 4% and 6%) and keeping the percentage of graphite (C) as constant (3%). In this paper effect of weight percentage of reinforcement were investigated. Microstructure, microhardness and ultimate tensile strength were estimated for the different weight percentage of reinforcements. Microstrucutre reveals that the distribution of the reinforcement and non evident of the clustering of the reinforcements in the aluminium hybrid MMCs was due to the stirring effect. Microhardness records its highest value of 95.4 VHN for 6% of ZrO2 and minimum value of 76.8 VHN for 2% of ZrO2 and 3% of C. Higher tensile strength of 149 MPa is observed for the 6% of ZrO2 and 3% of C and lower tensile strength of 134 MPa for the 2% of ZrO2 and 3% of C.Aluminium alloys are one of the mainly preferred engineering materials for aerospace, automobile and mineral processing industries for adequate performing components. Aluminium metal matrix composites have grown its prominent attention over the years. This is mainly due it its light weight, enhanced mechanical properties, low coefficient of thermal expansion and better machinability Abdizadeh et al. Moraes et al. The literature reveals that the use of ZrO The matrix material used in this experimental work is AA6063. AA6063 is an intermediate strength alloy commonly designated as an architectural alloy. It is usually preferred in complicated extrusions. AA6063 is the most commonly used aluminum alloy and comes in various tempers. Zirconium oxide (ZrO Graphite (C) is one of the stable type of naturally occurring crystalline carbon. It is used widely as an engineering material for a diversity of applications. Applications such as journal and thrust bearings, vanes, and piston rings. It has both the properties of a non-metal and metal. It is flexible but not elastic, has a high electrical and thermal conductivity. Due to the nature of low coefficient of friction, outstanding thermal conductivity and resistance to corrosion, C will be utilized as soft reinforcement. Stir casting is the most suitable and reasonably priced out of all the methods which are existing for the production of MMCs. The fabrication can be made in huge quantity and it allows extremely large sized components which are to be manufactured. In this process, the reinforcement of composites is stirred and mixed with the molten metal. Stirrer is provided which does the stirring action to form vortex. Graphite crucible of conical shaped is used in stir casting setup for melting of aluminium alloys. The capacity of the graphite crucible is upto 950 °C. The high ceramic alumina muffle is made to hold the crucible. The type of furnace used in the stir casting setup is resistance heating furnace. In this the coil is act as a heating element. The capability of the furnace is designed in such a way that it can reach 950 °C within 45 min. When the aluminium is in liquid stage it is very reactive with oxygen present in atmosphere and it forms oxide. For avoiding the formation of oxides, stirring takes place in closed chamber of steel sheet. The stir casting setup used in this study is shown in the Initially required quantity of AA6063 was taken and melted in resistance heating furnace. The reinforcement particles ZrO Microstructure examination was conducted to find the distribution of reinforcement particles in the aluminium hybrid MMCs by optical microscope. Microstructure samples taken from the stir cast aluminium hybrid MMCs were prepared by a sequence of process like grinding, polishing through 220 to 2500 mesh size abrasive papers and etching with Keller’s reagent. Sample specimen of microstructure is shown in the The tensile testing was conducted using a universal testing machine. The tensile test specimens were prepared from the stir cast aluminium hybrid MMCs according to ASTM E8 standard as shown in the The main objective of the Vickers hardness test is to measure the microhardness values of the specimen prepared from the stir cast aluminium hybrid MMCs. Rectangular specimens (15 mm × 15 mm × 10 mm) were prepared and hardness value was measured with a load of 500gms. The position of the indenter is moved down to the surface of the specimen. From the point of zero reference a small amount of load is given to the surface. Later, for a duration of 10 s the major load is given and relieved from the specimen after some time. The distribution of reinforcements in the metal matrix composites were examined through a optical microscope. The distribution of the reinforcements in the micrograph depicts that the stirring is successful. The clustering of reinforcements was declined and the blending of the reinforcements with the aluminium matrix is formed due to proper stirring. The Ultimate tensile strength of aluminium hybrid MMCs is shown in The consequence of ZrO Aluminium hybrid MMCs was successfully fabricated through stir casting technique. Microstructre illustrates that the distribution of the reinforcements in the aluminium hybrid MMCs is successful and this is due to stirring effect. Also there is no evident for the clustering of reinforcements and the amalgamation of the reinforcements with the aluminium matrix is formed due to proper stirring. The microhardness recorded its maximum value of 95.4 VHN for 6% of ZrO Similarly higher tensile strength value of 149 MPa is recorded for the 6% of ZrO  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.