On-farm field experiments were carried out at two sites having 38- and 10-year-old orchard cropping systems under sub-tropical climatic regions to evaluate changes in organic carbon accumulation and chemical and microbiological properties of the soils. Under a system of different intercropped fruit trees, the cultivation of coconut (Cocos nucifera L.) intercropped with guava (Psidium guajava L.) enhanced the soil microbial activity approximately 2-fold after 38 yrs over 10 yrs of the same intercropped system. Soil organic carbon increased from 3.4 to 7.8 and 2.4 to 6.2 g kg−1 after 38 and 10 yrs, respectively, following the establishment of orchards. The increase was attributed to greater recycling of bio-litters. Levels of dehydrogenase, phosphatase and soil microbial biomass under field conditions generally depended more on the nature of the cropping system than on soil types. Similarly, average carbon inputs of bio-litter to the soil in monocrop (0.98 Mg ha−1 yr−1) was less than intercropped fruit trees (2.07 Mg ha−1 yr−1). The average level of soil microbial biomass carbon was 1158 kg ha−1 (0–0.15 m depth) and the organic carbon turnover rate was 8.5 yr−1 after 38 yrs of intercropped fruit trees, which resulted in a lower ratio (1.81) of carbon inputs to soil microbial biomass carbon.Increasing concern for enhancing the long-term sustainable productivity of crops and cropping systems has emphasized the need to develop suitable management strategies which are able to improve the quality and health of the soil Crop management practices such as cultivation, crop rotation, crop residue management and use of chemical fertilizers affect the level of organic matter retained in soil Primitive agricultural technology was practised by most farmers on the western coast of India in the mid 1960s. However, the continuous use of inorganic fertilizer alone on rice cultivation had failed to sustain high productivity. This led farmers to adopt organic farming, preferentially in a horticultural based cropping system. Long-term effects of soil-crop management practices upon soil microbial activities and soil fertility status at these sites have been investigated. There are no reports on the effect of conversion of cultivated land to horticultural crops with respect to improvement in soil fertility under sub-tropical conditions. The present study was, therefore, undertaken to compare the changes in soil organic matter, the more labile carbon fraction soil microbial biomass carbon (SMBC), carbon turnover, activity of enzymes and chemical properties resulting from different soil-crop management practices under sub-tropical conditions. Two sites at which fruit trees intercropped with vegetable crops were selected. Site A had been farmed in this manner for 38 yrs and site B for 10 yrs. The site description details are given in the following sections. This site had been under rice cultivation approximately 15 yrs before converting to an intercropping system of fruit trees and vegetables. Three crops were grown annually in rotation. This system was maintained for 38 yrs (1960–1998). Site A was located in Western India at Kalpavruksha farm Dehri, Gujarat (20°81′N and 72°77′E). As per This site (Sanghvi farm) was located in Umangaon, Valsad, Gujarat Western India (20°55′N and 72°57′E). The land was under a cultivated paddy crop for approximately 5 yrs before initiation of the experiment. The soil was classified as Lithic Ustochrept. It was converted to an organic horticultural plantation in 1987. This site also has the same monsoon type climate as described for site A and unfarmed (10 yrs, no crops) soil physicochemical properties are given in Each experiment was conducted as a randomized block design with three replications. The plot size was 50 m Microbial biomass carbon was determined by the chloroform fumigation incubation method of Soil respiration was determined by incubating moist soil samples (50 g, 60% field capacity) in a air-tight jar with a beaker containing of 10 ml 0.5 M NaOH for 10 days. The evolved CO Dehydrogenase activity was assayed by the method of Soil samples were analysed for particle size distribution (pipette method) as described by Leaf-litter was collected during the month of December and April 1997 and 1998 (average of eight points for each replication of 1 m Available micronutrients (Zn, Cu, Fe and Mn) were estimated by using the diethylene triamine penta acetic acid (DTPA) soil test Data were analysed using two way analysis of variance for a randomized complete block design The various chemical compositions of different litters are presented in Different soil-crop management practices led to several changes in soil chemical properties ( On average, soil organic carbon increased from 3.4 to 7.8 and 2.4 to 6.2 g kg Available nitrogen and K were significantly ( Irrespective of soil types, cropping systems significantly ( In site B, the activity of DHA was highest ( The average carbon input in intercropped fruit trees was greater than the monocropped systems by 2- to 3-fold for the 38 and 10-year-old fields ( Thirty eight years cultivation of either horticultural fruit crops or vegetable crops resulted in a significant increase in organic carbon of nearly 26% as compared to 10 yrs of fruit trees. Under similar climatic conditions, the organic carbon accumulation varied possibly due to different soil types and quality and quantity of litter accumulation. Organic matter concentration in soil depends upon the relative rate at which organic materials are added to the soil, the rate lost through decomposition and leaching, and finally, crop residue management practices. These results support the conclusion of According to our data the chemical composition and annual quantity of litter accumulation varied considerably ( The status of available nutrient such as nitrogen, P, K, S, Fe, Zn and Cu increased relatively more after 38 yrs compared to 10 yrs irrespective of different cropping systems. The best crop combinations based on a yield point of view were of intercropping horticultural fruit trees (Coconut–sapota), and the vegetable rotation which were more profitable and sustained soil chemical and biological activity measured after 38 yrs. These findings highlighted the importance of farming methods that buried orchard litter into the soil to assure not only an accumulation of available nutrients, but improved soil biological health and restored soil organic carbon through time. On average, there was an approximate 1.6-fold increase of soil microbial biomass and 1.4-fold increase in soil respiration over 38 yrs cropping of orchard and vegetable crops compared to soil where fruit trees were grown for 10 yrs. This indicated that leaf litter decomposition was much higher at these sites and markedly altered the SMBC, because minimum tillage was maintained to create a soil microclimate as surface mulch due to turnover of litter through inherent soil biota. In the soil system, temperature and moisture play a major role in enhancing the microbial activity and hastening the litter nutrients mineralization process. The dehydrogenase activity was highly correlated with organic carbon Based on our results, it is apparent that intercropping, combined with litter recycling, improved soil physical, chemical and biological properties. Positive correlations between soil microbial biomass and available nutrient status such as nitrogen