Introduction
                  There is a lack of data on the management of osteoarthritis of the knee associated with intra-articular malunion. The present study sought to analyze and report results of total knee replacement (TKR) in this indication, including complications and technical specificities.
               
                  Hypothesis
                  TKR for osteoarthritis of the knee associated with intra-articular malunion entails an elevated risk of complication, with impaired functional results.
               
                  Objectives
                  To test this hypothesis in a retrospective series of 74 cases of osteoarthritis of the knee associated with intra-articular malunion.
               
                  Patients and methods
                  A multicenter retrospective series collated the records of 74 patients (mean age, 63±14 years) who underwent TKR for post-traumatic osteoarthritis of the knee associated with intra-articular malunion between 2000 and 2008. Mean trauma-to-TKR interval was 21.8±19 years (range 1 to 56 years). Patients were assessed clinically and radiologically at last follow-up, using the Knee Society score as modified by the Western France Orthopedic Society (Société orthopédique de l’Ouest).
               
                  Results
                  At a mean overall follow-up of 4±3 years (range 1 to 9 years), mean knee score improved from 25±12 to 85±7 (P
                     <0.001) and mean functional score from 52±13 to 66±10 (P
                     =0.004). Mean flexion gain was 6°: mean preoperative flexion, 104°±28° (10° to 150°), vs. 110°±19° (20° to 130°) at follow-up. Nineteen patients (26%) had complications, 13 of which were severe and liable to affect the functional result: three extensor system avulsions, four infections, five cases of stiffness and one of instability.
               
                  Discussion and conclusions
                  The present results highlight an elevated rate of complications, with poorer clinical results than those found with osteoarthritis of the knee secondary to constitutional deformity. The initial trauma, with associated hemarthrosis, and sometimes iterative surgery to reduce and fix the initial fracture, induce fibrosis and synovial attachments, leading to stiffness and hindering exposure. The patient should be informed, and warned that postoperative flexion amplitude may be improved but is bound to remain limited, especially in case of initial stiffness.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  Level IV: non-comparative retrospective study.Knee joint fractures are liable to be complicated by post-traumatic osteoarthritis, especially in case of incomplete reduction. At 6–22 years’ follow-up, Volpin et al. In advanced disabling osteoarthritis of the knee, total knee replacement (TKR) appears to be the only effective attitude. However, there are few reports of series of TKR in osteoarthritis associated with intra-articular malunion. Roffi et al. A symposium of the French Hip and Knee Society ( In the present retrospective series, 74 patients (40 female, 34 male; 74 knees) underwent TKR for post-traumatic osteoarthritis of the knee associated with intra-articular malunion between 2000 and 2008, in high-volume eight centers in France. In all cases, TKR was indicated because of advanced and disabling nature of the osteoarthritis. Mean age at surgery was 63 Mean trauma-to-TKR interval was 21.8 Standard semiconstrained implants were used in 41 cases (55%), revision implants (with stems and augments) in 29 (40%) and hinged implants in four (5%). Most implants were cemented (72/74, 97%). The patella was resurfaced in 60 cases (81%), and knee exposure required anterior tibial tuberosity osteotomy in 13 (18%). In the eight patients with extension stiffness, soft-tissue release (posterior capsule release) was performed to correct the flexion contracture, associated to increased distal femoral resection in seven cases. Flexion stiffness, on the other hand, required modification of the bone cuts in only a single case (increased tibial slope). Ligament surgery was common: lateral patellar retinaculum release (six cases), three release of one collateral ligament (two medial, one lateral), and one quadriceps arthrolysis according to Judet et al. Preoperative telemetry and stress X-rays were used to assess the mechanical angle and reducibility of the deformity. In each center, an observer that did not participate in surgery performed a clinical and radiological follow-up assessment on AP and lateral knee views, a femoro-patellar incidence and full-length AP view of both lower limbs. Clinical assessment was based on Knee Society knee scores Statistical analysis used SPSS software (version 12; SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL). Series characteristics were described as mean and standard deviation for continuous variables, and as percentage for categorical variables. The clinical SOO knee and function score assessment was analyzed by Student Complete and recent assessment data were available for 59 patients. The other 15 were considered lost to follow-up, not having been seen during the previous 2 years, although they had had a mean follow-up of 12 months (range 6–24 months) and useable records. Nineteen patients (26%) had complications: three extensor system avulsions (patellar tendon), four infections, six cases of stiffness and one case of instability, one fibular nerve palsy, one clunk syndrome, two hematomas and one wound of the popliteal artery: the extensor system avulsions included two cases of severe preoperative stiffness (flexions of 20° and 30° respectively in multi-operated knees) and one of chronic knee instability due to neurologic quadriceps insufficiency. This last case affected a woman that sustained a supra- and inter-condylar femoral fracture due to a fall, inducing post-traumatic osteoarthritis; after her TKR, she twice tore her patellar tendon during falls when her knee gave way. In all three patients, direct suture was performed. One of them showed 10° extension lag associated with residual flexion stiffness at 20°; one showed 20° extension lag associated with 75° flexion; the third recovered almost complete active extension with 120° flexion; infection included three multi-operated patients: one with severe flexion stiffness (20° preoperatively); infection set in following quadriceps arthrolysis and skin necrosis during rehabilitation; simple lavage and adapted antibiotherapy cleared the knee, with 90° flexion 2 years after the septic episode. Another infection occurred in a young patient who sustained very damaging trauma with bone-loss in both femoral condyles, initially filled using acrylic spacer covered by a free flap; several infections occurred before and one following TKR, successfully managed by lavage and prolonged antibiotherapy without the need for implant removal; final flexion was 90°, with satisfactory knee function (climbing up and down stairs without banister). The third infection in a multi-operated knee required one-step implant removal and replacement. A fourth patient showed early infection, treated by arthroscopic lavage, but died in the following year from intercurrent reasons; six patients showed residual flexion stiffness. Five had had severe preoperative stiffness (20°, 30°, 30°, 40° and 50°), with flexion gain of respectively 0°, 45°, 50°, −10° and 20°. The fourth patient thus lost 10° of flexion, but recovered complete extension despite 20° preoperative flexion contracture. A sixth patient had been managed conservatively for supra- and intercondylar femoral fracture; flexion increased from 70° to 85° following TKR. Two of these six patients showed avulsion of the patellar tendon, as already mentioned above, requiring postoperative immobilization, which delayed flexion rehabilitation; one patient required revision for laxity with knee instability; a thicker insert was implanted and the patella resurfaced, achieving improvement without the need for additional surgery; one patient with severe residual valgus knee following displacement of a lateral tibial plateau fracture showed fibular nerve palsy after the TKR; neurolysis was performed the same day, and the palsy regressed completely within a few week; The other complications comprised one case of clunk syndrome, successfully managed by simple excision of the fibrous suprapatellar nucleus, two hematomas managed by revision without further complication, and one popliteal artery wound caused by a cerclage to fix the tibial tuberosity, requiring bypass repair ( At a mean 4 Analyzing the results according to malunion location showed the greatest flexion gains in case of femoral malunion, where mean preoperative flexion was poorer than in tibial or patellar malunion ( In initially valgus knees ( This study involves certain limitations due to its non-controlled, multicenter, retrospective design. Moreover, longer follow-up would be necessary in order to assess the durability of implant fixation. Within these limitations, however, it represents one of the largest series in the literature, confirming the conclusions initially reported. TKR in this indication remains justified by the significant improvement obtained in knee and function scores, but failed to match that obtained in more classical etiologies of osteoarthritis of the knee associated with constitutional deformity, as demonstrated by Gerich et al. History of osteoarthritis after intra-articular malunion featured initial trauma and associated hemarthrosis and initial treatment, which was frequently surgical or else sometimes non-operative with prolonged immobilization. Such a history has three important consequences: post-traumatic joint fibrosis, induced by hemarthrosis and invasive joint surgery; lower limb misalignment, induced by insufficient reduction or secondary fracture displacement; and cartilage damage induced by the joint fracture, to a varying extent depending on the degree of comminution. Joint fibrosis complicates implantation, as it involves the soft tissue as a whole: the skin cover, which is deteriorated by multiple previous scars; the synovium adhering to the deep face of the extensor system; and extensor system retraction in case of longstanding stiffness. Firstly, it hinders joint exposure, with a risk of patellar tendon avulsion. In the present series, even though anterior tibial tuberosity osteotomy was performed in 20% of cases, three cases of extensor system avulsion occurred. Secondly, joint fibrosis limits mobility gain, as it is very difficult to treat all of the intra- and extra-articular components of stiffness. Implantation surgery releases the intra-articular adherences and those on the deep side of the extensor system (sub-quadriceps space arthrolysis), but does not treat extensor system retraction. Thus, despite associated bone and ligament surgery, mean joint amplitude gain was moderate (6° in flexion). Thirdly, anterior soft tissue retraction hinders postoperative cicatrization, with a risk of skin necrosis, so that the rehabilitation in flexion has to be limited. And finally, this poorly vascularized cicatricial fibrosis leaves the tissue more liable to infection, as seen from the 5.4% infection rate–much higher than for classical etiologies. For all of these reasons, it is therefore mandatory to inform the patient of the risks involved, and to establish objectives based more of pain relief than on recovery of mobility. The joint destruction caused by fracture induces misalignment and may require reconstruction of a bone extremity. This entails specific planning. The reducibility of the deformities allows the mechanical axis to be restored without associated osteotomy, whatever the initial deformity in varus or valgus. The deformities are reducible because they are intraligamentary (inside the capsule-ligament envelope), unless there has been capsule retraction on osteophytes. Reducibility should be assessed on X-ray views under forced reduction, which also reveal the status of the collateral ligaments. Views under reduction show the residual deformity, which is usually moderate and can be corrected by bone resection, with release of the collateral ligament located in the concavity of the deformity. Joint destruction, particularly that of the tibial plateau resulting from a compression fracture, needs to be assessed to know whether it can be included in the bone resection or if a bone defect will remain after the resection planned according to the implant thickness. In the latter case, one must make sure to have reconstruction augments and extension stems available for reconstructing the bone defect. In the present series, this was necessary in 40% of cases. One final precaution is to check collateral ligament competence in these multi-operated knees. Excessive laxity, especially in the convexity of the axial deformity, may require using an implant with higher constrain. In the youngest patients, semiconstrained implants are preferable, but only if residual laxity after realignment of the knee does not exceed the height of the posterior stabilization cam. In conclusion, TKR after intra-articular malunion is not straightforward procedure. The present results are in line with the literature, with a high complications rate and particularly the serious risk of extensor system avulsion. Deformity reduction is often easy, but material to fill intra-articular bone loss and ensure joint stability needs to be planned for. In at-risk patients with a long history of surgery, multiple scars and recent infection, caution is needed in restoring flexion. Patient information allows a precise preoperative contract, focusing on pain symptomatology rather than gain in mobility. The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest concerning this article. The authors wish to thank Pr. Argenson, Pr. Catonné, Pr. Huten, Pr. Judet, Pr. Massin, Pr. Neyret, Pr. Piriou, Dr. Bonnin and Dr. Deschamps for the charts used in this multicenter study.