As a tough problem in coal mines, there is not an effective solution to rockburst evaluation and prediction as yet. In this paper, an attempt to investigate a rockburst forecasting method was undertaken by applying small scale, laboratory modeling of the coal mine roof, coal and its floor. According to rockburst danger evaluation and forecasting in deep coal mines on the basis of microseismic (MS) monitoring, the frequency-spectrum evolution was analyzed in detail by the band-stop filter and Fourier transform of MS signals monitored in time. Research results show that a strong mainshock induced by coal and rock sample bursting failure would commonly be introduced when the predominant frequency-spectrum of MS signals begins to move to lower band and the vibration velocity gradually increases, and the signals closed to mainshock, precursor signals, which indicate the tendency of increasing low-amplitude and the decreasing high-frequency. Moreover, it is also found that the rockburst disaster intensity increases with the increase of vibration velocity of precursor signal, and it is opposite with the predominant frequency of precursor signal.Seismic events, i.e., fractures in coal and rock that radiate detectable seismic waves, are common phenomenon associated with mining in coal mines ( But in recent years, with the progresses in full-mechanized and full-mechanized caving advanced mining techniques and the development of mining equipments in Chinese coal mines, the large mining height and strong mining working face become more and more popular. The strenuous roof strata activity and fracture induced by mining overlying coal seams and the adjacent gob will cause strong mining tremors, the damage of which mainly shows the following three aspects. (a) Precursor strong mining tremor commonly happened prior to rockburst disaster. For example, at 3:03 on November 8, 2009, a rockburst disaster happened in 23130 working face tailentry of Yuejin coal mine of Yima Coal Mining Group (YCMG), followed by a strong mining tremor ( It is well known that acoustic emission (AE) and MS events can be indicators of coal and rock fracturing or damage as the coal and rock are brought to failure at high stress ( Research on the MS effect of mining-induced failure has been carried out in past decades. For instance, Cook et al. found a correlation between rockburst frequency and calculated energy release rate ( As a consequence, MS effect laws of coal and rock material deformation, fracture and bursting failure have been researched by extensive experiments in detail, especially, the correlation between the MS characteristic parameters and the rockburst danger also has been discussed fruitfully, the models of forecasting rockburst danger based on MS effect characteristic parameters have been established. However, the MS precursor effect of coal and rock material bursting failure is still lack of study in depth, in particular, the correlation between the precursor signal predominant frequency-spectrum and the rockburst mainshock signal intensity need to be interpreted clearly. Real rockburst in coal mines was difficult to simulate in the laboratory, so, it was decided that the small-scale compound samples composed of roof, coal, and floor were used to test MS signal in the process of deformation, fracturing, and failure by load until bursting in experiment, to study the MS precursor effect of rockburst induced by static high pressure formed by roof and floor holding to coal. By MS effect experiments of compound coal–rock samples, the predominant frequency-spectrum evolution law of MS signals before bursting failure had been found. With the load on samples increasing, the predominant frequency of MS signal would move to low-frequency band, and the relationship between the predominant frequency of precursor MS signal and rockburst intensity was negative. Using the SOS MS monitoring results of two rockbursts that occurred in a strong rockburst danger coal mine, the negative correlation between the total energy, event count and the predominant frequency of MS signals was revealed, which also verified the experimental conclusions. Experimental system can be classified into load device and monitoring equipments. Load device uses Coal and rock materials were collected from Sanhejian coal mine of Xuzhou Coal Mining Group (XCMG), where strong rockburst disasters often occurred. Via the standard Approaching to rockburst failure (mainshock signal) of coal and rock material, there are often a few lower amplitude and high-frequency MS events so-called precursor signals. The amplitude spectrum (Y-coordinate) in  The predominant frequency response of transducers is 1–100  According to AE maximum energy rate value measured from samples RCF1, RC5 and RC4 bursting failure, respectively about 1500 Strike length of full-mechanized caving 8929 working face in Xinzhouyao coal mine of Datong Coal Mine Group (DCMG) which thick and hard sandstone stratum is famous in China is 1504 The immediate roof is silt-finestone, and the thickness is 3.26–26.81 The width of coal pillar between 8929 working face and the adjacent 8927 working face mined is 20 To monitor the overlying roof fracturing and falls, especially evaluate the rockburst danger of 8929 working face in time, an SOS MS monitoring system, developed by Poland Central Mining Institute, was installed in May 2008, which is composed of real-time monitoring recorder, analyzer, sensors and the digital transmission systems etc. The frequency band width of sensor is 1–600 Two rockbursts happened in 8929 working face respectively on July 12 and July 17, 2008, which led to a certain extent effect for safe production in mine, the detailed description of two rockbursts as follows: (1) At 3:12 (2) At 8:45 According to location and energy calculation of MS monitoring system, the energy of two rockbursts reached to 3.57 In order to reveal the relationship between rockburst intensity and the predominant frequency-spectrum of precursor signal, the frequency-spectrum distribution characteristics of precursor signals of two rockbursts were analyzed in detail. Seen from above Figs., the vibration velocity of rockburst MS precursor signal on July 12 is less than 0.02  Seen from  As a consequence of the above, with the total energy and event count of MS signals increases, the predominant frequency gradually reduces. Especially, when roof fracturing pressure and rockbursts are induced, the predominant frequency of maximum energy signals will decrease. According to the trend lines in Through the experiments of seismic effect in the process of deformation, fracturing and bursting failure of compound coal and rock samples, MS monitoring results and analysis in field, the major conclusions are as follows: (1) With the load on compound coal and rock samples increasing, the predominant frequency of MS signal moves to low-frequency band. When bursting failure, the frequency-spectrum of mainshock signal shows wider frequency character and the lower-frequency components increasing significantly. (2) Experimental results indicate that the lower the predominant frequency of precursor MS signal, the higher the AE energy rate, also the stronger the bursting failure intensity of samples. Simultaneously, the shorter the interval between precursor and mainshock signals is, the stronger the bursting effect is. (3) MS monitoring results and detailed analysis in field show that the lower increasing vibration velocity, especially the lower predominant frequency of precursor signals can be used to evaluate the rockburst danger. We gratefully wish to acknowledge the collaborative funding support from the