The application of wood ash to forest soils has been used to compensate nutrient loss and avoid soil and water acidification. Using ashes in a non-stabilized form might negatively affect forest ecosystems. Bearing this in mind, together with landscape restrictions and socio-economic parameters, it underlines the importance of using pelletized ashes as soil additives in alpine areas. Therefore, in this study we evaluated the effects of pelletized ashes on the chemical and microbiological properties of four soils representative for the central Alps [rendzic Leptosol (L), fibric Histosol (H), haplic Podzol (P), and dystric Cambisol (Cm)] in a microcosm trial during 22weeks. The following ash-pellet treatments were at a ratio equivalent to 2Mgha−1: pellets without any additive (A); or in combination with bark, compost, and digestate (B–D). A control without ashes (Ct) was also included.
                  Weekly measurements of pH and electrical conductivity (EC) from the soil leachates were performed. A higher pH, relative to Ct, was found in treatment A for Podsol. Additionally, treatments B and C led to a pH rise in Leptosol. Electrical conductivity, total C and N, and inorganic N forms were not significantly affected by the pelletized treatments regardless the soil type. A similar trend was recorded for pH and EC levels from the leachate samples. A lower metabolic quotient (qCO2), relative to Ct, was recorded in Podsol following treatment A. However, when pellet ashes were applied in combination with digestate, a higher qCO2 than that in Ct was found for this type of soil, which might indicate a lower microbial C utilization efficiency and/or microbial stress. This latter treatment also resulted in a lower dehydrogenase activity in Podsol, whilst soil protease activity and N mineralization were not affected in any of the studied soils. We conclude that ash amendment in pellets form on certain soils improves their acidity levels without causing extreme effects.Use of wood for production of heat and energy is in many places displacing fossil fuels in response to the energy targets established by the European Union ( The continuous extraction of wood and logging residues from forest ecosystems has caused a nutrient depletion, which may induce soil acidification due to a low acid neutralizing capacity ( The potential benefits and drawbacks of using wood ash as a mineral supplement have already been tested in various studies ( The use of ashes as a nutrient supplement in the forestry sector has a longer tradition in the Baltic and Fennoscandian countries (boreal forests) than in the central Alps. This is attributed to the fact that in the central Alps the forest is often located on very steep slopes; and secondly, due to the economical importance of tourisms, along with the “patchiness” in the alpine forests broad scale applications are uncommon. All in all this increases the difficulty of the re-circulations of nutrients from wood ash into the soil, which has not been fully embraced by the forest owners and the local communities. Therefore, the main aim of this study was to test the impact of pelletized ashes on the chemical and microbiological properties of several soils representative for the central Alps. Moreover, we investigated if such changes in soil properties derived from the use of pelletized ashes will also affect the soil-leachate chemistry. For this study four representative forest soils from the Austrian Alps were chosen. Two soils developed on calcareous materials: rendzic Leptosol (L) (Terfens, 47°12′49″N 11°19′42″O) and fibric Histosol (H) (Zirl, 47°17′7″N 11°15′30″O); and two soils developed on noncalcareous materials: haplic Podzol (P) (Götzens, 47°12′49″N 11°19′42″O) and dystric Cambisol (Cm) (Götzens, 47°13′24″N 11°19′50″O). The sampling was performed on the 16th and 17th October, 2012. At each study site 15 soil cores (0–40 The laboratory-scale pellets were produced at the Institute for Material Technology (Universität Innsbruck) by using bottom ash and including the following additives at a specific ratio (ash:additive, w/w dry weight): spruce bark (75:25), sewage sludge compost (80:20) and anaerobic digested cattle slurry (95:5) ( The experimental set-up was performed in Perspex columns (11 Soil samples (10 Basal respiration (BR) and microbial biomass ( Leachate pH and EC values were determined using a pH-meter (MLP4, WTW, Weilheim, Germany), and a LF 330 conductivity meter with a standard cell TetraCon 325 (WTW, Weilheim, Germany), respectively, immediately after sampling, To test the effects of the pellet treatments on the aforementioned soil parameters, data were subjected to a one-way ANOVA. When significant One of the main effects of using wood ash as a soil fertilizer relies on its known capability to buffer pH ( The pH of the leachate was not affected by the addition of pelletized ashes ( Another important parameter to evaluate in ash-amended soils is the EC, an indicator for soil salinity ( For the remaining soil chemical parameters measured in the present study (i.e., Soil biological properties were found to be more sensitive when evaluating the impact assessment after application of fertilizers due to the fact that changes in microbial communities may occur more quickly than changes in other soil properties ( Dehydrogenase activity (DHA) is a measurement of intracellular activity reflecting the metabolic ability of the soil. This enzymatic activity is considered to be proportional to the biomass of the microorganisms in soil, and it is often dependent on soil pH, moisture and organic matter content ( According to Overall, Podsol was found to be more sensitive to ash addition than the other three types of alpine soils. Of interest is that the application of digestate in combination with pelletized ashes can exert a harmful action on Podsol soil microbiota, as indicated by the higher qCO We thank Johannes Mair for his analytical help and Dr. Andreas Saxer (Institute for Material Technology, Universität Innsbruck) for providing pelletizing machinery. MF-DJ was in partly funded by the “Doktoratsstipendium aus der Nachwuchsförderung” of the University of Innsbruck. This study was funded from the project AhsTreaT B01- BiEne-D by the alpS – COMET-Zenter für Klimawandelanpassung.