In order to further enhance the thermal fatigue resistance of bionic compacted graphite cast iron (CGI) which is processed by laser in water, the electrical pulse treatment is applied to improve the thermal fatigue resistance of bionic units. The results show that the electrical pulse treatment causes the supersaturated carbon atoms located in the lattice of austenite to react with the iron atoms to form the Fe3C. The microstructures of the bionic units processed in water are refined by the electrical pulse treatment. The cracks on the bionic units are reduced by the electrical pulse treatment before the thermal fatigue tests; and during the tests, the thermal fatigue resistance of bionic units is therefore enhanced by reducing the crack sources. By this way, the thermal fatigue resistance of bionic CGI processed in water is improved.The laser bionic process has received much attention in recent years due to its application which can enhance the performance of engineering materials. The laser bionic process, combining the bionic theory with the laser process, is regarded as an effective surface treatment technology. The researches of bionic theory have found that the non-smooth body surface of the soil animals can make them resist the wear of the soil The CGI is widely used in disk brakes, so the wear and thermal fatigue are its main failure mode The test materials are cut from the CGI disk brake of high-speed train, the components of which are listed in The photograph of the bionic specimen is shown in Electrical pulse tests are taken from the cupreous chucking instrument, where maximal pulse current density is 105 Thermal fatigue tests are carried out by the self-restrained thermal fatigue testing machine. The specimens are heated to 600 The microstructures of specimens are obtained by the scanning electron microscopy (SEM, TSM-5500 LV scanning electron microscope), combining with the X-ray diffraction (D/Max 2500 PC Rigaku, Japan), with Cu Ka radiation operated at a voltage of 50 The XRD analysis results of the bionic units of No. 1 and No. 2 specimens are shown in In fact, there have been cracks on the surface of bionic units before the thermal fatigue tests, as shown in Moreover, the cracks numbers change a lot in the early stage of the thermal fatigue tests. With the thermal cycles increasing, the cracks numbers first increase and then reduce; the difference is that the decline for No. 1 specimen begins after 300 thermal cycles, while that for No. 2 specimen begins after 200 thermal cycles. The decline of the cracks numbers can be ascribed to the cracks, driven by the thermal stress, propagating and joining with each other, as shown in Meanwhile the cracks numbers of the No. 2 specimen’s units are always less than those of the No. 1 specimen’s units. These above phenomena lead to the conclusions that the electrical pulse treatment can reduce the cracks on the bionic units processed in water and reduce their crack sources in the thermal fatigue tests, and thus enhance their thermal fatigue resistance. Based on previous researches As shown in The above situations are the ideal model of the relationships between the thermal fatigue cracks of the substrate and the cracks on the bionic units. Obviously the true circumstances are complicated, as shown in The electrical pulse treatment causes the supersaturated carbon atoms located in the lattice of austenite to react with the iron atoms to form the Fe The electrical pulse treatment reduces the cracks on the bionic units processed in water before the thermal fatigue tests, and the thermal fatigue resistance of the bionic units is enhanced by reducing the crack sources in them during the tests. After the electrical pulse treatment, the thermal fatigue resistance of bionic CGI processed in water is improved by way of enhancing the thermal fatigue resistance of the bionic units. This article was supported by the Project 985-High Performance Materials of Jilin University and the Project 985-Bionic Engineering Science and Technology Innovation.