Comparative studies of different discrete element models of a rock-type material are presented. The discrete element formulation employs spherical particles with the cohesive interaction model combining linear elastic behaviour with brittle failure. Numerical studies consisted in simulation of the uniaxial compression test. Two cylindrical specimens with particle size distributions yielding different degree of heterogeneity have been used. Macroscopic response produced by different discrete element models has been compared. The main difference between the compared models consists in the evaluation of micromechanical constitutive parameters. Two approaches are compared. In the first approach, the contact stiffness and strength parameters depend on the local particle size, while in the second approach, global uniform contact parameters are assumed for all the contacting pairs in function of average geometric measures characterizing the particle assembly. The size dependent contact parameters are calculated as functions of geometric parameters characterizing each contacting particle pair. As geometric scaling parameters, the arithmetic and harmonic means, as well as the minimum of the radii of two contacting particles are considered. Two different models with size dependent contact parameters are formulated. The performance of these models is compared with that of the discrete element model with global uniform contact parameters. Equivalence between the models with size dependent and uniform contact parameters has been checked. In search of this equivalence, different methods of evaluation of global uniform parameters have been studied. The contact stiffness has been evaluated in terms of the average radius of the particle assembly or in terms of the averages of the arithmetic and harmonic means of the contact pair radii, the geometric parameters used in the evaluation of the contact stiffness in the size-dependent models. The uniform contact strengths have been determined as functions of the averages of radii squares, squares of arithmetic radii means or squares of minimum radii of the contacting pairs.
                  For the more homogenous specimen, the models with local size dependent parameters and models with global uniform parameters give similar response. The models with uniform parameters evaluated according to the averages of the geometric parameters used in the evaluation of local parameters ensure better agreement with the respective models with size-dependent parameters than the models with uniform parameters evaluated according to the particle radii. Simulations using the more heterogenous specimen reveal differences between the considered models. There are significant differences in stress–strain curves as well as in the failure pattern. The models with local size-dependent parameters are more sensitive to the change of heterogeneity than the model with global uniform parameters.Numerical programs employing the discrete element method (DEM) have achieved a status of a standard analysis tool in geomechanics ( The main difficulty in using the DEM consists in adopting adequate interparticle contact model and appropriate model parameters which yield a required macroscopic behaviour. Many studies have been carried out to investigate the effect of local (microscopic) parameters in the discrete element method on macroscopic mechanical properties ( The main purpose of the present work is to study the influence of the evaluation method of local stiffness and strength parameters in the discrete element method on the macroscopic properties and macroscopic behaviour of the material model. Two approaches are compared. In the first approach, the stiffness and strength parameters of the contact model are assumed to depend on the size of contacting particles and are evaluated locally as certain functions of contacting pair radii ( There are no works showing the effect of the evaluation of local parameters on macroscopic behaviour. The present work is intended to fill this gap. The discrete element models, which will be studied, have been implemented in the discrete element program DEMPack ( The comparative studies presented in this work involve different possibilities to calculate size dependent local stiffness and strength parameters. Macroscopic behaviour obtained for different local size scaling parameter is compared. Then, a possible equivalence of these models and the model with uniform parameters will be investigated. Different options to determine global parameters equivalent to local size dependent parameters will be tested. It will be investigated how strongly the method of evaluation of local parameters affects macroscopic behaviour in the discrete element model. Rocks are heterogenous materials and their macroscopic properties are strongly influenced by their heterogeneity at microscale ( The heterogeneity of the discrete element material model can be further contributed by the spatial distribution of local model parameters, which can result from the method of evaluation of discrete element parameters. In order to check this effect in the present work much attention will be paid to the distributions of the geometric parameters used in evaluation of the contact stiffness and strength. Within the discrete element method (DEM), it is assumed that a material can be represented by an assembly of rigid particles interacting with one another. In general, the shape of the particles can be arbitrary, in this work spherical elements are employed. A discrete element formulation using spherical or cylindrical particles was first proposed by The translational and rotational motion of discrete elements (particles) is described by means of the Newton–Euler equations of rigid body dynamics. For the Similarly as in The overall behaviour of the system is determined by the contact laws assumed for the particle interaction. The contact law can be seen as the formulation of the material model on the microscopic level. Contact models in the discrete element method can include force and moment interaction between particles. In the present work, contact moments are not considered. Formulation of the constitutive model employs the decomposition of the contact force between two elements Cohesive bonds are broken instantaneously when the interface strength is exceeded in the tangential direction by the tangential contact force or in the normal direction by the tensile contact force Although the constitutive model adopted in this work is relatively simple, numerical tests show that a macroscopic behaviour of brittle rocks is represented properly. The deformation behaviour of brittle rocks under uniaxial compression before fracture is predominantly linear and can be modelled correctly with the linear elastic microscopic law. The perfectly brittle fracture criterion, employed in the microscopic model, reproduces well a brittle failure of rocks. A known drawback associated with the failure criterion defined by the Eqs. The constitutive contact model presented in Section Stiffness parameters, Strength parameters, Coulomb friction coefficient The formulation presented in Section There may be different assumptions about the form of the functions Cohesive bonding between two particles can be treated as a bar of length The axial force in a bar can be calculated from the following formula: Assuming maximum tensile and shear stresses in the bar connecting a pair of particles, In this model, the cohesive bond connecting two particles of radii Using the assumptions Similarly as in model 1, the equivalent shear stiffness of the bond, Choosing the minimum of the radii in Eq. In contrast to the models 1 and 2, the contact parameters in the model 3 are set equal for all the bonds ( The contact stiffness An advantage of such an approach consisting in the possibility to use analytical averaging procedures in the evaluation of the model parameters has already been mentioned above. This model may produce mechanical behaviour which is different from those obtained with the local size dependent parameters. This will be shown later in this paper. The models 1 and 2, in which contact parameters are evaluated locally according to the contacting particle size are defined by the following set of parameters: the contact Young’s modulus The set of parameters required to define the contact connection in model 3 consists of the following parameters: the normal contact stiffness The sets of the contact parameters in all the four models are completed with the inter-particle friction coefficient Comparative studies of the formulations employing locally evaluated and global uniform parameters will require equivalent contact model parameters ensuring similar macroscopic properties. Having assumed the contact parameters for the models 1 and 2, the parameters for the model 3 will be determined adapting the formulae for the models 1 and 2 by the use of appropriate average measures obtained for the whole assembly instead of the radii of individual particle pairs. Using the average of the radii of all the particles in the specimen 〈 Similarly to the stiffness calculation procedure, the normal and shear strengths for the model are calculated using the averaging procedure, but in this case the average of the squares of the radii is used in the respective formulae Using the average of arithmetic means Taking as a criterion different assumptions in calculation of the global uniform parameters we will distinguish the following cases within the model 3: The normal contact stiffness is calculated according to Eq. The normal contact stiffness is calculated according to Eq. The normal contact stiffness is calculated according to Eq. The above cases a–c will be later referred to as models 3a–3c. Comparative studies will be performed carrying out simulation of the uniaxial compression test of a rock-type material using two cylindrical specimens with different particle size distribution. Different models, both with local size dependent and global uniform constitutive parameters, will be compared. Certain values of microscopic parameters will be assumed for the models with size dependent parameters and appropriate equivalent constant parameters for the model 3 will be calculated. Macroscopic behaviour obtained in numerical simulations will be studied by comparing stress–strain curves and macroscopic parameters: the Young’s modulus, Poisson’s ratio and compressive strength. Possible equivalence of the investigated models will be verified. The best method to evaluate global uniform constitutive parameters ensuring equivalence with a given model with local size dependent parameters will be identified. The comparative studies for each specimen will be carried out according to the following plan: Comparison of the models with local size dependent stiffness and strength parameters (models 1 and 2). Comparison of each of the models with local size dependent parameters with appropriate models with global uniform parameters: Comparison of the model 1 with the models 3a and 3b. Comparison of the model 2 with the models 3a and 3c. In the present work, the effect of the friction coefficient and damping will not be studied. All the cases will be calculated using the same value of the damping and friction. The value of the damping chosen for all the models will ensure quasi-static conditions. Two cylindrical specimens of diameter 23 The first specimen, which will be later called the specimen 1, is more homogenous. It is formed by 10225 particles. The particle assembly is characterized by the particle size distribution shown in The initial number of established contact bonds in the specimen 1 is 60809, with the coordination number   The specimen 2 is modelled with 5868 particles. Particle size distribution is shown in The initial number of established contact bonds in the specimen 2 is 31431 with the coordination number Isotropy of the particle assembly defining the specimen 2 is proved by the uniformity of the polar distribution of the contact directions given in The model parameters assumed for the model 1 and 2 are presented in The particle–platen interaction was modelled using the frictionless contact model with the penalty stiffness Under an increasing load the damage in the specimen is developing progressively by breakage of bonds due to excessive shear or tensile forces until a complete failure is reached. The results of simulations are presented in the form of fractured specimens, axial stress–strain curves and plots showing evolution of damage. The specimens after failure are plotted with distribution of the damage parameter The axial stress–strain curves are plotted taking the axial components of the average strain and stress tensors calculated for the whole specimen. The average strains have been estimated using the Bagi’s equivalent continuum strain ( The specimens after failure obtained in the simulations using the models 1 and 2 are presented in The stress–strain curves for the models 1 and 2 are plotted in As it can be expected the failure load obtained using the model 2 is significantly lower than that obtained by the model 1. The microscopic strength in the model 2 is scaled by the minimum of the contacting particle radii which is the lower the arithmetic mean of the particle radii used for scaling in the model 2. Both models yield similar post-critical behaviour. The stress–strain curves in The evolution of the damage in the specimens for both models is illustrated in A typical brittle failure is also predicted using the model with global uniform parameters.   A very good agreement of the curves corresponding to the models 2 and 3c can be observed in   The axial stress–strain curves obtained for the models 1 and 2 are plotted in The curves plotted in The results of the simulations using the specimen 2 with different sets of equivalent parameters are shown in  The curves illustrating the damage evolution plotted in The results of the comparative studies presented above provide interesting observations on the effect of the evaluation method of the contact parameters in the discrete element method. Comparison of qualitative and quantitative results shows some similarities and differences. The results are quite similar for the more homogenous specimen (specimen 1). The two models with local evaluation of the constitutive parameters (models 1 and 2) predict very similar elastic properties, which can be explained by a small difference in this specimen between the arithmetic and harmonic means, the geometric scaling parameters used in these models to calculate the contact stiffness. Nevertheless, even for this specimen, the relationship between the scaling parameters are reflected correctly in the values of macroscopic properties. The model with the contact stiffness scaled according to the arithmetic mean of the contacting particle radii (model 1) yields slightly higher values of the Young’s modulus than the model with the contact stiffness scaled according to the harmonic mean (model 2), which is understandable having in mind that the arithmetic mean is always greater than the harmonic mean. The difference in the macroscopic stiffness manifests itself more clearly in the specimen with a higher radius ratio. The compressive strength predicted by the model 2 for both specimens is considerably smaller than that obtained using the model 1. This could be expected, since the minimum radius of the contact pair used as the scaling factor to determine the contact bond strength in the model 2 is smaller than the arithmetic mean of the radii of the contacting particle pair which is used to scale the contact strength in the models 1. It can be observed that damage in the specimens with the model 2 is initiated at lower loading levels than in the specimens with the model 1. This can be explained by a lower bond strength in the model 2. This is also the reason, why the damage development is more rapid and the damage is more distributed in the model 2 than in the model 1. This is especially visible in the more heterogenous specimen. The evolution of damage shows that the failure predicted by the model 2 is characterized by a greater number of broken bonds than in the case of the model 1. This indicates a more distributed damage which is confirmed by the images of failed specimens. In most cases, the failure of the specimens predicted by the analysis can be regarded as brittle, only in case of the specimen 2 with the model 2 a distributed damage typical for a ductile failure is obtained. The ductile character of the failure is associated with shear-dominant failure at the micromechanical level. The effect of the geometric heterogeneity (the ratio Similarly we can explain the failure mechanism observed in the specimens with the all the cases of the model 3. Despite the geometric heterogeneity, the uniform constitutive parameters result in localized brittle-like fractures. The localized nature of the failure predicted by the models 3 is confirmed by a lower level of global damage parameter evaluated for the whole specimen. The difference of the failure mode obtained with the models 3 with respect to other models is especially apparent for the specimen 2. The failure pattern predicted by the models 3 for the specimen 1 is similar to those predicted by the models with local evaluation of constitutive parameters. For the specimen with a relatively low geometric heterogeneity, the model with global uniform constitutive parameters can give results similar to those produced by the models with locally evaluated size dependent contact parameters. In order to get equivalent quantitative results using these two approaches, it is desirable to determine equivalent global uniform parameters using the distributions of the appropriate geometric parameters employed as scaling factors in respective models with local size dependent constitutive parameters. The parameters evaluated in this way give a better agreement than the parameters evaluated according to the average particle size in the discrete element assembly. The latter approach does not take into account actual geometric parameters used in the evaluation of contact parameters. 