Roughness of mineral particles affects bubble-particle interactions and particle flotation separation. In this study, magnesite was ground in stainless-steel disc and ceramic ball mills to produce flotation feed material of different surface nano-roughness, which was quantified using atomic force microscopy (AFM). The effect of surface roughness on the floatability of magnesite particles was carried out by a micro-flotation kinetic test using an XFG flotation machine. The flotation results demonstrated both higher flotation recovery and larger flotation rate constant for particles having larger nano-asperities of rough particle surface. Additionally, the difference in cumulative flotation recovery between magnesite particles with different nano-roughness characteristics systematically decreased with increasing collector (sodium oleate) concentration from 25 to 150 mg/L. Contrarily, a difference in the value of flotation kinetics constant for particles with larger and smaller asperities remained at a level of 0.2–0.3 min−1 for the entire range of collector concentration. The interaction energy between bubbles and rough magnesite particles with different nano-roughness was estimated using an extended DLVO (Derjaguin–Landau–Verwey–Overbeek) theory. The theoretical interaction energy points to lowering energy barrier when the magnesite particles are covered with 12 nm asperities as compared to 2 nm asperities. It is therefore hypothesized that the energy barrier is a primary cause for differences in flotation performance of particles decorated with nano-asperities of different dimensions.Compositional and physical heterogeneity influence the wetting characteristics of solid surfaces ( In summary, the literature reports the effects of particle surface roughness on their flotation performance quite well, however, understanding the factors that drive these effects has not been reached. A poor characterization of particle surfaces and their roughness characteristics, combined with misunderstanding the physics behind particle-bubble attachment events, hinder the progress. For example, only recently it was revealed through theoretical modeling that nano-scaled asperities can reduce energy barriers in interactions between rough particles and gas bubbles ( In this study, magnesite particles having two different nano-scaled topographies engineered in stainless-steel disc and ceramic ball mills are used to demonstrate a possibility of enhanced flotation recovery and kinetics through manipulation of nano-asperities on surfaces of milled particles. The particle surface roughness, including dimensions of asperities, are quantified through AFM imaging techniques. The enhancement of both recovery and kinetics of flotation through manipulation of nano-asperities on the particle surface is confirmed in flotation tests in the presence of a broad range of concentration of sodium oleate collector from 25 to 150 mg/L. By using the extended DLVO model, it is shown that the size of asperities decorating magnesite particles influences the energy barrier between mineral particles and gas bubbles during flotation. High quality magnesite lumps were selected from mined ore located in Dandong, Liaoning Province, China. The x-ray fluorescence (XRF) elemental analysis results confirmed their high purity with more than 97 wt% MgCO Chemically pure sodium oleate (NaOL) supplied by Aladdin Co., Ltd., Shanghai, China, was used as collector. Diluted sodium hydroxide (NaOH) or hydrochloric acid (HCl) were used as pH regulators. Deionized (DI) water was used throughout the experiments. Glycerin used in contact angle measurements was supplied by Fisher Chemical Co., Ltd, USA. Two techniques used in determining the surface roughness of magnesite particles in the size fraction of +0.038–0.074 mm were BET surface area analysis and atomic force microscopy (AFM) imaging. The BET method is commonly used in analyzing the specific surface area of mineral particles (  The surface topography of magnesite particles was obtained through AFM imaging, which is reliable for imaging both microscopic and sub-microscopic topography of mineral surfaces under ambient conditions ( The surface roughness R In this study, AFM images of magnesite particle surfaces were collected using a MultiMode 8 AFM (Bruker Corporation, Karlsruhe, Germany) using the peak force tapping-mode. First, the magnesite particles were fixed on a glass slide by glue. Then, five different particles were randomly selected and each particle was imaged. Both R Zeta potential values were measured by a Malvern Instruments Nano-ZS90 zeta potential analyzer manufactured by Japan Malvern Instruments, Malvern, UK. A pulp suspension containing 0.01 wt% −5 µm magnesite particles was conditioned in a beaker for 2 min. Then, the pH regulator and NaOL were added and the resulting pulp was conditioned for several minutes. This was in line with the flotation test conditions. The zeta potential at each condition was measured at least six times and the average value is reported. To obtain a smooth magnesite surface for the contact angle measurements, a magnesite lump was polished with 120 mesh, 400 mesh, 1200 mesh sandpaper and 1 µm diamond to produce a mirror-like surface. The polished magnesite samples were cleaned with ethanol and DI water several times just before contact angle measurements to reduce their contamination with air-borne organics. To prepare the magnesite with adsorbed collector, the lump was immersed in a NaOL solution for 3 min at pH value of 11. After removal from the NaOL solution, the sample was washed with DI water and dried before contact angle measurements. The magnesite surface was cleaned with plasma and re-polished before immersing into a new NaOL solution. The advancing contact angle for DI water and glycerin on the magnesite surface was determined by the sessile drop method using a Kruss G10 contact angle goniometer ( After contact angle measurements, the magnesite lump was dried, coated with carbon conductive film and imaged under a Philips XL 40 Environmental Scanning Electron Microscope (ESEM) (FEI, Hillsboro, OR) to determine quality of the specimen and quantify its porosity. Micro-flotation tests were conducted in an XFG flotation machine with 40 mL volume, at an impeller speed of 1920 rpm. First, 2 g magnesite particles were suspended in 35 mL DI water and agitated for 2-min in the flotation cell. Diluted NaOH (or HCl) was used to adjust the pH value of the pulp, and then conditioned for another 6-min. After that, the collector was added and the pulp was conditioned for an additional 3-min. The flotation kinetics test was based on the cumulative flotation recoveries collected during different flotation periods: 0–0.5 min, 0.5–1 min, 1–2 min, 2–4 min, 4–6 min, and 6–8 min. The flotation recovery was calculated based on the weight of the floated magnesite. All experiments were carried out at room temperature (~25 °C). Suresh and Walz developed a model on DLVO interactions between a rough spherical particle and a flat surface ( Two simple parameters define particle roughness ( The total interaction potential (E The retarded van der Waals interaction potential between a spherical particle with hemispherical asperities and air bubble is as follows ( After substituting Eq. The equation to calculate the electrical double layer interaction potential between a rough sphere particle and an air bubble is ( ε After substituting Eq. For calculation of hydrophobic interaction potential, the Lewis acid–base model was adopted ( In this equation, λ Therefore, The Hamaker constant can be calculated from To calculate the interaction potential between a hemispherical asperity and a smooth surface (E  Combining Eq. After substituting Eq. [4] into Eq. [19]: Flotation cumulative recovery is a function of flotation time during flotation kinetics tests. First-order model (classical) has been widely used to describe the flotation kinetics as follows: Micro-flotation tests of magnesite particles were carried out in alkaline solutions of NaOL to compare flotation kinetics of particles prepared in two different mills. The R Although the ceramic ball milled magnesite particles floated at higher kinetic rate than the stainless-steel disc milled ones, the differences in k values do not follow the same trends as 8-min recoveries discussed above. Specifically, the difference in k value recorded between ceramic ball and stainless-steel disc milled magnesite particles changed from 0.19 to 0.24 to 0.27 to 0.33 to 0.34 to 0.32 at NaOL concentrations of 25, 50, 75, 100, 125, and 150 mg/L, respectively. This observation suggests that although differences in 8-min flotation recoveries diminished with increasing concentration of collector, the addition of collector up to about 100–125 mg/L benefited flotation kinetics rates. The results of BET analysis are reported in  The zeta potential values measured for magnesite particles in water, in the presence and absence of NaOL, are shown in Under conditions of flotation separation of 100 mg/L NaOL and pH 11.0, the zeta potential of magnesite particles increased from about −5 mV to about −28 mV. This indicates stronger electrical double-layer repulsions between an air bubble and negatively charged magnesite particles during flotation separation from NaOL solutions. Although the NaOL collector increases the charges on magnesite particles, it also introduces attractive hydrophobic interactions between air bubbles and collector-covered magnesite particles that compensate and even over-power electrical double layer interactions as discussed in the next section. Two sets of advancing contact angle data as a function of NaOL concentration are plotted in The correction is only at a level of 1–4° depending on hydrophobicity of the minerals. The results in The flotation results presented in section 4.1 clearly indicate preferential flotation of magnesite particles produced by ceramic ball mill than stainless-steel disc mill. The particles from these two mills have identical composition, purity and surface charge characteristics, and nearly identical shape and specific surface area. These similarities also suggest that adsorption of collector on both batches of particles should be identical, or nearly identical. The two batches of particles only differ by sizes of nano-asperities, as recorded with AFM. It is therefore, very probable that size of asperities affects interactions between particles and gas bubbles (  As shown in This study investigated the effect of nano-roughness of magnesite particles on both their floatability and bubble-particle interaction. The following conclusions are drawn: We were able to produce two batches of nearly identical magnesite particles, having only different nano-roughness characteristics, by using stainless-steel disc and ceramic ball milling. The results of the flotation recovery and kinetics tests together with theoretical calculations proved that surface nano-roughness benefits the flotation performance of magnesite particles. The effect of surface nano-roughness of magnesite particles on their cumulative flotation recovery was gradually reduced with increasing concentration of NaOL collector during flotation. This suggests that hydrophobic forces caused by an adsorbed layer of oleate functionality operate outside the range of asperity size. A simple theoretical model proposed here reveals that the interaction energy between a flat bubble surface and a magnesite particle decorated with nano-sized asperities can be lowered and its location can shift to a larger distance by manipulating dimensions of asperity. Our theoretical analysis combined with unique experimental data should stimulate further research into grinding and milling operations and methods that could benefit more efficient and faster flotation separation.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The financial support for this work from the