A fluidized bed crystallization process was investigated experimentally, characterized by a continuous withdrawal of a suspension containing target particles having narrow size distribution. Three industrially relevant substances were applied in the study, namely l-glutamic acid, l-asparagine monohydrate and ortho-aminobenzoic acid. A continuous supply of seeds, required for the establishment of a steady state, was achieved by applying ultrasonic comminution of bigger crystals and agglomerates withdrawn from the bottom of the conical shaped lower section of the fluidized bed crystallizer. The influences of the flow rate and the initial seed crystal sizes on the generated product size distribution were studied. Steady state operation was achieved, i.e. the median sizes of the collected product crystals remained constant. A simple empirical force balance model based on the Richardson–Zaki relation could be successfully applied to explain main features of the observed internal crystal size distributions.Crystallization is one of the most effective ways to produce chemicals of high purity ( The application of fluidized bed crystallizers ranges from waste water treatment ( In 1967 an elegant continuous process performing a kinetic resolution of two stereoisomers was put into production exploiting a fluidized bed crystallizer combined with the continuous generation of seed particles by applying a low frequency ultrasonic (US) field to maintain the crystallization process in a steady state ( Only a few researchers have attempted to develop mathematical models for seeded fluidized bed crystallization processes. This is mainly due to the complex nature of the fluidized bed process and the still limited application of this type of crystallizers in the industry ( To optimize the performance of the crystallization process performed in a fluidized bed regime, the knowledge of the crystal size distribution (CSD) along the reactor height during the crystallization process is important. By changing the inlet fluid flow rate, the desired crystal size distribution can be shifted and eventually adjusted to the certain product outlet positions. Furthermore, the size of the product crystals can be significantly influenced by the specific seed crystal sizes ( The materials used in this work are the amino-acids  In order to study the crystal growth and product size distribution during the fluidized bed crystallization process, a pilot plant setup was constructed. A scheme of the experimental facility is shown in For the withdrawal of crystal suspension, seven outlets have been provided along the height From the top of the crystallizer, part of the solution was transported with the help of a peristaltic pump (5) for analysis of the solution concentration through a polarimeter (6) and densitometer (7) and then sent back into the feed tank. From the bottom of the crystallizer, part of the suspension was constantly pumped through a tempered US bath (8), where the crystals and crystal agglomerates were comminuted. 10% of the maximum power output of the device was applied at 35 Two series of experiments were conducted in order to characterize the dynamics and the steady state process by applying different flow rates and studying the crystal size distributions. In In a first series of experiments, the CSD was studied along the height of the crystallizer under the influence of three flow rates on the example of The influence of the different methods of production of the initially added seed crystals on the product CSDs of A second series of experiments was conducted by using a saturated solution of For inline monitoring and observation of the “steady state” of the fluidized bed, a FBRM probe (FBRM 400S, Mettler Toledo) was used at the crystallizer outlet III by keeping the flow rate constant for 15–20 All CSD measurements were additionally compared with light microscope image analyses of the offline taken samples. Solid state phase analysis of product crystals of the substances used was done with XRPD measurements. Hence, the solid phase has been identified as Saturated solutions were prepared according to the solubility data of the respected substance. These thermodynamic data were measured in preliminary experiments in a temperature interval between 10 and 50 The description of the results achieved and their discussion will be given in three sections. In the first section, the results of the first series of experimental studies regarding the observed crystal size distribution of In The data from In In It can be seen in The wide product CSD in From the It can be concluded from the results of the first series of experiments that the obtained CSDs of In the second series of experiments, the segregation of the crystals of The in-line FBRM monitoring started after addition of the crystals from the top of the crystallizer and their complete settling at the bottom. Shortly afterwards, the flow rate was increased to 6  Below an even simpler model is utilized to predict the position of a single particle in an up-flowing liquid phase, neglecting hydrodynamic details and particle–particle interactions. The Richardson–Zaki correlation is known to be effective in predicting bed expansion characteristics of a fluidized bed of mono-sized spherical particles ( In order to identify the position of a particle with diameter, At steady state, both forces introduced have equal values but different signs, Based on the given equations, a particle diameter can be evaluated in the homogeneous fluidized bed for a corresponding specific height under steady state conditions. In order to conform the calculated spherical particles to the real crystal shapes differing from spheres, a sphericity parameter, The void fraction, The results from the fluidized bed crystallization run of It can be seen from the figure that experimental For the determination of the sphericity parameter, Another validation of the simplified model (Eqs. It can be seen from the figure, that with increasing flow rate, the drag force The experimental and predicted median crystal size values for Comparing the derived median crystal sizes with the microscopic images, it can be concluded that the results from FBRM measurements and microscopic observations are in good agreement, although measurements were conducted at two different but adjacent outlets. An experimental study of the crystal size distribution of Future objectives include the application of preferential crystallization for enantioseparation in two coupled fluidized bed crystallizers to produce continuously pure enantiomers with well-defined crystal sizes. This project is supported by the