Lisfranc fracture-dislocation is rare. The authors report a retrospective series of 17 cases managed by a single surgeon between 1990 and 1998. The series comprised 12 male (71%) and five female patients, aged between 11 and 62 years (mean age=33.4 years). Etiology was predominantly road accidents (64%). On Lerat classification, 12 lesions were homolateral and five divergent. Seventy eight percent of the patients had other associated lesions and 53% were polytraumatised. Fourteen patients were treated by pinning: percutaneous in six cases and open in eight; the other three patients were seen at a late stage and underwent Lisfranc joint realignment arthrodesis. One patient died from severe cranial trauma; 12 were followed up for between 1 and 7 years (mean follow-up=4.5 years).
                  The eight patients managed by open or closed K-wire fixation and who were followed up had a mean midfoot Kitaoka score of 78/100: five results were good or excellent, two fair and one poor. Only 40% of the X-ray checks were strictly normal, the others disclosing joint alterations. The three cases managed by realignment arthrodesis showed union at 4 months' follow-up, with a mean Kitaoka score of 88.3/100 (2 excellent and one fair result).Fracture-dislocations of the tarso-metatarsal joint are rare, amounting to no more than 0.2% of fractures as a whole We here report a retrospective series of 17 Lisfranc joint fracture-dislocations treated by surgery, and discuss the means of managing such lesions. Between 1990 and 1998, 17 patients were treated for Lisfranc joint fracture-dislocation, 14 in emergency and 3 scheduled. All were operated by the same surgeon (JLB) in the traumatology–orthopaedics department of first the Edouard Herriot Hospital in Lyon (France) and then the Lyon-Sud Hospital. There were 12 male patients (71%) and five female, with a mean age of 33.4 years (range, 11–62 years). Etiology was principally road accidents (11 cases=64%); there were also two falls from windows, two other falls and two crushing injuries (one with a dodgem car, one with a motorbike). Twelve lesions were in the left foot and five in the right. Fracture-dislocation was diagnosed on the basis of a clinical aspect comprising mid-foot pain, swelling and deformity and X-ray examination with AP, 3/4 medial and lateral views. On Lerat's classification 14 patients were operated in emergency, with closed reduction and percutaneous pinning in 6 cases (with 3 or 4 divergent pins, depending on the lesion), and open reduction with K-wire fixation in eight. The approach was lateral longitudinal in three of these eight cases, medial longitudinal in two cases and combined medial–lateral in the other three cases. 3 patients had secondary realignment arthrodesis 2 months after trauma: one had undergone percutaneous pinning in another hospital, with poor immediate post-operative reduction; the other two were polytrauma cases, one with a neglected Lisfranc lesion and the other with a lesion which had been managed by short-leg non-walking cast due to contraindications for anaesthesia. All patients were immobilised in non-weight-bearing cast for 45 days; on K-wire ablation on day 45, a short-leg walking cast was prescribed for a further 3–6 weeks. The patients had follow-up appointments with a different physician from the department. This post-operative examination comprised: clinical a check-up; functional assessment in terms of mid-foot Kitaoka grading Among the 17 patients, 1 polytrauma victim died on day 15 following severe cranial and thoraco-abdominal trauma, and 3 were lost to follow-up. Ten (59%) kept their post-operative appointment, two were questioned by phone and 1 refused to cooperate. Mean follow-up was 4.5 years (range, 1–7 years). Four patients presented algodystrophy of the affected foot (two secondarily to open K-wire fixation and two secondarily to percutaneous pinning). This number may seem high, but this diagnosis was made only on clinical criteria (night pain, extended regional pain and swelling) with or without X-ray criteria (osteoporosis), without bone-scan proof. We did not find evident causal factors: no compartment syndrome or peripheral nerve damage. Three others had persistent lower limb oedema. Partial break-up of the osteosynthesis (K-wire fixation of an M1 base fracture-dislocation) was observed in one patient who had undergone open reduction. One patient required repeat surgery: he had had complex mid-foot trauma with associated comminuted 2nd and 3rd metatarsal head fracture and 4th metatarso–phalangeal fracture-dislocation, initially treated by open K-wire fixation. Significant residual pain persisted, for which partial (3rd cuneiform/3rd metatarsal, and 4th and 5th metatarso–cuboid) Lisfranc arthrodesis was performed, by a different surgeon, 3 years after the accident, followed by further medial arthrodesis performed by our own team 6 months later. At 7 years' follow-up, the result was poor (Kitaoka score=45/100) functionally, clinically and radiographically, despite the fact that there was fusion of the arthrodesis. The non-reoperated patients (13 out of 14) followed up in our study had a mean Kitaoka score of 78.4/100 (range, 53–91): i.e. five excellent or good results, and one fair and one poor result; there was no difference in this respect between percutaneous synthesis and open reduction (see No complications were to be observed in the three patients managed by realignment-arthrodesis. Their mean Kitaoka score was 88.3/100, with two excellent results and one fair (see Orthopaedic management by closed reduction and cast immobilisation gave high rates of failure All authors are agreed on the need for surgical management, but there are still some points which remain controversial. Should reduction be closed or open? What means of synthesis (screws or K-wires) should be used in open surgery? What place does primary arthrodesis have in the surgical management of new Lisfranc fractures? Whatever the means used, tarso-metatarsal fracture-dislocation management has to meet 3 criteria: anatomic reduction of the fracture, stable fixation Certain authors favour percutaneous pinning whenever closed reduction under fluoroscopy is feasible For other authors We tend to favour open reduction with K-wire fixation. Percutaneous pinning was, however, performed in this series, especially in the case of simple fracture-dislocation, and sometimes in cases of polytrauma because of the other lesions needing to be managed jointly. Any difficulty or defect in reduction found under fluoroscopy led us to perform open K-wire fixation. The fact that the functional results (in terms of Kitaoka score) were exactly the same with both methods, despite the fact that the more complex cases were managed by open reduction, confirms that open reduction–fixation is preferable to closed reduction, as already reported by Myerson In contrast, we recommend realignment-arthrodesis for neglected or mismanaged fractures and/or dislocations seen more than a month later. Isolated 1st metatarso–cuneiform joint arthrodesis may be indicated for severe columnar lesions, whereas partial, spatula arthrodesis gives consistently poor results Neglected Lisfranc lesions cause serious disability Lisfranc fractures need diagnosing early on the basis of a clinical examination and a strict X-ray assessment comprising AP, strict lateral and 3/4 oblique views. The prime prognostic factor is the quality of the reduction and the stability of the assembly. If closed anatomic reduction is achieved, fixation is to be ensured by percutaneous pinning. In case of fractures which are complex or hard to reduce, open reduction is mandatory, synthesis being ensured by K-wire fixation or else screw fixation in the case of the metatarso–cuneiform joints.