Lignocellulosic substrates are associated with limited biodegradability due to the structural complexity. For that reason, a pretreatment step is mandatory for efficient biomass transformation which will lead to increased bioenergy output. The aim of the present study was to assess the efficiency of two pretreatment machines to enhance the methane yield of meadow grass. Specifically, the application of shearing forces with a rotated plastic sweeping brush against a steel roller significantly increased biomass biodegradability by 20% under relatively gentle operation conditions (600 rpm). The more intense operation (1200 rpm) was not associated with higher methane yield enhancement. Regarding an alternative machine, in which the brush was replaced with a coarse steel roller resulted in a more distinct effect (+27%) despite the lower rotating speed (∼400 rpm). Moreover, the association of the substrate’s individual chemical components and the practical methane yield was assessed, establishing single and multiple linear regression models. However, the estimation accuracy was rather low with either single (regressor: lignin, R
                     2: 0.50) or multiple linear regression analyses (regressors: arabinan-lignin-protein, R
                     2: 0.61). Results showed that poorly lignified plant tissue containing relatively high fractions of protein and arabinan is more susceptible to anaerobic digestion.Agricultural land (i.e. arable land, permanent crops, permanent meadows and pastures) covers more than 37% of the total land surface with lignocellulosic biomass as the main organic component ( The biomass’ characteristics, such as plant size, shape and moisture content are crucial for efficient biomethanation and also, optimal process performance. Thus, lignocellulosic materials need to be pretreated prior to their introduction in the anaerobic reactor in order to avoid operational problems (e.g. clogging, floating layers) ( Moreover, for the overall sustainability of the pretreatment method, durability and robustness of equipment is of high importance. For instance, the performance of equipment can be deteriorated in real-life applications and in cases that large materials other than biomass are processed in error (e.g. metal pieces or stones). Thus, machine’s lifetime can be markedly decreased or the equipment can collapse adding extra costs. In this context, the controlled and optimized operation of full-scale harvesting machines can remarkably reduce the energy input and in parallel, increase the output of lignocellulose-based AD ( Of equal importance with pretreatment’s efficiency for high bioenergy output are the feedstock’s characteristics. For instance, biomass biodegradability is negatively correlated to the level of cell walls lignification ( The present study aims to elucidate the efficiency of two mechanical pretreatment methods for enhancing the biogas production from meadow grass. The performance was evaluated with respect to different operational parameters (i.e. different rotating speeds and biomass loads). Meadow grass was used a model biomass for the pretreatment tests due to its high availability in marginal lands and environmentally sensitive areas. Specifically, the meadow grass that is not used for grazing during summer due to its low fodder value can with great benefit be exploited for bioenergy purposes. Moreover, the correlation among substrate’s chemical characteristics and methane yield was examined to develop a rapid and reliable model to predict lignocellulose’s biodegradability. The development of an efficient prediction tool could allow the biogas plant operators to successfully assess the energy output that can be obtained by a given substrate. This application signifies, its high importance for real-life practices. On this subject, a heterogeneous dataset using various agricultural substrates were used to develop a prediction model. Inoculum was obtained from the effluent tank of a thermophilic biogas plant (Snertinge, Denmark). The inoculum was immediately transported to the laboratory and subsequently, was sieved to remove particles larger than 10 mm. Afterwards, the inoculum was incubated for 10 days at thermophilic temperature to remove background methane production. The main chemical characteristics of the inoculum were: pH: 8.07, Total Solids (TS): 24.1 ± 0.1 g/L, Volatile Solids (VS): 15.0 ± 0.1 g/L, Total Kjeldahl Nitrogen (TKN): 4.6 ± 0.2 g-TKN/L, Ammonium Nitrogen: 3.8 ± 0.1 g To define the correlation between methane production and lignocellulosic substrates’ chemical composition, diverse species were examined; grass obtained from various meadows (i.e. M1–M7), grass clippings (GC), wheat straw (WS) and digested biofibers (DB). Samples of non-cultivated meadow grass were manually collected from natural grasslands. The meadow fields were mainly consisted of white clover, tetraploid hybrid ryegrass, diploid early perennial ryegrass and diploid medium-early perennial ryegrass. For proper silage fermentation, the grasses were kept intact at room temperature for two days to be partially dried, and then, were placed in anaerobically sealed plastic bags without injecting biological additives for sixty days. Grass clippings and wheat straw were collected from fields in Zealand, Denmark. Overall, ten different lignocellulosic substrates were examined in triplicate samples. The chemical composition of the used substrates is presented in Meadow grass was used in order to assess the efficiency of mechanical pretreatments on biogas enhancement ( Batch assays were conducted to determine the Biochemical Methane Potential (BMP) of untreated and pretreated substrates according to the guidelines described by ( Measurements of TS, VS, pH, The effect of mechanical pretreatments on the kinetics of grass anaerobic degradation was evaluated using the modified Gompertz equation: where:      The coefficient of determination (R2) and the root mean square error (RMSE) were calculated in order to evaluate the prediction accuracy of the models ( The methane yields of untreated and pretreated grass with both pretreatment units are summarized in In the present study, the grass flow through the rollers could be improved at moderate rotating speed avoiding blockage of the equipment and thus, the demanding shearing forces were more efficiently applied. Apart from the increments on methane yield, the kinetic parameters were also influenced during pretreatment trials ( As a continuation of the first AD trial, a consecutive BMP test was conducted in order to examine the effect of a modified version of the machine on the biodegradability of lignocellulosic biomass. Specifically, the plastic brush roller was replaced by a coarse corrugated roller. The modifications were conducted based on previous findings which demonstrated that lignocellulosic structural changes are intensified with the application of shearing forces using mesh gratings of coarse steel ( These observations are particularly important as at real grass fields the biomass yield does not have a constant value but considerably varies due to heterogeneity of growth stages, species etc. ( Focusing on full-scale applications, harvester equipped with similar apparatus that apply shearing forces managed to pretreat efficiently lignocellulosic biomass and consequently, could improve the methane yield up to 20% ( Results obtained from the chemical characterization of the examined lignocellulosic substrates and their corresponding BMPs are summarized in Initially, PCA was applied to datasets (i.e. content of glucan, xylan, arabinan, lignin and protein) in order to reveal the correlations among the variables. The PCA biplot shows that the first two principal components explained 91% of total variation ( Previous studies concluded that simple linear regression analysis using the chemical characteristics of substrates cannot lead in high estimation accuracy, but can be used as an initial and time-effective prediction approach ( Linking the chemical composition of lignocellulosic biomass and BMP values was previously assessed using similar variables ( The application of two mechanical pretreatment units revealed to affect positively the methane yield and lag phase of grass-based anaerobic digestion process. The most aggressive machine enhanced the methane yield of meadow grass up to 27% compared to untreated samples. Moreover, the performance of the amended pretreatment unit was not negatively affected by treating increased biomass loads. Single and multiple linear regressions models were built to predict the methane production of diverse lignocellulosic substrates. Moderate correlation was noted ( We acknowledge financial support from EUDP project “New technology for an efficient utilization of meadow grass in biogas reactor”.