Sulphuric acid leaching of electrofilter fines Bayer Plant was investigated at different temperatures, using various particle size fractions and acid concentrations. Results showed that extraction was affected by acid concentration, initial particle size fraction and temperature of leaching. Aluminium dissolution in sulphuric acid increases as temperature does. At 90 °C, the increase in both acid concentration and reaction time has a positive effect on the extraction rate, which is also favoured by the decrease in particle size and solid:liquid ratio.
                  The results of a leaching kinetic study are presented. Heterogeneity of the residue implies the existence of two different kinetics, the first one fundamentally due to the dissolution of the hydrate and the second one, being the case in study, due to the dissolution of transition alumina. The data obtained for the leaching kinetics in this second case, indicated that the dissolution of aluminium is a diffusion controlled reaction.Electrofilter fines are residues generated in considerable amounts in the last stage of the Bayer Process ( In many hydrometallurgical processes, sulphuric acid has been selected as the cheapest and the most effective leachant ( The aim of this study is to determine the effect of temperature, particle size, acid concentration and solid:liquid ratio on the sulphuric acid leaching of electrofilter fines, for aluminium dissolution, which will allow the development of a manufacturing process for aluminium sulphate as a coagulant. This paper presents also the results of a leaching kinetics study of the Bayer electrofilter fines with sulphuric acid. Reactions in heterogeneous systems are complex and involve not only chemical reactions but mass transfer processes. Electrofilter fines from the Bayer alumina plant of S. Ciprian (Spain) were used for all kinetic leaching tests. Fines were characterized using various instrumental techniques such as: atomic absorption spectroscopy, particle size (Lumosed), surface area (BET nitrogen adsorption method), X-ray diffraction ( From data in In the XRD characterization, the crystalline phases present in the electrofilter fines were α-alumina, gibbsite and transition aluminas (Theta) ( The morphological characteristics of the electrofilter powder were observed using the Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM). In the micrograph, ( Leach solutions were prepared by adding an amount of sulphuric acid to distilled water to give the required acid concentration. Extraction experiments were carried out in a batch heated glass reactor equipped with a mechanical stirrer. For each test, the sample and leaching solution of predetermined concentration were charged into the reactor and the mixture was well stirred at 700 rpm. The temperature, particle size and solid:liquid ratio were varied to study the effect of these parameters on aluminium leaching to determine the optimum conditions for the aluminium extraction. Solution samples were withdrawn at definite times and filtered. The aluminium concentration in the filtrate was determined by atomic absorption spectroscopy. From that, the percentage extraction of Al was calculated. Some electrofilter fines were first milled in order to reduce the particle size and then leached with sulphuric acid. Size reduction was carried out by milling using the Sweco model 18/5 mill and SiC cylpebs as grinding media. The parameters considered included: milling time: 8 h (and 18 h); pulp density: 0.438; fines and grinding media, ratio: 0.135; 5 ml of sodium hexametaphosphate (5% in wt) used as dispersant. These milled samples were granulometrically analysed and the specific surface was also determined. The effect of temperature was examined in the range of 20–100 °C under the conditions of As can be seen in The particle size distribution results for the non-milled and milled samples are given in The effect of particle size on the extraction efficiency was studied using average particle sizes of These results show that the particle size has a significant effect on the dissolution of aluminium when the samples which have not been milled were compared with the ones milled for 8 h. After 5 min of leaching time, 18.2–23.3% of Al was extracted and after 180 min it rose to 32.7–39.4%, depending on the particle size, for an acid concentration of 50%. Similar effect was observed when the leaching was carried out with acid at 30% with similar aluminium extraction. It was observed that the aluminium dissolution increases both, with the time and when the particle size decreases. This can be due to the fact that with 8 h milling, part of the occluded gibbsite was freed and therefore easier to lixiviate. However, milling it for longer times (18 h) can produce changes in the hydrates, which makes them more resistant to the attack with sulphuric acid, obtaining alumina extraction percentages similar to the initial samples with long lixiviation periods, as can be seen it in Keeping the same lixiviation conditions, except for the particle size, the highest aluminium extraction corresponds to the samples milled for 8 h. The explanation for this fact comes from the porosimetric study carried out on the samples using mercury injection on Micromeritics Pore Sizer model 9305. The curves that show the porosity of the samples, Electrofilter fines of The effect of acid concentration (20, 30 and 50 wt.%) was evaluated at 90 °C with an agitation speed of 700 rpm using and a solid:liquid ratio of 30 wt.%. A plot of the percentage of extracted Al against time is presented in The rate of leaching and overall extraction increased with acid concentration. Extraction with 20% acid gave extraction efficiencies above 18% after 180 min for all size fractions. However, as acid concentration was increased above 20%, extraction increases to values 32.2–37.1%. The effect of solid:liquid ratios (10 and 30 wt.%) was studied using acid concentrations 30 and 50 wt.% H According to experimental results and regarding solid:liquid ratio change from 30 to 10% there was no significant increase in Al extraction when using 50 wt.% acid concentration. However, Al extraction increased when 30% acid concentration was used and solid:liquid ratio increased. The effect that predominates was the concentration of acid. This is due to the fact that the quantity of acid available for the reaction is higher and it can attack soluble Al better when low solid:liquid ratio are used. In  An X-ray diffraction analysis was carried out on the original sample for 8-h milled and leached for 5 and 180 min (see The aluminium extracted after 5 min of lixiviation process was higher than the amount of gibbsite content in the electrofilter dust. However, the diffractogram of the leached residue shows that there still remains gibbsite which had not been attacked. Aluminium present in electrofilter powders reacts with sulphuric acid according to the following reaction: Due to the product heterogeneity as indicated by the X-ray diffractogram of Different tests carried out with Bayer alumina hydrate samples using solid:liquid ratio of 10% and an acid concentration of 30% confirmed the fast dissolution of the hydrate ( For the kinetic study of reaction (1), tests were carried out by increasing the lixiviation time to 1080 min in order to obtain a higher dissolution of aluminium. The tests were done with a solid:liquid ratio of 10% and using acid concentrations of 30% and 50% keeping the temperature and stirring rate constant. In order to obtain the kinetic equation, the experimental data were transformed and correlated to various kinetic models for solid–liquid reactions. The rate of a reaction between a solid and a liquid can be expressed according to the heterogeneous reaction models. The rate of reaction decreases with time, this could be due to the reduction of the reactant surface or in reactant concentration ( A heterogeneous reaction may be controlled by: The surface chemical reaction. The fluid film diffusion. The product layer diffusion. Rate control by chemical reaction at the particle surface ( Based on the experimental data, plots of [1 In the case of The data cannot be correlated by this model as neither straight lines nor zero point intercepts were obtained. When the diffusion in fluid layer is rate controlling, the kinetics may be correlated graphically using this equation: Based on the experimental data, plots of [1   None of the straight lines can be considered close enough to fit the experimental data to suggest a fluid layer diffusion model for the leaching process. When the diffusion through the product layer is rate controlling, the kinetics may be correlated graphically using this equation: The plot of [1   Results of the sulphuric acid leaching of Bayer electrofilter fines showed that the rate and level of extraction of aluminium are affected by the reaction temperature, particle size, solid:liquid ratio and acid concentration. Higher temperatures increase the aluminium extraction. The Al extraction reached 19.5% after 1 h for 20 °C and 28.2% at 90 °C; no significant improvement in results can be achieved at boiling temperatures. The results show that the aluminium extractions at 90 °C increase when the particle size decreases and when the specific surface is also increased. A higher concentration of acid also improves the aluminium dissolution as well as a longer time of reaction. At 90 °C, the extraction rate increases when the particle size and solid:liquid ratio are decreased, the concentration of acid is increased, and the reaction time is longer. Heterogeneity of the residue implies the existence of two different kinetics, the first one fundamentally due to the dissolution of the hydrate and the second one, being the case in study, due to the dissolution of transition alumina. The kinetic study indicates that the leaching of Bayer electrofilter fines is diffusion in the solid layer controlled process.