Synthetic minerals consisting of cement with different added components were used to investigate the breakage effect induced by high-voltage pulses in metallic and non-metallic components. Both inter- and intra-mineral induced effects were investigated. The results showed that the main determining factors on the induced effects were mineral properties and distance from the electrodes. For single-ball embedded synthetic minerals, the induced effect was mainly affected by the ball size and location in synthetic minerals. For multi-ball embedded synthetic minerals, there were no obvious differences in the induced effects, although the number of balls does affect the direction and density of current beams. The induced effect was mainly affected by the dielectric differences in the mineral components and it showed the characteristic of relativity. Its breakage behavior is mainly influenced by minerals associated with him. The induced effect was also shown by non-metallic components under specific conditions.Metals are one of the most important resources for modern industrial societies. The primary sources of metals in nature are ores. As a result of exploitation, high-quality ores are gradually being exhausted; therefore, low-quality ores are becoming increasingly important raw materials for mineral processing worldwide ( Andres ( Previous studies have focused on the selective fragmentation of minerals containing different components, with exclusive attention devoted to the metallic components. In the present study, minerals containing metal and non-metal components were fragmented to explore the inter-granular and intra-granular induction mechanisms and investigate the main factors affecting the induction process. In this paper, the overall train of thought is organized as follows. And the train of thought map is shown in The use of cement to study the mechanisms of mineral breakage is widespread in the literature and a higher similarity was shown with nature minerals ( The iron and glass balls with different dielectric properties were selected. For the manufacture of samples, the iron ball or glass ball were placed in the cement during the manufacturing process. Three type of ball positions in synthetic minerals were used in this paper: up, middle and down. As shown in Previous studies for high voltage pulse breakage have employed single particle and multi-particle breakage methods ( Experimental parameters and results are shown in  In addition, the effect of ball position (3 mm up“3U”, 3 mm middle“3M”, 3 mm down“3D”) of synthetic minerals on the induced effect was investigated. The experimental conditions and results in To investigate the influence of iron ball content, breakage tests for synthetic minerals embedded with 2% and 4% (mass content of iron ball) were carried out. In accordance with described in The effect of ball size and content on the product size distributions after 5 pulses was investigated, with the results shown in Synthetic minerals with 6 mm iron balls (I), glass balls (G), inner pores (P) and pure cement (C) were used to investigate the influence of mineral components on the induced effect. The induced effect among different minerals was investigated. The breakage characteristics of I VS (versus) G, G VS P, P VS C were compared. The iron ball, glass ball and pore were all located in the mineral sample center. The placement of mineral samples with different components is the same as that shown in Similar breakage rates were shown for G VS C. The breakage rates of I VS G were 73.33% and 26.67%, respectively, and those of P VS C were 86.67% and 33.33%, respectively. What’s more, the breakage test of C was conducted and its breakage rate was found to be 36.67%.  The induced effect of the mineral components (i.e. iron balls, glass balls, and pores) in inter mineral samples was investigated. During the tests, the voltage was set to 170 kV, the pulse number was 1 and the electrode gap was 25 mm.   As As As The same minerals showed different breakage rates under different mineral combinations, which indicates that the induced effect depends on the relative positions of the balls in minerals—i.e., the closer the ball to the electrode, the higher the breakage rate and the stronger the induced effect from the high-voltage pulse discharge. Moreover, the breakage rate of minerals under high-voltage pulses, which is affected by the combined minerals, is not fixed. During high-voltage pulse discharge, the electrodes used in the chamber were needle-plate electrodes, which formed a non-symmetrical, unstable electric dependent on the sample characteristics. A high-strength electric field is generated at the position where the metal ball size is either large or relatively close to the electrodes. As As As For As As The induced effect of minerals on high voltage pulse discharge is relative, and the intensity of induced effect is also a relative concept. The induced effect of minerals on discharge was mainly related to the combination minerals. The breakage behavior is mainly influenced by minerals associated with him. As shown in According to the data in The breakage rates of the same minerals were counted in this study. As shown in Different results were also shown for the same samples in intra-mineral breakage test. For G, the induction was weakened and disappeared with the increasing distance between ball and electrode, and the relativity of induced effect was still reflected. The induced effect in minerals was mainly determined by their attraction to pulse discharge, which enhances the breakage rate of itself and reduces the breakage rate of combined minerals. For single-ball embedded minerals, the ball size and location are the main factors which determine induced effect. Stronger induced effect was shown by minerals with larger ball sizes and those closer to the electrodes. For multiple-balls minerals, the ball size and content have no obvious influence on the induced effect, but will affect the number of current beams and change the progeny distribution of the products. The induced effect was shown by both metallic and non-metallic components. The induction intensities of different components were consistent with the differences in dielectric constants. The order of induction intensity was I > P > G. Moreover, the induced effects were relative, with G showing no obvious induced effect in the inter-granular tests, whereas the induced effect was present in the intra-granular tests. The induced effect was mainly affected by presence of the competing minerals, being stronger under the competing minerals with weaker induced effect. The results of this study demonstrated the relative induced effect by high-voltage electric pulses, which is helpful in understanding the effects of changing mineral characteristics on high-voltage pulse breakage, and in better guiding the applications of high-voltage pulses.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The work is the