In this paper, the cell average discretization [Kumar, J., Peglow, M., Warnecke, G., Heinrich, S., & Mörl, 2006a. Improved accuracy and convergence of discretized population balance for aggregation: The cell average technique. Chemical Engineering Science, 61, 3327–3342] is extended to solving multi-dimensional population balance equations. Similar to the one-dimensional case, the scheme is based on an accurate prediction of certain moments of the population. The formulation is quite simple to implement, computationally not expensive and highly accurate. Numerical diffusion is a common problem with many numerical methods when applied on coarse grids. The presented technique nearly eliminates numerical diffusion and predicts four moments (zeroth, first, first cross and second) of the distribution function with high accuracy. The technique may be implemented on any type of grid. The accuracy of the scheme has been analyzed by comparing analytical and numerical solutions of three test problems. The numerical results are in excellent agreement with the analytical results and show the ability to predict higher moments very precisely. Additionally, an extension of the proposed technique to higher dimensional problems is discussed.fraction of particles birth rate death rate multi-dimensional number density function integration limits heaviside function total number of cells degree of aggregation properties average properties number initial number of particles time property flux aggregation kernel Kronecker delta Dirac-delta distribution particle property particle distribution function fractions the cell average fixed pivot granule size distribution population balance equation particle property distribution particle size distribution Population balances are well known in various branches of engineering including crystallization, comminution, precipitation, polymerization, aerosol and emulsion processes. These processes are characterized by the presence of a continuous phase and a dispersed phase composed of particles with a distribution of properties. The particles might be crystals, grains, drops or bubbles and may have several properties like size, composition, porosity and enthalpy. Many applications consider the size of a particle as the only relevant particle property and can be modeled using one-dimensional population balance equation. It is comparatively easy to measure and therefore commonly used to characterize a particle. It may be determined in various forms such as a typical length, area, volume or mass. It might be diameter in case of a sphere, side-length for a cube, surface area or volume for more complicated particles. The traditional one-dimensional population balance models assume that granule size, usually volume, is the only independent granule property that influences the granulation process. A one-dimensional PBE for growth, agglomeration and breakage has been applied to numerous processes in chemical engineering such as crystallization, granulation and agglomeration, see An application of a multi-dimensional PBE appears from simultaneous agglomeration and drying in fluidized bed granulation, see  In this paper, we provide a general perspective of multi-dimensional population balances for pure aggregation problems and discretized methods to solve them. There are two reasons to consider the pure aggregation process. First, numerical methods for multi-dimensional aggregation problems are highly demanding and secondly derivation of a numerical scheme for solving multi-dimensional aggregation problems is of great difficulty. The solution of a multi-dimensional problem is computationally highly expensive and therefore we will derive a numerical scheme for a two-dimensional PBE. Nevertheless, the idea of the numerical scheme could easily be extended to An The aggregation kernel of a multi-dimensional PBE is denoted by Numerical solution of the above PBE We present a new numerical technique to solve the two-dimensional PBE Furthermore, a similar extension of the fixed pivot technique by We now present the extension of the cell average technique to the two-dimensional PBE We now formulate the cell average idea mathematically. Let us define the discrete number density For notational convenience  Integrating the Eq. It should be noted that our main concern is the discretization of the property variables and therefore, for notational convenience, we have omitted writing Here The birth and death terms are given as For uniform liner grids, Eq. The birth term Similarly, the net flux of the extensive property y, Consequently, the average property values of all newborn particles in the cell If these average values The above system of equations (four variables and five equations) has a unique solution, see Furthermore, it is easy to show that the assignment process of particles is also consistent with the first cross moment It must be pointed out here that the particles assignment process is consistent with the first cross moment  It is clear now that the formulation is consistent with Now Collecting all birth contributions to the node Here  It is also of interest to mention the discrete formulation of a one-dimensional PBE in the form presented above and to see the similarity between them. The discrete formulation for the one-dimensional case can be rewritten as Clearly the two-dimensional formulation is a direct extension of the one-dimensional case. We have written the formulation Now it is easy to formulate the extended version of the fixed pivot technique for two-dimensional problems in the similar way. The basic difference between the two techniques is the averaging of properties. The reassignment strategy is the same in both the techniques. If a newborn particle appears due to aggregation or breakage in the dotted domain in Consider that a birth takes place at Let us denote the fraction of the birth assigned to the node Now the continuous PBE Substituting the Note that besides the correct prediction of total mass and number the fixed pivot technique is consistent with the first cross moment In order to show the effectiveness of the two numerical techniques, we now present some comparisons of the numerical solutions with analytical solutions of two components processes. The aim is to demonstrate the difference between the extended cell average and fixed pivot techniques. We will consider three different test cases in this section. The first test case presents the computation on a complete two-dimensional problem to check the ability of the schemes to estimate the complete particle property distribution and its moments. The second test case is a one-dimensional problem computed by the extended techniques to demonstrate the numerical diffusion (smearing effect). Finally a more complicated two-dimensional case will be considered. In all the following case studies we have used a higher order positivity preserving ODE solver to solve the resulting set of ODEs. When integrating the resultant system using a standard ODE routine, for example ODE45, ODE15S solvers in MATLAB, we observed some negative values for the number density at large sizes. These negative values may lead in the sequel to instabilities of the whole system. Therefore, one should take care of the positivity of the solution by the numerical integration routine. We force the positivity in our numerical results using an adaptive time step Runge–Kutta method. The step size adjustment algorithm is based on embedded Runge–Kutta formulas, originally invented by Fehlberg. It uses a fifth-order method with six functions evaluation where another combination of the six functions gives a fourth order method. The difference between the two estimates is used as an estimate of the truncation error to adjust the step size. A more detailed description of the method and information about implementation can be found in First we considered a problem from He considered a discrete aggregation problem of two different types of particles. Analytical solutions of moments for the constant kernels have been summarized in As expected, the prediction of the zeroth and first moments in  We cannot conclude from this test problem the choice of a better technique. The fixed pivot technique predicts three moments accurately but fails to predicts other higher moments. On the other hand, the cell average predicts higher moments with good accuracy. Let us consider the same initial condition and other parameters as before with a sum kernel It is clear from this test case that the cell average technique predicts higher moments with great accuracy. On the other hand, a diverging behavior of some higher moments at large times has been observed by the fixed pivot technique. More interestingly, some unexpected results of the first cross moment in the case of sum kernel have been obtained by the fixed pivot technique. These results by the fixed pivot technique are supposed to be predicted with very high accuracy or at least with better accuracy than those obtained by the cell average technique. But as we have seen, the numerical results by the fixed pivot technique in the case of the sum kernel are very poor. Next we will see that the cell average technique predicts not only higher moments accurately but also suffers from much less numerical diffusion (smearing effect). Here we compute a one-dimensional problem with both extended techniques. We consider aggregation of mono-disperse 2-mer granules, i.e., each granule is composed of two primary particles of different properties. Whenever two granules aggregate they will form a new granule with an equal number of primary particles of each type. In that way it is a one-dimensional problem. The new granules will be formed along the diagonal only. The aim here is to calculate the PSD using both techniques and to see the numerical diffusion in each case. The computation is done with the constant aggregation kernel at The distribution of granules has been presented in Furthermore, different moments of granule distribution have been compared with the analytical solutions. The first cross moments are plotted in Now we compare numerical results with the analytical solution from Similar to other cases, the first two moments Before concluding this section, some attention to the computational time must be given. The computations are made on a Pentium-4 PC with 1.5 The cell average and also the fixed pivot techniques have been extended for solving two-dimensional aggregation population balance equations. The schemes are based on internal consistency of some selected properties. We have chosen the consistency of the first two moments of the population. In the cell average technique, this is done by collecting all of the particles in a cell and then distributing them to neighboring cells so that the scheme is consistent with the first two moments. On the other hand, in the fixed pivot technique the newborn particles of different sizes in a cell have been distributed to neighboring nodes separately without collecting them first at a intermediate pivot in the cell. Moreover, it has been observed that with this setting the prediction of one extra higher moment, the first cross moment of the distribution, is preserved during the redistribution of the particles in the fixed pivot technique. As a result, the fixed pivot technique becomes internally consistent with three different moments. While the cell average technique remains consistent with the first two moments only. However, the numerical results of moments in the case of a size-dependent kernel show that the cell average technique makes better prediction of moments compared to the fixed pivot technique. The accuracy of numerical results has been shown by comparing the particle size distribution and its moments for several test problems. Similar to the one-dimensional case, the numerical results show that the cell average scheme has potential to predict the number density distribution as well as higher moments with better accuracy. We have presented the cell average technique for two-dimensional aggregation problems in such a way that it could easily be extended for more than two-dimensional problems. But it will in that case become computationally very expensive. Therefore some other criteria to reduce the computational cost should be proposed. The birth rate in a cell is given as Assuming Substituting It can be further simplified to the form: Similar steps can be followed for discrete death rate as For a finite domain, truncated up to Using the definition of Dirac-delta distribution, we obtain: Again we make use of Dirac-delta distribution to give We want to prove the following equality: We take the left hand side (L.H.S.) and substitute the values We want to solve the following system of equations: Operate  Operate  Operate  Operate  Operate Operate Operate   For a constant kernel, analytical solution is given as