Mixer settler is widely applied in solvent extraction, especially in hydrometallurgy and rare earth element separation. The study and development of the settlers are to achieve clean separation, reduce the loss of the reagents and the occupied areas. Hydrodynamic characteristics of settlers have been investigated in present work, both by experimental and numerical approaches. Experiments that explored the influences of different parameters on the settling characteristics, such as impeller speed in mixer, volume flow of aqueous and organic phase, have been conducted by particle image velocimetry (PIV). Meanwhile, a three dimensional computational fluid dynamic (CFD) simulation has been developed to predict the flow characteristics of the settler, which was proved to be well consistent with experimental data. Preliminary explorations of new design with baffles were proposed. Compared with the non-baffle settler, the residence time distribution was increased and entrainment in the aqueous outlet was reduced in the settler with baffles, which indicated a better phase separation. The hydrodynamic simulation offers an easier, cheaper and time-saving idea to realize better designs for a settler.Rare earth elements (REEs) are known as industrial vitamins that contain 17 elements, including 15 lanthanides and scandium and yttrium ( Many researchers have studied the performance of settlers, both by experimental and computational approaches. In addition to liquid-liquid flow characteristics, investigators also concerned about the time problems, especially phase separation time (PST) and residence time distribution (RTD). To describe flow hydrodynamics in settler, numerical models that considered the influences of droplet movement and interaction are favorable. In present work, we combined the experimental measurement with the numerical simulation to study flow characteristics and settling performance in a settler. PIV was applied to inspect the effect of parameters (energy input from mixer, flow ratio) on the settling characteristics. Meanwhile, a 3D CFD simulation was carried out to predict the performance of the settler. Furthermore, the flow behavior of settler with and without baffles was compared to acquire an optimal design, as well as the residence time distribution and entrainment in the aqueous outlet. The computational fluid dynamics would provide a more convenient approach to design industrial settler. The mixer-settler employed in this study was made of plexiglass for laboratory purpose. It was a rectangular vessel with 800 As shown in All the simulations were carried out with Fluent 6.3.26. The basic equations in a CFD simulation are conservation of mass, momentum and energy. Since it is a gravitational settling process, the model involves two immiscible liquids, and the flow can be considered as incompressible. The Eulerian multiphase model and the standard k– The first order discretization scheme was applied for momentum, turbulent kinetic energy and for the energy dissipation. SIMPLE method was adopted for the pressure-velocity coupling. The under relaxation parameters were adjusted as required for the convergence. The simulations were considered to be converged when the system had good stability and the residuals of momentum, velocity components, turbulent kinetic energy and its dissipation rate equations fell below 10 The numerical model of the settler was modeled in GAMBIT. The buffer zones in the outlets were simplified for convergence. Hybrid grids were generated to acquire high quality mesh, with unstructured tetrahedral grid for the outlet and hexahedral grid for the rest part, giving a total grid number about 4,210,000. The model built based on laboratory entity was shown in At the inlet, a constant velocity was specified and at the outlets, pressure outlet boundaries were assumed. Turbulence of the fluid was reflected by the turbulent intensity and hydraulic diameter. The droplets were supposed to behave as rigid non-interacting spheres of fixed size. Besides, an organic-aqueous interface was assumed as the initial condition. The volume flow rate of water was fixed at 6 When the flow collided to the bottom wall, there was a distinct backflow. When the backflow encountered the incoming flow, a small eddy was produced near the bottom of the inlet. Obviously, the velocity of the aqueous phase in the forepart and lower part was more intensive than back end. With the increasing of impeller speed, the turbulence in the settler was strengthened as there were more eddies, which was undesirable in a settling process. Emulsification would appear when higher volume fraction of organic phase was involved, which might hinder the camera shooting. Ranged from 0.025 to 0.075, the volume fraction (vf) of organic phase was set as variable to investigate the flow characteristic in settler with a constant rotation speed at 100 The influence of impeller speed at fixed volume fraction of organic phase was probed either (see Despite a more visual understanding of the flow characteristics within the settler, the PIV measurement was limited by the operation conditions. Therefore, we turned to computational fluid dynamics for more information of the flow fields in settler, such as the distribution of the organic phase and the time parameters. Validation is necessary for checking the consistence between the CFD simulations and the experimental data, which make the numerical predictions meaningful. As illustrated in Particularly, the comparison of average velocity for the measuring plane was revealed in Experiments could only offer local velocity information for one of the phases. While by simulations, regional velocity information for aqueous and organic phase would be acquired easily, as well as local distribution of the volume fractions. The model for the settler was initiated with organic-aqueous interface; the velocity vector diagrams demonstrated an apparent dispersion band for organic phase and evident entrainment for the aqueous phase in Analysis of the volume fraction for oil phase that varied with regions has been performed, both in vertical and horizontal. As exposed in Experiments would be obstructed when the systems encountered with an emulsification caused by many factors, such as high rotating speed and high content of organic phase. These knotty problems were smoothly solved by data processing of simulation results. As displayed in As mentioned, Numerical simulations played an important role in settler design, offering reliable predictions and novel approaches for better design. Immobilized the operation conditions with impeller speed at 100 According to the vector and contour diagrams emerged in On account of the baffles, the aqueous phase was inclined to flow upward to the organic layer, resulting in more drastic turbulence. However, the velocity in the rear baffles decreased significantly. Comparisons of organic entrainments in water outlet between four baffle designs with settler without baffle was made to evaluate the separation performance. In terms of entrainments in water outlet, the separation efficiency was improved in settlers with baffles. Accordingly, B120 was superior to B102, B100 and B122, while the difference between B120 and B102 was tiny. In spite of owning three baffles for B122, its performance was inferior to B100 which only had one V-shaped baffle, giving clues that the location of baffles was crucial. A possible explanation for the performance of B122 was that, a short flow was likely to be developed to pass through the middle baffle when two pieces of rectangular baffle was too close. In addition, runs to track tracers were carried out to calculate the residence time distribution of aqueous phase for different designs. The residence time distribution of new structured settler emerged an improvement in flow pattern and suggested a reduction of entrainment. Meanwhile, the disparity of residence time for four baffle design was narrow, within few tens of seconds. Experiments carried out by particle image velocimetry provide a primary cognition for the hydrodynamics flow characteristics of settlers. The influence of different parameters on the settling characteristics has been assigned that increasing impeller speed may strengthen the turbulence flow and the light phase did not change the flow pattern but the direction of circulation flow. Based on the consistence of computational data with experiments, numerical information manipulations offer an opportunity to have a deeper insight into the flow characteristics of settler. The evaluation of dispersion band was applied as criterion for separation efficiency. Without obstruction of emulsification caused by high ratio of organic phase, the fluid flow in settler was obtained, showing a steady flow. Moreover, preliminary explorations of new design with baffles are presented. Though generating a more severely turbulence in oil layer, adding baffles would be an important approach to reduce the velocity came from the mixer, increase separation efficiency in regard to entrainments in aqueous outlet and residence time distribution for aqueous phase. This research was carried out under the Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 