Tumbling mill scale-up has had largely empirical roots. Energy size and energy size distribution relationships have been derived from relatively large data bases combined with a sprinkling of fundamental science. High fidelity simulation (HFS), which is based on multi-physics models, allows one to examine the interactions that occur in a mill amongst media, particles, wear parts and slurry at the microscale level. Thus, fundamental questions concerning particle capture, energy utilization and fragment creation as they depend on “equipment size” can be addressed. In this paper, the process is taken from the single particle breakage level, through laboratory grinding experiments up to full-scale commercial mill operation. The basis for certain empirical relationships is explained in fundamental terms. A look at the future of scale-up based on the use of such tools is presented.The accuracy of tumbling mill scale-up design has always been and will always be determined by the fidelity of the mathematical models used for prediction. In the middle of the last century, In the late 1980s and early 1990s, microscale refinements of the PBM scale-up approach were made in which the underpinning of specific selection and breakage functions were articulated based on impact breakage tests and frequency of breakage energy application spectra ( During the last decade, new high fidelity simulation (HFS) modeling tools have been developed, which promise to overcome many of these limitations identified above. In particular, the use of discrete element method (DEM) simulations of charge motion and the use of energy spectra ( Since 1992, radical enhancements in DEM code making it three-dimensional, the addition of computational fluid dynamics (CFD) to describe fluid motion and its influence of particles and finally particle breakage ( This paper is concerned with exploring the potential of HFS in putting fundamental foundations into existing design procedures and to taking modeling for scale-up design to a new level of accuracy. High fidelity simulation is a mineral processing modeling tool-set consisting of multi-physics models for describing particle and ball motion, slurry flow and breakage within tumbling mills. The first of the tools is DEM of simulation, which provides a numerical procedure for solving Newton's laws of motion for each element (in this case each ball and particle) to predict element position, velocity and forces of interaction over time ( The second tool in the HFS tool-set is computation fluid dynamics (CFD) which numerically solves the Navier Stokes equation for fluid flow bounded by an arbitrary, definable geometry ( The third tool is discrete grain breakage (DGB) modeling which numerically solves the energy conservation equations for crack propagation in a solid particle consisting of discrete grains. The final result of these calculations is progeny size distributions summed up to give overall device product size distributions ( An illustration of the type of microscale detail that can be obtained from a high fidelity simulation of a tumbling mill is shown in Recent efforts by the author have focused on how these tools can be integrated to produce an overall design procedure. Although it is still early in these efforts, the results are promising. In broad outline, this procedure is as follows:  Breakage and/or wear is characterized in the laboratory—Ultra Fast Load Cell ( DEM/CFD models are constructed and executed. Product size distributions are calculated from DGB or PBM. Mill dimensions and/or operating conditions are adjusted and a new simulation is run. This sequence of steps is shown schematically in The steps involved in scale-up design calculations will be illustrated for non-ore concentrate grinding. In this case, the full-scale mill is already operating and therefore a comparison of predictions and actual performance is possible. In this example, scale-up calculations are made based on characterization data obtained from energy monitored batch grinding tests. Here, a 10×11.5-in. batch mill with a torque meter is used with the same fraction of critical speed, ball size distribution, ball filling, particle filling and % solids, and feed size distribution is used as planned for operation of the large mill. In parallel, a 3D simulation of the experimental batch mill was done using DEM as shown in the snapshot in A pre-specified amount of energy is input to the batch mill (kW h/ton of feed) to achieve a product size similar to the target size of the large mill. It was confirmed that the DEM simulation yields the same power draw as the experimental mill (see At the end of the batch test, the product size distribution was determined by sieving to be as shown in At this point, microscale (energy normalized) grinding rate parameters were estimated (by nonlinear regression) by combining the impact energy spectra generated for the DEM mill with the microscale selection of the form given in Eq. The best fit values (with an RMS of 0.0026) are In turn, the microscale selection functions from the batch test were combined with the impact energy spectra for the commercial mill derived from the high fidelity simulations as shown in A comparison of predicted and measured product size distributions for the large mill with a feedrate of 106 mtph is shown in During the course of this study, there has been ample opportunity to test the validity of various empirical scale-up relationships against physics based model predictions. In particular, the influence of mill speed, ball load and mill diameter on power draw was investigated for large and medium size mills. Traditionally, the power draw values are estimated by the empirical Rowland and Kjos model ( In A comparison of predictions of power draw for different mill sizes is shown in It is interesting to note that since the DEM model for power yields a range of values depending on lifter profile and ball size and since the Rowland and Kjos empirical model does not include the effect of these variables, the use of DEM for refined calculations has significant potential. In fact, errors from the empirical predictions are expected to be on the order of 0–7% for a typical range of internals designs. Finally, a comparison of the methods to predict product size distributions including Bond energy size (empirical), population balance models (phenomenological) and DEM/DGB (physics based) modeling was made. The previously proven, scale-up relationships of Bond and the specific energy-based population balance models predict that the products from two mills will basically be of the same size if they receive the same specific energy. Thus, the energy normalized scale-up relationships often assumed based on empirical evidence is validated by the DEM/DGB simulations. Once again, if one takes into account that mill internals can influence grinding rates by up to 10% and the fact that the Bond and standard PBMs do not account for these variables, it should not be surprising that the errors of prediction with the empirical or phenomenological approach when used in conjunction with a Rowland and Kjos power model can produce design errors of up to 20%. As a final note, the HFS approach provides microscale insights into grinding media size effects in tumbling mills as well. Here, we see that as expected, the large balls are most effective for large particle breakage and the small balls are most effective for fine particle breakage. Most significantly, however, we see that the three specific theoretical selection function curves rotate around a single pivot point (seen in This paper has briefly described the elements of high fidelity simulation (DEM, CFD, DGB and PBM) which are required for a true physics based tumbling mill scale-up procedure to be successfully developed. It was demonstrated that these tools provide a basis for accurate full scale tonnage, power and product size distribution predictions from DEM modeled batch tests. In addition, it was shown that the HFS results explain in microscale terms a number of empirically observed scale-up relationships for power and product size distributions. This paper has shown that HFS has exciting potential for use in tumbling mill scale-up. The author believes that these tools will have real value for design of all types of comminution equipment in the future. HFS gets us closer than we have ever been before to first principles design. Next steps involve building more powerful simulators to handle larger problems and the design of rigorous material characterization (particles and wear parts) procedures to improve predictive accuracy. The author wishes to thank Metso Minerals and Dr. William T. Pate, Dr. Xiangjun Qiu, Dr. Alexander Potapov and Dr. Ming Song for providing the high fidelity simulations presented here. Data provided by IOCC operations in Labrador City, NFLD, is also gratefully acknowledged.