True stress versus true strain curves obtained from isothermal compression tests over a wide temperature range from 573K to 723K and a strain rate range from 0.001s−1 to 1s−1 were used to evaluate the material constants of two models: the modified Zerilli–Armstrong (ZA) model and the strain compensation Arrhenius-type model. The suitability levels of these two models were evaluated by comparing both the correlation coefficient R and the average absolute relative error (AARE). The number of material constants involved in these two models was also compared. The results showed that the predictions of these two models were in good agreement with experimental data for 7050 aluminium alloy. Fewer material constants were involved in the modified ZA model, while better tracking of flow stress behaviour was obtained using the strain compensation Arrhenius-type model. The coupled deformation-heating effect was observed to be weak during the elevated-temperature deformation process.The elevated-temperature deformation behaviour of metallic materials reflects the nonlinear relationship between flow stress and process variables such as the strain Recently, several constitutive models have been proposed, including empirical, semi-empirical, phenomenological and physically-based models As is well known, 7050 aluminium alloy belongs to the 7XXX series of aluminium alloys. It exhibits a high strength-to-weight ratio and high fracture toughness. The outstanding performance of this alloy is due to the fine and uniformly distributed precipitates in its matrix, which precipitate during artificial ageing processes In this paper, experimental data from isothermal compression tests were used to determine the relevant material constants involved in the two models mentioned above. The prediction suitability of these two models was then evaluated by considering the correlation coefficient Commercial 7050 aluminium alloy was used in the isothermal compression tests performed in this study. The principal chemical components of the alloy were (in wt.%) 5.90 Zn, 2.10 Mg, 2.10 Cu, 0.11 Zr, 0.07 Fe, 0.03 Si, 0.03 Ti, 0.01 Cr and bal. Al. Isothermal compression tests were carried out on a Gleeble-3500 thermo-mechanical simulator. The deformation temperature was varied from 573 The experimental true stress versus true strain curves obtained from isothermal compression tests are plotted in The modified ZA constitutive model has been used to predict the flow stress behaviour of materials at elevated temperatures as follows In this study, 573 At Similarly, the slope of the line represented by Eq. The accuracy of the above-mentioned models was further verified by employing the standard statistical parameter Subsequently, a constrained optimisation procedure was used to find the optimised set. The eight strain values mentioned above (values ranging from 0.1 to 0.8 at intervals of 0.1) were adopted in the calculations. Corresponding values of Another parameter used to quantify the predictability of the modified ZA model is the where As is well established, the constitutive equation relating the flow stress, temperature and strain rate can be suitably described through an Arrhenius-type model, especially at elevated temperatures For low stress levels ( The value of ln In previous studies, it was usually assumed that strain effects on flow stresses were insignificant and were not considered in Eq. In the study described below, the values of the material constants were determined at various strains in the range from 0.1 to 0.8 at intervals of 0.1. The fifth-degree polynomial shown in Eq. The predictability of the strain compensation Arrhenius-type model was also quantified in terms of the standard statistical parameters Based on the calculation procedure described above, it was determined that the modified ZA model and the strain compensation Arrhenius-type model can both predict the elevated-temperature flow stress behaviour for 7050 aluminium alloy. The strain compensation Arrhenius-type model showed almost the same prediction accuracy as the modified ZA model in terms of the values of A comparison of As is well known, the flow stress equation is related to the nonlinear relationship between flow stress and process variables such as strain, strain rate and temperature. It can typically be described by the expression The predictability accuracies obtained using these two constitutive models were almost the same; thus, it was concluded that the coupled deformation-heating effect was weak in the modified ZA model. This is most likely related to the good specific heat capacity and high thermal conductivity of 7050 aluminium alloy. In fact, it was difficult to induce a temperature enhancement because of the material’s good specific heat capacity. Moreover, the high thermal conductivity easily gave rise temperature homogeneities at elevated temperatures. Meanwhile, the strain compensation Arrhenius-type model tracked the deformation behaviour more precisely. This proved that the coupled deformation-heating effect was weak and the coupled viscosity effect was the main coupled effect that could best track the flow stress behaviour accurately. Elevated-temperature deformation behaviour can be predicted using the The experimental true stress versus true strain data obtained from isothermal hot compression tests conducted on a Gleeble-3500 thermo-mechanical simulator (over a temperature range of 573–723 Both the modified ZA model and the strain compensation Arrhenius-type model can predict the flow stress behaviour of 7050 aluminium alloy at elevated temperatures well. Compared with the strain compensation Arrhenius-type model, the modified ZA model required much fewer material constants to identify. The strain compensation Arrhenius-type model provided more accurate tracking of flow stress behaviour. It is concluded that the coupled deformation-heating effect (the coupled effect between the strain and the temperature) was weak in predicting the flow stress behaviour of 7050 aluminium alloy. The authors are very grateful for the support received from the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No. 51275414 and Aeronautical Science Foundation of China under Grant No. 2011ZE53059. The authors would also like to thank Prof. Y.Q. Yang and Mrs. N.Z. Zhai of the Shaanxi Materials Analysis and Research Center for their useful technical guidance and extensive experiments during the final stages of this investigation.