The first two-stage zinc pressure leaching plant with 100 kt-Zn/a capacity in China was put into production in 2009, to recover zinc, rare metals, germanium and gallium. However, the total extraction of zinc is limited to just 93% in initial production. To improve the co-recovery of metals, pressure leaching tests were carried out on the first-stage leach residue from the initial flowsheet. The effects of Fe(III) concentration, oxygen partial pressure, reaction time, sulfuric acid dosage, and particle size of the residues were investigated. The results showed that particle size and acid dosage greatly affected the zinc, iron, gallium, and germanium extraction. The particles of size above 74 μm are the main obstacles to improve extraction. Grinding can effectively improve the recovery of the main metals. The zinc extraction can reach 96.7% after grinding the coarse particles (> 74 μm) prior to leaching. The extraction of other metals are 84.7%, 81.7% and 81.4% for iron, gallium, and germanium, respectively. The total recovery of the two-stage leaching is 98.2%, 90.0%, 86.3% and 87.8% for zinc, iron, gallium, and germanium, respectively.Gallium and Germanium are both valuable scattered metals, widely used in modern technology including communication, optics and solar cells, and all of them are considered as strategic materials. Since 1984, US began to stockpile germanium, and published a list of 35 critical minerals, including gallium and germanium, in 2018. There are few gallium and germanium minerals isolated as the low grade, and mainly recovered as by-product in sphalerite, bauxite and coal processing plants. The zinc concentrate processed from Fan Kou zinc and lead mine in China is rich in rare metals gallium and germanium, with typical grade of Ga 200 g/t and Ge 120 g/t. Zinc exists as sphalerite, gallium and germanium mainly exist in the lattices of sphalerite, which are difficult to be separated. Thus, the concentrate has been treated using Waelz process in Dan Xia Smelter in China in the past, where more than 45% Ge and most Ga were lost in the rotary kiln slag. The flow-sheet is shown in Many attempts have been made to improve the recovery of Ga and Ge. Tests on reduction sulphidization smelting [ To avoid the emission of SO The total zinc extraction is just 93% and the undissolved zinc content in the residue is about 8–10%, which means that the leach residue need further treatment. The purpose of this study is to find the main reason for the low recovery in production to enhance the leaching of zinc, gallium and germanium. The first-stage pressure leaching residue used in this study was supplied by Nonfemet Dan Xia smelter in Guangdong province, China. Prior to the experiments, the material was dried, crushed and mixed. The elemental composition was analyzed with ICP-AES, and mineral composition of the residue was identified by X-ray diffraction (XRD). The particle size distribution was examined by wet sieving. The pressure leaching tests were carried out in a 2 L electrically heated titanium autoclave. Every time 100 g of leach residue from first-stage was pulped with sulfuric acid solution at a solid to liquid ratio 5 g/ml. Sodium lignin sulfonate (0.2 g) was added to avoid the aggregation of molten sulfur [ The elemental composition was analyzed with ICP-AES, and the results are shown in The mineral composition of the residue was identified by XRD. Based on XRD, and SEM analysis, the relative contents of main minerals were decided, as shown in Ferric/ferrous redox couple can effectively enhance the phase transfer efficiency of oxygen from gas to liquid. The Fe(II) in the solution is oxidized into Fe(III) by oxygen, then Fe(III) is reduced to Fe(II) by sphalerite, meanwhile, the zinc in sphalerite is leached into solution [ Oxygen partial pressure can effectively enhance the leaching of zinc and iron, as shown in In zinc hydrometallurgical process, the waste electrolyte is returned as lixiviant for zinc extraction, and normally the acid concentration of the waste electrolyte is in the range of 160 to 200 g/L. According to the two-stage mass balance calculation result, the initial acid concentration for the residue leaching should be controlled in the range of 130 to 180 g/L. When the mole ratio of acid to zinc is 1.5 with solid to liquid ratio 5, the initial acid concentration is 180 g/L, and as a result, the initial acid concentration is kept at 180 g/L and the solid to liquid ratio is adjusted accordingly. The effect of sulfuric acid on metals extraction is presented in To determine the zinc formation in the residue, the chemical phase of zinc in the leached residue was analyzed, as shown in The extraction of zinc, iron, gallium and germanium were investigated as the reaction time varied from 1.0 h to 4.0 h, as shown in In pressure leaching process, the particle size of the raw material significantly affects the extraction efficiency by influencing the specific surface area of solid (m Trial test results on the grinding of the first-stage residue are shown in  In production, the first-stage residue is rod-milled with ISA mills and the zinc extraction is 89.1% in the second stage. The test results under different conditions are listed in The first stage residue produced in the currently practiced two-stage pressure leaching process in Yufang Wang and Haibei Wang are the principals of the project, designed the experiments. Yufang Wang, Xiangliang Li, Chaozhen Zheng carried out the experiments, and analyzed the data. Yufang Wang wrote the manuscript, Xiangliang Li and Chaozhen Zheng made the amending and addition. We declare that we have no financial and personal relationships with other people or organizations that can inappropriately influence our work, there is no professional or other personal interest of any nature or kind in any product, service and/or company that could be construed as influencing the position presented in, or the review of, the manuscript entitled “ Study on the improvement of the zinc pressure leaching process “. This study was supported by  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at