The habitual consumption of even moderate quantities of alcoholic beverages is clearly associated with reduced bone mass, increased prevalence of skeletal fracture and also it is the major risk factor for the development of secondary osteoporosis. The present in vitro study was designed to determine the dose response effects of ethanol on osteoblast-like human osteosarcoma cells (SaOS-2) proliferation, differentiation, mineralization and cyto-toxicity. SaOS-2 cells were plated in 48 and 6 well culture plates and exposed to different concentrations of ethanol (1, 10, 100, 200 and 300mM) for 24, 48 and 72h. At the end of incubation, proliferation of cells was studied using crystal violet Bioassay. The cell lysate was utilized to determine ALP activity and conditioned media were used to measure LDH activity. Histochemical localization of ALP and mineralized nodules were studied from cells treated with ethanol (10 and 100mM) for 21 days. At higher doses, there was a significant reduction in cell number, whereas at lower doses there were variable effects. In 24h treatment, the higher doses showed a significant increase in ALP activity, whereas 48 and 72h treatments showed an opposite trend. Ethanol treatment caused a dose- and time-dependent increase in LDH activity. Ethanol treatment altered the quality of mineralization at 10mM dose whereas completely inhibited mineralization at 100mM dose, despite the presence of serum. In conclusion, the toxic effect of ethanol is reflected on cell proliferation, differentiation and mineralization even at low doses and at extended treatment duration.Chronic alcohol abuse is associated with pronounced detrimental effects on the skeletal system. Numerous reports implicate alcohol as a major risk factor for the development of osteoporosis, especially in men ( Bovine serum albumin (BSA), naphthol AS MX-phosphate, Tris–HCl, β-glycerophosphate, Vitamin C, dexamethasone, SaOS-2 cell-lines were procured from National Centre for Cell Sciences (NCCS), Pune. SaOS-2 cells were cultured, in DMEM containing 10 The cell proliferation of osteoblast-like cells was determined by the crystal violet bioassay ( Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity was determined by the method of Lactate dehydrogenase activity was determined by the colorimetric method as described by SaOS-2 cells were trypsinised and for mineralization the cells were seeded in 6 well plates at 2 Histochemical staining of an adherent cell population was done to determine the covered area of cells that exhibits the alkaline phosphatase (ALP) enzyme and those areas that have mineralized ( The results were evaluated by the statistical tests analysis of variance (ANOVA) and Student Newman Kuel's (SNK) test, at The effect of ethanol treatment on human osteosarcoma (SaOS-2) cells was determined after 24, 48 and 72 In order to determine whether ethanol alters alkaline phosphatase activity, a marker for the differentiation of osteoblasts, the cellular ALP activity was measured after exposing SaOS-2 cells with different concentrations of ethanol for 24, 48 and 72 The measurement of LDH specific activity in the conditioned media is an indicator of the increased permeability of plasma membrane as a sequel of cytotoxicity. As described previously, the SaOS-2 cells were exposed to different concentrations of ethanol for different durations. The conditioned media were collected after respective treatment regimen and the specific activity of LDH was measured. After 24 In order to study the effect of ethanol on in vitro mineralization process, SaSO-2 cells were cultured for 14 and 21 days. Exposure of SaOS-2 cells to ethanol for 14 days resulted in a decrease in the intensity for ALP staining at 100 Alcohol-induced osteoporosis is characterized by a considerable suppression of osteogenesis. We therefore exposed human osteosarcoma cells (SaOS-2) to various concentrations of ethanol in order to understand how ethanol interferes with osteoblast cell functions and mineralization. In the present study, the cell number demonstrates that all the doses showed a significant decrease except the lower doses 1 and 10 LDH is a stable cytoplasmic enzyme present in most cells. LDH is released into cell culture medium in conditions such as damage to plasma membrane, apoptosis and necrosis ( Exposure of SaOS-2 cells for 14 days resulted in a decrease in the intensity for ALP staining at 100 In conclusion, the data from this investigation indicate that alcohol alters human osteosarcoma cell (SaoS-2) proliferation, differentiation and mineralization in vitro. Further, it seems that ethanol reduces the number and activity of bone forming cells rather than interfering at the critical events of mineralization. Future studies should address the process of matrix formation and mineralization of the osteoid in order to identify the critical step affected by ethanol. University Grants Commission Special Assistant Programme (UGC-SAP) and Department of Science and Technology-FIST (DST-FIST) are greatly acknowledged for their financial support of this work.