Among the technological routes for recycling mining and beneficiation slate wastes, thermal expansion seems particularly attractive, yielding products adequate for use in civil construction, especially as pozzolanic material for cement manufacture. The present investigation aims at analysing the properties of slate before and after the thermal expansion, searching for the reasons of expansion and the variables that affect the characteristics and properties of the products. Results of standard test procedures recommended by the construction industry are presented and discussed.Slate mining and beneficiation wastes are inadequately disposed in piles. These wastes represent a significant amount of material with potential for utilisation. The proposed alternative is treating this material by thermal expansion to generate products for utilisation in the cement industry. Studies were performed searching for a correlation among mineralogical, petrographic and geochemical properties of slate with those of the thermal expansion products with the aim to shed light onto the causes of the expansion and the variables that affect the characteristics and properties of the products. Natural slate wastes do not possess pozzolanic activity. Thermally expanded wastes, on the other hand, may replace partially the Portland cement clinker as a pozzolanic additive. The following materials were used: grey slate wastes (from mining and cutting activities) from the Portland cement clinker and gypsum, used in tests of axial compression resistance for comparison with slate as pozzolanic additive; sand, for composing the mortar mix. A literature review suggested the use of a rotary tubular kiln in the thermal process of expansive clays and slates ( The wastes of slate were cut in squares or rectangles (1–4 The main variables that may influence the thermal expansion process are: type of the kiln; feed rate, size distribution, heating rate, time and temperature of calcination, type of slate. Only one type of kiln was utilised, allowing a feed of 30 The kiln consists of two adjacent heating zones. The sample was heated up to 600 After the preliminary experiments, the heating rate was set at 5 The thermal expansion products were characterised via X-ray diffraction (degree of remaining crystallinity); chemical analyses (expressed as oxides): FeO (wet chemistry, volummetry with K microscopic analyses (size and dimensions of the pores, preferential direction of the expansion and degree of homogeneity of the phases produced by calcination); determination of the specific mass, water absorption and mechanical resistance. Pozzolanic activities with cement and lime are standardised in Brazil ( Wastes of grey slate (the most abundant type) were selected for the determination of pozzolanic activity, at its natural condition and after expansion. The samples were ground to maximum 34% retained in 0.045 Specimens were prepared with the standard mix (clinker According to this method the pozzolanic activity is evaluated by comparing the amount of Ca(OH) The major mineralogical components of the slate, according to X-ray diffraction, are: white sericite mica, quartz, chlorite, feldspar, and carbonates. Minor components are epidote, turmaline, zircon, apatite, biotite, and opaque minerals. The presence of significant amounts of chlorite, mica, carbonates, hematite and pyrite, affects the expansion of slates, due to the role of these minerals in the characteristic structure and texture. Chemically, the major species detected were SiO The average value obtained for the specific mass was 2.7 and low indexes of water absorption were determined (<0.2%). The calcination temperature affects the degree of expansion of the slate. The products achieved at 1250 The thermal expansion products are predominantly amorphous with only quartz and pseudo-spinel with a low crystallinity are present as crystalline phases, according to X-ray diffraction, indicating significant structure change with respect to the natural slate. Regarding chemical composition, the higher expansion indexes of slates are associated with higher levels of loss on ignition, due to CO The average value obtained for the specific mass was 0.90 for thermal expansion products and low values for water absorption index were determined, both before and after thermal expansion. Specifications from SiO SO Moisture (%max): 3.0 (NBR & ASTM); <1 (natural); <1 (expanded). LOI (%max): 10.0 (NBR & ASTM); 3.43 (natural); 0.01 (expanded). Alkalis as total Na Results of pozzolanic activity (chemical method) related to natural slates did not confirm the pozzolanicity of the mortars. On the other hand, the results confirmed pozzolanic activity of the sample with calcinated slate. Results of pozzolanic activity (mortar method), also confirmed pozzolanic activity of the sample with calcinated slate. Thermally expanded slate presents pozzolanic activity level higher than the standard minimum limit and similar to that for the reference mortar. The pozzolanicity of the thermally treated slate is not dependent on its chemical composition, but whether silica present in it (and to a lesser extent also the alumina) is in an amorphous state that can be activated to react easily with the Ca(OH) The calcination temperature is relevant regarding the thermal expansion parameters: expansion degree, specific mass and mechanical resistance of the products. The expansion of slates occurs in the direction perpendicular to the cleavage, as observed in the specimens produced, indicating a close correlation between structure, mineralogical composition and thermal expansion. It is believed that the presence of filosilicates, parallel to the cleavage plane, presenting inserted layers of structural water, plays a relevant role in the thermal expansion. The sequence of structure water between the plaques also plays a relevant role regarding the thermal expansion, due to the release of water present in the slate structure. The chemical composition of the thermal expansion products, as well as their low crystallinity degree, are within the specifications for use as pozzolanic materials. The results of pozzolanic activity, obtained by the chemical method, were confirmed by the results of mechanical resistance of mortars, showing that the products of slate thermal expansion present pozzolanic activity. Products from thermal expansion of slates, due to their pozzolanic character, represent a technically viable alternative for the use of wastes from mining and beneficiation of slates. Natural slate does not present pozzolanic activity but its chemical composition is compatible with its use as mineral addition to clinker.