Pyrolytic chars are a potential high-quality fuel for use in iron ore sintering and pulverized coal injection (PCI) operations of blast furnace. In this study, industrial char produced from a moving-bed pyrolyzer was screened into four particle size ranges and compared with coke used in an industrial sintering process and a PCI coal used in an industrial blast furnace, and their basic compositions, micropore structures, functional group distributions, carbonaceous structures, reactivities, and gas release behaviors during combustion were analyzed. Furthermore, the mechanism underlying the particle size-dependent properties of the char was analyzed by comparing it with a char prepared under laboratory-simulation conditions. Results demonstrate that char particles larger and smaller than 3 mm (the turning point) have different structures and properties. More specifically, particles larger than 3 mm have stable properties, better developed pore structures, carbonaceous structures that are more ordered, superior reactivities, and lower releases of SO2 and NOx. Therefore, they represent a desirable option for use in fueling sintering and PCI operations. Char particles smaller than 3 mm were further investigated by screening them into particle size ranges, and results showed that they had significantly varied compositions and structures, which further confirmed their unsuitability for use in the two operations. Finally, the particle-size-dependent properties of the char can be explained by the differing residence times, the radial variations in pyrolysis degrees, and the mechanical (or thermal) stresses experienced by the different raw coal particles within the pyrolyzer.Sintering provides lump ore feedstock to blast furnaces, and coke-making produces coke to fuel blast furnaces and acts as an exothermic agent and reducing agent; both underpin the feedstock framework are indispensable within the iron and steel metallurgical industries. However, both processes pose challenges associated with their high energy consumption and emissions of environmental pollutants, particularly with respect to large amounts of harmful gases [ In the process of iron ore sintering, iron-containing fines or particles are heated to a semi-smelted status and are then solidified to lumps. This process involves burning coke fines or anthracites in the layers of iron ore feedstock. The yield and quality of sintered ores are affected by the parameters used within the process: in particular, the combustion temperature and rate, the width of the burning zone, and the atmosphere in which the feedstock is sintered [ The introduction of pulverized coal injection (PCI) technology has enabled expensive metallurgical cokes to be partially replaced with cheaper pulverized coals to fuel blast furnaces, which has provided the opportunity to reduce the ratio of coke consumed in blast furnaces. As PCI coal is intended to partially replace the role of coke as an exothermic agent and reductant, it needs to have a high calorific value. It also needs to be easily grindable, of a suitable particle size, and have low ash and appropriate volatile contents, as it is burned in a confined space within the tuyere and raceway in a very short residence time (~20 ms) [ Pyrolytic char is the solid material that remains after the more valuable tar is extracted after low-temperature pyrolysis of low-rank coal. The pyrolysis process usually employs a moving-bed reactor. A part of the coal gas generated from the pyrolysis is returned to the lower part of the reactor and combusted (after being mixed with the air therein) to serve as the heating source for pyrolysis [ During char production, a part of the sulfur- and nitrogen-containing organic groups in the raw coal are converted and released out of the solid feedstock. Thus, the combustible pollutant component content of the resulting chars is significantly decreased, the content of fixed carbon is increased, and the resulting char is a cleaner fuel with higher calorific value [ Another challenge for using chars is that their quality varies greatly with particle size. Girolamo et al. [ In this study, an industrial char with different particle sizes prepared using the same feedstock material and pyrolysis technology were screened into four particle size ranges and compared with a coke used in an industrial sintering process and a PCI coal. More specifically, the fuels of different particle sizes were first comparatively analyzed for their basic properties, such as proximate and elemental composition, microstructure, and carbon chemical structure. They were then investigated for their combustibility and gas release behavior during combustion. Finally, the reason for the performance difference of industrial char with different particle sizes was also explained by the process of char refining in the laboratory. A char sample was collected from a moving-bed pyrolyzer (with an annual capacity of 150 thousand tons; located in northern Shaanxi Province, China). The pyrolyzer was configured as follows: feedstock material: subbituminous coal with a volatile content of 36.11%; feedstock particle size: 0.3–8 cm; pyrolysis temperature: 650 ± 10 °C; feedstock processing time: approximately 3.5 h; residence time in the maximum-temperature section: approximately 40 min; tar yield rate: 8.8 wt%. The sample was screened into four particle size ranges as follows: >25 mm (Char A), 13–25 mm (Char B), 3–13 mm (Char C), and <3 mm (Char D). To make comparisons with the char, a coke and a PCI coal were collected from an industrial sintering and an industrial blast furnace, respectively. To ensure that samples were representative, they were collected from different positions within fuel stacks (15 g each from the bottom, middle, and top of fuel stacks). The solid samples were ground to particle sizes smaller than 74 μm, baked in an oven at 120 °C for 4 h, and stored in a drying vessel. The samples then underwent proximate and elemental analyses, and the ash content, ash fusion characteristics, calorific value, and explosive behavior (using the flame length method; for PCI fuels only) were determined, and the results are presented in The pore structure of samples was determined using a JB-BK222 BET surface area and pore diameter analyzer (manufactured by JWCB SCI & Tech, China). The specific surface area and total pore volume were computed using the Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) method and employing the N The functional group of coal chars was detected through Fourier infrared spectrometer (FITR) (German Bruker, Vector [ The chemical structure of the char was analyzed using two methods for comparative purposes: Raman spectroscopy and X-ray diffraction (XRD). Raman spectroscopy was conducted at a wavelength of 514 nm and resolution of 1 cm X-ray diffractometer (XRD) (X'Pert PROMPD) analysis was conducted using a Cu-Kα target at a scanning rate of 4°/min. The combustion and gas-release behaviors of the char were determined using thermogravimetric-mass spectrometric analysis. Mass variations were determined using a Setsys synchronous analyzer (manufactured by Setatram, France), and gas-release data were obtained using a ThermoStar quadrupole rod mass spectrometer (manufactured by Pfeiffer, Germany). The test was performed using the following settings: sample quantity of 10 mg; an oxygen rich atmosphere (28% O The test was conducted to investigate the following combustion behaviors: 1) ignition temperature, T To investigate the particle size-dependent properties of the industrial char, a pyrolytic char was prepared using a laboratory fixed-bed pyrolyzer to simulate industrial char. The laboratory fixed-bed pyrolyzer is able to accurately simulate the industrial-scale moving-bed pyrolyzer, as the latter is designed to move very slowly and the entire layer of materials on the bed is moved. In other words, a portion of the moving material layer is fixed in position in relation to the entire material layer. This is therefore not significantly different from the laboratory fixed-bed pyrolyzer from the perspective of the small amount of sample. This is for simplification purposes. The same raw coal used for the industrial char (as shown in The char particles that are larger than 3 mm have a volatile content of 6–12%, fixed carbon content of 80–83%, and an ash content of approximately 6%, whereas char particles smaller than 3 mm have higher volatile content of 17.24%, higher ash content of 14.33%, and a lower fixed carbon content of 65.42%, as shown in Sintering and PCI operations require strict control of the proximate and elemental compositions of the fuels used. A fuel with a high volatile content and low fixed carbon content is low in calorific value, and its combustion cannot therefore produce a temperature high enough for sintering; such char can only replace a limited amount of metallurgical coke when fueling PCI operations. A char with an ash content that is too high results in higher useless content in the sintered ores, which thus compromises the quality of sintered ores. If used to fuel PCI processes, such char results in an increased fuel ratio. Therefore, Char D (smaller than 3 mm) fails to meet the requirements for sintering and PCI operations, owing to its undesirable composition. However, the ash content and ash fusion temperatures of the various char particle sizes are insignificantly different, and the four char samples with different particle sizes exhibited no return flame, thereby confirming that they are not explosive. Pore structure is a major factor affecting the inherent reactivity of char. The differential surface areas and pore volumes of the char, PCI coal, and coke were measured using the N However, the various char particles have markedly different pore structures; those larger than 3 mm have a superior pore structure compared to those smaller than 3 mm. This can be explained by the mechanism whereby different particle sizes result in different pyrolysis conditions and different pyrolysis behaviors of the char, which thus markedly influences pore growth, development, and collapse [   In contrast, the PCI coal exhibits larger A The microcrystalline structure of the fuel was investigated using the XRD method, and the results are presented in  The char particles exhibit only insignificant differences in combustibility. More specifically, Chars A and B are similar to PCI coal with respect to combustibility, as revealed by the very similar ignition temperatures, temperatures at the maximum reaction rate, burnout combustion rates, and burnout temperatures. The combustion curves of Chars B and D either lag behind or are ahead of those of Char A, Char C, and PCI coal. There is no positive relationship between particle size and combustibility for the char particles. More specifically, the combustibility sequence of char particles are in the order of Char D > Char C > Char A > Char B. Generally, the char has a similar combustibility to PCI coal, and is thus a potential replacement for PCI coal. Because char has better combustibility than coke, replacing coke with char to fuel sintering processes would provide more concentrated combustion and a superior heat release and higher burnout efficiency. The improved combustibility would contribute to improvement in the combustion behavior of the fuel layer within the sintering processes, and thus provide an increased sintering efficiency and higher sintered iron ore quality.  As shown in As shown in As shown in In summary, smaller char particles are markedly different from char lumps; therefore, chars with different particle sizes require different treatments. Char lumps that are larger than >3 mm are an ideal replacement for PCI coal in blast furnace owing to their higher carbon content, lower ash content, higher calorific value, more developed pore structure, considerably less ordered carbonaceous structure, and more consistent reactivity than PCI coal. Smaller char particles (<3 mm) are very different from char lamps in composition and structure and are generally unsuitable for use in blast furnace PCI operations due to their higher ash contents and lower calorific values, although they are similar to PCI coal with respect to their volatile content, pore structure, and good combustibility. Char lumps are also an ideal option for use in fueling sintering processes owing to their lower release of gaseous pollutants and are superior to coke fine. Although smaller char particles have good chemical structures and combustion activities, and they meet the particle size requirements of sintering without the need for grinding, they cannot be directly used in fuel sintering processes owing to their higher ash and volatile contents and lower calorific values. The next section focuses on the analysis of smaller char particles to determine the presence of component segregation and consideration of the possibility of using them for fueling sintering and PCI operations following further particle size screening.     This section discusses the particle size-dependent pyrolytic behavior of the raw coal used for preparing the laboratory char, and compares the results with those of raw coal used in industrial char. To further compare the laboratory char with the industrial char, a comparative structural analysis of both was conducted at different degrees of pyrolysis (results are presented in In summary, the above results confirm that the industrial char is well simulated by the laboratory char, and the pyrolytic degree of the char does not increase with an increase in particle size. As the particle sizes of the raw coal are larger than 3 mm and the sizes of some of the output pyrolytic char particles are smaller than 3 mm, some of the raw coal particles are broken during pyrolysis. This is consistent with the finding that the ash content (approximately 22%) of smaller char particles (smaller than 120 μm) is significantly higher than that of larger char particles. The process can be explained by a mechanism whereby some minerals in the broken larger particles are segregated and they then attach to smaller particles. This breaking of raw coal particles may be caused by thermal stress resulting from uneven heating experienced in the interior and exterior of particles, or by mechanical friction between particles and between particles and the wall of pyrolyzer during particle precipitation. This breaking mechanism requires further investigation.  Char particles larger than 3 mm exhibit stable basic properties and meet the requirements for sintering and PCI operations. They are similar to PCI coal and superior to coke in terms of volatile, ash, fixed carbon content, and calorific value. The char particles exhibit size-dependent pore structures, functional group distributions, and a carbonaceous structure. More specifically, char particles smaller than 3 mm (Char D) exhibit a less developed pore structure, higher content of aliphatic side-chains, and carbonaceous structures that are less ordered than particles in the range of 13–25 (Char B). Char A (>25 mm) exhibits similar properties to Char C (13–25 mm). Char provides better combustibility than coke. Char D (<3 mm) has better combustibility than PCI coal, whereas char particles larger than 3 mm have a similar combustibility to PCI coal. Char releases less gaseous pollutants such as SO Char D (<3 mm) was further investigated to confirm its particle size-dependent properties. Results show that smaller particles have a significantly poorer quality, which is demonstrated by their higher ash and volatile contents, lower fixed carbon contents, lower calorific values, less developed pore structures, less ordered carbonaceous structures, lower ignition temperatures, lower burnout rates, and are associated with the phenomenon of combustion trailing. A comparison between industrial char and laboratory-simulated char showed consistent particle size-dependent compositions and structures. The size-dependent properties are mainly related to the different precipitation velocities and residence times of raw coal in the pyrolyzer, which in turn results in varying degrees of pyrolysis at different positions within particle. Smaller char particles may be derived from thermal stress in larger raw coal particles or mechanic friction in the pyrolyzer. The authors thank the