Numerical simulations are undertaken for the transient squeeze flow between parallel plates under a constant load. The conservation equations are solved via the finite element method in space and the Crank–Nicolson method in time. The constitutive equation used to describe the semi-concentrated fiber suspension is an integral equation proposed by Dinh and Armstrong for fiber-filled Newtonian liquids. New results are obtained for both random and aligned fibers and for different levels of squeeze force, and these are compared with the corresponding Newtonian ones, which are slightly lower. The fiber orientation in the flow field is also obtained for different points in the material.In recent years the squeeze flow problem has received considerable attention as evidenced in the latest review by Engmann et al. On the other hand, the material being squeezed is also a subject of intense investigation A well-established constitutive equation for semi-concentrated fiber suspensions in Newtonian liquids is the Dinh–Armstrong model Some of the issues that have arisen from these earlier works concern the coupling of the flow field with the stress field, the differences from the equivalent Newtonian results, and the differences by assuming either the random or the aligned version of the model. It is, therefore, the purpose of the present work to study the squeeze flow problem between parallel plates under a constant load for semi-concentrated fiber suspensions obeying the Dinh–Armstrong model and compare the results with the corresponding Newtonian predictions. New results are obtained for different loads and fiber characteristics, for the two versions of the model, thus enhancing our knowledge of transient behaviour in this important flow problem. The problem at hand is shown schematically in In the above, dimensionless variables have been used in the governing differential equations. Thus, all lengths are scaled with the initial gap height The extra stress tensor for semi-concentrated fiber suspensions is given by the Dinh–Armstrong integral constitutive model In order to find the distance between two given fibers, Dinh and Armstrong For the present simulations, the fiber concentration is represented by the volume fraction ( Thus, it is possible to rewrite the constitutive model (Eq. Currie In the above expressions, These tensors can be expressed in terms of the velocity vector and its gradients. This approximation is used by Malamataris and Papanastasiou The above system of conservation and constitutive equations needs also boundary and initial conditions for its full description and solution. Unlike the case of squeeze flow studied in most simulations in the past, where there is symmetry in both directions, the present problem is symmetric only about the symmetric boundary: along DA, lower fixed plate: along AB, no-slip conditions are imposed, free moving surface: along BB′C, no surface tractions are imposed, upper moving wall: along CD, a dimensionless constant load has been imposed, The last boundary condition of a constant load force involves an integral according to the definition of the squeeze force: The numerical solution is obtained with the Galerkin finite element method (G/FEM), using as primary variables the two velocities and pressure ( For all cases we have used two meshes shown in The initial mesh configuration was that of a rectangular domain (0.5 A key ingredient of the solution process is the remeshing scheme used for the advancement of the flow front. The present scheme is based on detecting degenerate elements. Namely, when the angle between any two adjacent sides of a quadrilateral element become 180° or more, the domain is rediscretized in order to maintain the quality of the mesh and, therefore, the quality of the solution. In our case, whenever a node on the flow front reaches either the top or the bottom boundary, namely, the contact line of the free surface and the parallel plates, the solution is stopped and a new mesh is generated. This is done by an elliptic mesh generation, in which a set of Laplace equations is solved for the physical domain coordinates ( The time discretization is obtained with finite differences, and the marching in time is carried out with the Crank–Nicolson method. The time step was chosen as 1/100 of a time unit. The time stopping criterion was set by the user, and in the present work was 5 time units, although much longer times have also been tried with no surprises. The iterative scheme for the system of equations in space was a full Newton-Raphson (N-R) method with analytical evaluation of the Jacobian entries. The criterion for convergence of the iterative process for each time step was for the norm-of-theresiduals <10 The calculations are first pursued for Newtonian fluids for different squeeze loads The dimensionless compression ratio, CR, defined by The dimensionless compression length, CL, defined by The dimensionless compression speed, CS, defined by The dimensionless compression pressure, CP, defined by The Newtonian and Dinh–Armstrong results for the compression rate for different applied loads are given in The dimensionless compression length is given in The dimensionless squeeze speed is given in The dimensionless squeeze pressure as a function of time is given in Increasing the fiber concentration from It is interesting to examine closely the fountain flow at the front and its evolution in time. The steady-state solution was first given by Mavridis et al. The full solution behaviour for the DA (random) is shown in An interesting feature of fiber suspensions is the fiber orientation, which can vary from totally random to highly oriented. The Dinh–Armstrong model was shown to predict fiber orientation well The quantitative measure of this variation is the orientation (or probability) distribution function Secondly, The solution to the probability distribution function for a two-dimensional case is given explicitly by Ahmed and Alexandrou In the present work, we show the development of the fiber orientation with time at three different locations inside the material. These locations are marked as points 1–3 shown in In these figures the horizontal solid lines represent the initial random orientation (i.e., at It is important to note the degree of alignment in these figures. The degrees of alignment represented by the peaks are higher in For the highest load studied ( Turning now to the DA-a model (aligned, Eq. In the above, we have assumed a random initial fiber orientation. The initial fiber orientation does affect the predictions, as evidenced in the work by Papanastasiou and Alexandrou The ALE formulation, in conjunction with the finite element method in space and the finite difference method in time, has been used to derive numerical solutions for the planar squeeze flow problem of semi-concentrated fiber suspensions. The results with the Dinh–Armstrong model do not show any dramatic differences from the corresponding Newtonian results, but in general higher fiber concentrations and higher fiber aspect ratios give higher compression heights, speeds and pressures. In contrast, fiber orientation is a strong function of position, and at the flow front high orientation is produced due to the fountain flow there. The random version of the model shows more effect than the aligned one for the field variables, but the aligned version predicts higher fiber orientation, as expected. The coupling of the flow field with the stress tensor does have an effect on the results compared with the Newtonian model, albeit small (in the order of 5% for the lower loads). This effect becomes smaller as the load increases. Decoupling fiber orientation from flow and assuming only Newtonian kinematics would not lead to results very different from the ones obtained, since the results for the primary field variables are not very different from the corresponding Newtonian ones. However, the major effort put in this work was to solve the coupled problem, which is not trivial from a numerical point of view. The present results are offered as reference solutions for the planar squeeze flow problem. Their natural sequence is the axisymmetric squeeze flow problem both for constant speed and constant force Financial support from the European Union's Centres of Excellence consortium under the title of “Polymer Injection Advanced Molding” (PIAM) project (Contract No.: NMP2-CT-2003-505878) is gratefully acknowledged.