A production block of the underground mine exploiting the Chelopech high sulphidation epithermal copper-gold deposit was subjected to geometallurgical modelling. This study details the procedure used based on traditional comminution and mineralogical indices. Drop weight and batch grinding tests were performed on representative samples to yield parameters related to Axb and operating work OWi indices. These were further correlated with the ore mineralogical features using principal component analysis. Modal mineralogy data processed by a set of linear equations enabled the estimation of the aforementioned indices with a deviation of ±2.4 for Axb and ±9.08 kWh/t for OWi respectively. Based on ore textural characteristics and non-sulphide gangue (NSG) minerals content, two geometallurgical domains were identified as a first approach to modelling of the studied block.The mining industry is witnessing a constant decline of metal values in new mineral deposits discoveries ( Dundee Precious Metals (DPM) is a Canadian-based company active in extraction and production of commodities such as copper and gold. DPM’s flagship operation is located in Chelopech, Bulgaria; an underground mine which produces copper and pyrite concentrates. The mine started operation in 1954, with an expansion in 1975 to being further acquired by DPM in 2004. Crushed ore is processed through a flotation circuit fed from a SAG mill. Copper bearing minerals and pyrite are concentrated to deliver grades of 15–17% copper, 20–30 g/t gold and 5% arsenic on average. The company brought into exploitation a block which has not been included in the mining program schedule so far. Due to the high geological and mineralogical complexity, a geometallurgical oriented study of the block was proposed with the aim to predict ore behaviour in comminution and flotation. More precisely, the study encompasses characterization of feed and products from a laboratory bulk sulphide flotation, single particle impact breakage and batch grinding tests. With the aim to create mineral based models able to predict variables such as flotation recovery, operating work index ( A geometallurgical modelling methodology developed by researchers at the Julius Kruttschnitt Mineral Research Centre – JKMRC ( In order to identify the main minerals influencing comminution performance, mineral characteristics and metallurgical variables were correlated using principal component analysis (PCA). Due to the limited amount of samples and high amount of variables, PCA was considered a practical method to find correlations between the target variables in different variability dimensions or factorial planes. The data set used in the PCA was comprised of the mineral composition of 9 ore samples and one measured comminution index ( The iterative procedure serving to support the linear regression between the metallurgical variables (Y) and mineral variable (X) was done following the equation Further on, the difference between the estimated variables (Y′) and the experimental ones (Y) was correlated against new mineralogical variables (Z) to obtain new estimations (Y″) as shown in Eq. Drill core samples and hand-picked specimens were collected by the geological team of DPM Chelopech at 9 different locations within the block. Each sample collected was approx. 10 kg keeping representativeness in terms of Cu grade, texture, mineralization style and lithology. The drop weight tests required approx. 2 kg of material. Drill core fragments of about 10 cm in length were crushed using a rock hammer and sieved at 25 and 20 mm to ultimately obtain 90 pieces in the size rage of −25 + 20 mm. As a rule, for performing a complete JK-Drop weight test ( An additional 2.5 kg of each sample was crushed in a jaw crusher to 99% passing 3.35 mm. This material served as feed for the batch grinding tests with particle size distribution (PSD) estimated by sieving through the following screens (mm): 3.35, 2.36, 1.18, 0.84, 0.425, 0.3, 0.212, 0.15, 0.075 and 0.053. The conceptual design of the adapted JKMRC drop weight test (JK-DWT) is presented in The specific energy applied to each sample at the different heights was calculated using Eq.     Depending on the type of ore sample (i.e., Mp), the actual applied energies deviated slightly from the ones calculated based on Eq. The fractions obtained from each energy test (3 products per ore sample) were dry sieved on screens with the following openings (mm): 20, 12.5, 7.92, 5.66, 3.35, 2.36, 1.18, 0.84, 0.42, 0.3, 0.21, 0.15, 0.075 and 0.053. Non-cumulative retained PSD were plotted in order to estimate in which size ranges the samples deviated the most. Representative samples were sent for mineralogical quantification through X-ray powder diffraction (XRD). The relationship between A comparison between the 9 ore samples subjected to the tests was performed by ranking them based on the Grindability was assessed using a Magotteaux laboratory ball mill. For each test, 1000 cm     The index corresponds to an empirical equation designed for Bond Ball Mill Work Index (BMWi) prediction. The calibration constant A corresponds to a number in kWh*kg/t, whose value represents specific energy correlations between this procedure and the original Bond work index test procedure ( The ore samples were characterized prior and after the comminution tests. Modal mineralogy, texture, associations, alterations and grain sizes were examined on representative polished blocks and grain mounts. XRD was performed using a Bruker D8-ECO powder X-ray diffractometer with CuKα radiation. The quantification was done using the Rietveld refinement which models the powder patterns starting from the crystal structure of the different phases ( Around 5 g of material previously ground at 80% passing 90 µm were used to fabricate grain mounts with 30 mm diameter, following an established procedure ( BSE images of 3000 × 2000 pixels were used during post processing of the X-ray spectra. Erosion, dilation, and thresholding were implemented in a pre-defined order to be able to classify the pixels in the images (i.e. segmentation) and produce an additional output consisting of mineral maps of the samples. The minerals were classified according to their average elemental compositions and additional constraints to not measure grains touching borders inside sampling fields and to neglect grains smaller than 5 µm were imposed. In addition, the polished blocks were characterized using an OLYMPUS BX60 reflected light optical microscope to identify textural characteristics. The particle size distribution at each energy level per sample is plotted in One could note in The calculated values of Breccia and tuff are regarded as the predominant texture of the samples hosting the ore mineralization, which is presented in the form of disseminated sulphides and stockwork veins types. Breccia textures result from tectonic and/or magmatic events, forming tectonic or hydraulic breccia. This texture was identified in virtually all the samples from both the drill cores and hand specimen ( Stockwork is the predominant mineralization style identified in samples S9, S10, S4 and S3 ( Disseminated sulphides are the predominant mineralization style in S5, S7, S2, S6, and S8 ( The results from the automated mineralogy for the feed samples of the comminution tests are shown in The mineralogical assay on the products taken from the samples subjected to 1 kWh/t impact energy, identified quartz as the most common mineral in all the samples, followed by kaolinite + dickite and pyrite.  On the other side, XRD results from the batch grinding tests for −0.150 + 0.075 mm and −0.840 + 0.425 mm are presented in In general, there is an overlap between the results presented in The drop weight test (DWT) results suggest that the  The PCA realized through correlation between the  The PCA results suggest that alunite, kaolinite + dickite and sulphosalts content correlate with The current study has shown the feasibility of predicting ore behaviour in comminution through rapid methodological tests and at the same time considering ore mineralogy. The following conclusions have been drawn: The content of kaolinite and dickite in the studied ore correlates to its resistance to impact breakage. An increase in kaolinite content correlates to an increase in The modal mineralogy based Two geometallurgical domains of the block based on textural characteristics could be integrated in mine production schedule in terms of ore residence time in the grinding unit. The information about the modal distribution of kaolinite group minerals in advanced argillic alteration would allow production control through its integration into the block model. However, the presence of minerals in low concentrations, such as rutile, brings challenges in terms of their quantification. Therefore, further research is oriented to increase the models robustness by finding the elemental expressions that better describe the studied block mineralogy. The single particle impact breakage used in this study proved to bring a fast, reliable and low-material demanding tool for geometallurgical testing which can be applied in early-stage geometallurgical characterization projects. The authors would like thank Dr. Simon Michaux for the support and guidance in the comminution tests methodology and modelling. Thanks go also to Dr. Hassan Bouzahzah for the automated mineralogy analysis support, and to the anonymous reviewers whose recommendations enhanced the quality of this research article.