The energy required to liberate a mineral of economic interest from its gangue constituents in the host rock is described in this chapter. The design of equipment use for the purpose is indicated in some details. Standard laboratory tests for determining this energy are described for ball and rod mills systems of grinding. The methods of calculating this energy are illustrated with worked examples.The term Unless a particle is spherical or cubic, its size determination is never an absolute process. Particles such as (a) and (b) in There are many ways the size of an irregular particle could be characterized, with none being absolutely right. For instance, the particle size can be characterized by determining the size of hole or aperture the particle will just pass through (sieve size), or the time the particle takes to settle in a fluid such as water and express the particle size as the size of a sphere that has the same settling rate ( The particle dimensions measured by optical methods are limited to sizes greater than 100 μm. With an electron microscope, particle sizes down to 0.001 μm can be measured. For gravity sedimentation methods, the particle size should be greater than 1 μm. Where individual measurements are not required approximate size ranges can be obtained by sieving. The closer the successive sieve sizes are, the closer is the approximation to the real size of the particles held between successive sieves. This information is usually sufficient for most metallurgists and sieving is the most common method of determining size. The use of a microscope to measure the size of irregularly shaped mineral particles can be a tedious and difficult process. A video camera linked to a computer with image analysis software can speed up the process of size recognition by the projected outline of a particle. Video systems are used to size large lumps of rock on conveyor belts and even on the back of dump trucks as the load is tipped into crusher feed bins. The obvious technique is to measure the average distance between two extremities of the particle and the arithmetic or geometric mean of a number of measurements taken. The extremities of the distance to be measured are standardized The relative size of particles may also be indicated by reference circles having an equal projected area or perimeter ( In some cases the average estimations of diameters is expressed as the This method gives a slightly higher average than the arithmetic mean size of a particle. Therefore when reporting particle size it is necessary to quote the method used. Due to the difficulty in measuring length, sometimes the particle size is described in terms of its volume or surface area, as a volume mean diameter or a surface mean diameter. In a sample consisting of several particles, this concept can only be used if it is assumed that all the particles have the same shape. Thus if In a mass of sample, Equation If all the particles are assumed to have equal dimensions, which is expressed as the mean volume diameter, Hence Using Equation Similarly, the surface mean diameter, Gold nuggets were examined under a microscope and the following frequency distribution was obtained: Assuming the nuggets are of similar shape, determine the size distribution on a mass fraction basis. Data: density of gold nugget = 17,580 kg/m Let  Therefore, the mass fraction for each size interval would be The calculations can now be made as follows to estimate In metallurgical practice where sedimentation or classification of particles is required, the      Equation The expression is not applicable for very small particles or conditions that lead to Brownian movement of particles. When applying Equation Note: Equation In practice, difficulty arises in determining the The expression Equation It has been found that The relation between the drag force and For turbulent conditions, Newton derived the forces due to drag as During the settling of a particle under streamline conditions, the force acting on the particle due to gravitational acceleration is given by   This would be equal to the force at the This equation is Stokes’ equation as given in Equation Even though the terminal velocities can be calculated from Equations By multiplying both sides of Equation Similarly we can arrive at an expression, which is independent of The right-hand side of Equation Similarly, the Tables and charts are available, plotting log [( As the tables are applicable for spherical particles, Heywood Other shape factors have been proposed, such as the sphericity factor,   The values of log [( Specular haematite particles from Labrador were sampled to determine the size of individual particles. The average Data: μ (H For simplicity we may assume that the iron ore particles are spherical in shape, therefore Equation Substituting into Equation An irregular shaped mineral particle (shape factor, Projected area of particle = then From Appendix D2, and taking ρ Let the projected diameter of particle be Next dividing both sides of the equation by the term substituting Substituting the data gives Then from From That is, the corrected value of log Now Usually, gravity segregation methods are used to determine particle sizes down to 0.02 μm. Equation For a spherical particle, obeying Neglecting acceleration, Equation Assuming that the initial position of the particle in the centrifuge was Thus from a knowledge of In commercial centrifuges, the positions of a particle, A monochromatic laser beam impinging on a mineral surface will be transmitted, reflected, refracted or diffracted. The intensity of the diffracted beam and the angle of diffraction are used to measure the size distribution of the particles in the sample. The basic underlying principle is that the intensity of the diffracted beam is a measure of the size and number of particles having specific cross-sectional area in the path of the beam and that the angle of diffraction is inversely proportional to the particle size. The angles and intensities of scattering of a laser beam impinging on a mineral particle are small angle, high intensity for large sized particles and large angle, low intensity for small sized particles. Thus, a spectrum is produced, from which both the angle and intensity of the particles may be easily measured. The size of particle affects the angle of light diffraction, while the number of particles of that size also affects the intensity of the diffracted light.  The laser sizing equipment consists of a He–Ne laser, sample suspension and circulation system and photon detection of the angle and intensity of the diffracted beam. The laser beam is collimated with lenses and mirrors to provide a monochromatic beam. The emerging wave length of the polarized beam varies with different manufacturers but is usually of the order of 450–900 nm. For sample handling and sequestering, the particles are dispersed either in air or in a suitable liquid of known refractive index. It is also necessary to know the refractive index of the mineral particles. Two systems have been employed to present the particles to the laser beam, namely, The dynamic system The static system The dynamic system is more commonly used in metallurgical practice. In this system, the sample is dispersed in a fluid and pumped through an optically flat measurement cell, placed in the optic axis between the laser source and the light detection system. This is distinct from For the measurement of the angular spread and intensity of the diffracted light, an array of photo-diodes or similar detectors are used. To reach the sensor device, the diffracted beam passes through a liquid of known refractive index. The particles, whose sizes need to be determined, should preferably be non-magnetic, as near to spherical shape, isotopic, homogeneous and preferably not transparent or translucent. During crushing and grinding operations, particle shapes can, in general, be said to approach a near spherical shape. This is a favourable situation for size measurement by laser diffraction. The overlapping light diffraction interference pattern from a distribution of particle sizes is a function of the particle size and the wavelength of the laser beam, specifically the ratio of particle diameter and wavelength ( The smaller the particle size, the wider the scattering angle so that for a particle of 0.5 μm, the angle can be greater than 90°. Hence, side detectors and even back detectors ( As the particle size decreases and becomes small relative to the wavelength of the light, the scattering intensity minimum disappears and the contrast in the maximum intensity becomes too small to accurately determine any size information. By reducing the wavelength of the light, the ratio For particles less than 200 nm, the difference between the vertical polarization of the scattered light and the horizontal polarized light can be combined with the other two approaches and the lower sizing limit can be extended to ∼40 nm. This technique is referred to as The measurement range for the laser diffraction technique, using a combination of these approaches, is therefore typically 0.03–3500 μm. For a mixture of particles sizes, the diffracted light patterns for large and small particles will overlap. Hence, two or three laser beams of differing colour (wavelength) are sometimes used to distinguish patterns from large and small particles. The spread and intensity of the diffracted beams are measured and the mean size of the spread taken as the particle size. Alternatively, the The scattering pattern of angles and intensities observed in the laser instrument are dependent on the particle sizes in the measuring cell. Particle shape will affect the shape of the diffraction pattern. The pattern is circular for spherical particles but becomes distorted for irregular shaped particles. The scattering pattern of a distribution of particle sizes is the same as the sum of the patterns of the individual particles in the distribution. The size distribution is back-calculated using light scattering theory to the size distribution that would produce the observed pattern. Computation of the observed scatter patterns converting to particle size is based on Fraunhofer diffraction theory, and Mie diffraction theory. When light interacts with a particle, it will emerge from the particle by Diffraction from the particle edges Reflection Refraction Reradiated following absorption All of these interactions will contribute to the scatter pattern observed in both angle and intensity. The scatter pattern will, therefore, also depend on the refractive index of the particle. The Fraunhofer theory is a first approximation model which assumes Particles are circular opaque disks Only edge diffraction Only small angle scattering (particle sizes greater than 20–50 μm) The Fraunhofer model is relatively simple and requires no understanding of the optical properties of the particles. When smaller or finer particle sizes are present, the contribution of refraction becomes more important. Reflection and absorption are undesirable because it reduces the intensity of the light scatter pattern and adds no useful information on the particle size. The Mie diffraction theory accounts for refraction and reflection which allows estimation of the scatter pattern of smaller particles. The Fraunhofer model provides particle sizes fairly accurately when the particles are relatively large, but the Mie model accurately covers particle sizes of cross-sectional diameter from 0.045 μm to 2000 μm. The Mie model requires the use of the refractive index of the dispersant and the solid in suspension in the dispersant, while the Fraunhofer method does not require this information to interpret sizes. The Fraunhofer method may be considered a special case of the Mie method. Both the methods are normally used for particle size greater than 10 times the wave length of the laser beam. The data are reported as either a volumetric mean diameter or a surface area mean diameter equivalent of a sphere, which could differ from the arithmetic mean sizes reported by other techniques such as sieve analysis. The difference in particle size distributions generated by different techniques was shown in testwork on ultrafine grinding of a gold ore. Disadvantages of the light scattering technique are as follows: It is extremely difficult to extract shape information from the scatter pattern, so hard spherical particles are assumed. This will affect the accuracy of the size measurement but will still allow monitoring of a change in size distribution. Because the light diffraction instrument measures the assemblage of particles in the sample rather than individual particles, the scatter pattern is related to the volume of the particle and hence the size distribution is volume based. This cannot be converted into a number-based distribution, such as obtained by image analysis, without significant error. This volume basis will tend to weight more heavily on the largest particles which will have the largest volume (or mass) but not represent the largest number of particles. For particles less than 20 μm, detailed optical properties, such as refractive index, are required for accurate measurement. Advantages of the light scattering technique are as follows: Wide size range of application, 0.03–3000 μm Can measure dry powders, slurries, emulsions, pastes Very fast analysis: seconds or minutes First principle measurement; requires no calibration and does not go out of calibration Ease of use Very small sample required, milligrams. Whichever method of measuring particle size is used, the characterization of a sample according to size is referred to as a size analysis. A size analysis in mineral processing is primarily used to obtain quantitative data about the individual size and size distribution of particles in the process stream. This is important in assessing the quality of grinding, optimum size of feed to a process for maximum efficiency etcetera. In most mineral processing applications, an approximate size of particles is all that is required. Sieving through standard sieves of known apertures and determining the sieve size on which all the particles are retained can conveniently give the limiting size of a group of particles subjected to the operation. The closer the size of successive sieves the closer would be the estimation to the true size. Instead of individual measurements of sizes of particles, the mean size of a particle passing through and retained on sieves gives a good approximation of particle size within the sieve ranges. The sieve size analysis of a mineral sample giving the mass fraction of mineral retained between successive sieve sizes is usually recorded as in There are no particles larger than 3350 μm (i.e. the fraction of particles retained on the 3350 μm screen is zero). The mass of material on the 1680 μm sieve equals 28.5% of the total mass. The mass fraction retained on the 850 μm screen and passing through the 1680 μm screen equals 22.8%. Similarly, the mass of material between sieve fraction 420 μm and 210 μm equals 8.4% by mass. The total material retained on the 420 μm sieve equals 0 + 28.5 + 22.8 + 13.2 = 64.6% by mass (rounded up). Similarly, the mass of mineral retained on the 210 μm sieve = 28.5 + 22.8 + 13.2 + 8.4 =  73.0% (rounded up), and so on as seen in column 3 of Even though the subsequent sieve openings are related by a factor of 1/√2 (Tyler’s series), a plot of size against mass percent in most cases is far from a straight line. To obtain a specific screen size that passes or retains a given mass, usually some interpolation of the tabled data is required. For example, in Plotting the data in this form ( The distribution of sizes in a sample does not often follow a normal distribution, as in If this plot is linear (the size distribution is In some cases, curvature of the plot is observed in the coarse sizes because the maximum particle size is not equal to infinity. In some cases where the distribution is skewed, a linear plot can be obtained by plotting the log of the cumulative undersize against the log of the screen aperture, preferably on a log–log paper ( It is not necessary to plot both the cumulative oversize and undersize as each is the mirror image of the other as seen in The     Taking the logs of both sides of this equation and rearranging it This is the equation of a straight line if The slope of a graph is taken as the ratio (Y1 − Y2)/(X1 − X2), where (X1, Y1) and (X2, Y2) are two points on the graph ( In Alternatively, if the distance in millimetre between one log cycle on the An alternative plot, especially suitable for finely ground particles, like that produced in tumbling mills, is to plot log [log 100/(100 − The Rosin–Rammler (or Weibull) distribution is expressed as    Rearranging and taking the logarithm of both sides of Equation Taking logarithms a second time to remove the exponent gives A plot of log log (100/ A sieve analysis showed the following results (  Rosin–Rammler Typical calculations using the data in This can now be plotted on normal graph paper ( Since sizing by different methods (sieving, cyclosizer, laser sizing) covers different size ranges, size distributions from different methods may need to be combined to give a complete size distribution. Sizing of the same sample by different methods will generally produce different results because of the difference in measurement principle. The difference is related to particle shape.  For the screening samples, the +38 μm screen fractions were obtained using standard 200 mm diameter BSS screens and the −38 μm fraction wet screened on a 10 μm nylon mesh screen. For comparison, a separate −212 μm sample was completely wet screened on all the above screens and also laser sized. Each sizing method covered some of the same size range to make comparison possible. Since the sample that was cyclosized (−75 μm) represents only a portion of the whole sample (61.6%), the results have to be adjusted by multiplying the mass % in the cyclosizer fractions by the −75 μm proportion. That is, for the −45 + 34 μm fraction, the scaled cumulative % passing is 0.802 × 61.6 = 49.4%. The same applies to the combination of the +75 μm screened results with the −75 μm screened results. When re-plotted, the data points line up with the +75 μm screen data as seen in The The laser sizer results of the cyclosizer minus cone 5 fraction, normalized to the total sample mass using the procedure described above, are plotted in As there is no absolute measure of size for irregular shaped particles, different methods of size measurement will give different size distributions. Generally, it is expected that irregular shaped particles will yield different sizing results when measured by different techniques. The differences can be quantified in terms of a This factor is generally determined experimentally by selecting a number of cumulative % passing values and obtaining the ratio of  Data obtained on analysing a tumbling mill product are given below. Plot the data using the Using the following data, plot a Samples of the feed to a ball mill and the product after 15 min of operation were analysed and the results are as follows: Estimate the rate of reduction of the 1000 μm feed size during the mill operation. The product from a grinding mill was sampled every 30 min for the first hour, then hourly for 4 h. The samples were screened and analysed yielding the following average size distribution: Estimate the rate at which the 100 μm feed size is reduced and its mass fraction after 2 h of operation Two sets of size analysis results are available for a given material. From a Gold nuggets were examined under a microscope and the following results were obtained. Determine: the size distribution on a mass basis the size distribution on a surface area basis. Data: density of gold nugget = 18,500 kg/m A pond contains particles from a process tail stream. If the pond is 500 mm deep, calculate the size of particles still suspended after 30 min from entering the pond. The particle density is 2650 kg/m The diameters of six lots of particles from a sample were measured under an optical microscope and a sedimentation method. The number of particles of each lot was counted and tabulated as The particles were all of similar shape, having a shape factor of 0.3. Estimate: the size of particles having the same specific surface as the mixture the surface area per unit volume of particles. A cylindrical glass tube of diameter 20 mm and capacity 22 cm The diameter of particles that would settle if the movement of particles was under streamline conditions. The diameter of particles that would settle under turbulent conditions when the rotational speed was increased to 4280 rpm.  A 1% suspension of hematite particles in methanol (1% solution in water) was filled in a cylindrical centrifuge tube 3 cm long × 1.9 cm diameter and rotated at 5000 rpm. Estimate: The size of particles that would settle every second for 5 s at the bottom of the tube If the numbers of particles settling every second were 200, 120, 80, 60, 20, determine the mean specific surface of the hematite particles. 