Introduction
                  Although the use of a dynamic hip screw (DHS) is considered to be the preferred treatment for intertrochanteric fractures, the external fixation device could produce clinical outcomes comparable to the outcomes obtained with conventional treatment. Furthermore, because external fixation is minimally invasive, we expected a lower rate of morbidity. Therefore, we compared the two treatments in a clinical trial of elderly patients with intertrochanteric fracture.
               
                  Methods
                  60 elderly high-risk patients with an average age of 78 years were treated for intertrochanteric fracture, resulting from a low energy trauma. Patients were randomly divided in two groups regarding to treatment. In Group A the patients were treated with DHS, while in Group B were treated with external fixator.
               
                  Results
                  The fixator was well accepted and no patient had significant difficulties while sitting or lying. The average intraoperative time was 73min in Group A and 15min in Group B (p
                     <0.05). 27 patients of Group A need blood transfusion postoperatively and none in Group B (p
                     <0.05). The mean duration of hospitalization in Group A and Group B was 8.4 and 2.2 days, respectively (p
                     <0.05). 9 of patients Group B had pin-track infection grade 2 that all were treated by oral antibiotics. There were no differences in comorbidities, quality of reduction, screw cut out, bed sore and HHS between the two groups.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Treatment with external fixator is an effective treatment for intertrochanteric fractures in elderly highrisk patients. The advantages include quick and simple application, minimal blood loss, less radiation exposure, adequate fixation, pain reduction, early discharge from hospital, low costs and favourable functional outcomes.Hip fractures are a leading cause of death and disability among the elderly The sliding hip screw is widely used for fixation of intertrochanteric fractures During the 1950s, external fixation was used to treat intertrochanteric fractures, but a high prevalence of postoperative complications such as pin-loosening, infection, and mechanical failure of the fixator caused surgeons to discontinue its use Sixty patients, 19 men and 41 women with an intertrochanteric fracture from a minor trauma were selected for the study. All of our patients were elderly high-risk patients with several comorbidities such as heart failure, coronary artery disease, hypertension, renal failure, malignancy, thyroid disease, anaemia, or pulmonary disease ( This patient population was randomly placed in two groups, by a computer-generated list, regarding to the treatment. The first group (Group A; Cephalosporin (1 In Group A, with the patient in a supine position on a fracture table, holding the leg under controlled traction the fracture was reduced in both planes under image intensification. The intraoperative time was measured from the time that the patients was transferred to fracture table to the time that the wound was sutured closed. A routine lateral approach to the proximal part of the femur was used, and a 135° four-hole dynamic hip screw (Mathys R, Bettlach, Switzerland) was implanted In Group B, the patients had local anaesthesia. With the patient in a supine position on an operating table, hanging the leg from the table from proximal tibia ( Under fluoroscopic control two proximal and two distal 6.5-mm schanz pin were percutaneously inserted along the femoral neck and into the proximal femoral shaft, respectively. The most proximal pin was inserted first along the femoral neck within 5 In Group B, intraoperative time was measured from the time that the reduction was attempted to the time that the fixator was completely mounted onto the pins. In both groups the reduction considered acceptable when less than 5 On the first postoperative day, the Group A patients were mobilized and partial weight-bearing with a walker or crutches was encouraged. Group B patients on the first postoperative day, were mobilized, sitting on bed or on a chair, while on the second postoperative day patients were advised to walk with a walker but non weight-bearing. External fixator was removed in the outpatient department with local anaesthesia after radiological confirmation of fracture union. In a mean time of 73 days after surgery In our study, cut out was defined as varus collapse of the fracture, with a femoral neck-shaft angle of >10° and with extrusion of the screw from the femoral head exceeding 1 When the fixators were removed, the pin tracks were classified according to the system of Dahl et al. Pin entry sites were cleaned with saline solution every two days. Low molecular weight heparin (Enoxaparin 40 Follow-up visits were scheduled at 14, 45, 90, 180 and 360 days after surgery and new X-rays were performed at that time. Evaluation during treatment included plain radiographs and pain assessment using the visual analogue scale (VAS), on the 3rd postoperative day. The operative time, postoperative complications, number of blood transfusions, length of the hospital stay and pre-fracture/postoperative ability to walk independently were also recorded. Clinical evaluation of patients was assessed with the Harris Hip Score Statistical analyses were carried out using SPSS (SPSS statistic package, version 21.0.0) statistical software. The Pearson Chi-Square Test and the The average patient age was 78 years (range: 61–98 years). In Group A, eleven patients had an AO/OTA type-A1 fracture and nineteen patients had a type-A2 fracture. In Group B, thirteen patients had a type-A1 fracture and seventeen patients had a type-A2 fracture ( In Group A, 22 patients had spinal anaesthesia whereas 8 patients had general anaesthesia. In Group B, all patients had local anaesthesia. In Group B External fixator was removed in the outpatient department in a mean time of 73 days after surgery. The average intraoperative time was 73 All fractures healed uneventfully in both groups. The more prolonged healing time was noticed in fractures with subtrochanteric extension and medial cortex comminution. In Group A patients, 28 fractures, were acceptably reduced. In Group B patients, 26 fractures were acceptably reduced ( The fixator was well accepted in Group B patients and no one had significant difficulties while sitting or lying ( In Group A patients, duration of hospitalization ranged between 5 and 16 days with a mean of 8.4 days. In Group B patients, the mean duration of hospitalization was 2.2 days (range: 1–5). The difference between Groups A and B was statistically significant ( 3 patients in Group A and 4 patients of Group B had bedsore ( Intertrochanteric hip fractures account for approximately half of all hip fractures in the elderly population. Among these fractures, 50–60% are classified as unstable Scott All these studies reported the advantages of external fixation including quick and simple application, minimal blood loss, less radiation exposure, pain reduction, satisfactory stability, and early weight-bearing. Pertrochanteric external fixator has been mainly used in elderly high-risk patients Our results are in accordance with the aforementioned studies. There was no difference between acceptable reduction, VAS, HHS and bed sore between the two groups. On the other hand, statistically significant difference was found in the operative time, blood transfusion and duration of hospitalization between the two groups, with the external fixator group had lower operative time, no need of blood transfusion, earlier discharge and so lower costs than the DHS group. In accordance with previous studies, the mean intraoperative time for application of the fixator was short (15 There was no need of fracture table to achieve acceptable reduction in external fixator group and it was accomplished only by hanging proximal tibia of operating table, as opposed to much consuming time for applying fracture table in DHS group. Intraoperative blood loss was minimal and postoperative haemoglobin levels were similar to the preoperative levels and no blood transfusion was required, in opposition to other surgical methods The external fixator offers additional advantage, leading to minimal radiation exposure, comparing other surgical methods. Vekris et al. An additional advantage of external fixation was the possibility of application under local anaesthesia for patients who have poor general health in whom other options were not applicable In accordance to our study, Vossinakis et al. Moroni et al. In accordance to Vossinakis and Badras study Varus collapse and shortening are mechanical complications commonly reported after either internal or external fixation of unstable or severely osteoporotic intertrochanteric fractures. Although most of the patients in our series had poor bone quality, low incidence of mechanical complications was recorded in patients treated with external fixator. Badras et al. A potential disadvantage of external fixation is that assessment of fracture-healing is sometimes difficult. Better diagnostic tools or the development of radiolucent fixators would help to solve this problem. In addition, an improved fixator design allowing compression and dynamization at the fracture site may be beneficial in facilitating fracture-healing Our study shows that external fixator is an effective treatment for intertrochanteric fractures in elderly highrisk patients. It is applicable under local anaesthesia and does not need any fracture table, radiation exposure is little, Operative time is short, blood loss is negligible, reduction is acceptable and stable, limitation of hip/knee motion is not appreciable, bed sore is low, duration of hospitalization is short, costs are low and functional outcomes are favourable. There is no conflict of interest. The authors did not receive grants or outside funding in support of their research or preparation of this manuscript. They did not receive payments or other benefits or a commitment or agreement to provide such benefits from a commercial entity. The authors wish to thank Dr. Mohammd Emami for his valuable comments.