Cyanex 301 can extract both Ni(II) and Co(II) from the leach solution of nickel laterite ore. About 10mol/L HCl solution is needed to strip Ni(II) from the loaded Cyanex 301. To overcome this difficulty, a mixture of Cyanex 301 with TBP was employed to develop a process for the recovery of Co(II) and Ni(II) from the laterite leach liquor. It was found that this mixture showed synergism on the extraction of Ni(II) and significant improvement in Ni(II) stripping was obtained. A developed process was proposed, in which Co(II) and Ni(II) were selectively extracted by this mixture over other elements, and then stripped with 3 and 7mol/L HCl solutions, respectively. A comparison of single Cyanex 301 and Cyanex 301+TBP process was made and discussed in detail. The essential advantages of single Cyanex 301 process were retained in this mixture process, while the main drawback in Ni(II) stripping was improved. Batch-type experiments were conducted to simulate multi-stage counter-current extraction and stripping, indicating that Ni(II) of 99.96% purity was obtained with a recovery percentage of 92.7%.Laterite ore is one of the most important reserves of nickel and cobalt together with abundant iron and small amounts of aluminum, manganese, magnesium and other elements. About 70% of the world's land based nickel resources are found as laterite ores Cyanex 272 exhibited a great performance on Co(II) and Ni(II) separation, with a separation factor as high as 6972 The Goro process is another commercially applied solvent extraction process for the recovery of Co(II) and Ni(II) from Goro laterite ore Based on the Goro process, we improved the process by using only Cyanex 301 to recover Co(II) and Ni(II) with high purity from a leach solution of nickel laterite ore containing Co(II), Ni(II), Mg(II), Mn(II), Ca(II), Al(III) and iron. Simultaneous extraction of Co(II) and Ni(II) and selective stripping of them was successfully demonstrated in our previous work Literature survey indicates that the extraction of Co(II) and Ni(II) from acidic leach liquors with the mixtures of Cyanex 301 and amines, such as Aliquat 336 In this work, a mixture of Cyanex 301 and TBP was employed to improve the stripping efficiency of Ni(II). The effect of composition of the mixture on the extraction and stripping of metal ions was investigated. It was found that extraction of Ni(II) was enhanced and complete stripping of Ni(II) would be possible with lower concentrations of HCl solutions after adding TBP into Cyanex 301. A process was developed for the recovery of Ni(II) and Co(II) from the chloride leach liquor of laterite ore by extraction with this mixture. A comparison was made on the processes with single Cyanex 301 and the mixture of Cyanex 301 and TBP on the basis of batch simulation results for the counter-current extraction and stripping. The chloride leach liquor of laterite ore contained large amounts of ferrous iron (90 Cyanex 301 (Bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)dithiophosphinic acid) was purchased from Cytec Canada Inc. TBP (tributyl phosphate) was supplied by Yakuri pure chemical Co., Ltd. They were used without any further purification. Kerosene (Daejung Chemicals and Metals Co., Ltd., Korea, 95%, Aromatic content < The general extraction and stripping batch experiments were carried out by contacting equal volumes (20 McCabe-Thiele diagram was constructed to determine the number of extraction and stripping stages in a continuous operation. The equilibrium isotherm for extraction and stripping was obtained by mixing an aqueous solution and organic solution at different phase volume ratios. The counter-current simulation experiments for the extraction and stripping were carried out in batch-wise laboratory scale to verify the results obtained from McCabe-Thiele diagrams.  In the case of Co(II), the extraction percentage increased steadily with the increase of Cyanex 301 mole fraction in the mixture. Compared to the extraction by single Cyanex 301 ( To figure out the optimum organic composition for Ni(II) stripping, the effect of the Cyanex 301 mole fraction on the stripping of Co(II) and Ni(II) from the loaded mixture by 7 The optimum condition for the effective extraction and stripping of Co(II) and Ni(II) was considered to be Cyanex 301 mole fraction of 0.67, i.e. 1 The stripping behavior of Co(II), Ni(II) and Al(III) from the loaded mixture of 1 A method for separation of Co(II) and Ni(II) from the loaded mixture of 1 Extraction isotherms were constructed to determine the number of stages by varying the O/A volume ratio from 1/5 to 7/1, while keeping other experimental parameters constant. The mixture of 1 To confirm this, a two stage counter-current batch simulation experiment was carried out at an O/A ratio of 3 using 1 The loaded mixture of Cyanex 301 and TBP and 3 Based on the results obtained from McCabe-Thiele plot, a two stage batch simulation experiment on the counter-current stripping of Co(II) was carried out. The loaded organic phase was obtained by batch simulation experiments in Ni(II) stripping isotherm from the Co-free Cyanex 301 To verify the stripping stages obtained in the Ni(II) stripping isotherm, batch simulation for the three stages counter-current stripping of Ni(II) from the Co-free Cyanex 301 Based on the aforementioned data, a developed process for the recovery of Co(II) and Ni(II) from the leach liquor of nickel laterite ore by using mixture of Cyanex 301 and TBP is illustrated in The comparison of the two processes was made and listed in The prominent advantage of the Cyanex 301 A mixture system of Cyanex 301 and TBP was employed to improve the stripping of Ni(II) from the loaded Cyanex 301. The optimum mole fraction of Cyanex 301 in the mixture for effective extraction and stripping of Co(II) and Ni(II) was obtained. In this process, Co(II) and Ni(II) were simultaneously extracted over Mg(II), Mn(II), Ca(II) and Al(III) with 1 The batch simulation results of the whole process with Cyanex301 This work was supported by the Global Excellent Technology Innovation of the