The Permian siliciclastic Kupferschiefer of Poland is the host for economically important Cu-Ag deposits. Within the Kupferschiefer of the Polish Zechstein basin, mineralogical and detailed stable isotopic analyses of clay minerals, quartz and calcite show that the metal enrichment processes are associated with significant changes in oxygen and hydrogen isotope composition of the illitic clays, with a decrease in illite crystallinity and an increase in the percentages of neoformed illite (1M/1Md polytypes) in the clay size fractions. D/H and 18 O/16O ratios of the minerals in the host rock have been affected by the mineralizing process. The magnitude of the isotopic shift in 18O/16O (518O of illite decreases of ∼4‰) and D/Hof illitic clays (δD increases of ∼ 40‰) coeresonnds with diatance to “Rote Fa¨ule” and Cu-mineralized zones within the Kupferschiefer. The isotopic zonation of fine-grained illite is explained by fluid-rock interaction with ascending, oxidizing solutions, which are thought to have been responsible for base metal deposition and formation of Rote Faule. Published microthermometric fluid inclusion data and the degree of maturation of organic matter imply a maximum temperature between 100° and 150°C during host rock alteration and ore formation. The characterization of the fluids as basinal brines were confirmed by the published fluid inclusion studies. The estimated isotopic composition of the mineralizing brines (δ18O between +2 and +7%0; δD between –3 and –23%o) rgue for its origin from meteoric waters by salt dissolution and evaporation in the sedimentary basin of the Rotliegendes. A participation of heated geopressured brines from Zechstein salt-bearing rocks and, therefore, an origin from evaporated seawater cannot be excluded. The results, together with previously published K-Ar data on illite, argue for a post-depositional origin of base metal mineralization within the Kupferschiefer of Poland. The metals were most probably derived by leaching of Rotliegendes volcanics with the saline waters. Upward migration and penetration into the Kupferschiefer were restricted to zones of enhanced permeability at the margins of the sedimentary basin and adjacent to paleohighs.In the mining districts of southwestern Poland (Cu deposits of the Fore-Sudetic Monocline and the North-Sudetic Trough), significant enrichment in copper and silver is found in the basal Zechstein strata in the vicinity of epigenetic oxidized areas, denoted as “Rote Fäule” ( Based on the relation of ore-grade mineralization to Rote Fäule and on geothermal reconstructions, copper mineralization is thought to have resulted from the migration of hot, oxidizing, saline brines from the Rotliegendes sandstones toward the pre-Zechstein paleohighs into shales rich in organic carbon ( To clarify the validity of the proposed models for ore genesis within the Kupferschiefer shale, information about the origin and evolution of the ore-forming fluids are needed. Until now, the only direct information about the nature of the ore-bearing solutions came from rare fluid inclusion studies in the carbonate cement of Weissliegendes sandstone ( As indicated by these results, stable isotope ratios of clay minerals are useful in interpreting conditions and mechanisms of formation of ore deposits in sedimentary sequences ( The geology of the pre-Permian basement of the Polish Zechstein basin is shown in At the end of the Variscan orogeny, the intracon-tinental basins (e.g., Polish basin) were filled with early Permian pyroclastics, lava flows, and clastic sediments (red beds of the Rotliegendes). At the end of the Rotliegendes, Poland had been eroded to a peneplain ( The top of the Weissliegendes sandstones, reworked and redeposited by the invading Zechstein sea, represents the first influence of the Zechstein transgression following a long period of arid to semiarid conditions. After Zechstein transgression the Kupferschiefer was the first marine sedimentary layer covering large parts of central Europe. The time of Kupferschiefer sedimentation has been reported as 258 Ma in a recent compilation ( The Kupferschiefer copper deposits are localized in the southwestern part of Poland, in the Fore-Sudetic Monocline and the North-Sudetic Trough ( Beside the alteration of the Kupferschiefer in Rote Fäule zones (replacement of pyrite by hematite, hematite The locations of the boreholes sampled for Kupferschiefer shale are shown in After gentle mechanical disaggregation, portions of the whole-rock samples of the Kupferschiefer were treated chemically to remove carbonate, organic matter and ferric oxides, following the procedures outlined by The clay minerals were identified using a Philips Model 12045 X-ray Diffractometer. Air-dried and glycol-solvated oriented clay mineral separates were analysed on glass slides from 2° to 32° CO Prior to extraction of oxygen, silicate samples were dried under vacuum for 6 Hydrogen for isotopic analysis was extracted from the < 2  The base metal content and metal facies of the Kupferschiefer together with mineralogical and crys-tallinity data (Kubler index and intensity ratio of illite)of the clay size fractions (< 2 Illite is the predominant mineral in the clay size fractions of the Kupferschiefer shale adjacent to the ore districts. Chlorite is found to be a major constituent near the Fore-Sudetic Block ( The clay size fractions of the samples from the non-mineralized Kupferschiefer in central and northern Poland, where barren, pyritic shale predominates, mostly consist of mixtures of illite and minor amounts of kaolinite (up to ∼ 25%) and chlorite (≤ 10%) ( The results of this study and the preliminary study of clay mineralogy and K-Ar age of illite show that both diagenetic illite (1M/1M These results point toward the formation of illite by recrystallization of detrital illite during alteration related to Kupferschiefer mineralization in Poland. From the differences in illite crystallinity and poly-typism, as well as in K-Ar ages, The oxygen isotope data of the calcites and the clay size fractions from the Kupferschiefer are summarized in Within both, the mineralized (samples Be1 to Be21, and Be43) and the non-mineralized zone (samples Be22 to Be42) of the Polish Kupferschiefer, the δ The δ The relationship between δ  The relationship between δ The proposed isotopic exchange between the il-lites and an externally derived fluid most probably has taken place during mineralization. The correlation of regional differences in δ The relationship between δ Therefore, the isotopic composition of waters responsible for host rock diagenesis and ore deposition can best be estimated from the δ Hydrogen isotope investigations were also performed on the < 2 The differences in hydrogen isotopic composition of the clay minerals from mineralized and barren Kupferschiefer together with the tendency towards higher δD values with decreasing distance to the Rote Faule zone in the mineralized sections ( As already outlined in the discussion of the δ The estimated range in isotopic composition of the ore forming solutions (δ The coexisting waters at surface temperature (25°C) calculated from illites of Rote Fäule samples (mineralized zone)show δ D and δ The results of fluid inclusion studies in the carbonate cement of the Weissliegendes sandstone from the Richelsdorf area (Germany) by The proposed interpretation from the stable isotopic composition of the mineralizing brines is consistent with the model for the evolution of Rotliegendes brines in closed basins, described by  The results from stable isotope investigations of clay minerals and carbonate from Kupferschiefer of the Polish Zechstein basin indicate isotopic exchange of the fine-grained (< 2 The occurrence of saline fluid inclusions ( Support of this study by S. Hoernes (University of Bonn, Germany), D.A. Vanko (Georgia State University, USA) and S. Speczik (Polish Geological Institute) is gratefully acknowledged. The article benefited from the critical remarks of J.I. Drever (USA), R.O. Rye (USA)and an anonymous reviewer. This study was partly performed during a research stay of one of the authors (A.B.)at the Georgia State University (Atlanta, GA, USA) and Purdue University (West-Lafayette, IN, USA), made possible by financial support of the Max Kade Foundation (New York, NY, USA). Oxygen isotope analyses at Purdue were supported by a Purdue Global Initiative Faculty Grant. The Polish Geological Institute, Warsaw, allowed the collection of the Kupferschiefer samples from its borehole profiles and provided financial support to A.B. during sample collection.