Mineralisation of CO2 using magnesium silicate rock offers a large carbon and storage (CCS) potential with documented advantages compared to underground storage of pure CO2. Work in Finland has resulted in what is referred to as “the ÅA route”, involving stepwise carbonation of serpentinite rock. Magnesium is extracted and converted into magnesium hydroxide (Mg(OH)2), which is carbonated in a pressurised fluidised bed (PFB) reactor at elevated pressure and temperature. The combined operation of a water-shift reaction and carbonation of Mg(OH)2 is addressed in this paper for (coal) gasification syngas and, in more detail, blast furnace top gas. Water produced during the carbonation step can drive the water-gas shift reaction. HSC and Aspen Plus are used for thermodynamic equilibrium product gas and solid products composition analysis. Optimal process conditions appear to be 400–450 °C, at a pressure of 40 bar or higher, for acceptable degrees of conversion. This is partly the result of the water-gas shift reaction equilibrium moving to the CO side at higher temperatures, besides increased calcination of Mg(OH)2 to much less reactive MgO. An energy requirement assessment for blast furnace top gas processing shows that power input requirements may be more than compensated for by waste heat.Mineralisation of CO Work on magnesium silicate-based rock carbonation in Finland, since 2005 primarily at Åbo Akademi University has resulted in what is referred to as “the ÅA route” or “ÅAU process”, which is based on step-wise carbonation of serpentinite rock, containing mainly serpentine (3MgO·2SiO The fact that water is the product of a chemical reaction that fixes CO This is competing with Mg(OH) Thus, this paper reports on first analysis, via a modelling study using HSC Chemistry (v.5.1) for Gibbs energy minimization Besides this the conversion of Mg(OH) Earlier work on pure CO  For the HSC simulations the following gaseous, liquid and solid phases were considered besides the gases listed in For the IGCC syngas, CO A similar plot for MgO shows that more than ⅓ of the Mg(OH) For the blast furnace top gas, CO The results show a clear decrease in CO levels while at low pressures and high temperatures the CO From the findings given here it must be concluded that a temperature in the range 400–450 °C and a pressure of 40 bar (or higher) are preferable for achieving CO A simple Aspen Plus (v.8.2, later v. 9.0) model composed of an equilibrium (Rgibbs) reactor and downstream gas/solid separator operating at 400–500 °C, 40–100 bar was used to verify (in more detail) the Case 2 findings for blast furnace top gas. A feed gas of 1 kmol/s with the composition given in  To finalise the analysis of the water-gas shift and carbonation reactor, the effect of the water content in the blast furnace top gas for water-gas shift reaction combined with Mg(OH) A more thorough analysis of chemical reaction kinetics is the next step for this study, while also membranes in combination with water-gas shift reactions deserve more attention, as this would remove H The Aspen Plus model shown in Heat exchanger HX2 is defined to preheat solid for the reactor, heat exchanger HX3 is used to cool the hot solid product after the gas/solid separator (PRDSPLIT) while preheating the incoming gas to ΔT = 20 °C below the reaction temperature. Heat exchanger HX1 is used to further preheat the incoming gas, the same gas upstream after it leaves the compressor, which is the highest temperature occurring in the process. Thus, three heat exchangers allow for preheating the incoming gas and solid while cooling the product solid. Besides this, excess heat from the conversion reactor will be obtained, as quantified below. The temperature of the product gas after expansion is not considered for further heat recovery. A detailed analysis of stepwise compression and expansion of the gas streams is outside the scope of this study: our earlier work addressed that for magnesium hydroxide carbonation for CO The energy use analysis was made for process conditions 400–460 °C, 40 bar or 100 bar (abs) pressure in the conversion reactor, with the 1 kmol/s blast furnace gas input as in the previous subsection. For the 400 and 460 °C and 40 or 100 bar the results obtained are summarised in The combined operation of a water-shift reaction and carbonation of Mg(OH) Our (former) colleague Dr. Martin Slotte is acknowledged for support with the Aspen Plus simulations.