At Northam Platinum Mine in South Africa intense potholing of the Merensky Reef has led to the development of several mineralogically different reef types in proximity to one other, which results in differing processing performance. In particular, the nature and texture of the valuable sulfide minerals, as well as the nature of the gangue minerals and degree of alteration in the various reef types affects both milling throughput and flotation recovery. The three major ore types being processed and thus selected for this study are the Normal reef, NP2 reef and P2 reef. The focus of this study was to investigate the relationship between changes in mineralogy and the effect of copper sulfate addition at two grind sizes on the laboratory batch flotation performance obtained with the three reef types. The best results were obtained with the NP2 reef in terms of expected industrial throughput, recovery and grade of all base-metal sulfides despite this reef type having the lowest feed grade of sulfide minerals. The biggest difference was in the recovery and grade of pyrrhotite. The better performance of the NP2 reef ore relative to the Normal and P2 reefs has been attributed to the equigranular nature of the reef type together with its feldspathic mineralogy. In contrast, the Normal and P2 reefs are orthopyroxene rich and are associated with more alteration minerals. The Normal reef contained the greatest amount of alteration minerals which correlated to the poorest flotation performance in terms of recovery and grade at all conditions tested. Whereas addition of copper sulfate did not affect the flotation of the sulfides in the NP2 reef ore, it significantly improved the overall performance of the base-metal sulfides in the Normal and P2 reefs, especially for pyrrhotite.Northam Platinum is located on the Western limb of the Bushveld Complex ( The variability of the Merensky reef at Northam results from potholing during formation. Although the mechanisms responsible for pothole formation are still a subject of debate, it is generally considered to have formed through a thermo-chemical erosion process (e.g. The run-of-mine ore processed at Northam consists almost exclusively of these three reef types, and no allowance is made for any specific processing requirements of the individual reef types. The presence of texturally and mineralogically similar melanorites and chromitites at the top of each reef types strongly suggests that this forms a drape over a variably eroded footwall ( The variability of the flotation performance of Merensky reef ores has previously been recognised. Wiese et al. The mechanism for copper activation on pyrrhotite has been shown to be through the direct adsorption of Cu(II) onto the pyrrhotite surface followed by in situ reduction to Cu(I) In this study, the unique geology of Northam in containing three reef types, with variable silicate mineralogy, base-metal sulfide content and variable textures allows for the analysis of mineralogical effects and copper sulfate addition on the flotation of the base-metal sulfides (BMS) and gangue minerals. Bulk samples of the Normal, NP2 and P2 reef Merensky ores were collected by Northam personnel and freighted to the University of Cape Town. The samples were representatively split and prepared into respective sub-samples for mineralogical characterisation and batch flotation tests. Mineralogical characterisation included the examination of samples by optical microscopy and the QEMSCAN analysis of sized flotation test feeds ( Batch flotation tests were performed on 1 Mineral grade-recoveries (chalcopyrite, pentlandite, pyrrhotite and total sulfide;  The BMS inventory was roughly equivalent for the Normal and NP2 reefs (1.5 wt% and 1.4 wt% respectively), but significantly higher within the P2 reef (2.3 wt%). Pentlandite formed ∼35% of the total sulfide budget whereas pyrrhotite formed ∼30%, and chalcopyrite formed between 15% and 20%. The remaining sulfides (e.g. pyrite) formed between 15% and 20% of the total sulfide budget. These ratios were broadly consistent for all three reef types. A comparison of the liberation of the sulfides is illustrated in In A summary of the flotation results from batch flotation tests is given in Using the methodology given in From the sulfide grade-recovery curves illustrated in Cumulative pentlandite recoveries show considerable variation between the three reef types (66.4–84.2%; Cumulative pyrrhotite recoveries were calculated, not measured, and problems associated with this approach are displayed in Cumulative BMS recoveries show considerable variation between the three reefs (71.6–92.8%). The NP2 reef reports recoveries greater than 90% for all conditions (90.1–92.8%), which is 5% greater than either the Normal or P2 reefs. In contrast the Normal (71.6–84.9%) and P2 (76.9–84.4%) reefs report lower recoveries and greater ranges of values. Copper sulfate addition significantly improves recoveries for the Normal and P2 reefs at both the standard and fine grind sizes ( Milling times for the three reefs suggest that the NP2 reef is the softest, relative to the Normal and P2 reefs, with the P2 reef the hardest. This difference in hardness can be attributed to mineralogy, texture and degree of alteration. Since the mineralogy of the Normal and P2 reefs are similar the role of alteration and texture must be critical. The Normal reef is slightly more altered than the P2 reef, and contains a much thicker inter-chromitite pegmatite (∼150    It is particularly interesting that copper sulfate addition enhances the sulfide recovery of orthopyroxene dominated reef types without seemingly affecting the sulfide recovery of plagioclase dominated reef types. This may be attributed to the increased alteration of BMS ores given that monoclinic or magnetic pyrrhotite may form through low-temperature alteration of non-magnetic pyrrhotite, which appears to be more sensitive to copper activation ( This study has demonstrated that there are different optimum conditions for the flotation of the ores evaluated. The best performance, in terms of sulfide recovery, grade and throughput, was obtained with the NP2 reef ore relative to the Normal and P2 reef types and indicates that the NP2 reef ore is the most favourable of the three Northam reef types to process. Furthermore, the assumption that the PGM remain intimately associated with the sulfides, suggest that the NP2 reef would be the most profitable to process. The milling time is the shortest and since there is no significant improvement in liberation with finer grinding, there is no need to re-grind to maximize recovery. This means expected throughput on an industrial scale may be up to twice as efficient as either the Normal or P2 reefs. Copper sulfate addition has no effect on either the sulfide grades or recoveries. The Normal reef and P2 reef were dominated by orthopyroxene, and copper sulfate addition resulted in improvements in grades for all base-metal sulfides and improvements in recoveries for pentlandite, pyrrhotite and overall base-metal sulfides. These improvements are probably related to activator addition which suitably prepared the surface of the sulfides (particularly pyrrhotite) for xanthate adsorption and subsequent flotation. The milling times for these reef types are longer than the NP2 reef due to the inequigranular nature of each reef type, and the predominance of orthopyroxene, which is postulated to be ‘harder’ than plagioclase under impact breakage. The P2 reef, despite having the highest BMS feed grades does not report the highest BMS recoveries. This is due to the complex sulfide textures resulting from grain coarsening during the emplacement of the MCU and subsequent potholing, and to the presence of orthopyroxene within the concentrates, rendered floatable through association with talc. The presence of this orthopyroxene had the effect of lowering the grades and recoveries. Northam Platinum Limited for supplying the ores used in this study. The chemical engineering department at the University of Cape Town for financial support.