Nitrogen-incorporated lithium silicophosphate (LiSiPON) thin-film electrolytes, which contain two glass-forming elements, are fabricated by sputtering from a (1−x)Li3PO4·xLi2SiO3 target in a nitrogen reactive plasma. The results of impedance measurements show that the activation energy for conduction decreases as the Si content increases, which leads to an increase in the ionic conductivity of the films. It is suggested that these improvements in the electrical properties of the films are due to the combined effect of the mixed former and nitrogen incorporation. It appears that the decomposition potential of the electrolyte film in contact with Pt is about 5.5V.Li-ion conducting, inorganic, solid electrolyte films have attracted much attention in their application to thin-film, rechargeable, lithium microbatteries. The microbattery is fabricated by depositing thin-layers of the cell components, i.e. cathode, electrolyte, anode, and current-collectors. As an electrolyte, amorphous glassy thin-films of sulfides It has been reported that the use of two glass formers leads to conductivity enhancement due to the mixed former effect. For example, glasses of the Li Incorporating nitrogen into the oxide network is another approach. For example, in Lipon electrolyte films, which are deposited by sputtering Li To increase the ionic conductivity and to enlarge the electrochemical stability window as an electrolyte for solid-state, thin-film, lithium batteries, this study attempts to combine the above approaches, viz. the mixed former effect and nitrogen incorporation. In our previous report The nitrogen-incorporated lithium silicophosphate (for simplicity, referred to as LiSiPON) films were deposited by RF-magnetron sputtering of single targets in pure N The compositions of the electrolyte films were determined from Rump simulation of the spectra from Rutherford backscattering spectrometry (RBS). The time-of-flight method of the elastic recoil detection (TOF-ERD) technique using a high-energy Cl ion incident beam was used to quantify the Li content. The crystallographic structure was analyzed by X-ray diffraction using Cu For ac impedance measurements, Pt|electrolyte|Pt sandwich structures were fabricated on alumina substrates with a typical electrolyte thickness of 1 The X-ray diffraction patterns of sputtering targets prepared by heating the cold-pressed mixtures are given in The RBS spectrum of the as-deposited film on a Si substrate from a 0.6Li Complex impedance spectra of the electrolyte films have been examined as a function of composition. The Nyquist plots are presented in To determine the activation energy for ionic conduction, the conductivity has been obtained from impedance plots measured at various temperatures, see where The linear sweep voltammogram for the Pt|LiSiPON|Pt cell up to 6.2 From the above results, the combination approach of the mixed former effect and nitrogen incorporation is believed to be effective in increasing the ionic conductivity of the glass thin-film electrolyte. Therefore, further studies to determine the structure and to interpret the transport mechanism are necessary. Nitrogen-incorporated, lithium silicophosphate, thin-film electrolytes are fabricated by sputtering from a This work was supported by The Korean Ministry of Science and Technology through the research program of the National Research Laboratory.