The effects of soy protein concentrate and κ-carrageenan mix (GELPRO, 3:1 ratio) (ranging from 0 to 3%) and varying levels of collar fat (ranging from 20 to 40%) on comminuted scalded sausage quality characteristics were investigated. Sausage quality was determined by measuring textural, hydration and colour characteristics. GELPRO preparate addition favourably affected WHC and thermal stability of sausages processed regardless of the fat content. Use of an additive affects the sausage texture, but the effect depends on the amount of the additive used. Fat reduction resulted in a decrease in hardness, gumminess and chewiness of final products. Lower fat contents were also accompanied by a significant reduction in the cooking yield and WHC. Sausage colour parameters were affected only by varying fat levels (L*, b*).High-fat finely comminuted meat products, very popular and widely consumed in Poland, represent a large portion of the total meat industry production. The revised The objective of our study was to evaluate the effect of varying GELPRO preparate (soy protein concentrate and κ-carrageenan mix in 3:1 ratio) levels on the quality of comminuted, scalded sausages containing various levels of fat and to examine its role in enhancing the production yield and textural properties. Model sausages were made from: 2nd grade (tendinous) beef trimmings–40%, 2nd grade (fatty) pork–10%, 3rd grade (tendinous) pork–10% and deskinned collar fat–20–40%. The meat and fat were ground separately in a laboratory grinder through a plate with 3 mm diameter orifices. The ground meats and fat were portioned and packed in polyethylene bags so as to give the various desired composition of batters according to the experimental design described ( Total moisture (950.46 B), fat (960.39) and protein (981.10) contents were determined in quadruplicate by the Association of Official Analytical Chemists ( Cooking loss was estimated as (%) weight loss occurring during cooking. Thermal emulsion stability (thermal drip) was determined using a modification of the method described by The colour of sausages was measured using a reflectance colorimeter Minolta CR 200b and expressed as CIE Lab The textural characteristics of cooked sausages were analysed according to texture profile analysis (TPA) ( Response surface methodology (RSM) was used to study the technological effects of different amounts deskinned collar fat and GELPRO preparate addition i.e. 20, 30 and 40 and 0, 1.5 and 3.0%, respectively ( The experiments were designed according to a 3-level factorial plan ( For each experimental factor the variance was partioned into components — linear, quadratic and interaction — in order to assess the adequacy of the second order polynominal function and the relative importance of these components. The significance of the equation parameters for each response variable was assessed by F test. Statistical analysis was done using the STATISTICA™ StatSoft, Poland. Data for proximate composition were analysed by one-way analysis of variance. To obtain confidence intervals means were compared by using the least significance difference (LSD) multiple range test at 95% confidence level.   Analysis of variance indicated that the regression model for WHC was highly significant. Water holding capacity (WHC) is the ratio of moisture retained in the sample to the initial moisture content, so the higher percentage indicates release of less moisture. Generally, as the fat content of processed meat products is gradually reduced while the water content is increased, the product's water-binding capacity becomes the critical issue in production. Both fat-substitute and fat addition significantly affected WHC determined for model sausages. The results of model fitting showed that the variables studied significantly affected this parameter. This effects manifested itself in the linear terms ( Analysis of variance indicated that the regression models developed for the hardness, cohesiveness, gumminess and chewiness were adequate ( The data determined for fracturability were only slightly influenced by varying levels of fat additive used, while the amount of GELPRO added had no effect on values of this parameter. Increased fat-substitute level to 3% resulted in nearly 50% higher values of gumminess and chewiness in comparison to control batches with 0% level of an additive ( Both fat and fat-substitute level had no significant effect on springiness ( The colour attributes of cooked meat products arise mainly from the pigmentation of the meat with which they are made and from the variations of pigment conversion rates occurring on cooking. However, when the myoglobin content is kept constant the colour of frankfurter type products is mostly influenced by fat content and added water. Fat increase in cured meat products such as frankfurters and bologna leads to an increase in lightness, and a decrease in redness of the products. ( In our experiment, models for the lightness ( They were used only for trend analysis. The regression model for redness ( However, the results of model fitting showed that for the lightness and yellowness, fat content was the only variable that significantly affected colour. This positive contribution manifested itself in the linear term (  No significant effect of preparate addition on the sausage colour parameters ( GELPRO preparate as a recipe component of batter favourably affected WHC and thermal stability of sausages processed regardless of the fat content. However, although this additive was successfully used to control binding properties in the model system, it did not improve the textural parameters. No significant influence of the fat-substitute on sausage colour parameters was observed.