Calcium carbonate has been synthesized by the reaction of Na2CO3 and CaCl2 in the presence of bovine serum albumin (BSA) and soluble starch. Effects of various bovine serum albumin (BSA) and soluble starch on the polymorph and morphology of CaCO3 crystals were investigated. Crystallization of vaterite is favored in the presence of BSA and soluble starch, respectively, while calcite is favored in the presence of a mixture of BSA and soluble starch. The morphologies of CaCO3 particles in the presence of mixture of BSA and soluble starch are mainly rod-like, suggesting that the BSA, soluble and their assemblies play key roles in stabilizing and directing the CaCO3 crystal growth.Nature has succeeded in producing a number of inorganic functional structures with designed morphology, polymorph, orientation of inorganic minerals, sizes and arranged them into highly ordered and hierarchically organized structures from nanoscale to macroscale Calcium carbonate is one of the most abundant minerals in the natural world. It forms scales, geological deposits, ocean sediments and biominerals such as pearl, nacre of mollusc shell and otolith Calcium carbonate is also one of the most useful and versatile chemical materials with broad industrial applications, for example, as filler in paint, rubber, and paper The morphology, polymorph and morphology of the CaCO One way for the organic matrices to influence the shape of the mineral is by chemical interaction Starch, a polysaccharide, may be used to facilitate particle formation because of hydroxyl groups, which can coordinate to Ca BSA can also use its Therefore, soluble starch and BSA were selected as the model organic additives of polysaccharide and protein to influence the crystallization and growth of calcium carbonate. But in living organism, there may be simultaneous protein and polysaccharide. The polymorph and morphology of CaCO All commercially available chemicals were of reagent grade and used as received without further purification. Powder X-ray diffraction patterns were performed with a Bruker D8 ADVANCE X-ray diffractometer with Cu- In this research, CaCO 50.0 The XRD patterns corresponding to the as-prepared samples are given in The contents of vaterite and calcite in all as-synthesized samples can be calculated based on equation In system 2, BSA was used as regulator with soluble starch. In system 3, BSA and soluble starch were added into system used as adjustors. But the amount of BSA was fixed as 6.0 In system 4, BSA and soluble starch were added into system as regulator. The amount of soluble starch was fixed as 1.2 Fourier transform-infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy can be used to investigate the chemical nature of the particles The prepared calcium carbonate samples, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 and 14, are mixture of calcite and vaterite crystals. The others are pure calcite. All these results are consistent with the XRD analysis results. The XRD and FT-IR results indicate that no characteristic absorption of other phases is observed, indicating that BSA and soluble starch have significant effect on calcium carbonate polymorphism. In soluble starch molecules, there are many hydroxyl groups which can form complexes with Ca When the BSA and soluble starch were mixed together, they can produce assemblies by strong hydrogen bonds such as N The morphologies of the obtained crystals were observed by SEM.    In these experiments, protein BSA, soluble starch can use their groups to coordinate with Ca The BSA, soluble starch and their mixture were used as crystal growth modifier to control the crystallization of CaCO This work was financially supported by the