Calcaneal fractures are difficult to treat because of their often-related sequelae. The authors present a simple, rapid, economic, and easy-to-perform technique that uses percutaneously positioned Kirschner wires plus a plaster cast for the reduction and stabilization of certain calcaneal fractures. A review of the relevant literature is also provided.Treatment of calcaneal fractures represents a challenge for foot and ankle surgeons, since the calcaneus is a bone of crucial importance to ambulation. Traditional methods involving open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) of the calcaneus, while providing a powerful way to restore the anatomical alignment of the calcaneus, are known to be associated with a wide range of potential soft tissue complications ( The surgical technique requires no more than 3 or 4 K-wires, or appropriately sized Steinmann pins, depending on the size of the involved osseous fragments. With the patient prone or in the ipsilateral decubitus position, and anesthetized, image intensification fluoroscopy is used to guide placement of the first percutaneously driven K-wire into the calcaneus, taking care to purchase the dense subchondral bone under the posterior facet without violating the subtalar joint cavity. After ensuring proper placement, this first K-wire is then maneuvered as a joystick in order to lower (move plantarward) the tuberosity of the calcaneus while simultaneously elevating the depressed posterior facet of the os calcis ( This method of calcaneal fracture reduction and stabilization conveys some aspects worthy of note, not the least of which is elimination of the need for a more traditional ORIF. As such, the risk of soft tissue compromise, including injury to vessels, nerves, tendons, and skin, is reduced. Therefore, the method may be the preferred technique in certain patient populations, such as those affected by diabetes mellitus with neuropathy, peripheral vascular disease, immunocompromise, and tobacco use. Secondly, the method described in this report is relatively inexpensive, rapid, and easy-to-perform, in comparison to ORIF. Third, this method allows the surgeon to immediately assess the adequacy of restoration of Böhler's angle by means of fluoroscopic inspection, and alignment of the posterior facet of the calcaneus can be manipulated further by means of the joystick wire before stabilization, if further reduction is deemed necessary. It should be kept in mind that restoration of Böhler's angle, hence the alignment of the posterior facet, is the surgeon's primary goal in regard to reduction and stabilization of fractures of the calcaneus, and implementation of the Brixian Bridge, as described in this article, can be used to satisfy that aim in many cases. Naturally, the proposed technique should not be expected to be of much use in the treatment of calcaneal fractures involving severe depression and rotation, as well as comminution of the thalamus (the thick cortical bone supporting primarily the posterior facet of the subtalar joint), because such injuries typically require ORIF with spongiosa grafts from either an autologous or allogeneic iliac crest source in order to adequately restore articular congruity (