This study aimed to investigate the effect of partial fat replacement with two species of gum tragacanth (Astragalus gossypinus and Astragalus compactus) on physicochemical, textural, oxidative stability, and acceptability of reduced fat emulsion type sausages. Increasing the concentration of both gums to 1%, minimized extractable fat and cook loss. A. gossypinus at the concentration of 1% was the most effective in retardation of TBARS formation in sausages (p < 0.05). Reduced-fat sausages with 1% A. gossypinus showed the lowest carbonyls at the end of storage (28 days) (p < 0.05). Sausages with 1% A. gossypinus or A. compactus showed the lowest shear force (~6 and ~7 N respectively) and hardness (~21 N/cm2) among all treatments (p < 0.05). The results suggested that A. gossypinus (1%) enhanced oxidative stability and textural properties. Addition of 0.5% A. gossypinus showed an acceptable sensory score of the sausage formulation and as a potential fat replacer in the reduced fat sausages.Due to the desire for healthy foods, many consumers in recent years have limited their consumption of high-fat convenience meat products due to high cholesterol and calorie contents that related to the development of cardiovascular disease and hypertension ( Gum tragacanth is an exudate from the stem of the bush like plant Gum tragacanth sample exuded from species of The dried raw gum was ground with a coffee mill, sieved (40-mesh size), kept in the plastic bag and finally used in this study. Sodium carbonate, thiobabituric acid (TBA), trichloracetic acid (TCA), bovine serum albumin (BSA), monosodium phosphate, disodium phosphate, Malondialdehyde (Diethylacetal) (TEP), ethylenediamintetra acetic acid (EDTA), 2,2-Diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH), 3-(2-pyridyl)-5,6-diphenyl-1,2,4-triazine-4′,4″-disulfonic acid (ferrozine) and guanidine hydrochloride were obtained from Sigma Chemicals Co. (St. Louis, MO, USA). 2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazine (DNPH) was obtained from Acros Organics, Germany. Methanol and chloroform were obtained from Loba Chemie, India. Ethanol and Ethyl acetate were obtained from Mojalali, Tehran, Iran. Sausage formulation in this study was according to Goshtiran factory (Tehran, Iran). The lean beef meat was thawed at 4 °C for 24 h and then ground through a 3-mm plate (Hamekareh, Pars Khazar Co., Iran). The two types of gums were used separately in sausages and each gum was used at three levels (0.25, 0.5, and 1.0%). Eight groups of batters were prepared in a pilot plant using the ingredient levels shown in The content of fat, protein (N × 6.25), moisture, and ash of sausages was determined according to the Association of Official Analytical Chemists ( Cooking loss of sausages was measured by calculating the weight difference before and after cooking, using the following equation: Cook loss (%) = (weight before – weight after)/weight before × 100. The meat batters were evaluated for emulsion stability using the method of TEF = (Weight of centrifuge tube and sample) − (Weight of centrifuge tube and pellet). % TEF = TEF/sample weight × 100% Fat = (Weight of crucible + dried supernatant) - (Weight of empty crucible)/TEF × 100. The surface color of cooked sausages was measured using a Hunter Lab colorimeter (Color Flex, Virginia, USA) using a D65 illuminant setting, and 10-degree standard observer with 3.2 cm viewing aperture. The instrument was calibrated by black and white reference tiles (L* = 92.24, a* = −1.31, b* = 1.18). The L* value (lightness), a* value (redness/greenness), and b* value (yellowness/blueness) were measured on the surface of each sausage in triplicate at each storage time. Secondary lipid oxidation products were assessed by TBARS analysis following the method described by Protein oxidation was determined following the method of DPPH The ferrous chelating activity of gums was estimated using the method of Samples (36 mm (diameter) × 12 mm (height)) were uniaxially shear-compressed with a V-shaped blade attached to an Instron Universal Testing Machine (model 1011, Instron Crop., Canton, MA) using a 5 kg load cell at a constant cross-head speed rate of 1 mm/s according to method described by The texture of sausage was measured with a Texture Analyzer (Testometric, Model M350-5AT, Rochdale, UK) according to the modified method of One hundred sausage consumers (males (65) and females (35)) with an age range of 23–55 years were selected for sensory evaluation of the sausages. Private booths under white fluorescent lights were prepared for each consumer ( The experiments were replicated three per batch to produce sausages and all parameters were measured in triplicates. Data were analyzed as a factorial design using the PROC MIXED procedure. The factors included eight treatments (T0: high-fat control, TC: reduced fat control, T1: 0.25% G, T2: 0.5% G, T3: 1% G, T4: 0.25% C, T5: 0.5% C, T6: 1% C) × five storage times (0, 7, 14, 21, and 28 days). Formulation and storage time were assigned as fixed effects and replication as a random effect. Eight treatments and storage period data were treated as independent variables. TBARS, pH, a Proximate compositions of sausages with added tragacanth gums are presented in The pH decreased significantly during storage at day 28 and there was a significant difference ( High and reduced fat sausages were tested for total expressible fluid and cooking loss ( Low-fat sausages with added 0.25–1% tragacanth gums showed less cook loss than the control (TC) ( There was no significant difference ( Effect of tragacanth gums in preventing of lipid oxidation in low-fat sausages was evaluated by measuring the changes of thiobarbituric acid-reactive substances (TBARS) ( The occurrence of protein oxidation was determined by measuring the changes of protein carbonyls ( Textural properties of sausages with the addition of tragacanth gums are depicted in Effect of tragacanth on several textural properties of reduced fat sausages including hardness, adhesiveness, springiness, and fracturability was determined ( Color, aroma and taste scores were similar ( The present study showed that addition of tragacanth gum ( This research was supported by