Attachment of four strains of Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans to pyrite, chalcopyrite, galena, sphalerite or quartz was found to be mineral-selective. The bacterial extracellular polymeric substances (EPS) are responsible for mediating this process. Attachment of cells of A. ferrooxidans as well as of Acidithiobacillus thiooxidans was diminished, when depleted of their EPS. After 5 days of cultivation cells of A. ferrooxidans cover mineral surfaces with a dense biofilm, as visualised by fluorescence microscopy and AFM. Primary attachment was restricted to surface sites with visible defects.
                  Chemical analyses of EPS of A. ferrooxidans, A. thiooxidans and Leptospirillum ferrooxidans indicated neutral sugars, fatty acids and uronic acids. The composition differed with the strain and the growth substrate. IronIII ions were only detectable in EPS of ironII ion- and pyrite-grown cells, but not in EPS of sulfur grown cells. Pyrite oxidation rates correlated with the amount of EPS-complexed ironIII ions in the case of A. ferrooxidans and L. ferrooxidans. Furthermore, pyrite oxidation rates of L. ferrooxidans were correlated with the genetic affiliation of the strains. The data for A. ferrooxidans seem to indicate a similar correlation, however, the results were not as clear-cut as those obtained for L. ferrooxidans. Sulfur oxidation rates of A. thiooxidans did not require EPS complexed ironIII ions.Acidophilic leaching bacteria like A prerequisite for initial attachment of bacterial cells are EPS that mediate this contact In the present study the attachment behavior of cells of For this study the following strains of Cells of the species Elemental sulfur used for leaching experiments was obtained as finely divided powder. It was sterilized in mineral salts medium by autoclaving for 20 min at 112 °C. For attachment experiments sulfur was melted, crystallized and ground. Afterwards it was sieved to a grain size of 50 to 100 μm. Finely ground pyrite, chalcopyrite, sphalerite or galena were also used for leaching and attachment experiments. Ground quartz was taken as control substratum for attachment experiments. All minerals were sieved to a grain size of 50 to 100 μm. Pyrite and tempered quartz were purified by boiling in 6N HCl to remove iron ions Polished pyrite, chalcopyrite, sphalerite and galena plates (approximately 10 Cells of For attachment experiments 50 mL mineral salts solution with 20% pyrite, chalcopyrite, sphalerite, galena, sulfur or quartz were incubated with 3 Sterilized pyrite coupons were incubated in 50 mL mineral salt medium containing 5 To differentiate strains of Cells of Crude EPS were analyzed for iron species Cells of the The attachment of cells of strain R1 to the minerals is displayed in Attachment of cells of strain SPIII/3 was less specific than that of the other strains ( The relevance of the EPS for cell attachment of The biofilm of cells of IronII ion-grown cells of To select active and less active strains for mineral dissolution of Strains of Strains of The metabolic activity of the strains selected for EPS analysis are displayed in EPS are produced by all strains of Cells of The chemical composition of the EPS of cells of As displayed in Attachment experiments with different strains of Visualizing attachment and biofilm formation by cells of EPS production by leaching bacteria is influenced by the growth conditions of the cells. Cells growing with a soluble substrate produce only small amounts of EPS, while solid substrates enhance the EPS production The composition of the EPS also varies with the growth conditions as has been shown before Comparison of IORs and PORs of strains of different subgroups seem to indicate a correlation with the genetical differences of the strains of