Recent studies have shown that a suitably thermomechanically processed Al–Zn–Mg–Cu–Zr–Sc alloy having an essentially unrecrystallized grain structure may be subjected to superplastic deformation at a temperature and strain rate combination of 475°C, 1.9×10−2
                     s−1 to obtain a total elongation of 650%. The present work demonstrates that the utilization of two-step strain rate at 425°C during superplastic deformation of a similarly thermomechanically processed alloy increases the total elongation value to as high as 916%. The beneficial effect of two-step strain rate could further be realized at 350°C to obtain a total elongation of 438%. Using electron backscattered diffraction, the present work provides a systematic assessment of the changes in (i) percentage recrystallization and (ii) recrystallized grain size with percentage elongation in the material superplastically deformed using both one- and two-step strain rates. The purpose of the present investigation involving the Al alloy 7010 containing Sc is twofold. First, it is to examine the influence of a two-step strain rate at two different temperatures on the attainment of total percentage of elongation during superplastic deformation. It is considered that the advantages associated with the utilization of a two-step strain rate are (i) the increase in percentage elongation and (ii) the reduction in the time required to deform the material. The latter has a significant commercial implication because a major problem associated with the superplastic forming of aerospace materials has been the low forming rate, i.e. <10 The alloy used in the present investigation has the composition (wt.%) of Al–6.3Zn–2.3Mg–1.5Cu–0.14Zr–0.23Sc–0.04Fe–0.02Si. Fe and Si impurities were associated with the primary aluminium that was used to prepare the alloy. The alloy was prepared in an induction furnace, cast, homogenized and scalped. The resultant slabs (395 Flat tensile samples (having a gauge length of 10 In the present study, the superplastic deformation of the alloy was further carried out at 350 Electron backscattered diffraction (EBSD) was utilized to examine the grain structure developed in the thermomechanically processed (TMP) material and those developed during the superplastic deformation. Unless otherwise stated, the location of samples for the microstructural studies of the superplastically deformed materials was confined to the center of the gauge length. In EBSD analysis, a combined criterion of grain size and in-grain misorientation was used     It may be noted that at both temperatures (i.e. 425 and 350 The present results and interpretations demonstrate that high-strength Al–Zn–Mg–Cu–Zr alloy 7010 containing 0.23 