Three different tungsten precursors were used for TiO2 modification: H2WO4, WO2, and ammonium m-tungstate. It was proved that modification of TiO2 with tungsten compounds enhanced its photocatalytic activity through the improvement of charge separation. This effect was obtained by coating of TiO2 particles with tungsten compound, which changed their surficial electrokinetical potential from positive onto negative. The most efficient tungsten compound, which caused enhanced separation of free carriers was ammonium m-tungstate (AMT). Two dyes with different ionic potential were used for the photocatalytic decomposition. It appeared that cationic dye—Methylene Blue was highly adsorbed on the negatively charged surface of TiO2 modified by AMT and decomposed, however this photocatalyst was quickly deactivated whereas anionic dye—acid red was better adsorbed on the less acidic surface of TiO2 and was rapidly decomposed with almost the same rate in the five following cycles.It was reported that doping WO In this paper influence of inorganic tungsten precursor on the properties of TiO TiO From the TEM image small crystallites of TiO Three inorganic tungsten precursors were selected for TiO BET surface area was measured by nitrogen adsorption at 77 The prepared samples were tested for their photocatalytic activity toward decomposition of dyes in water. As the model compounds, two dyes of different structure (acid red and methylene blue) were selected. Acid red is an anonic azo dye whereas methylene blue (MB) is cationic dye, the most popular used for the photocatalytic tests. The photocatalytic reaction was conducted in 500 In Modification of TiO By impregnation in autoclave this reduction of BET surface area was somewhat lower than in case of using vacuum evaporator. The content of WO In The presented results show influence of the tungsten precursor doped to TiO It can be observed an increase of OH radicals formation within irradiation time at the presence of all the photocatalysts. However higher rate of OH radicals formation was noted for TiO In order to prove that the yield of OH radicals formation on TiO It can be seen that the intensity of the emission spectrum for each TiO In The prepared photocatalyts showed different activity under UV–vis and artificial solar light irradiations. The results from the preliminary adsorption of MB on the photocatalyst surface showed that only TiO It can be stated that under UV light oxidation with OH radicals is very powerful but under visible light adsorption of dye on the photocatalyst surface and photocatalytic reactions assisted with sensitized reaction of dye proceed. MB is a cationic dye, therefore it preferentially adsorbs on the negative charge surface. It is the reason why so high adsorption of MB was noted on TiO In order to compare the mechanism of MB decomposition with other dye of different ionic potential, the other experiments were carried out. In this case acid red (AR), an anionic azo-dye was used as a model compound. In The highest affinity of AR to the photocatalyst surface was noted for unmodified TiO For more detailed studies the other photocatalytic tests were performed in the commercially available photoreactor of Heraeus company. In Although both, TiO In order to check the stability of the photocatalyst for long time of using, some tests of cycling decomposition of MB and AR under UV–vis irradiation were performed. Experiments were performed at the same conditions as previously, each time photocatalyst was recycled and turned to another new prepared model solution of dye with the same concentration. In In the first run TiO Some UV–vis/DR spectra were performed to evidence the changes of the photocatalyst surface (TiO It is clearly seen than MB was adsorbed on the surface of photocatalyst and this surface was not recovered before next cycle of MB decomposition. In Modification of TiO Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are Supplementary data to this article: