This study was conducted to compare the environmental effect of weight reduction and different material composition of packages using life cycle analysis of a traditional bacon package (L-board bacon package) compared to a new light weighted bacon package (OLB bacon package). A sensitivity analysis of the main components for the L-board and OLB bacon package is included to confirm either the potential environmental benefits obtained by weight reduction of the traditional bacon package or changing packaging materials. The L-board bacon package is composed of polyethylene/wax coated paper/polyethylene with an overwrap pouch. The new lightweight OLB-board bacon package is composed of reverse printed oriented polypropylene/expanded polystyrene with adhesive, along with a lighter weight overwrap pouch. Environmental impacts were characterized by life cycle assessment with SimaPro software. The general principles, framework of this study, goal and scope definition of the problem, inventory analysis, and interpretation of the results were conducting according to the ISO 14040 family of standards. The new light weighted OLB-board bacon package shows lower environmental burden than the traditional bacon package in most impact indicators, except the mineral extraction indicator. Based on a sensitivity analysis, it was found that changing the material of the original bacon package reduces more the environmental burden of the final bacon package than reducing the weight of the original bacon board material.Household disposal of packaging and containers have steadily increased since 1960 leading to growing waste reaching the municipal solid waste (MSW). In 2010 in the U.S., containers and packaging made up the largest portion of the MSW around 30%, representing 76 million tons of which only 36.7 million tons were recovered ( Light weighting, being part of the 6R concept, is the reduction of the weight of the packaging material by changing the gauge or the type of material, so that the weight of the final package and/or packaging system can be reduced ( Bacon packaging has not been an exception to these sustainability-packaging trends. Bacon has been the second largest category for in-home pork eating in the last eight years, representing 19% of total pork eating at home in the U.S. ( The goal of this study was to compare the environmental burden of the L-board and OLB-board using LCA. The target audience of this study was brand owners and stakeholders. The life cycle of this study was mainly cradle-to-grave, except for corrugated boxes and PE bags used in the packing process that had cradle-to-cradle boundaries. In other words, raw material extraction, intermediate product production, assembly, transportation, waste treatment and environmental benefits generated by recycling were included in this study. Since postconsumer bacon packages are contaminated by the fat of the bacon, it was reasonable to rule out recycling as an end-of-life option for bacon packages. For this reason, the end-of-life for L-board and OLB-board bacon packages was modeled as 81.5% landfill and 18.5% incineration, the U.S. average ( The functional unit was determined as the needed packages to deliver 1000 lb of bacon to the retail consumer (1000 bacon packages of capacity 1 lb each) in the U.S.  All transportation and distribution were handled by single unit diesel truck, except for the OLB first scenario, in which ships were used to transport the plastic resin to make film. The detailed distances for the transportation and distribution systems for each system are provided in L-Board is composed of three main raw materials: wax, paper and PE. The paper was produced in Montgomery, Alabama (AL) and shipped to the paper converter in Kalamazoo, Michigan (MI). The wax was produced in Houston, Texas (TX) and shipped to the paper converter in Kalamazoo, MI. Wax coated paper was produced at the paper converter (Kalamazoo, MI), and shipped to Menasha, WI where it was laminated to white and to clear PE, also delivered from Houston, TX. Both sides of the wax-coated paper were laminated (extrusion coated) with PE, and the board was printed. After laminating and printing, the boards were die cut, resulting in 10% wt. scrap. Disposal of the 10% wt. scrap was assumed to be by landfill, as this is the common practice in Wisconsin (WI) ( In order to evaluate the environmental impact of light weighting and changes of material, several hypothetical scenarios were established. The only difference in OLB first and OLB second is the origin of the EPS resin and film. L-board is the scenario representing the life cycle of the current traditional bacon package. L-Board 25 and L-Board 50 were the hypothetical scenarios with reductions of 25% and 50% across all the materials used for the L-Board. For example, L-Board 25 is composed of 25% less wax, paper and PE. In this study, the traditional and new OLB bacon package systems were divided into 4 phases to facilitate the understanding of the results. Those four phases were material production, intermediate processes, transportation and disposal. In the next paragraph, a short summary of the databases used for this study is provided. For the material production phase, the data for the traditional bacon package was obtained from US-EI 2.2 ( For the intermediate process phase, the data for extrusion laminating was obtained from BUWAL 250 (although this is an old database the authors could not find reliable newer data) ( In the transportation phase, all distance calculations were obtained from Google maps. For the OLB bacon package, two different models were examined. The difference between the first and the second model for the OLB board (indicated as O1 and O2) was only in the distance between the manufacturer and supplier of EPS. The remaining distances were identical. All data for transportation used in traditional and new OLB bacon package systems were obtained from US-LCI. The distances used are shown in In the disposal phase, it was assumed that 18.5% of the total waste flow was incinerated, and 81.5% of the waste flow was landfilled ( Life cycle impact assessment was conducted in accordance with TRACI 2 ( In the material production phase, the Surlyn For the intermediate process phase, die cutting and printing processes were ignored because these are common to both systems. For the printing process, it was assumed that the L-Board and OLB bacon package used essentially the same printing processes. For the die cutting process, the OLB bacon package uses moderately heated dies, but also uses smaller and more efficient machinery than that used for the L-Board. Data was not available to quantify any resulting differences, but they were judged to be too small to be included. Packaging of the packaging materials themselves (distribution packaging for delivery to converters, etc.) was ignored due to lack of data and assumed to be the same for both systems. Packages for shipment of the packaged bacon were assumed to differ only by the reduced board and pouch weight; so all the secondary packaging was ignored. Only the weight differences were considered in estimating impacts associated with transport of the packaged bacon. Impacts associated with warehousing and retailing were ignored. It is believed that any resulting differences are likely to be insignificant, and that they would generally favor the OLB system due to its lighter weight. For the transportation phase, there were two assembling facilities for the L-Board, each accounting for roughly 50% of traditional bacon board production, so 50% of the L-Board production was modeled as delivered to each of the two facilities. The same rule was used for the pouches. For the OLB bacon board, there were also two assembling facilities, so modeling was the same. However, for the OLB bacon pouch, there were also two co-extrusion facilities. Therefore, the model assumed 25% of the OLB bacon pouches were delivered to each of the two assembling facilities from the two co-extrusion facilities. This may have somewhat increased the transportation-related impacts, as it did not allow for preferential shipment to minimize distance. For the disposal phase of the L-Board, the 10% scrap produced during the die cutting process was assumed to be landfilled, in accordance with common practice. In contrast, the 10% scrap from the OLB bacon board was assumed to be incinerated, again in accordance with common practice. After initial packaging and before shipment to retailers, leakage can occur. As mentioned, disposal of bacon from leakers for both the L-board and the OLB bacon package was ignored in this study. The end of life scenario for both the L-Board and the OLB bacon packages after consumption was modeled as 18.5% incineration and 81.5% landfill, the U.S. averages ( To interpret the results of the life cycle impact assessment, contribution, uncertainty, and discernibility analyses were performed at the level of characterization. Contribution analysis was conducted to determine which processes generate the higher environmental load. Uncertainty analysis was conducted to assess the variation and the uncertainty of inventory data using Monte Carlo simulation runs. Since a number of alternative scenarios were evaluated and compared, discernibility analysis was performed using Monte Carlo simulation.  For the acidification and respiratory effects impact indicator ( The largest contribution to the carcinogenic and non-carcinogenic impact assessment indicators for the OLB first, second and L-board bacon package systems was the disposal phase, specifically the landfill of plastics ( Material production was found to be the main contributor to ozone depletion for the OLB first, second and L-board bacon package systems ( In the case of eutrophication and ecotoxicity indicators, disposal was the largest contributor in the OLB first, second and L-Board bacon package systems ( Transportation was the main contributor in the OLB first, second and L-board bacon package systems for smog, specifically diesel powered single unit trucks ( In the case of land occupation indicators from the Impact 2002 + method, material production was the largest contributor for the OLB first, second and L-Board package systems, specifically softwood and hardwood consumption for corrugated boxes ( Material production was the main contributor for non-renewable energy in the OLB first, second and L-Board package systems, specifically production of nylon and production of LDPE ( In the case of mineral extraction, the OLB first and second scenarios and L-Board packages have material production as the main contributor ( Section Based on the discernibility analysis ( A life cycle study of two bacon board inserts (L-Board made of paper, wax, polyethylene, and ink and OLB made of expanded polystyrene, oriented polypropylene, adhesive and ink) was conducted to analyze their environmental burden using TRACI 2 and Impact 2002 + impact assessment methodologies. The OLB was modeled with two transportation scenarios (O1 and O2), and hypothetical scenarios were established to determine the effect of weight reduction of the L-Board primary structure (L, L25 and L50). The life cycle impact assessment results showed that a 25–50% weight reduction of the wax coated paper and polyethylene layer of the L-board will overall reduce the environmental burden of the L-Board package as expected; however, this reduction is not enough to outweigh the benefit of changing the main component from the paper to EPS, except for the mineral extraction indicator from Impact 2002+. In addition, a weight reduction of the wax coated paper structure may not guarantee acceptable performance of the package ( The results presented in this study emphasize the importance of using environmental evaluation during the design step of a packaging system. Designing the optimal relationship between the type and weight of the packaging material during the product development stage can optimize not only the performance of the packaging systems, but also reduction in the environmental burden of the entire life cycle of the product/package system. The authors would like to acknowledge  Supplementary data related to this article can be found at