Phase diagrams are normally calculated from a combination of physical equations and experimental parameters. Gibbs free energy of mixing; thermodynamics activity and enthalpy of mixing; transformation temperatures and the concentration range of the alloys components are calculated to permit an alloy system database to be constructed. The molar specific heat capacity (cv) is normally obtained by numerical derivative of the enthalpy equation with respect to temperature and concentration. The experimental determinations of the topological parameters as a function of concentration and temperature is an enormous task. On the other hand, physical formulations such as Einstein’s and Debye’s equations are physically consistent models for the molar specific heat capacity of the solid, and they depend only on a set of basic physical parameters. Einstein’s formulation works very well for temperatures T > 102 K, however, as it varies in the form of 1/T2, it fails to conform to lower temperature experimental data. Debye assumed only three branches of the vibrational spectrum with the same linear dispersion relation, and derived an equation also consistent for lower temperatures, and as the temperature decreases to absolute zero, it varies as a function of 1/T3 thus permitting experimental scatters to be fitted. Another way for calculating cv is by carrying out polynomial functions [1], which are only recommended for temperatures above 298.15 K, because bellow this temperature, cv is strongly dependent on the quantization of thermal energy, which can be stored in different forms in the material, such as electronic, magnetic, vibrational, rotational and translational energies. In this paper corrections for Debye’s and Einstein’s equations for cv are derived to encompass its thermal history dependence, electronic and rotational energies for both lower and higher temperatures in order to permit the calculation of the molar specific heat capacity of pure metals, phases and single-phase alloys.In many areas of science and engineering, the calculation of thermophysical properties of pure elements, compounds and alloys are a need for R & D. In this sense, alternatives combining the application of analytical theoretical models, thermodynamics software and numerical models can be used to provide thermophysical properties of relevant multicomponent alloys. The use of computational thermodynamics coupled to numerical algorithms of heat transfer have been recently applied for the determination of thermophysical properties of multicomponent Al-based alloys, such as surface tension and Gibbs-Thomson coefficient [ Basically, for the solid state of matter there are two main approaches for the calculation of the molar specific heat capacity: (i) for high temperatures, in which empirical formulae based on integrals and experimental coefficients are used to estimate the molar specific heat capacity as a polynomial function of temperature [ In this paper, two models for pure elements, that is Einstein’s and Debye’s, are used considering the additions of electronic and rotational energies contributions to the molar specific heat capacity The thermal energy of a material can be stored into several forms, such as, translational In the case of solids, the translational energy  For pure elements, the Einstein’s model for the vibrational contribution [ In Eq. The electronic contribution is written in terms of the vibrational or phonon energy contribution, that is As an approach for rotational energy, we regard the following basic equation, In Eq. A relation between vibrational and rotational transitions are show in Then, the molar specific heat capacity regarding vibrational, electronic and rotational energies is given by the following equation,  In Eq. The Gibbs-Thomson effect lowers the melting temperature [ In order to apply Eq.  The Einstein’s model predictions do not conform to experimental scatters for low temperatures, decreasing rapidly to the absolute zero, due to its The Debye’s temperature for pure elements is normally found in the literature [ The addition to Eq.  The principle behind the calculation of the molar specific heat capacity for multicomponent systems here carried out is the Neumann-Koop principle [ In Eq. Concerning the critical grain volume The alloy/compound fundamental frequencies are expressed as a function the linear combination of Debye’s temperatures of elements/compounds described by Eq. The element/compound electronic contribution to the molar specific heat capacity can be expressed in terms of the phonon contribution as, Then, the total electronic molar specific heat capacity provides,  The modified Debye’s equation for alloys compounds and single-phase alloys is derived based on the same Neumann-Koop principle. Debye is important as it can handle from low temperatures, where the quantum effects on the molar specific heat capacity are very pronounced, to higher temperatures until melting. Here magnetic anomalies such as Curie, Neel and Schottky are not taken into account.  In  In the case of For the case of alloys, the contents of Si in In In For the cases of diamond [ The model for pure elements and the model for single-phase alloys/compounds was shown to agree well with Debye’s and Einstein’s models for low temperatures curves, considering the same set of additional equations for the thermal history dependence, for the electronic and for the rotational energy contributions to the molar specific heat capacity. This demonstrates the physical consistence of both basic models. In general, for pure elements, a second level of state (n = 1) was enough to conform to the Thermo-Calc calculations. In the case of graphite all models based on the Debye’s approach for the first (n = 0) and second level (n = 1) fitted well the Thermo-Calc results. For diamond, nevertheless, considering Debye’s temperature of The authors declare that this manuscript is original, has not been published before and is not currently being considered for publication elsewhere. The article has been written by the stated authors who are ALL aware of its content and approve its submission, as well as by the responsible authorities – tacitly or explicitly – at the institutes where the work has been carried out. The authors acknowledge the financial support provided by and A sample calculation of the molar specific heat capacity for a pure metal (Aluminum -Fig. 2a) as a function of temperature can be found in this section. The code was written in Python 3. 