Sulphur is liberated from the coal structure and released in various forms during coal thermal processing. The possibility of sulphur capture, through injection of SO2 into a packed coal bed in a pilot packed bed reactor operated under controlled conditions, was investigated. Results showed that SO2 injection into a packed coal bed leads to sulphur capturing mainly in the coal mineral matter. Mineralogical analysis (XRD) of the ash samples obtained from the experiments indicates that the sulphur-capture products that are formed include FeS, CaS and small amounts of organically associated sulphur. Troilite (FeS) was observed in the SO2 treated samples, while no troilite was observed in the reference samples. Calcite and dolomite are transformed into CaO and other calcium-containing compounds in the pyrolyses zone, with some CaS being formed in the gasification zone via the reaction between SO2 and CaO in the presence of CO from the gasification reactions. CaO formed at the high temperatures in the combustion and ash zone is transformed into CaSO4 upon reaction with SO2 as an oxidizing atmosphere prevails in this zone. The existence of these compounds is dependent on the extent of oxidising or reducing conditions during the process, with CaS favoured under reducing conditions and CaSO4 favoured under oxidising conditions.Sulphur emission from especially coal combustion processing plants is one of the environmental concerns that limit the growth of coal utilisation worldwide. During coal combustion processes, sulphur is liberated from the coal structure and released mainly as SO The experimental procedures were conducted using an inertinite rich, medium rank, high ash bituminous coal blend, from a Highveld colliery in South Africa, with proximate and ultimate analysis properties indicated in The coal was prepared by screening and sizing according to the particle size distribution and masses. The fractions between −1.70 and +75 The pilot packed bed reactor consists of a lined steel jacket with outside diameter of 0.8 The amount of 240 The air flow was then maintained between 35 and 45 For the reference process (without SO Following cooling, the pilot packed bed reactor was tilted onto its side and opened up like a coffin to allow sample taking. The bed was divided into seven approximately equal-volume sized fractions (sample 1 at the top of the bed, and sample 7 the ash bed sample at the bottom of the reactor). These portions of coal products were analysed. The seven fractions taken after each run were subjected to sample preparation for various analyses including: elemental analysis, physical analysis and mineralogical analysis. The fractions were all separately crushed to −1 The total sulphur content was determined from the ultimate analysis, which also gave the contents of carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, and oxygen by difference. The South African Bureau of Standards, Coal and Mineral Technologies (CMT) Laboratories determined the percentages of the elements carbon, hydrogen and nitrogen using the ASTM D5373 method X-ray analysis is a well established method for process and quality control in the coal industry. The crushed representative samples were submitted for qualitative and X-ray diffraction (XRD) analyses. The XRD analyses were performed on a Panalytical X’Pert PRO Multi-purpose Diffractometer (MPD). Four hour scans were performed at 40 The residual solid samples collected after each of the experimental runs were divided into 7 approximately equal volume portions from the top to the bottom of the pilot packed bed reactor. The fractions were labelled samples 1–7 with sample 1 being the sample on top, and sample 2 the next, with sample 7 the last sample at the bottom of the reactor. The reaction zones, namely the drying zone, pyrolysis zone, gasification zone and the combustion and ash zone, were identified according to the description by Bunt and Waanders The samples were analysed for their total sulphur content as described above, and the results are presented in From The total sulphur content profile for the SO The total sulphur content as well as the mass of the individual samples was used to calculate the total amount of sulphur captured to relate it to the sulphur introduced into the system. The total mass sulphur captured through SO  The results obtained for the sulphur analyses of the samples with SO The percentages of sulphate sulphur were very low and followed the same trends whether SO  Pyrite was also observed to be present in samples 1–4, with no pyrite observed in samples 5–7. This is due to samples 5–7 being exposed to higher temperatures (more than 700  No CaO was detected in sample 5, which suggests that most of the CaO formed from the decomposition of calcite and dolomite reacted with SO  The decrease in the amount of CaS with an increase in bed depth (zones 5–7) was accompanied by an increase in the amount of CaSO As the total mass percentage of sulphates within sample 7 was below 0.1%, the contribution of the abovementioned reactions to the total sulphur captured is very low. From the results of the total sulphur and ash analysis, it was observed that capturing of sulphur occur in the last part of the pyrolysis zone and the gasification and ash zones of a pilot packed bed reactor after the introduction of a SO The mass percentages of total sulphur decreased throughout the pilot packed bed reactor from the top to the bottom for the reference samples. The percentage of mineral sulphur in the reference samples followed the same trend as that of the total sulphur. The amount of sulphate sulphur was low in all the samples and only small changes were observed. The decrease in sulphur observed in the reference samples (no SO The increase in total sulphur content in the gasification, combustion and ash zones (samples 5–7) after admission of SO For samples 5–7 (the gasification, combustion and ash zones), it seems that the SO It seems that the calcite and dolomite are transformed into CaO and other compounds in the pyrolysis zone, with some CaS being formed in the gasification zone via the reaction between SO The authors thank Dr Adam Baran for his assistance with XRD analysis as well as the Coal and Materials Technology Laboratories of SABS in Secunda for elemental analysis.