The photodegradation of some VOCs in an annular reactor is chemical step controlled. The limitation due to mass transfer is negligible. The use of a combined plug-flow model shows that the apparent rate constant (k
                     *) is equal to kK representing the Langmuir–Hinshelwood rate constants. So the design of an annular reactor using the L–H model can be considered. The photodegradability of the tested VOCs is strongly dependent on the product kK. Trichloroethylene is the best degraded while toluene is the worst. The study of the mineralization rate, defined as the ultimate degradation phase of the compounds, shows that this last is firstly dependent on the contact time and not on the nature of the VOC. Moreover increasing the inlet VOC concentration leads to a decrease in the mineralization rate.Both industrial and domestic activities are responsible of the emission of the volatile organic compounds (VOCs) As a consequence of these problems, VOCs have drawn considerable attention in these last years. Therefore, there is currently a great deal of interest in developing processes which can destroy these compounds Photocatalytic oxidation of organic compounds in gas phase appears to be a promising process for remediation of air polluted by VOCs. Heterogeneous photocatalysis using TiO This process has been widely studied in the case of water treatment While the UV/TiO In this study, an annular photoreactor is used. The aim is to evaluate the limitation step of the VOCs photodegradation. A design equation, based on Langmuir–Hinshelwood and mass transfer model, is proposed. It can be used as the base of the photoreactor scale-up. The effects of the gas flow rate and the VOCs inlet concentration are also studied. Finally, the mineralization process, which is the ultimate step of the degradation, is approached. The VOCs used for the photodegradation were trichloroethylene (TCE), toluene, isopropanol and butane (Carlo Erba, 99% purity). No further purification of the products was done. The VOCs analysis was carried out using a gas-phase chromatograph equipped with a flame ionization detector (Fisons). The carbon dioxide produced was measured by an infrared detector (Cosma Beryl 100). Catalyst was TiO A plug-flow annular photoreactor ( The ambient air was used as a gas carrier. Its relative humidity was about 45–50% and the temperature was at 20 When the VOC were gaseous at ambient temperature, as butane, the secondary flow gas was mixed directly to the main stream. In a typical test, a contaminated air stream was passed through the photoreactor in the absence of UV illumination until the gas–solid adsorption equilibrium was established. This dark equilibration process provides a qualitative indication of the adsorption affinity between the catalyst and the VOC. After the adsorption process reached equilibrium (depending upon the nature of the VOC, the flow rate and the concentration), as indicated by identical inlet/outlet VOC concentration, the UV illumination was turned on and the outlet gas was sampled at regular intervals. A new steady state was achieved about 30–60  Whereas the mass transfer rate could be very large and not limiting for a batch reactor Overall mass balances on the gas phase and the solid phase, in a continuous reactor at steady state, give the following equations Gas phase: Solid phase: Usually we can assume that Solid phase: The product  Eq. If we suppose that the mass transfer is not the limiting step and that the effect of intermediate product is negligible, then the degradation rate in a plug-flow reactor can be expressed as Then the comparison between the value of The regression of experimental results using the L–H model is represented in The values of L–H rate constant and Langmuir adsorption constant, obtained from the linear regression, are Eq. Nevertheless, it would be useful to obtain the apparent rate constant We note that the ratio  This is probably due, in our point of view, to the “flow instability”. The Reynolds number varies from 57 to 292 for the highest flow velocity. Even if the flow is laminar some localized turbulences can appears due to the roughness of the catalytic media, and this leads to the improvement of the mass transfer. The appearance of these turbulences being random, this can explain the differences observed. The degradation of toluene decreases when the inlet concentration increases ( The study of the photodegradation of other VOCs has been carried out on the same plug-flow reactor. The L–H model is used to represent the experimental results obtained. The other VOCs studied are isopropyl alcohol, tricholoroethylene (TCE) and butane. The experimental results and the L–H model are represented in We note that for all the VOCs, the kinetic step seems to be the limited step. The L–H model gives a correct correlation with the experimental results. The values of the L–H constants are given in As we reported above, the degradation rate is dependent on The experimental quantity of the produced carbon dioxide is compared to the theoretical. This last is the quantity which can be obtained if the VOC degradation is complete, i.e. leads to the formation of carbon dioxide, water and minerals. For example, when one mole of butane is degraded it will lead to the formation of four moles of carbon dioxide. We note that for all the VOCs, the mineralization rate ( Furthermore, in the experiments carried out with different inlet VOCs concentrations, we note ( At high flow rate, the mineralization rate becomes independent on the inlet concentration. In other words, the contact time becomes the prevalent factor. The behavior is the same for all the VOCs. The photodegradation of some VOCs in a plug-flow reactor was studied. The limited step of the process is the chemical one. The use of Langmuir–Hinshelwood model gives a good correlation of the experimental results and allows us to determine the reaction rate constant A model based on a combination of mass transfer and chemical steps was used to correlate the experimental results. The comparison of the apparent rate constant ( The study of the mineralization rate of the VOCs shows that the predominant parameter is the contact time. The nature of the VOCs has no significant effect on the mineralization. A complete study with identification of the by-products will give more information concerning the photodegradation of the cited VOCs.