The directional coefficient of thermal expansion (CTE) of intermetallics in electronic interconnections is a key thermophysical property that is required for microstructure-level modelling of solder joint reliability. Here, CTE ellipsoids are measured for key solder intermetallics using synchrotron x-ray diffraction (XRD). The role of the crystal structure used for refinement on the CTE shape and temperature dependence is investigated. The results are used to discuss the βSn-IMC orientation relationships (ORs) that minimise the in-plane CTE mismatch on IMC growth facets, which are measured with electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) in solder joints on Cu and Ni substrates. The CTE mismatch in fully-intermetallic joints is discussed, and the relationship between the directional CTE of monoclinic and hexagonal polymorphs of Cu6Sn5 is explored.Thermo-mechanical fatigue is a common failure mechanism in Pb-free solder joints In many Pb-free solder joints (e.g. ball grid arrays (BGAs)), the majority of the joint is βSn phase. Tetragonal βSn is well-known to exhibit strongly anisotropic thermal expansion, with CTE along [001] approximately twice the CTE along [100] = [010] Additionally, Sn-based intermetallic compounds (IMCs) are present in solder joints, both as an interfacial layer(s) between the metallic substrate and solder and also as IMC particles within the βSn matrix of the bulk solder. These IMCs play an important role in thermo-mechanical fatigue in addition to the βSn phase Past reports on the CTE of intermetallics relevant to soldering have only measured the mean CTE (usually as the linear CTE) In this paper, we first use synchrotron powder XRD to measure the directional CTE of Ni Ni Ag Cu Cu βSn powder was produced by taking 99.99% purity αSn from a previous study Powders were placed into 0.3 mm capillaries and tested on the Powder Diffraction beamline at the Australian Synchrotron at 30–305 °C using a Cyberstar hot-air blower. High resolution X-ray powder diffraction data were collected using a Mythen-II detector with a 15 keV beam (wavelength 0.8265 Å) in the 2θ range 10–80° at ambient pressure. Once the desired temperature was reached, the sample was held isothermally for 10 min for data collection. A Si standard (NIST640C, a = 5.43119 Å, Rietveld Refinement was performed in TOPAS 4.2 (Bruker-AXS, Germany). The model structures that were refined were taken from the following references: Ni 2θ zero error was determined from a standard 0.3 mm capillary of Si/LaB Since the approach in this work is to use the sets of temperature dependent d-spacings to calculate thermal expansion, Pawley fitting can be used to find a set of I (hkl) at each temperature instead of performing a full Rietveld refinement at each temperature. Pawley fitting was used for Cu The conversion of vectors from crystal coordinates to Cartesian coordinates is defined here such that the Z-axis is parallel to c and the X-axis is in the a-c plane for all phases. The resulting conversion matrix A is given in Eq. All The value of For all planes in the XRD spectrum, values of Eigenvalues (denoted E1, E2, E3 here) and eigenvectors of the CTE tensor were then calculated from the The Cartesian coordinates of the end point of the radius vector Sn-0.7Cu, Sn-3.5Ag and Sn-4Ag-0.5Cu alloy (wt%) were prepared by mixing 99.9%Sn with Sn-10%Cu and/or Sn-99%Ag. The mixture was melted at 450 °C, solidified in a graphite crucible, rolled and punched into discs, and remelted on a hot plate at 300 °C to produce 500 μm solder balls using surface tension. The resulting solder balls were then reflowed on different substrates with a ROL-1 tacky flux to make Sn-0.7Cu/Cu, Sn-4Ag-0.5Cu/Cu and Sn-3.5Ag/Ni joints. The joints were then given a final reflow by heating at 0.16 K/s to 250 °C and cooling at 0.33 K/s in a Mettler Toledo DSC1. Cu  For phases with multiple proposed crystallographies in the literature (i.e. Ag The Ni  The Ag  The Cu  It was found that if the simpler Cu More reliable hexagonal ηCu  Note that the unit cell orientations are plotted relative to the Cartesian orientation for both phases following the convention in section The CTE of βSn is included here to enable a comparison with the intermetallics. Fits to the βSn lattice parameters and cell volume data in the range 30–250 °C are given in  Recommended values for the temperature and orientation dependent CTE of Ni The typical cooling rate at the end of soldering is sufficient to retain Cu To compare the CTE of the two Cu  The similar CTE anisotropy can be explained by examining the crystallographic similarities between the phases in more detail. There is further complexity with Cu  The temperature dependence of the maximum CTE mismatch is summarised in Among all pairs of phases, the largest maximum CTE mismatch is for βSn-Ni The sum of the total CTE mismatch between two phases is constant no matter how they are orientated, which means the total stress induced by CTE mismatch at any interface is not a function of orientation. However, since the shear stress acting on the interface is more deleterious than the normal stress Cu In the case of Cu The minimum in-plane CTE mismatch on the interface between βSn and the IMC facets in To minimise the in-plane CTE mismatch on a Ni In the case of Ag CTE ellipsoids have been measured using synchrotron powder X-ray diffraction on Ni Each of Ni The growth facets of Cu There are only minor differences in the CTE of the monoclinic and hexagonal polymorphs of Cu The authors are grateful for funding from The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at