Quinoa is an attractive non-animal protein source, because of its absence of gluten and the favorable amino-acid profile. The objective of this study was the extraction of quinoa protein by two consecutive approaches. Initially, the protein-rich bran was isolated by optimizing the conditioning parameters of a milling fractionation procedure. In contrast to the protein content of the whole grain, 11.75% in dry base (db), the bran fraction contained 27.78% (db) protein when conditioned with 15% moisture at 20̊C for 20h. Subsequently, an aqueous extraction was developed, resulting in a protein solubility of 60% at pH 10 and 20̊C for 1h. For purification at the isoelectric point, the pH-value and the separation method were varied. After drying, an extraction of proteins from bran yielded 68% (db) as compared to 52% (db) protein from quinoa whole grain flour.The uptake of proteins is one of the major factors for maintaining human health. Because of the higher costs for animal protein production and the huge amount of resources which are required, plant-based protein sources are of growing interest. In addition, the incidence of allergies and intolerances concerning proteins from egg or milk has been rising. Currently, cereals and legumes represent the main alternatives, for both human and animal nutrition. However, the alcohol soluble gliadins and glutenins in wheat are attributed to the celiac disease ( Protein from these sources can be isolated by solvent extraction to serve as an ingredient in dietary supplements. Additionally, for gluten-free products the application of protein isolates can be beneficial for processing and quality improvement of bread, pasta, dietary supplements, baby foods and beverages. According to The type of milling product, processing parameters and suitable solvents have to be taken into consideration to achieve a maximum yield. Previously, a lot of studies have focused on the extraction of proteins from whole grain flours for e.g. amaranth ( Nevertheless, in the case of quinoa and amaranth, milling presents a technological challenge because of their small kernel sizes: for quinoa 1.0–2.5 After choosing a suitable milling fraction for protein concentration, an extraction procedure has to be developed. The aim of this study was to optimize a fractionation process in order to separate quinoa flour from the bran fraction. Second, proteins of the bran fraction were further concentrated by optimizing an extraction process, aiming to reach a protein content between 50% and 90%. Different pH conditions for extraction were analyzed and the resulting solution was further purified and dried to obtain a stable product which can be used as dietary supplements and functional food ingredients. Organic Royal Quinoa grains ( Milling fractions were analyzed for their moisture and ash content by employing standard methods of analysis, AACC 44-01 and 08-12, respectively ( Color characterization of milling fractions was measured using a Spectrophotometer fitted with an optical sensor from BYK Gardner GmbH (Geretsried, Germany) on the basis of the CIE The particle size distribution of flour was measured according to ICC standard method No 207 ( After enriching the proteins in the bran fraction through conditioning, milling and sieving, further concentration was conducted by solvent extraction followed by an optional purification procedure as described in The preparation of quinoa bran protein isolates was conducted by using different pH values for extraction and precipitation according to Statistical analysis was performed with the software Prism 5 (Version 5.03, GraphPad Software, Inc.) on all data. To detect significant differences between means, one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with separation of means by the Tukey–Kramer test was applied with a significance level of The results of varied conditioning settings are presented in The coloring of flour is often used to evaluate its quality and pureness. Especially the whiteness, which is composed of brightness and yellowness, is of interest for characterizing milling products. However, for untypical grains like quinoa the predictability of the pureness by these values is not guaranteed because of considerable differences regarding the seed structure. According to The particle size distribution of milling fractions can be of interest for technological applications, because of differences regarding the reactive surface of particles, which is of particular importance for the extractability of components or other applications. As an example, The particle size distributions of the quinoa milling fractions are presented in The solubility of proteins depends on the physicochemical state of the molecules, which can be favorably or adversely affected by processing treatments such as heating or drying during processing and storage. Further factors are the ratio of polar to non-polar groups as well as the primary, secondary, tertiary and quaternary structure of the protein. In alkaline solutions the conformation alters, exposing more hydrophobic groups, which promotes higher protein solubility by increasing the interactions with water ( Alkaline solubilization of proteins was performed in the range of pH 7 to 12 revealing that solubility increased by elevating the amount of sodium hydroxide (see The impact of the particle size (250 Another critical factor for extraction processes is the duration, since diffusion and enzymatic degradation processes are time-dependent. Therefore, the extraction was elongated up to four hours to test the effect on protein solubility. As a result, there was no significant variation regarding the protein solubility after varying the duration of the extraction (see As a final factor, temperature is known to influence conformation and hydrophilic behavior of proteins. In order to avoid irreversible protein denaturation during extraction, temperature was kept below 60 Protein–protein interactions increase in the area of the isoelectric point as a consequence of minimum net electrostatic charges of the molecules. This isoelectric point of the quinoa proteins (extracted at pH 10) was evaluated in a pH-range between 2 to 6. After acidification, the solubility of proteins was determined in proportion to the amount of previously extracted proteins. Both, the separation of insoluble products from the alkaline protein solution after the initial extraction stage, as well as the separation of the precipitated proteins from soluble residues after acidification, were performed by centrifugation. Focusing on maximizing the protein yield, these centrifugation steps were performed with three different centrifugal forces: 4500 To sum up, quinoa bran is a suitable byproduct of the milling process, which facilitates the concentration of the proteins. The results indicate that conditioning of quinoa is the first step to separate the outer parts of the seed from the starch-rich perisperm by choosing the right pre-conditioning settings (15% seed moisture and 20 Depending on the industrial purpose, milling fractions feature their own technological characteristics, which can be individually applied for modifying gluten-free foods, bakery products or dietary supplements. More recently observed by Since gluten-free flours are mostly lacking protein when based on corn (6.58% db) or rice (6.99% db), the targeted application of small quinoa bran amounts can improve the nutritive value without impairing gas holding properties and bread volume ( This work is based on a research project (16847 N), which was supported by the German Ministry of Economics and Technology (via AIF Project GmbH, Berlin, Germany) and the FEI (Forschungskreis der Ernährungsindustrie e. V., Bonn, Germany).