Arbitrary shape object detection, which is mostly related to computer vision and image processing, deals with detecting objects from an image. In this paper, we consider the problem of detecting arbitrary shape objects as a clustering application by decomposing images into representative data points, and then performing clustering on these points. Our method for arbitrary shape object detection is based on COMUSA which is an efficient algorithm for combining multiple clusterings. Extensive experimental evaluations on real and synthetically generated data sets demonstrate that our method is very accurate and efficient.Automatically detecting arbitrary shape objects can be widely used in civil engineering for designing roads, bridges, and buildings; mechanical engineering for designing engines, aircraft and transportation products; biomedical engineering for designing new diagnosis tools and improving existing ones; mining engineering for spotting, extracting, and processing minerals. Clustering has so many applications in a variety of disciplines. Some recent applications of clustering can be found in Arbitrary shape object detection, which is a very challenging problem by its nature, can benefit from well established concepts in clustering methodology. Unfortunately, existing sophisticated clustering techniques cannot be successfully applied due to several reasons. Unsatisfactory accuracy results obtained on challenging data sets by clustering methods such as k-means, k-medoids, agnes, etc. is the leading factor for avoiding clustering techniques on arbitrary shape objects. Another disadvantage is the need for the number of output clusters in advance by many clustering algorithms, which is unknown in most cases. Our main contribution is a new arbitrary shape object detection (ASOD) algorithm, which provides very accurate results and automatically detects the number of objects in a data set. ASOD does not make any assumptions about the input, thus it can be applied widely to many engineering disciplines. ASOD is based on a combining multiple clusterings method known as COMUSA ( Our paper is structured as follows: In In this section we explain the general characteristics of arbitrary shape object detection (ASOD), which is presented in Algorithm 1. Our method decomposes the input data into point cloud, and groups the points based on their proximity. Each cluster generated by ASOD represents a distinct object in the input data—the number of clusters is found automatically. In line 1, objects are decomposed into representative data points using various techniques presented in the literature such as Arbitrary Shape Object Detection (ASOD) In some cases there can be larger objects for detection: user input relaxation rate is used to achieve this, which is defined as follows. On a set of edge weights Experimental results demonstrate that the relaxation parameter affects the accuracy of ASOD (see Although ASOD is based on COMUSA, ASOD and COMUSA serve completely different purposes. ASOD is a clustering technique which is designed for arbitrary shape object detection, whereas COMUSA is used for combining multiple clusterings. ASOD works on an input data set representing objects, however COMUSA takes a collection of clusterings of a data set—not the data set itself—as its input. Finally, ASOD operates on a distance graph constructed by pairwise Euclidean distance between points, but COMUSA operates on a similarity graph of objects which is built by the evidence accumulated in the collection of input clusterings. In this section we present an objective cluster quality measure, experimental data sets, and test results. We use adjusted rand index (ARI) in order to measure the extent to which the clustering structure discovered by ASOD matches some external criteria, i.e. class labels which correctly identifies each object. Given a data set of points In ARI can be formulated as follows: We have conducted experiments on a computer having Intel Xeon X550 2.6 We evaluated ASOD on real and synthetically generated data sets having two and three dimensions. On very challenging data sets, which most of the existing clustering algorithms fail, ASOD accurately identified arbitrary shape objects. Practical run time results with ASOD are obtained on even very large data sets having tens of thousands data points.  Ch4C data set in Ch5C data set, which contains 731 data points and five distinct objects, is shown in In general arbitrary shape object detection in three dimensions is more difficult compared with the previous data sets. 2Ring3D, Chair Cup & Box3D, and Helicopter are three-dimensional objects having 348, 41424, and 11857 data points respectively as shown in Validity results of ASOD on all the test data sets are shown in Number of objects found by ASOD is compared with the original number of objects on test data sets in ASOD, very accurately and very efficiently, detects arbitrary shape objects on some very challenging real and artificial data sets. ASOD detects the number of objects automatically with respect to the relaxation rate. Each object is represented by its corresponding representative data points with varying details. Working on data sets with too many representative points may increase the accuracy of ASOD, but it certainly increases the execution time as well. In the future, we are hoping to improve ASOD by eliminating the input relaxation rate, and by treating a set of points as a single point which may lead to shorter execution times.