Axial fatigue experiments have been conducted employing notched samples of a 316L stainless steel under both constant and variable amplitude loading. A number of samples were subjected to high cycle fatigue (HCF) in the range of ∼144,000–271,000 cycles and subsequent tensile tests, in order to evaluate the change in tensile mechanical properties due to prior fatigue damage. The results obtained have shown that HCF in this range of cycles gives rise to a significant increase in the yield stress of the material, while other mechanical properties determined in tension remain almost constant. It has been determined that the increase in yield stress with the cyclic ratio (D) is more significant as the maximum stress applied to the material increases. Such a behavior has been described by means of a simple parametric relationship, which could be employed for the practical determination of D in parts and components made of this material, by means of simple tensile testing. A plausible explanation of the increase in yield stress with D, based on the development of the dislocation substructure able to modify such a property, has been proposed. The fractographic analysis that has been conducted on the samples tested in tension after fatigue damage indicates that such a phenomenon also gives rise to the development of fatigue cracks, whose size increases with D. It has been shown that the number of cycles to fracture in two-stress step fatigue tests can be satisfactorily predicted by means of the Palmgren–Miner linear damage cumulative rule. A non-linear numerical procedure has been presented in order to re-compute the fatigue strength coefficient and fatigue exponent of the material, from data obtained under variable amplitude loading conditions, whose values give rise to a satisfactory description of the S–N experimental data. The use of more complex non-linear damage cumulative rules has not given rise to any significant improvement in the number of cycles recorded in the second stress step. It is believed that, due to the significant plastic deformation that occurs at the notch root during fatigue testing, cyclic creep (or ratcheting) damage in addition to fatigue damage could also be present.It widely recognized that fatigue damage is an important phenomenon associated with the degradation of the mechanical properties of a material due to cyclic loading and represents a fundamental aspect of the overall evaluation of the remaining life of machine parts and components in service. Fatigue damage can compromise significantly the safety of operating mechanical structures subjected to stresses of variable amplitude and therefore constitutes an important consideration in the mechanical design of such structures, in order to guarantee their service operation under safe conditions. Two critical issues related to fatigue damage are the evaluation of the extent to which the mechanical properties of the material are changed due to prior fatigue damage and the development of appropriate rules that would allow an accurate prediction of the remaining fatigue life when it is subjected to stresses of variable amplitude. Fatigue properties have been traditionally correlated with tensile static mechanical properties by means of several methods In this sense, Duyi and Zhenlin However, fatigue damage has not only been expressed in terms of the development of a dislocation substructure but also of other structural imperfections. For example, the work conducted by Murakami and Miller In relation to the behavior of stainless steels, particularly of the 316L type, the current literature indicates that in the past few years the main interest have been focused on the analysis of the LCF behavior as a function of testing temperature, initial metallurgical condition, nitrogen content and creep-fatigue interaction Thus, given the limited information available on the effect of HCF cumulative damage on the static mechanical properties of stainless steels, as well as the way in which damage in these materials can be expressed from the microstructural point of view under such fatigue conditions, the present investigation has been conducted in order to study these phenomena on a 316 The present investigation has been conducted with samples of an AISI 316L stainless steel with the following chemical composition (wt.%): 0.018 C, 20 Cr, 0.045 N, 11.3 Ni, 2.2 Mo, 1.44 Mn, 0.22 Co, 0.42 Cu, 0.29 Si, 0.029 P, 0.029 S. The material was in an annealed condition, with a hardness of 238 HVN SiC papers grit 320–1500, were subsequently employed for eliminating the remaining circumferential notches and imparting a “mirror-like” finish during the final mechanical polishing operation. The mean roughness of the as-polished specimens was of ∼0.045 Both tensile and fatigue tests were conducted employing a computer-controlled servo-hydraulic machine (Instron 8502, Canton, MA, USA). Tensile tests were carried out at a crosshead speed of 2 Fatigue tests were conducted in air at room temperature and a frequency of 20 The fracture surfaces of some selected specimens tested in tension after achieving a pre-established damage degree were examined employing scanning electron microscopy (SEM) techniques. The observations were carried out both on the plane of fracture and on cross sections normal to such a plane. The main objective of the study was the corroboration of the notch role in the fatigue crack initiation step and the determination of the existence of fatigue cracks after the first stress step, in the two-stress step tests. For this purpose, all the observations were carried out employing a Phillips microscope at a potential of 20 The tensile tests conducted with samples of the material in the as-received condition indicated a mean yield stress of 516 In the above equation, The value of such constants is simply determined by means of linear least square analysis. However, as will be shown in the forthcoming, a different estimate of the parameters A and m can also be obtained from the cumulative damage data and the models employed for their interpretation, by means of non-linear least square analysis. As explained above, in order to determine if the cumulative damage degree has any influence on the static mechanical properties, a number of samples were subjected to fatigue at 400 and 476 As can be observed from the above table the only mechanical property that appears to be modified in a significant manner is the yield stress, which is observed to increase with the damage fraction and maximum stress, as shown in  As can be seen from The experimental data is observed to be evenly distributed around the straight line that represents the model and no particular trend, regarding the over- or sub-estimation of the residual fatigue life as a consequence of the stress sequence application, is apparent. Thus, by combining Eq. From the above equation it possible to derive an expression for the number of cycles expected during the second step of the sequence, n The experimental data presented in   The present results differ somewhat from those reported by Duyi and Zhenlin In the present case, the increase in yield stress also indicates an increase in dislocation density, but only to an extent able to modify such a property without inducing significant changes in the work-hardening behavior and other flow stress parameters. Given the relatively low stacking fault energy of the 316L stainless steel, it would be expected that the increase in dislocation density led to the development of a dislocation substructure composed of ill-defined cells, with a higher dislocation density at the cell boundaries. Therefore, plasticity effects associated with the subsequent tensile testing of the pre-fatigued samples will give rise to higher dislocation densities than those developed during HCF damage, which will determine the work-hardening characteristics and flow stress of the material.  An important aspect concerning the validity of Eq. Regarding the prediction of the residual fatigue life,  As pointed out by Mesmacque et al. As suggested by Kwofie and Chandler Finally, Fatigue damage induced on notched samples of a 316L stainless steel under high cycle fatigue conditions leads to a significant increase in the yield stress of the material, while other mechanical properties determined in tension remain almost constant. The increase in yield stress with damage degree is more significant as the maximum stress applied to the material also increases. Such a behavior can be described by means of a simple parametric relationship, which can be employed for the practical determination of the degree of fatigue damage of parts and components made of this material, by means of simple tensile testing. It is believed, in agreement with the existing literature, that such an increase in yield stress could be related to the development of a dislocation substructure able to modify such a property. The fractographic evidence obtained from samples tested in tension after fatigue damage also shows that the latter gives rise to the development of fatigue cracks whose size increases with D. It has also been determined that the number of cycles to fracture in two-stress step fatigue tests can be satisfactorily predicted by means of the simple linear damage cumulative Palmgren–Miner rule. A non-linear numerical procedure has been presented in order to re-compute the fatigue strength coefficient and fatigue exponent of the material, from data obtained under variable amplitude loading conditions, whose values give rise to a satisfactory description of the S–N experimental data. The use of more complex non-linear cumulative rules did not give rise to any significant improvement in the number of cycles recorded in the second stress step. It is believed that, due to the significant plastic deformation that occurs at the notch root during fatigue testing, cyclic creep (or ratcheting) damage in addition to fatigue damage could also be present. The present investigation has been conducted with the financial support of the Venezuelan National Fund for Science, Technology and Innovation (FONACIT) through the project LAB-97000644 and the Scientific and Humanistic Development Council of the Universidad Central de Venezuela, CDCH-UCV, through the Project 08-00-5790-2005.