Milling processes are known to cause polymorphic transition in enantiotropic systems and the micronization process employed to produce microparticles for inhalation formulations has been reported to result in solid-state damage. The aim of the current work was to investigate the polymorphism of salmeterol xinafoate (SX) following antisolvent micronization from poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) solvents and compare this to the properties of SX conventionally crystallized and micronized. Powder X-ray diffraction revealed that SX crystallized predominantly as the SX form I polymorph following rapid precipitation from PEG solvents and cooling crystallization from propan-2-ol. Thermo-kinetic analysis using a modified Avrami–Erofe’ev equation was applied to differential scanning calorimetric thermographs of crystallized and micronized SX. The kinetic analysis revealed that SX crystallized from PEG solvents underwent significantly less or no re-crystallization of SX form II from the melt. A polymorphic transition was identified upon heating ball-milled SX, although the untreated material was resistant to such transformation. The thermal behaviour of SX crystallized from PEG solvents was consistent with a lower degree of crystal lattice disorder and higher enantiotropic purity than SX crystallized from propan-2-ol; the same was also true when comparing SX before and after micronization.Salmeterol xinafoate (SX) (4-hydroxy-α SX exhibits enantiotropic polymorphism ( An investigation into the polymorphism of SX has revealed the existence of an enantiotropic pair SX I (characterized by a melting point at ∼125 It has been suggested that aggressive quench crystallization of SX leads to crystal disorder of the SX I lattice ( PEG 400, Analar SX particles were produced by Amphiphilic Crystallization from solutions of 4% (w/w) SX in PEG 400 (SX PEG 400) and in PEG 6000 (SX PEG 6000) by the addition of water to the drug solutions (SX PEG 400 The dried powders were washed once more with 200 A 1.6% (w/v) suspension of SX in propan-2-ol (110 SX particle size was determined by laser diffraction using a Malvern Mastersizer X (Malvern Instruments Ltd, Malvern, UK) equipped with a 100 mm lens validated according to ISO 13320 (1990) standards. The dispersant liquid was an SX-saturated solution of 0.5 % w/v Span 80 in cyclohexane. SX particles (macrocrystals and SX PEG 6000) were milled in a Retsch MM200 ball mill (Glen Creston Ltd., Stanmore, UK) using zirconium oxide 25 Powder X-ray diffraction was performed on SX particles using a Philips PW 1730 X-ray diffractometer system (Philips Analytical, UK). X-rays were generated by a PW1730 4 Thermographs were produced using a TA 2920 modulated differential scanning calorimeter (TA Instruments, UK). Approximately 1–2 Samples of salmeterol xinafoate were heated at a rate of 10 The particle size distribution of SX microparticles was measured as previously reported ( The X-ray diffraction pattern of the starting material, i.e. micronized SX, is presented in PXRD is conventionally applied to determine the crystallinity of sample powders based on the line broadening, peak intensity and background. All samples demonstrated a high background, which contributed to the difficulty in using PXRD to verify the absence of crystallinity on the basis of peak intensities. Nevertheless, mSX and SX crystallized from isopropanol displayed similar peak heights, which were higher than those of SX microcrystals produced from PEG solvents. A high background arises from difficulties in preparing samples of crystals of small size and preferred orientation affects ( When samples of SX PEG 6000 and macrocrystalline SX were subjected to mechanical comminution (ball milling), an underlying halo effect was generated (  The crystallization of SX II from the melt was inhibited in all cases by increasing the heating rate to 40 No differences were found between the enthalpy of fusion of SX form I for SX PEG 6000 (62.36 The kinetic profile of the re-crystallization process was studied by constructing an An Avrami–Erofe’ev-type Equation The AE equation is generally applied to The integral function of Although non-isothermal (dynamic) methods may be applied for analysis of solid-state transitions upon heating, the situation is complicated by the concomitant melting and re-crystallization events, such that the enthalpy response is not separated for either event. It is for this reason that in the current non-isothermal study the conversion plots were constructed as The The ‘goodness of fit’ was judged by the magnitude of the errors in conjunction with the coefficient of determination ( A solid-state transition from SX I to SX II was observed in the processed SX PEG 6000 material at heating rates of 2 In all cases, the crystallization of SX, whether by cooling crystallization in propan-2-ol or antisolvent crystallization from PEG solvents resulted in SX crystalline material of the form I polymorph. The isolation of SX as the form I polymorph has been reported previously regardless of whether a rapid quench crystallization or a slower batch cooling crystallization process was effected ( All crystallization processes were performed at a temperature below the identified transition temperature range of 80–100 The dimorphic polymorph which exhibits the lowest activation energy barrier and highest pre-exponential frequency term will therefore demonstrate the highest nucleation rate allowing preferential polymorphic crystallization ( Seeds of SX form II must be present in order for re-crystallization of the SX II from the melt ( The solid–solid transition (i.e. not involving melt re-crystallization) of SX I into SX II for milled SX PEG 6000 was consistent with enantiotropic polymorphism ( An alternative hypothesis is that seeds of SX II only form upon heating above the enantiotropic transition temperature due to the presence of regions of milling-induced short-range disorder (e.g. lattice strain, point dislocations). Crystals of a low temperature phase that are substantially free from defects resist solid-state transformation, and thus melt at the fusion point of that polymorph ( Microparticles of SX produced by antisolvent crystallization from PEG solvents were crystalline in nature. The microcrystals were of the (low temperature) stable form I polymorph. The absence of re-crystallization of the high temperature polymorph, SX II, upon heating was consistent with a low degree of crystal lattice disorder and with enantiotropic purity. It appeared that re-crystallization of SX II required embryonic seeds of SX II to be present at the melting point of the low temperature polymorph, SX I. The thermo-kinetic behaviour of PEG-crystallized SX pointed to polymorphic control of SX for inhalation formulation when compared to the conventionally micronized material, which exhibited disruption in crystallinity. The origin of SX II seeds at fusion of SX I remains obscure due to the high limits of detection of PXRD. We conclude that SX II seeds are most likely formed by heat-induced solid-state transformation at localized high-energy lattice defects upon passing the enantiotropic transition temperature (90–110 The authors are grateful to King's College London and MedPharm Ltd. for financial support of this work and to Prof. Peter York for providing SEDS salmeterol.