Blast furnace dust is a typical secondary resource produced in manufacturing iron. This substance contains many recyclable components, such as iron, lead, zinc, and carbon, which have not been properly utilized. Zinc is a dispersed component in blast furnace dust, but its volatility depends on its carrier minerals, such as hematite, coke, and silicate in descending order of zinc volatility. Volatilization is the necessary procedure of removing toxicity and recycling zinc from blast furnace dust. However, two critical limits exist: the amount of carbon in the residue and the amount of franklinite in the blast furnace dust. Zinc can be enclosed by the carbon grains according to kinetic analysis and energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS) tests. Therefore, the coke dosage should be controlled carefully to avoid carbon residue and increase the volatilization rate of zinc. Meanwhile, both franklinite and zincite are general zinc-bearing phases in the adopted dust, but neither can volatilize before being reduced to metallic form. Calculations show that the available reduction temperature of zincite is higher than that of franklinite. Nearly all the zinc in hematite and carbon is in the form of zincite and can be easily reduced in the heating process. However, the zinc in silicate mainly exists in the form of franklinite and is difficult to be reduced and volatilized, which explains the lower volatilization rate of zinc in silicate than in coke and hematite. In the last part of this investigation, the mineral phase and morphology of the volatiles obtained after fume reduction volatilization are tested for the first time to evaluate their potential application value. Only high-purity crystal zincite is found, which means that the volatiles can be used directly as high-grade zinc smelting materials without purification.Blast furnace dust, which is the solid component of blast furnace gas, contains many ferrous and nonferrous metal micro-particles ( Blast furnace dust contains recyclable elements, but none are sufficiently concentrated for utilization ( The environmental risk and potential value of blast furnace dust make it becomes an increasing concern for both researchers and engineers. Zinc oxides can be reduced to metallic vapor in a reducing atmosphere. Hence, a fume volatilization technology using rotary kiln is proposed for the recycling of zinc from low-grade zinc-bearing dust by exploiting the properties of zinc ( Besides, zinc volatilization is the critical procedure of removing toxicity and should therefore receive special attention. The current research investigates the difference in zinc volatility in various carrier minerals to reveal the restrictive factors of volatilization. Although the lead content of blast furnace is not as high as its zinc content, most of the lead can be recycled as a secondary product of zinc extraction on the basis of their similar reaction properties. Hence, the similarities between zinc and lead are also analyzed in this investigation. The mineral phase and morphology of the volatiles obtained by fume reduction volatilization are then tested to evaluate their potential application value. The results reveal the critical limits of blast furnace volatilization and may serve as an academic reference on the clean recycling of zinc, lead, and iron from blast furnace dust. The coke adopted was sampled from Shandong province of China. Its proximate analysis data is shown in The carbon content was analyzed by computer-based carbon and sulfur analysis instrument (NCS, CS 2800, China); other compositions are analyzed by ICP-OES (Rayleigh, UV-9600, China). The mineral composition, micro-features and micro-composition of blast-furnace dust were tested by powder XRD (Rigaku, TTRIII, Japan), SEM and EDS (ZEISS, EVO 18, Germany), respectively. Blast-furnace dust, sodium carbonate, and coke adopted were dried in a drying oven at 105 °C then mixed and crushed to 100% passing 2 mm. The mass ratio of the dust and coke was 1:0.25. Transferred 10 g of the mixture into a 30 ml lidded corundum crucible within another 100 ml lidded corundum crucible (double-layer crucible), and then placed them into a muffle furnace at 1050 °C and 1150 °C but uncontrolled the gaseous atmosphere. The crucible inside was used for containing the mixture while the outside one was used for collecting volatile. The experimental reaction system is shown in After cooling, the content of Zn or Pb in the mixture was tested by ICP-AES. The volatilizing ratio Zn or Pb ( The blast furnace dust adopted in this study was sampled from the bag-type dedusting system of a large iron and steel company in Hebei province, and its chemical composition and XRD image are shown in  The SEM photo and EDS images of the blast furnace dust are shown in The bright gray grains in position 1 in Position 2 in In position 3 in Position 4 in The element area profiles obtained by the EDS of the blast furnace dust are shown in The iron and oxygen contents of the bright area in position 1 in The comparison of image [h] with the rest of the images in As shown in As shown in The SEM photo and the microzone chemical composition obtained by the EDS of the blast furnace dust after heating for 600 s are shown in The gray grain in position 2 in The bright gray grain in position 4 in The element area profiles obtained by EDS from the sample after heating for 600 s are shown in In image [e] in Similarly, the grain in the top left corner is marked “carbon” (image [a]) because of the considerably small amount of zinc distributed in that grain (image [f]). This finding verifies that most of the zinc in carbon grains evaporates to gas in the heating process ( However, a large amount of zinc ( In summary, zinc is a dispersed component in blast furnace dust, but its volatility depends on the carrier minerals. Unfortunately, the data collected are insufficient to reveal the volatilization process of lead due to the limited EDS performance. However, the regularity of zinc and lead seems similar in The SEM photo and the microzone chemical composition obtained by the EDS of blast furnace dust heated for 300 and 1200 s are shown in As shown in The data in All the images in  Between 500 °C and 1500 °C, metallic zinc can volatilize to gas according to Two possibilities of zincite and franklinite reduction reactions are shown by Eqs. The available reduction temperatures of zincite and franklinite are 984.21 °C and 1047.39 °C, respectively. Franklinite is the main zinc phase in silicate, as analyzed in Section Volatile metallic zinc generally appears on the surface of zincite and franklinite. The thickness of the metal layer is incomparable to the size of the reactant due to the continuous volatilization of newly generated zinc. Zinc is typically wrapped by carrier minerals in blast furnace dust, and zinc vapor must past through these minerals before turning into gas. The volume and concentration remain stable in the reduction and volatilization processes. Hence, the The reduction dynamic curves of silicate, carbon, and hematite in a series of temperatures are obtained by measuring the zinc volatilization rates ( The activation energy of zinc volatilization from carbon is much lower than those from silicate and hematite, thereby implying that only the volatilization process in carbon is controlled by diffusion and those in silicate and hematite are controlled by chemical reaction. Both dynamic analyses and EDS tests confirm that the diffusion from carbon limits zinc volatilization. However, carbon is a necessary reactant in zinc volatilization because it provides a reducing atmosphere. The restriction of carbon on zinc volatilization can be avoided by controlling the coke dosage carefully and reducing carbon residue, as well as providing a reducing atmosphere. The XRD pattern and SEM-EDS images of the volatiles collected under the heating temperature of 1150 °C, heating time of 600 s, and 5% coke dosage are shown in The volatiles collected are in the form of zincite in the shapes of chip or lath with high crystallinity and purity ( The lead in blast furnace dust can be reduced and volatilized as well as zinc according to the investigations above. However, no lead-bearing components are found in the volatile. This observation indicates that the deposition behaviors of zinc and lead from the gas phase are different, thereby implying that the two elements can be separated in the heating process through this deposition nature.  The volatility of zinc in diverse carrier minerals varies. Zinc is a dispersed component in blast furnace dust; however, its volatility depends on carrier minerals, such as hematite, coke, and silicate in descending order of zinc volatility. The franklinite content of blast furnace dust is a critical limit of its volatilization rate. Both franklinite and zincite are general phases of zinc in the adopted dust, but neither can volatilize before being reduced to metallic form. Calculations show that the available reduction temperature of zincite is higher than that of franklinite. Hence, most of the zinc in hematite can be reduced to metallic form and volatilized to gas in the heating process for nearly all zincites. However, zinc mainly exists in the form of franklinite in silicate. Thus, its volatilization rate remains low. The amount of carbon residue is the other critical limit of the volatilization rate of zinc. The positive effects of coke on zinc volatilization are reduced after the coke dosage reaches 5% because the zinc volatilization process in carbon is controlled by diffusion. Hence, the volatilizing resistance from carbon is enhanced by the increase of coke dosage. The mineral phase and components of the volatiles from the blast furnace dust are tested for the first time. The mineral phase and morphology of the volatiles obtained after fume reduction volatilization are tested to evaluate their potential application value. Results show only high-purity and high-crystallinity zincite in the volatiles, thereby indicating that these volatiles can be used directly as high-grade zinc smelting materials without purification. Separation possibilities are observed in zinc and lead during the heating process. Lead can be recycled as a secondary product of zinc because of their similarity in terms of volatilization. However, no lead-bearing component is found in the volatiles, thereby showing that the deposition conditions of zinc and lead in gas are different. Therefore, possibilities of separation are established during the heating process. This study was supported by the