One of the most important characteristics of a backfill material is the particle size distribution. In this paper, the authors have focused the effect of deslimed mill tailings on paste backfill performance at a copper–zinc mine in northeast Turkey. The use of sedimentation methods to deslime has a widespread utilisation and regarded as a true fractional size analysis practice. The common laboratory method of beaker decantation was used for desliming in order to determine the optimum particle size distribution. For studying the beaker decantation, two mine tailings, namely tailings samples A and B are used which have particles 52 and 54 wt.% finer than 20 μm, respectively. The fines content (−20 μm) of each tailing were reduced to 15, 20, 25 and 30 wt.% via desliming. Deslimed tailings then were tested to investigate the relationship between particle size and strength gain. It was found that strength ranges of the deslimed tailings were from 12% to 52% higher than as-received mill tailings.Most mining operations utilize the tailings coarse fractions for backfilling while the fines have been traditionally disposed on surface in tailings ponds. Some backfill plants are prepared using total mill tailings as paste backfill and placing it underground as a pulp between 75 and 90 wt.% solids ( The main objective of this work is to optimise one of the most important parameters called size distribution that influences the paste backfill performance utilized underground disposal. For studying the sedimentation, tailings samples A and B were chosen from an underground massive sulphide ore mine. Tailings samples A and B (as-received) were found to have 52 and 54 wt.% of their particles finer than 20 μm, respectively. The major mineral for the tailings samples A and B is pyrite with minor detection of dolomite. Also found in trace amounts were sphalerite and barite. Minor quantities of kaolinite were detected for tailings sample B, as well. With regard to chemical composition, the tailings are dominated by 57% and 43.67% Fe Modification of particle size distribution of the tailings material is a useful tool for improving strength characteristics of paste backfill produced (  It can be seen from The effect of fines (−20 μm) contained in tailings on the strength of paste backfill was investigated using the deslimed and total tailings. The results showed that decreasing the fines content of the tailings via desliming produced a positive effect on the UCS of paste backfill samples. The use of hydrocyclone to deslime has a wide spread utilisation and could be employed to improve paste backfill performance in this mine. It was also observed that the optimum UCS for both tailings peaked at 25 wt.% fines. The positive effect of desliming could be attributed to the improvement in the gradation of tailings. Furthermore, tailings B was observed to produce the paste backfill samples with consistently low UCS compared with tailings A. This could be ascribed to the relatively high water-retention ability of tailings B presumably due to its high silicate content as indicated by the results of mineralogical, chemical and rheological analysis.