Humic acid (HA) was the predominant component of the MHA (modified humic acid) binder invented by the authors. This work aims to study the effect of the solution pH value on the HA adsorption onto natural magnetite/hematite/quartz particles and the strength of green pellets with the MHA binder. The SEM images for HA indicated that HA had distinct morphology at different pH values. The adsorption density of HA on the three oxide minerals was significantly pH-dependent and decreased with increasing pH value. The zeta potential values of the magnetite, hematite and quartz particles coated by HA became negative and the isoelectric point of the three natural oxide minerals disappeared in the tested pH value range. The electrostatic interaction and the ligand exchange were the two leading interactions for the HA sorption onto the magnetite/hematite particles, while the small adsorption amount of HA onto the quartz was attributed to the hydrogen-bond interaction. The pH value of the MHA binder solution affects markedly the strength of green pellets from magnetite and hematite concentrates. At pH ~7.0, the HA molecule was expanded and dispersed well and the relatively strong bonding bridges were formed among the iron ore particles. The optimal pH value was founded to be around 7.0 for preparing high-quality iron ore green pellets.Binder is essential for producing iron ore pellets and enabling them to survive handling, drying and roasting. Presently, bentonite is chosen as a worldwide binder in the iron ore pelletizing process Previous studies indicate that HA (humic acid) and FA (fulvic acid) are the two organic functional components of the MHA binders in which HA is about 90 As a pellet organic binder, the bonding effect relies on the ability of the binder to adhere, expand and disperse, which is determined by the affinity for the iron ore surface and the configuration of organic molecules In summary, pH value has prominent effects on the configuration of HA and its sorption onto metal oxide particle surface. As is well-known, magnetite and hematite concentrates are used as two kinds of typical pellet feeds, in which quartz is the predominant gangue mineral. Consequently, it is significant to further understand the effect of pH on the sorption of humic acid onto the three kinds of natural oxide minerals (magnetite, hematite and quartz), since the pH value of HA solution greatly affects the morphology and adsorption of HA onto the oxide mineral particles. Our objectives here were to (1) observe the change of humic acid configuration under different pH values and the micrographs of iron concentrate particles coated by humic acid, (2) quantify the adsorption of humic acid onto the natural magnetite, hematite and quartz surfaces at different pH values, and (3) further ascertain effects of solution pH values on the adsorption interactions of humic acid onto natural magnetite/hematite/quartz particle surfaces and the strength of iron ore green pellets. The natural magnetite, hematite and quartz as sorbents were taken from the mines in China. XRD patterns given in the Supporting information revealed that these sorbents, which had no detectable crystalline impurities, matched exactly with magnetite, hematite and quartz, respectively. The BET surface areas for magnetite, hematite and quartz were determined by N The purified HA was used as a sorbate. The detailed method for preparing the purified HA was described elsewhere The magnetite concentrate for pelletizing was taken from Panzhihua in China, and its chemical compositions and BET surface areas were referred to the previous article MHA binders for pelletizing are extracted from Lining brown coals of China and the total acid group, –COOH and –OH The surface structure of HA and morphology of iron concentrate particles coated by HA at different pH values were examined by scanning electron microscopy (Quanta 200, FEI Corporation, Holland). Calculated HA was dissolved in 0.1 Preparation of iron concentrate particles after sorption of HA was referred the former publication Initially, the HA solutions with desired concentration (50 Zeta potential is frequently used to obtain surface potential information and investigate the effect of humic substance adsorption on the surface charge of metal oxides 5 For each batch balling test, 5 The drop number (units: times/0.5 The pH value of the HA solution affected the structure of HA to a great extent, so that the expansion and dispersion of the MHA binder were pH-dependent significantly. The micrographs of HA samples, which dried naturally at different pH values, are shown in At the pH value of 3.0, the compacted HA was observed to be sheet-like and stacked together. At the pH value of 7.0, irregular flat aggregates of HA were found in The adsorption tests of HA onto natural magnetite, hematite and quartz were conducted to determine the affinity of HA to the oxide mineral surfaces in the pH value range of 3.0–12.0. The results obtained at the initial HA concentration of 25 Within the initial HA concentration of 25–125 The adsorption density Γ Zeta potential values of the HA and the natural magnetite, hematite and quartz particles within the pH value ranging from 2.0 to 12.0 are given in In the tested pH value range, the zeta potential values of the HA were negative and decreased with the increasing pH value, and the pH After sorption of HA at the HA initial concentration of 100 As shown in As seen in The sorption of HA on iron oxide particles can be mainly characterized by electrostatic interactions and ligand exchange. As reported, moist iron oxide particles are hydrated, and M–OH groups cover their surfaces. The M–OH sites on the surfaces react with H The pH In addition, there was specific adsorption via ligand exchange between the HA molecule and magnetite/hematite particles which had been reported in the previous article From the batch sorption experiments and the zeta potential analyses of the three natural oxide minerals, it can be inferred that the MHA binder was more effective on the magnetite and hematite particles in the iron ore pelletizing process, compared with the gangue composition of quartz in the concentrates, and the effective sorption of HA in the MHA binder onto the magnetite/hematite particles mainly contributed to the interaction between the MHA binder and the surface of iron concentrates. From the various morphologies of HA at different pH values, it can be inferred that the viscosity of the MHA binder, which has direct effects on the green pellet strength, varies with the solution pH value. Consequently, the viscosity of the MHA binder solution was detected. With the increasing pH value, the viscosity of the MHA binder solution increased firstly and then went down, and had a summit of 1.345 at pH value ~ The above results showed that the coating HA had great influence on the surface charge property of the natural oxide mineral particles. Particularly, the surface charge signs of the magnetite and hematite particles were reversed. Interactions between the HA molecule and magnetite/hematite particles were governed by the surface charge, which was pH-dependent in the solution. In addition, some researchers pointed out that the configuration of HA, varying with the solution pH value, was closely related to its viscosity It was seen from First of all, magnetite and hematite were the two main components in the iron concentrates. As reported, the pH In the pelletizing process, after the pellet binder has been adsorbed onto the surface of iron ore particles, the bonding effect of organic binder also relies on its ability of expansion, dispersion or slip among the iron ore particles except for the strength of HA bonding bridge In the absence of HA (in After adsorption of HA at pH ~ When the pH value increased to around 7.0, the HA molecules were flatted on the magnetite particle surface and the carbon content was decreased to 9.18 As we observed from the SEM image of HA ( A suitable pH value of the MHA binder solution was required for preparing the superior green pellets when the MHA binder was used for pelletizing. At the optimum pH value close to the pH  The pH value obviously affects the configuration of HA. At pH The adsorption density Γ Zeta potential values of magnetite/hematite/quartz particles coated by HA molecules decreased apparently and charged negatively. The IEP of the three oxide minerals coated by HA disappeared in this study. The adsorption interaction of HA onto the magnetite and hematite particles was mainly attributed to electrostatic interaction and ligand exchange, while the adsorption of HA onto the quartz resulted from the hydrogen-bond interaction between the quartz and HA. When the MHA binder was used to prepare superior iron ore green pellets, a suitable pH value of the MHA binder solution was required at pH ~ The authors want to express their thanks to the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at