This paper studies the removal efficiency of six heavy metals (Zn, Ni, Cr, Pb, Cu, and Cd) from anaerobically digested biosolids by chemical extraction, as a necessary step for reducing the adverse effects of land application of biosolids. To assess the heavy metal extraction, two organic acids (citric and oxalic), two inorganic acids (nitric and hydrochloric) and one strong chelator (EDTA) were tested at different conditions of concentration and reaction time. Experimental studies revealed a broad range in metal removal efficiencies of the different extraction agents. For all six heavy metals investigated in this study, better removal efficiencies were achieved when organic substances with acidic and/or chelating proprieties were used as extracting reagents. Zinc and nickel were the heavy metals with the strongest affinity for the extraction reagents used in this study, having the best removal efficiency with citric acid. Copper, cadmium and lead seem to have a low affinity for all extraction reagents used in this study, with the exception of EDTA which gives some better results. Chromium was not at all extracted when the two inorganic acids were used, being effectively removed only by the extraction with citric acid. Since not one of the extracting agents tested could extract all metals, a hybrid process combining two or more extraction reagents should be applied for a better removal of heavy metals from biosolids.Increasing urbanization and industrialization have culminated in a dramatic growth in the volume of municipal wastewater produced worldwide. Sewage treatment in activated sludge based plants results in the production of large amounts of biosolids. For instance, estimates of 1998 biosolids production was about 7 The biosolids applied in this research originated from an anaerobic digester of a sewage treatment plant (STP) located in Piteşti, Romania, and is intended to be used as long-term source of organic matter and nutrients in agriculture. The heavy metals chosen to be studied were: chromium, copper, lead, cadmium, nickel and zinc; the choice was based on the relatively high concentration of these metals in the biosolids and on their high toxicity, compared to other metals. By comparing the metal composition of this biosolid and the maximum allowed concentrations for land application, presented in Each metal analysis was performed in duplicate and relative errors of less than 2% were routinely obtained. The significance of the independent variables and their interactions were tested by using the Microsoft Excel 2003 ANOVA statistical tool. Since the P-value was <0.05 (F In order to investigate the effect of the nature of the extracting agent on the heavy metal removal efficiency, two inorganic acids (nitric and hydrochloric), two organic acids (citric and oxalic), and one strong chelator (EDTA) were tested as extracting agents. The chemical metal extraction with acids was performed at pH 1 for nitric and hydrochloric acid, at pH 2 for citric and oxalic acid, and at molar ratio chelator/total metal Heavy metals can exist in the biosolid matrix mainly in two forms: (1) adsorbed on the organic and inorganic biosolid phases, and (2) as inorganic precipitates (carbonates, phosphates, sulfides etc.) ( Obviously, this extraction mechanism is possible only for cationic heavy metals, adsorbed onto negatively charged functional groups. Anionic metal/metalloid contaminants like hexavalent chromium (HCrO Because both nitric and hydrochloric acids are strong Brönsted acids, they dissociate completely in aqueous solution and are good sources of hydronium ions. Batch heavy metal extraction experiments with nitric and hydrochloric acids conducted in this study resulted in the following order of metal removal: As can be observed from Eqs. Because oxalic and citric acids are weak Brönsted acids, they are not completely dissociated in aqueous solutions; however, they are still able to release hydronium ions in aqueous solutions. Therefore, just like strong acids, they can extract heavy metals from biosolids based on the exchange of adsorbed metals for hydronium ions, according to Eqs. Extraction by organic chelating agents is possible only for cationic heavy metals, which are Lewis acids (electron acceptors) and which may combine with a Lewis base (the organic chelator and an electron donor) to form a complex. Batch heavy metal extraction experiments with oxalic and citric acid performed in this study resulted in the following order of metal removal: As can be observed from Eqs. EDTA is a polidentate organic ligand which can act as a strong chelator. Therefore, the mechanism of EDTA heavy metal extraction is the chelating extraction mechanism presented in The order of metal removal by EDTA which resulted from this study was as follows: From Eq. The effect of the extracting agent concentration on the heavy metal removal efficiency was examined by testing the four acids at different conditions of pH, and EDTA at different molar ratios chelator/total metal. The chemical metal extraction with acids was performed over the pH range of 1–6 for nitric, hydrochloric and oxalic acids, and over the pH range of 2–6 for citric acid. The chemical metal extraction with EDTA was performed at four molar ratios EDTA/total metal: 1:1, 2:1, 4:1, and 6:1. The removal efficiencies of the heavy metals, by the different extraction agents at different extracting agent concentrations, are presented in Because heavy metals are predominantly adsorbed or precipitated inside the biosolid matrix, in the first step of the extraction process they have to be either desorbed or dissolved. Thereafter, the solubilized metals have to diffuse from the biosolid matrix into the solution, a process that takes time. In order to assess the effect of extraction time on the heavy metal removal efficiency, batch experiments were conducted at those concentrations of the extracting agents which have lead to best removal efficiencies for the six heavy metals: pH 1 for oxalic, nitric, and hydrochloric acids, pH 2 for citric acid and molar ratio EDTA/total metal Reagent consumption is often a major factor in determining the economic viability of a waste treatment process. Therefore, it must be considered when a decision is taken concerning the best process that should be developed. The extracting reagent consumptions were determined based on the experimental data from this study, as follows: Initial concentration of each heavy metal: as presented in Total initial heavy metal concentration in the biosolid: 0.02 Maximum removal efficiencies were obtained at pH 1, for nitric, hydrochloric and oxalic acid, at pH 2, for citric acid, and at molar ratio chelator/total metal The ratio biosolids (kg D.S.)/volume of extraction agent (L) used for heavy metal extraction: 1/10. The results, presented in It is obvious that the two organic acids result in the most excessive reagent consumptions, almost three times higher than the consumption needed when inorganic acids were used. The reagent consumptions for the two inorganic acids were relatively similar; but, when organic acids were used, the consumption of oxalic acid was 21.8% greater than for citric acid. This could be explained by the fact that the mass of oxalic acid needed to obtain pH 1 was greater than the mass of citric acid needed to obtain pH 2. Therefore, it can be concluded that reagent consumptions for the two organic acids are also relatively similar. However, the most important observation of this section is that the lowest reagent consumption was observed for EDTA. A broad range in metal extraction efficiencies was observed in this study, depending on factors such as: (1) nature of the extracting agent, (2) nature of the extracted metal, (3) concentration of the extracting reagent, and (4) extraction time. The most important factors affecting the removal efficiency of heavy metals from biosolids were found to be the nature and concentration of the extracting agent and the nature and chemical form of the heavy metal in the biosolids matrix. Less strongly bound heavy metals and heavy metals present as inorganic precipitates are extracted more efficiently from the biosolids than strongly bound heavy metals. Heavy metal removal efficiencies increased with the increase of extracting agent concentration. Zinc and nickel showed the strongest affinity for all extraction reagents used in this study, having the highest removal efficiencies among the six studied heavy metals; this could mean that zinc and nickel were present in the biosolid matrix, either as weakly adsorbed cations to the biosolids functional groups, or as inorganic precipitates. The best removal efficiencies for zinc and nickel were obtained with citric acid. Copper, cadmium and lead seem to have a low, almost similar affinity for all extraction reagents used in this study, except EDTA which gave better results. Chromium was not at all extracted when the two inorganic acids were used, being effectively removed only by extraction with citric acid. This could suggest that chromium existed in the biosolid matrix only as very strongly adsorbed Cr(III) and not as inorganic precipitate. The experimental results from this study reveal that, for all six heavy metals investigated in this study, better removal efficiencies were achieved when organic substances with acidic and/or chelating proprieties were used as extracting reagents, in comparison with the removal efficiencies observed for the two inorganic acids. Moreover, lowest reagent consumption was calculated if EDTA is used as extracting reagent. It is obvious that one extracting agent alone will not be suitable for removing all of the metals from biosolids. Therefore, the solution to this problem could be a hybrid process combining two or more extraction reagents. This work was supported by the