Pediatric brain tumors (PBTs) are the most common solid malignancies in childhood and continue to pose a serious burden to modern societies. Existing treatments impose debilitating effects on the developing child, highlighting the need for molecularly targeted treatments with reduced toxicity, as well as the necessity of markers that reliably assess efficacy of, and tumor response to targeted-therapies of PBTs. On this regard advances in technologies of protein identification and quantification, the large-scale, high-throughput investigation of the proteome, as well the newly-emerging field of “proteogenomics” aim to further our knowledge towards understanding the molecular pathophysiology of PBTs. This mini review article presents all updates on knowledge produced and published during the last years on PBT research derived from “omics” technologies, mainly involving protein research and proteomics.Pediatric brain tumors (PBTs) are the most common solid malignancies in childhood and the most common cause of cancer-related mortality and morbidity in this age group. Diagnosis and treatment of these tumors have undergone significant improvements over the last decades, starting with implementation of imaging techniques like computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Neuropathology has, since, moved from an essentially morphology-based approach to more sophisticated discipline applying molecular biological techniques that provide new insight in this group of tumors, by allowing identification of molecular targets [ The need of markers that reliably assess efficacy of, and tumor response to, specific biologic-targeted therapies ( Some of the needs mentioned above are being addressed through advances in technologies of protein identification and quantification, that make possible the large-scale, high-throughput investigation of the proteome. Furthermore, it is nowadays quite common to see genomics data informing proteomics data analysis or This mini review article aims at updating knowledge produced and published during the last years since our last review article [ Given the sensitivity of currently existing analytical methods, primary tumors are amenable to direct molecular analysis. Clinical specimens have been used by researchers for the study of mutations, copy number variations, differential transcript and proteome profiles. However, the availability of adequate amount of material from PBTs and the extent of heterogeneity in specimens pose serious challenges for any comprehensive study and clinical correlations of these tumors. Furthermore, direct molecular analysis between tumor and the non-tumor tissue from the same patient is also difficult on account of tumor boundaries. Tissue collected from temporal lobe epilepsy surgeries are usually used instead as experimental controls, but they most often come from different subjects than tumor donors. Despite these limitations, primary brain tumors are important for analysis and have been used with reasonable success in PBT research [ Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) In their latest study, Spreafico et al. sought to characterize the CSF proteome of patients with CSF tumors to identify biomarkers predictive of metastatic spread [ CSF samples from children with brain tumors and controls (extra-CNS non-Hodgkin's lymphoma) were processed reverse-phase liquid chromatography/electrospray tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Six proteins (type 1 collagen, insulin-like growth factor binding protein 4, procollagen C-endopeptidase enhancer 1, glial cell-line derived neurotrophic factor receptor α2, inter-alpha-trypsin inhibitor heavy chain 4, neural proliferation and differentiation control protein-1) revealed the ability to discriminate metastatic cases from controls. Their analysis also included validation of results by reverse phase protein array (RPPA), western blot and ELISA. Since CSF biomarker discovery, in general, suffers important physiological and technical challenges, including: low protein levels and the presence of highly abundant proteins masking less abundant ones, the authors firstly relied on initial non-targeted discovery phase, selecting 26 top proteins. These initial molecules underwent further quantitative validation, and were scored regarding their ability to distinguish CSF samples between metastatic cases and controls. The authors ultimately highlighted six proteins as potential biomarkers of meningeal spread. Most important aspect of the study was the coupling of MS analysis with a core-shell nanoparticle capture technique, enabling for identification of a large number of low-weight and low-abundant proteins, not previously described in the CSF. A number of medium-scale expression studies characterizing the levels of mRNA and proteins expressed in normal and cancerous tissue have been undertaken with the goal of identifying unique expression signatures associated with cancer phenotype [ Massimi et al. investigated the molecular characteristics of Adamantinomatous craniopharyngioma (ACP), a tumor entity often burdened by a poor prognosis in children as far as risk of recurrence and quality of life are concerned, aiming at finding new therapeutic options [ It is important that, through this analysis, the proteomic characterization of ACP cyst fluid led to identification of proteins strongly connected with mineralization process, lipid transport, and the inflammatory response, that are in total accordance with ACP cyst fluid composition (lipids, granules of cholesterol, flecks of calcium). It is evident form their results that for the specific malignancy, as well as a number of other cases, inflammation plays a crucial role in the development of cystic ACP (cyst formation and growth). Furthermore, key points of their study, including a-defensins and b-thymosins, deserve greater attention as potential molecules for targeted therapy, since they seem to be centrally involved in ACP tumor growth, progression and infiltration. In 2014, Inserra et al. applied LC coupled to LTQ-Orbitrap analysis for a proteomic study of pediatric pilocytic astrocytoma brain tumor intracystic fluid by an integrated top-down/bottom-up platform [ It is important to note that their top-down approach highlighted proteins' post-translational modifications, thus advancing comprehension of molecules with importance in disease onset and development, such as truncated, oxidized, and glycosylated proteoforms, while allowing for recognition of high-molecular-mass proteins thus widening proteome characterization. Key results of this approach include several proteins belonging to the apolipoprotein family presenting different post-translational modifications, including the presence of dimeric forms, and the characterization of truncated cystatin C, missing the first four N-terminal amino acid residues, and reported to strongly modulate the human immune defense mechanisms Our group recently reported on a proteomics-based analysis of childhood medulloblastoma tissues. Our experiments were performed on tissue specimen collected at surgery. With 17p loss being the commonest chromosomal aberrance observed in our analyzed sample set, array-CGH were employed to first distinguish for 17p-positive cases, which were further processed. 2-DE coupled to MS identification, fully-exposed the MBL-specific protein profile. Protein profiles of malignant tissues (surgically removed specimens) were compared against profiles of “normal” cerebral (non-malignant parts of surgical specimens) tissues and quantitative protein differences also determined. Bioinformatics, functional and database analyses, characterization and classification and sub-network profiling, generated information on MBL protein interactions. Our results confirmed dominance of the PI3K/mTOR signaling network for the specific childhood brain malignancy. Furthermore, 380 single-gene products were uniquely associated with the MBL phenotype. Quantitative assessment revealed 200 proteins to be up-regulated and 150 down-regulated, in MBL tissues compared to normal cerebral controls. IGF2, PI3R5, Raf-1, Rictor, MAPK1, S6K1, 4EBP1 and ELF4A, as part of the IGF system (implicating PI3K/mTOR) were deemed to be de-regulated. By the specific approach and by deciphering of the MBL proteome we showed that mTOR/PI3K signaling de-regulation is of dominant importance in 17p MBL cases [ Tumor-derived cell lines constitute a complementary alternative to study molecular aspects relevant to the tumors. Several studies have used cell lines for targeted functional studies as well as high-throughput molecular analysis under defined con- ditions to understand molecular mechanisms underlying PBTs mechanisms of tumorigenesis [ In 2015 Staal et al. performed proteomic profiling of medulloblastoma using multiple SILAC-labeled primary patient-derived tumor cell lines as an internal standard for agnostic tumor protein quantification [ This study has several aspects that grant its uniqueness; one of them being that the reported proteomics data highlight significant differences in the metabolism of MYC-amplified In 2017 Gu et al. aimed at studying the molecular mechanisms of medulloblastoma tumor metastasis, by employing experiments involving CHLA-01-MED and CHLA-01R-MED isogenic cell lines derived from the primary and metastatic tumor of the same patient diagnosed with stage IV medulloblastoma. More than 1400 significantly altered proteins between the primary and metastatic cell lines were identified by a modified deep-proteome analysis approach, while the study included quantitative profiling of the expression of >10,000 proteins. Their results included reporting on proteins that are known factors, such as placental growth factor (PLGF), LIM homeobox 1 (LHX1) and prominim 1 (PROM1), as well as the negative regulator secreted protein acidic and cysteine rich (SPARC). Additional transwell experiments and immunohistochemical analysis of clinical medulloblastoma samples implicated yes-associated protein 1 (YAP1) as a potential key factor contributing to metastasis as well as a potential novel target for therapeutic intervention to improve long-term prognosis of medulloblastoma. Overall, they identified thousands of significantly regulated proteins including several known drivers and suppressors of medulloblastoma metastasis, as well as numerous proteins with unknown function in medulloblastoma metastasis, that will be the focus of future studies [ It is important to note that incorporation of the deep-proteome analysis approach to quantitate protein expression of the two medulloblastoma isogenic cell lines, provides an ideal model for cell-based screening to investigate the potential drivers of tumor metastasis. The study, furthermore, identified thousands of significantly regulated proteins including several known drivers and suppressors of medulloblastoma metastasis, as well as numerous proteins with unknown function in medulloblastoma that will be the focus of future studies. Mice are among the most extensively-used animal models for studying human disease, in particular cancer, since they represent a controllable experimental and manageable living system, closely-mimicking disease conditions of the human organism. With regard to brain tumor studies, xenografts, are effective testing models, when it comes to analysis of characteristics of the tumor, while offering great possibilities for drug testing as well as testing of therapy protocols. These positive attributes are further complemented by the fact that proteomic experiments involving xenografts offer ease of laboratory handling and direct sample acquisition amidst experimental sessions [ Our group has recently reported on a new xenotransplantable tumor cell line, derived from a 6-year-old female patient with cerebellar medulloblastoma, as well as the complete proteome molecular characterization of a series of tumors from medulloblastoma xenotransplanted mice [ On a larger picture, characterization of patient-derived xenografts (PDXs) derived from a variety of cancers to date has included genomic sequencing, transcriptional profiling, and immunohistochemical staining [ Although not In the latest Nature article, Northcot et al., applied next-generation sequencing technologies in order to elucidate the genetic underpinnings of pediatric medulloblastoma subgroups (WNT, SHH, Group 3 and Group 4) that define distinctive transcriptional epigenetic signatures that define clinically-relevant patient subsets [ Among their findings, at the level of individual genes, novel candidate drivers were reported in each of the consensus subgroups; hotspot insertions that target A considerable molecular and clinical heterogeneity has been demonstrated in the study, suggesting that currently defined MB subgroups are likely to be an oversimplification of true molecular substructure. Their Methylation analysis of over 1250 MBs discovered new tumor subtypes enriched for specific genetic and transcriptional signatures, especially those underlying Group 3 and Group 4. Definitive de-convolution of these subtypes will enable a better understanding of the developmental origins of MB, creating a path towards the efficient modelling of each individual subtype in the correct cellular context using subtype-relevant genetic perturbations. In their latest review article, Staal et al. discuss how recent advances in quantitative proteomic techniques are now providing new insights into the functional biology of medulloblastoma tumors, as illustrated by the use of proteomics to bridge the gap between the genotype and phenotype in the case of c-MYC-amplified/associated medulloblastoma [ More than 50 studies are reviewed in the article with in-depth coverage of topics such as: protein quantification using stable isotopic labeling by amino acids in cell culture, proteomic analysis of medulloblastoma and c-MYC function, characterizing medulloblastoma using MicroRNA–proteomic networks, poteomic analysis of medulloblastoma-derived exosomes. From the studies it can be concluded that multiple post-transcriptional factors significantly restrict direct correlations between genomic aberrations and oncogenic behavior. The significance of exosomes inmodulating cancer cell behavior, either through altering transcriptional pathways or directly through proteomic signaling mechanisms is revealed. Most interestingly, the review article underlines that the emerging field of proteogenomics, or otherwise “Viewing the genomic landscape through the lens of proteomics” may provide the necessary context by identifying which genomic aberrations are translated to the functional compartment of the cell, thus helping to discern the essential genomic features of a tumor. A rapid expansion of applied quantitative proteomic capabilities is anticipated in the near future with implications for biological investigation, drug target identification, and biomarker discovery. Over the last decade, the scientific community has witnessed rapid technological advancements in deep mass spectrometry-based proteomics and high-throughput next-generation sequencing; proteogenomics, More specifically regarding PBT anticancer research, we are amidst a period where a shift in scientific direction is occurring; data from both genomic and proteomic technologies are being combined to provide fuller answers on questions regarding tumor origin and therapeutic intervention. Integrating proteomic data with complementary genomic, epigenomic and transcriptomic data in pediatric neurooncology positively yields a better mechanistic understanding of the disease processes underlying these malignancies. Towards this goal multi-center, standardized and coordinated efforts to facilitate targeted therapeutics discovery and implementation is of cardinal importance. The Authors declare that there exist no conflicts of interest with regard to the present study.