Using SC–CO2 as antisolvent, Ginkgo ginkgolides were successfully micronized. Gas antisolvent (GAS) crystallization process was efficient in a wide range of experimental conditions. Among the process parameters, temperature, pressure, solution flow rate and solute concentration have been tested.Processes that involve a supercritical fluid are of great interest for the precipitation of compounds difficult to comminute. Because of their high diffusivity, adjustable solvent power and low viscosity, supercritical fluids are very interesting solvents, allowing improved mass transfer. Many product properties that are relevant in the industrial use can be adjusted by changing the particle size and particle size distribution of the powder. This statement is valid in several fields ranging from polymers to pharmaceutical and inorganic powders. Generally, micronization is mostly carried out in industrial productions by two commonly used techniques, recrystallization from solution and comminution Therefore, it is desirable to explore alternative methods, which at least partially overcome those problems. As an alternative to the traditional techniques, various supercritical fluid-based precipitation processes have been proposed. The first known precipitation process based on supercritical technique is known as Rapid Expansion of supercritical solution (RESS) In the recent years, micronization processes, using a supercritical fluid as an antisolvent, are widely described in the literature Applying the Gas Antisolvent (GAS) crystallization process can process solids, which are insoluble in a compressed gas. For this, a solution consisting of an organic solvent, which has to be completely miscible within the compressed gas and a solid material dissolved in this solvent is sprayed through a nozzle into a high-pressure vessel filled with a compressed gas. The formation of the particles is based on two mechanisms, which take place simultaneously. On the one hand, the solvent diffuses into the compressed gas and on the other hand, the compressed gas penetrates into the droplets where it acts as an antisolvent for the dissolved material so that precipitation occurs. A distinctive characteristic of supercritical fluids is the diffusivity that can be up to two orders of magnitude higher than those of liquids. Therefore, the diffusion of the supercritical fluid into a liquid solvent can produce a fast supersaturation of solute dissolved in the liquid and its precipitation in micronized particles. According to Kröber and Teipei The objective of this investigation is to describe the influence of process parameters (pressure, temperature, flow rate and concentration) on the particle size and morphology of the  The solvent ethanol used during this work was obtained from Shanghai Analytical Reagent Factory, and it has a minimum purity of 99.9%. The material that contains 95%  GAS experiments were carried out with the following experimental conditions: range of precipitation temperature: 298–318 K range of precipitation pressure: 9–18 MPa  solution flow rate range: 0.1, 0.2 and 0.3 l/h CO Temperature, pressure, Experiments were carried at: It is clear that the crystals in Experiments were carried at: Experiments were carried out at solution flow rates of 0.1, 0.2 and 0.3 l/h, Experiments were carried at: Precipitation of We are grateful to the National Natural Science Foundation for the financial support (Project No. 29976008).