Four idealised assemblies of equally sized spherical particles are subjected to a range of macroscopic compressive principal stresses and the contact forces on individual particles are determined. For each set of contact forces the stress fields within individual particles are studied. A failure criterion for brittle materials is imposed and indicates that crushing (or rupture) occurs when the maximum contact force reaches a threshold particle strength value, irrespective of the presence and magnitude of other lesser contact forces acting on the particle and the material properties of the particle. Combining the crushing mechanism with an assembly instability mechanism enables failure surfaces to be drawn in the three-dimensional stress space. A simple spatial averaging technique has been applied to the failure surfaces to remove the effects of assembly anisotropies. Sections of the failure surfaces on π planes have similarities to those commonly used in sand modelling.Particle crushing in granular media and its influence on macroscopic stress–strain behaviour are of great interest to the geotechnical, mining and mineral engineering industries. Particle crushing alters the stiffness and strength of a soil and changes the particle size distribution. It is associated with volumetric contraction if drainage is allowed and pore pressure build-up and increased tendency for liquefaction if drainage is prevented. Such phenomena are of particular significance in establishing the driving resistance, set-up time and bearing capacity of piled foundations, pull-out resistance of anchors, interpreting the results of in-situ penetration tests, and assessing seepage through and stability of earth dams and their foundations. There have been numerous theoretical studies on the behaviour of granular media when particle crushing occurs. Many constitutive models have been developed, which treat the granular medium as a continuum (for example Other studies focus on the crushing of individual particles of which the medium is composed. For example, More recently the ideas of a fractal evolution of particle size have been adopted when introducing a breakage parameter into energy dissipation assumptions of a crushable soil treated as a continuum ( Each of these studies relies on certain statements and hidden assumptions concerning the relationship between the macroscopic stresses acting on the medium, contact forces on a particle within the medium, and the occurrence of crushing. However, the links between key model ingredients and assumptions, the strength of individual particles and the occurrence of crushing as influenced by contacts with neighbouring particles have not been clearly established. The objective of this investigation is to provide a fundamental study into the relationship between the macroscopic stresses acting on regular granular assemblies of spherical particles and crushing of individual particles within the assemblies as influenced by neighbouring particles. Stress configurations within individual particles are investigated and a failure criterion for brittle solids imposed to identify the mechanisms causing crushing. Making the further assumption that crushing is analogous to failure, macroscopic failure surfaces are drawn. For the first time the mechanisms causing failure of individual particles are linked to material strength properties and ultimately to macroscopically observed characteristics. The macroscopic stresses causing crushing and failure may become valuable ingredients in the constitutive modelling of crushable granular media. The failure surfaces may, for example, provide a cap to the frictional Mohr–Coulomb wedge. In general, granular materials of interest to engineers are not formed of spherical particles and, even with spherical particles, the randomness of the assembly readily departs from regularity. Photoelastic studies (for example, This study is limited to four idealised assemblies defined by Each spherical particle located within an assembly is subjected to discrete forces at the points of contact with neighbouring particles and the corresponding stress state within each particle will be non-uniform. However, an average stress tensor for each particle can be easily determined ( The forces at the particle contacts will be determined for the cases when the idealised assemblies are subjected to generalised macroscopic stress states, which consist of compressive loading on the three principal planes: To illustrate the use of this procedure consider the example of a simple cubic assembly in the The volume of a single spherical particle is The same procedure can be followed for the other three assemblies. Their configurations in sections through the For each assembly there is an influence of orientation of principal stress axes The stress field in a single spherical particle corresponding to the contact forces determined for each assembly ( Let Stresses at  Theoretical values for the stresses at any location on the plane containing vectors The stress Stresses in the Failure of a brittle sphere subjected to a single pair of diametrically opposite contact forces has been studied by The characteristic unconfined compressive and tensile strengths of the material are then: The criterion is a modified form of the von Mises criterion, the modification surrounding the inclusion of  In the Now a more elaborate stress field analysis will be conducted for multiple pairs of contact forces, again using the failure criterion of As a starting point it is assumed that a particle within an arrangement will rupture when Another key assumption here is that if a single particle ruptures then the entire assembly has failed. As each particle in an assembly is subjected to contact forces of identical configurations, each particle will fail simultaneously. An alternative view not employed here is that contact forces in granular media, even idealised assemblies of equally sized spheres, vary significantly across different particles. In this case contact force magnitudes may be described using a probability density function (see for example By imposing various macroscopic stress states together with these assumptions a macroscopic failure envelope in the The simple cubic assembly is considered first. The instability failure criterion is geometrically controlled and therefore independent of the magnitude of In establishing the failure surface for particle rupture it is necessary to consider the effects of superimposed stress fields for each pair of contact forces. The discovery that failure is controlled by the maximum contact force is very useful; this result is not affected by variations in contact area ( This result can be generalised to situations where multiple contact forces are present (acting normal to the particle surface) but not necessarily appearing as diametrically opposite pairs. The stress field in the vicinity of a contact force acting on a small contact area is virtually identical to that for a uniform pressure acting on a circular area on an elastic half-space ( We can now generalise our conclusion that the particle rupture failure criterion is reached when the maximum contact force is equal to that required to cause rupture of a singly loaded sphere, denoted It is important to point out that if a laboratory test is used to obtain The two sets of straight lines form equilateral triangles in the normalised The other Lode angles marking transition points can be found by reflection. For An orthogonal view of the failure surface is presented in A three-dimensional image of the overall surface is shown in The same procedure was used to establish failure surfaces for the other three assemblies. In all cases it was observed that the maximum The failure surfaces for stability and rupture in each assembly were drawn by setting the contact forces (listed in For the cubic tetrahedral assembly each surface was defined by four straight lines as illustrated in For the tetragonal sphenoidal assembly the failure surfaces for rupture and stability are defined by five straight lines, although those for For the pyramidal assembly the failure surfaces for rupture and stability are defined by six straight lines, although those for The surfaces drawn are influenced by the orientation of principal stress axes The three-dimensional asymmetry of the cubic tetrahedral, tetragonal sphenoidal and pyramidal assemblies gives rise to an asymmetry of the failure surfaces in the A simple procedure will now be followed to remove the asymmetry implied by the assumed assemblies of The three parts in Eq. The averaged failure surfaces are shown in  The crushing of individual particles within granular assemblies subjected to macroscopic stresses is controlled primarily by the largest contact force acting on a particle that produces a critical internal stress condition. For the simple case when each particle in an idealised regular assembly is subjected to an identical configuration of contact forces, assembly geometry has only an indirect influence on crushing except insofar as denser assemblies have a greater number of particle contacts and therefore generally lower contact forces for a given set of macroscopic stresses. A stress field analysis in which a failure criterion for brittle materials was imposed indicates that crushing does not directly depend either on the presence and magnitude of other lesser contact forces acting on the particle or on the material properties of the particle. By taking crushing and assembly instability as each being analogous to separate mechanisms of failure a series of macroscopic failure surfaces has been drawn. The size and shape of the surfaces are heavily dependent on a particle characteristic strength. The surfaces are also dependent on the assumed orientation of the assembly with respect to the macroscopic principal stresses, making the surfaces asymmetric about the hydrostatic axis for some assemblies. For these cases, a spatial averaging technique involving a number of simplifying assumptions may be applied to draw alternate composite failure surfaces that are symmetric about the hydrostatic axis. Sections of the averaged macroscopic failure surfaces on