Purpose
                  Both external fixation (ExFx) and open reduction and internal fixation(ORIF) were used to treat complex tibial plateau fractures, but it was not sure which one was better. So we did this meta-analysis to evaluate the outcomes of ExFx and ORIF in managing complex tibial plateau fractures.
               
                  Methods
                  Articles published before August 5, 2016 were selected from PubMed, Cochrane library, and some other electronic database. Relevant journals were also searched manually with no language limited. Two independent reviewers searched and assessed the literature. A fixed effect model was initially used for meta-analyses with RevMan 5.3.
               
                  Results
                  When compared with ORIF, cases undergoing ExFx were more likely to return to the preinjury state at the early stage, but no difference in the later period of follow-up. However, ExFx group had higher infection rate (OR 1.98, 95% CI 1.08–3.63, P = 0.03), higher venous thromboembolism rate (OR 1.56, 95% CI 0.49–4.96, P = 0.45), higher re-operation rate (OR 0.87, 95% CI 0.47–1.62, P = 0.66) and lower compartment syndrome rate (OR 0.61, 95% CI 0.12–3.22, P = 0.56), lower TKA rate (OR 0.51, 95% CI 0.20–1.34, P = 0.17). There were no statistically significant differences in the rate of deep infection, venous thromboembolism, compartment syndrome and VTE between the two groups.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Although external fixation may offer some advantages, both were acceptable strategies in managing complex tibial plateau fractures. According to our analysis results, we strongly recommend that selection of definitive fixators should base on the fracture patterns, soft-tissue condition as well as the injury stages in clinical practice. More important, further multicentered, randomized controlled studies should be implemented to get a more reliable and clear result.Tibial plateau fractures accounted for 1–2% of all the fractures, approximately 8% of them occured in elderly All kinds of treatment, from conservative treatment to surgical management, were aimed at anatomic reduction of the articular surface, restore of tibial length and alignment and prevent secondary displacement of the fracture fragments Adequate fixation and early motion were important for a good prognosis and satisfied postoperative rehabilitation, so fire-wire external fixation, like Taylor spatial frame, Ilizarov circular frame, Monticelli-Spinelli circular fixator were good alternative interventions, which allowed for early and adequate initial weight bearing without limitations related to skin condition, was considered as an ideal method to these cases, who cannot use internal fixation due to trauma of the soft tissue envelop, deficiency of bone stock, and bony comminution We performed this meta-analysis to discuss whether the external fixation (ExFx) provided better radiological and clinical outcomes and fewer post-operative complications than open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) for managing complex tibial plateau fractures. Electronic searches were performed by using PubMed, Cochrane library, Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CCTR), China national knowledge internet database, Wan Fang database without restriction for publication date and languages in August 5th, 2016. The following medical subject headings (MeSH) and terms were used to achieve broad and specific searches: “internal fixation”, “external fixation”, “complex tibial plateau fracture”, “Schataker 6”, “Schataker VI”, “Schataker 5”, “Schataker V” with the Boolean operators AND or OR. Additional records were identified through google search engine or other available databases according to the Cochrane Collaboration guidelines. A study was included in the analysis as following criteria: Studies on complex tibial plateau fractures and conducted on human subjects (RCTs or quasi-RCTs). Studies directly compared the effectiveness of ExFx and ORIF. Reporting the data of outcomes (radiological, clinical and others) and complications (OA, infections, DVT and others). The follows were excluded: reviews, isolated case reports, pathological fractures, biomechanics analyses and others. The risks of bias were assessed independently by two of the authors, with Randomized control trial were assessed by using the Cochrane Collaboration Risk of Bias Tool Datum were independently extracted from articles, tables and figures by two investigators, including the first authors, study design, the publication date, sample size, follow-up duration, interventions, outcomes as well as adverse event. Any disagreement was discussed and resolved with a third independent author. Statistical analyses were conducted with Review Manager Version 5.3 (Cochrane Collaboration, Software Update, Oxford, UK). Statistical heterogeneity was assessed using the A total of 672 studies were identified with an initial decision, this yielded 243 titles for initial screening after removal of 429 duplicates. Following initial screening and application of the inclusion/exclusion criteria, there were one RCT and eight retrospectives, a total of 11 articles were carried out on all The details about the included studies were summarized in There were 515 individuals with 519 fractures in our pooling of studies (four people suffer from double knee fractures), 239 (46%) fractures in ExFx group and the others (54%) in ORIF. Mckee et al. The other eight retrospective studies The results of meta-analysis were showed as The COST Significant shorter than ORIF group (9.9–23.4 days in COST, Only the COST Chan et al. Two studies There were 67 fractures (13% of total fractures) assessed of osteoarthritis (OA) Six studies reported the functional outcomes As Five studies (403 fractures, 78% of total) reported on subsequent knee arthroplasty (TKA) All the eight retrospective studies reported the infection cases in the follow-up period (436 fractures)  Three studies Krupp et al. Notoriously, complex tibial plateau fractures were a challenging fractures associated with severe bone and soft tissue injury, which led to high complication rates and poor clinical outcomes External fixation, which preserve soft tissues and reduce the rate of deep infection, has led many surgeons to apply it as a minimally invasive surgery to treat complex tibial plateau fractures One potential bias was that only one RCT (16% fractures) and eight retrospective studies (84% fractures) have directly compared the ExFx and ORIF in treating complex tibial plateau fractures. However, they were high quality research in which the main focus was on clinical outcomes, we also could get some valuable and reliable information. Firstly, we found almost half of the cases were. high energy trauma fracture, like motor vehicle accident or fall from a height Initially, we hoped to test the functional outcomes of the two methods, nevertheless, various evaluation system made it difficult to performance this compare. Except for the COST, which reported a higher HSS at the early stage and better ROM in ExFx group Theoretically, more minimal invasive surgery, like Taylor Spatial Frame or Ilizarov circular frame, would be more helpful for the healing. Indeed, Conserva et al. As the analysis results showed above, we could know that the ExFx group seemed had higher osteoarthritis(OA) rate, lower subsequence total knee arthroplasty(TKA) rate and lower re-operations Infections, or other advert events, in theory, was superior in open reduction and internal fixation. However, our results were against to this concept. As compared to ORIF group, the rate of infection (both superficial and deep infection), venous thromboembolism (VTE) and joint stiffness were higher in the ExFx group. Fortunately, no evidences showed there were serious infections occurred as well as the compartment syndrome, and no studies reported the Pulmonary embolism (PE). Only one RCT, small sample size, various assessment tools and short follow-up duration made it difficult to achieve our goal which was to recommend the better surgical method in treating complex tibial plateau fractures. Fortunately, the pooled studies and accumulated datum were relatively high quality, we also got some valuable conclusion. Based on our analysis results, external fixation may offer some advantages in terms of soft tissue healing. However, with the use of minimally invasive internal fixation locking plates, the superiority of external fixation was no longer obvious. The currently existing evidences didn't give us a clear recommendation on whether ExFx was better than ORIF in managing complex tibial plateau fractures, and longer duration studies on comparing ORIF and ExFx were required. Although orthopedists should be mindful the complications and the subsequence procedures after surgery, both ExFx and ORIF were acceptable strategies in managing complex tibial plateau fractures. In clinical practice, we should select proper fixator based on the fracture patterns, soft-tissue condition as well as the injury stages. Meanwhile, further multicentered, randomized controlled studies should be implemented to get a more reliable and clear result. No. None of the authors have any financial funding. Xing-wen Zhao and Xin-long Ma did the design. Xing-wen Zhao, Jian-xiong Ma, Xuan Jiang, Yin Wang, Fei Li, and Bin Lu did the data collection. Xing-wen Zhao and Jian-xiong Ma did data analysis and writing. The authors declared that they have no conflict of interest. Jian-xiong MA. Reviewregistry111. The study was supported by the