Spray forming exhibited an equiaxed grain morphology of the primary α-phase in Al–4.5 Cu alloy, round to irregular non-dendritic morphology of the primary α-phase in Al–15 Cu alloy, particulate eutectic morphology in Al–33 Cu alloy and non-faceted growth morphology of the primary CuAl2 β-phase in Al–40 Cu alloy. Development of microstructure during spray forming of Al–Cu alloys is discussed in light of the solidification behaviour of droplets and spray-deposits.The microstructural control exercised during spray forming process provides an exciting new opportunity to the development of materials with a superior physical and mechanical properties. Several benefits of this processing methodology are by now well established. Rapid solidification effects inherent in spray deposition process due to high heat exchange rate at the droplet-gas interface and also on the deposition surface ensures considerable chemical and microstructural homogeneity of the spray-deposit The evolution of microstructure during spray deposition depends in a complex way on droplet dynamics and their thermal state on the deposition surface. These are controlled by process variables employed to atomize the melt, nozzle-substrate distance and design of spray nozzles The details of the spray forming set-up are described elsewhere The composition of the alloy and the process variables employed in the present work are given in Several samples from the centre and peripheral regions of the spray-deposit were prepared for the microstructural examination. These were polished by standard metallographic procedure and etched with a Keller’s solution. The microstructural examination was carried out in a Metallux-3 optical microscope. The variation in volume fraction of solid in the spray with distance from the atomisation zone was estimated using the solidification model earlier developed based on heat flow analysis Spray deposits of Al–4.5 Cu alloy showed a characteristic equiaxed grain morphology in contrast to dendritic morphology of the primary phase of the as cast alloy The microstructural variation presented above is rationalised in light of the alloy composition and conditions of solidification of droplets during flight as well as the spray-deposit during spray forming process. Subsequent to atomisation of the melt, a wide size range of droplets are generated in the spray. The size and size distribution of droplets in the spray are represented by three characteristic droplet diameters During spray deposition droplets impinge on the deposition surface with high velocities. Consequently, cells and dendrites of semi-solid and semi-liquid droplets are disintegrated into fine debris particles. This effect is more severe in Al–15 Cu alloy due to its increased liquid fraction on the deposition surface arising from large number of droplets in the mushy state compared to Al–4.5 Cu alloy. These debris particles either remelt or coarsen by coalescence depending on the volume fraction of the liquid phase on the deposition surface In Al–4.5 Cu alloy, due to a large volume fraction of the primary phase and spatial constraint, the growing interfaces from different nucleation centres converge at common boundaries to provide an equiaxed grain morphology of the primary α-phase. However, as the volume fraction of the primary α-phase is less in Al–15 Cu alloy, its isolated debris particles can not grow to form equiaxed grain and isolated morphology of particles are retained with a particulate eutectic morphology in the inter particle regions. Similar condition also prevails during spray deposition of the eutectic and hypereutectic alloys. As a result the coupled growth of the eutectic phases becomes less favorable even in an alloy of eutectic composition. Consequently, the melt on the deposition surface solidifies with formation of a particulate eutectic morphology. The turbulent fluid flow condition of the deposition surface during spray deposition of Al–40 Cu alloy due to similar reasons modifies the growth morphology of the primary CuAl Spray deposition of Al–Cu alloy in a wide range of composition showed several microstructural variation of the primary α- and β-phases. In Al–4.5 Cu alloy, an equiaxed grain morphology is developed in contrast to dendritic growth morphology of the primary α-phase in the as cast condition. This is observed to be distinctly different from the spherical and irregular shape of the same primary α-phase in Al–15 Cu alloy. The lamellar eutectic morphology of the as cast alloy is fully modified to a particulate eutectic morphology during spray deposition of Al–33 Cu alloy. The primary CuAl