Printed circuit board (PCB) scrap has a metal content of nearly 28%, including an abundance of nonferrous metals such as copper, lead, and tin. The purity of precious metals in PCBs is more than 10 times that of content-rich minerals. Therefore, the recycling of PCBs is an important subject, not only from the viewpoint of waste treatment, but also with respect to the recovery of valuable materials. A new process was investigated which involved mechanical crushing, screening, drying and electrostatic separation via corona discharge. The results show that (1) a two-step crushing process could completely strip metals from base plates; (2) the effect of aggregation opposed the production on fine powders; (3) particle sizes between 0.6 and 1.2mm are most feasible for separation in industrial application; (4) Corona electrostatic separation is an efficient and environmental means for recovering metals from PCBs.The production of printed circuit boards (PCBs) is increasing worldwide. New technological innovation continues to accelerate the replacement of equipment leading to a significant increase of waste PCBs. The PCBs have nearly 28% metallic content Chemical and mechanical methods have been the traditional methods of recycling PCB waste. Chemical methods consist mainly of pyrolysis, combustion, hydration, and electrolysis. Pyrolysis and combustion generate atmospheric pollution through the release of dioxins and furans. Hydration and electrolysis produce large quantities of waste acid liquid during the recycling process that must be carefully disposed. Many researchers have used various mechanical methods to separate metals from PCBs, such as shape separation Corona electrostatic separation has been investigated extensively in the minerals-processing industry. Both the fundamental and practical aspects of electrode system design have been investigated and developed by Iuga et al. This study involved 40 The entire pre-process of crushing, screening and drying shown in The PCB material consisted of reinforced resin and metal components such as copper wires and joints. Because they have high hardness and tenacity, general-purpose crushing machines could not achieve effective stripping. A high-speed shearing machine was instead used as a crude crushing apparatus. The shearing action generated by the rotor and stator cutters crushed PCB plates to the small grains. A hammer grinder, specially designed for PCBs, was employed as the second crusher. The materials were stroked and milled by high-speed hammer heads. The action of the hammer heads not only removed metals completely strap from base plates, but also decreased the wrapping of wires. The 1-mm diameter of the screen holes in the hammer grinder produced an excellent grade of metals stripped from base plates The materials coming out of the hammer grinder were screened by an electric shaker. In various sieve layers, the delaminated material mix was separated according to size: All samples were heated to 100 Corona electrostatic separation is an important technique suitable for separating metals from nonmetals. A high-voltage electrostatic field is generated by a corona electrode and an additional electrode, as shown in In this study, the corona electrostatic separator was controlled as shown in   The weight content of particles in box I from samples #1 to #5 decreased with box number, as shown in Materials were feed by an electric shaking feeder in this study. The effect of aggregation was observed during the process of feeding sample #5. It was difficult to avoid electrostatic charge in the experiment, and the particle size of sample #5 was too small, hence electrostatic forces caused some powders to aggregate. Because nonmetal comprised a large proportion in the materials, two kinds of aggregate were produced, as shown in  Because of the extreme differences in the density and electrical conductivity of metallic and nonmetallic materials in the mixture, the method of separating metals and nonmetals in this study was also shown to be effective for the separation of a mixture conductive and nonconductive particles via changed pre-processing and operating parameters of the corona electrostatic separator. It has been shown in the present study that, By using a two-step crushing process, metals can be completely stripped from PCB base plates. The effect of aggregate opposed regular production on fine powders. Particle sizes between 0.6 and 1.2 Corona electrostatic separation is an efficient and environmentally friendly way for recovering metals from PCB scrap. The project is supported by Program for New Century Excellent Talents in University.