From squirrels to peccaries, seed predators are found in several mammalian orders. To access protected kernels, they use either their incisors or canines to remove seed shells but can also use their premolars and molars to break seed shells. Both behaviors can result in dental adaptations, such as a thicker enamel or round cusps. However, a large part of the literature focuses on molars, which is based on the basic assumption that seed predators commonly chew hard food or use their molars to break hard seed shells. In this study, we investigated the occurrence of molar seed breaking in a seed predator, the black-tufted capuchin monkey Sapajus apella. We conducted 65 feeding trials on captive specimens (N = 11) at the Guangzhou Zoo using soft shell (peanut) and hard shell seeds (walnut).
                  Molars biting represented 5.5% of the whole feeding repertoire. We did not find clear evidence of a difference in molar biting between peanuts and walnuts. This low occurrence of molar use suggests a preference for the use of anterior teeth when monkeys are ingesting challenging food. The occurrence of all ingesting behavior, including molar biting, was lower in males which was attributed to their larger size, stronger arms and jaw muscles. Molar shell breaking is therefore interpreted as a costly behavior, only performed when other behaviors cannot be used to open the shells. While captivity could have affected feeding behavior, the low occurrence observed in this study questions the choice of S. apella as a preferred model of seed shell breaker in paleoecological studies. Morphological traits which allow S. apella to break hard shells using its molars could have been co-opted along adaptations to chew abrasive foods.Apart from non-physical protection such as mast-fruiting or toxic compounds, seed protection comes in many mechanical forms, from the hard shell of hazelnuts to the tough pods of tamarind fruit ( Seeds and other physically challenging food items are expected to exert a strong selection, since individuals not adapted to their consumption may sustain considerable dental damage ( The fossil record presents evidence of seed predation events by rodents dating back to the Eocene (  On the one hand, every tooth class may participate in seed consumption at the pre-mastication level, even though some orders rely on a single tooth class. For instance, rodents almost exclusively use their incisors to gnaw holes into seed shells ( Among other adaptations, the molars of seed consumers are usually characterized by blunter dental elements, an increase in occlusal complexity and a thicker enamel ( Capuchin monkeys, which include platyrrhines from the genera This paper aims to investigate the occurrence of molar use during seed ingestion in the black-tufted capuchin monkey This protocol complies with the principles for the ethical treatment of non-human primates of the International Primatological Society. From May to June 2018, we performed feeding experiments on a group of 12 captive tufted capuchin monkeys ( Monkeys were fed every morning between 9:00 and 10:00 AM. This time of the day was chosen for the study because it precedes the first meal of the monkeys, ensuring that satiety would not be a confounding factor for the experiments. Monkeys were fed with two kinds of food items representing two levels of protective shell hardness. We choose walnuts in the shell to represent a challenging hard food item and peanuts in the shell to represent a non-challenging soft food item. This choice was justified by the difference in shell hardness between the two fruits, but also by their reasonable amount of hardness which minimized the risk of dental injuries. Food hardness was controlled using a HP-500 durometer from Handpi Instruments. We used a flat head to compress food samples and estimated the stiffness (in N.mm-1) from the initial slope of the stress/displacement curve and the strength (in Kg) from the maximal force required to break the shell ( A total of 65 feeding trials were conducted by giving a single food item to a selected monkey. In order to avoid interference due to food preference, only one kind of food was provided to the monkeys during the same day. Ingesting behavior was observed using focal animal sampling with no time record ( The analysis was performed in R 3.6.0 ( The black-tufted capuchin monkeys in our study showed all the expected ingesting behaviors described in the ethogram ( Capuchin monkeys also engaged in non-oral food preparation behaviors, most commonly, repeatedly hitting the food item on a substrate surface (usually tree branches or man-made wooden structures). This “hitting behavior” was particularly frequent during feeding bouts involving walnuts. Hitting was not recorded, as it never resulted in the shell being opened, but it might have weakened the shell before oral processing behaviors, which eventually resulted in the kernel being accessible. It was also performed while the monkeys were eating other non-challenging foods e.g., cut apples provided by the caretakers. When the monkeys processed walnut shells, count per trial was higher for scraping as well as incisor, canine and molar biting ( Count per trial was higher in females for scraping as well as incisor, canine and molar biting ( The ingestion of walnuts, compared to peanuts, took the monkeys a greater number of actions, except tearing for which the difference is negligible. For molar biting, the effect of food hardness might have been overestimated, likely because of the small number of reported events. Nonetheless, consuming hard food took monkeys more ingesting actions, which likely took them more time. This is consistent with results reported for another seed predator, the sooty mangabey Even so, the fact that molar biting represented less than 5% of all observed behavior when confronted to walnuts contradicts our expectation that monkeys would take advantage of their molar's hard-food breaking adaptations. The use of distal teeth, which are closer to the joint than incisors or canines, requires a larger gape ( Similar to food hardness, sex had a strong impact on the average count per trial, as females performed significantly more ingesting actions in order to process the food, regardless of their age ( In addition, molar biting and to some extent canine biting were less common in adult males ( One possible explanation is that molar biting is used by capuchin monkeys as an alternative strategy when the use of incisors is not sufficient to get through the seed's defenses. According to the results reported in this study, the anterior teeth of In contrast, black-tufted capuchins as well as other capuchin monkeys have reduced third molars, despite a position which submits them to the highest potential load (Wright et al., 2005). This contrasts with other seed-breaking primates such as mangabeys. However, it could be the byproduct of capuchins' smaller size, since breaking walnut-sized seed shells with third molars may require a larger gape ( Putting the influence of abrasive foods aside, would the reported low occurrence of hard-shell breaking using molars be insufficient to drive dental adaptation? Hard foods that are only consumed seasonally as fallback foods can exert a strong selective pressure on animals in the wild, eventually leading to the emergence of (dental) adaptations ( Our results seem to indicate that black-tufted capuchin monkeys prefer to remove seed shells using their anterior teeth rather than their posterior teeth. Monkeys would only resort to molar biting occasionally, most likely when they lacked the physical strength to ingest seeds using only their incisors. This is supported by the effect of sex on molar biting count, which was significantly higher in females. Adaptations of To conclude, this study questions the choice of tufted capuchins for inferring molar adaptation to hard-food breaking in extinct mammals, including fossil hominins. Instead, incisors and canines of tufted capuchins would better suit the inference of hard-food ingesting adaptations. The analysis of molar and premolar dental microwear is still expected to carry some signal because of shell fragments ingested by mistake, but other estimates such as enamel thickness or dental topography could be misleading without the input of anterior teeth. Numeric data and R code will be made available on Researchgate ( The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was supported by the Guangzhou Zoo and