Background
                  This study aimed to assess the whole-body vibration (WBV) exposure among large blast hole drill machine operators with regard to the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) recommended threshold values and its association with machine- and rock-related factors and workers' individual characteristics.
               
                  Methods
                  The study population included 28 drill machine operators who had worked in four opencast iron ore mines in eastern India. The study protocol comprised the following: measurements of WBV exposure [frequency weighted root mean square (RMS) acceleration (m/s2)], machine-related data (manufacturer of machine, age of machine, seat height, thickness, and rest height) collected from mine management offices, measurements of rock hardness, uniaxial compressive strength and density, and workers' characteristics via face-to-face interviews.
               
                  Results
                  More than 90% of the operators were exposed to a higher level WBV than the ISO upper limit and only 3.6% between the lower and upper limits, mainly in the vertical axis. Bivariate correlations revealed that potential predictors of total WBV exposure were: machine manufacturer (r = 0.453, p = 0.015), age of drill (r = 0.533, p = 0.003), and hardness of rock (r = 0.561, p = 0.002). The stepwise multiple regression model revealed that the potential predictors are age of operator (regression coefficient β = −0.052, standard error SE = 0.023), manufacturer (β = 1.093, SE = 0.227), rock hardness (β = 0.045, SE = 0.018), uniaxial compressive strength (β = 0.027, SE = 0.009), and density (β = –1.135, SE = 0.235).
               
                  Conclusion
                  Prevention should include using appropriate machines to handle rock hardness, rock uniaxial compressive strength and density, and seat improvement using ergonomic approaches such as including a suspension system.A feature of a machine is that when it oscillates due to external and internal forces, these are transmitted to workers' bodies through the part in contact with the vibrating surface, such as the handle of a machine (known as “hand–arm vibration”), surface of a piece of equipment, or seat of a mobile machine (known as “whole-body vibration”, WBV). Occupational exposure to WBV has generated many health concerns and related medical and socioeconomic consequences in most industrialized countries. It is recognized as a potential risk factor for musculoskeletal disorders (MSDs) in the workplace Opencast mines are associated with high level of mechanization that includes deployment of heavy earth moving machinery for production and ancillary processes. Vibration sources in opencast iron ore mines include machines such as drills, shovels, road headers, rock breakers, bulldozers, and heavy duty dumpers. The operators of such machines are therefore expected to be subjected to high exposure to WBV. Moreover, trucks and buses operate on public roads which are paved. However, the heavy machinery in mines operate under unpaved and undulated natural surfaces with the potential of high WBV exposure. In India, the number of miners regularly exposed to WBV ranges from 1.80 lakhs to 18 lakhs and they are at risk of WBV related health consequences Many factors may influence the WBV exposure level of heavy earth moving equipment operators. This can broadly be categorized into: (1) machine related factors that include vehicle type and design, age and condition of vehicle, vehicle suspension systems, seat type and design, cab layout, position and design, vehicle or machine speed, lighting and visibility; and (2) personal factors such as drivers' age, body mass index (BMI), living style, and health status. In addition to this a job-associated factor can also be thought of which includes road condition, task design, work organization, and working condition Of all the machinery in mines, the drill machines used for drilling holes for production blasts are different from others due to: (1) limited mobility; and (2) high energy operations where holes are drilled into natural strata which are very hard. In addition to machine-related and personal factors, the rock-related parameters such as hardness, uniaxial compressive strength, and density of rock significantly influence The study was conducted during May–November 2013 in four opencast iron ore mines located in eastern India. All these mines are operated by the same company and have the same infrastructure and service facilities required for large sized and fully mechanized opencast mines. These mines supply iron ore to integrated steel plants. The method of mining is top slicing with deep hole drilling and blasting. The height of the benches is 10 m in overburden and ore with bench width more than or equal to the bench height. Down-the-hole method of drilling is being practiced with 6 inch (150 mm) diameter drills. Loading was being carried out with a combination of shovel, hydraulic excavator, and front end loaders of 2.7–4.6 m The study protocol included: (1) face-to-face interview using a questionnaire to record personal factors including operator's age, weight, height, and drilling experience; (2) collection of drill machine-related data (manufacturer, age of drill machine, height of seat and seat rest, and thickness of seat pad) from mine office; (3) collection of rock samples from drilling sites and laboratory test for the hardness, uniaxial compressive strength, and density of rock; and (4) measurement of WBV exposure. The study population included all 32 blast-hole drill machine operators who were working in the four mines. Among the 32 operators selected, 28 (87.5%) operators participated in this study. The four nonparticipants were not available when the study was conducted. The age of the operator was recorded from the identity card where date of the birth is mentioned. The height of the operators was measured using an anthropometer (Martin-Type anthropolometer, Takei Scientific Instruments Co. Ltd., Niigata-City, Japan A total of 10 drill machines from two manufacturers (Atlas Copco, Pune, India and Ingersoll Rand, Bangalore, India) were used in four mines where the study was conducted. Machines of only one model of each manufacturer (Model IDM30 of Atlas Copco and Model DM30E of Ingersoll Rand) were in use in all these mines ( Both the machines are multi-pass rotary drilling rig specifically designed for production blast hole drilling. The drill bit size is 127–171 mm and it can drill up to a depth of 27.4 m with a 9.1-m drill pipe change. A four-position drill pipe changer is optionally available to achieve drilling depths up to 57.7 m. The machines generate a drill bit load force of up to 133 kN. The optional angle drilling package allows the tower to be positioned up to a maximum of 20° from the vertical in increments of 5°. The machines are crawler mounted with hydraulic top-head drive arrangement. Designed for quarrying and small mining operations, it can be easily loaded onto a trawler and moved from one location to another The drill machine operator sits inside the cabin and operates it. The seats are of rigid type without any effective suspension system ( A total of 12 rock samples were collected from drilling locations at four mines. Laboratory investigations included preparation of rock core sample of NX size (diameter = 54 mm and length to diameter ratio = 2:1) and measurement of its hardness, uniaxial compressive strength, and density, the parameters that are expected to affect the WBV exposure ( Hardness was measured by the Schmidt hammer rebound hardness test which consists of a hammer released by a spring that impacts against the rock surface through a plunger. The rebound distance of the hammer indicated the hardness (rebound hardness) of the rock    WBV exposure were measured according to the standard procedure of the ISO 2631-1 (1997) guidelines An accelerometer was connected to a precision vibration meter (Model no. Nor 133, ISO 8041). The time period for vibration measurement may have an influence on the measurements ISO 2631-1 (1997) guidelines   Individual RMS values of the accelerations measured by the precision vibration meter along the  In the present study, the exposure duration of a driller is 20 minutes. According to ISO 2631-1 The outcome variables were the vibration exposure defined by the RMS acceleration in all three axes ( The characteristics of the operators and their work conditions (machine and rock parameters) as well as their WBV exposures are presented in Most of the operators were aged 50 years and older. The mean age of the participants was 52.6 years (SD = 4.5, range: 42–60 years). The average drilling experience was 16 years (SD = 7.3, range: 5–30 years) ( The age of the drill varied from 4 years to 8.5 years ( Hardness of core samples varied from 28 to 52, suggesting wide variation of hardness of rock in the four different mines where the study was conducted. The uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) of core samples varied in the range of 9.54–53.45 MPa. Density varied from 2.2 g/cm Irrespective of personal, machine-, and rock-related factors, In addition to the higher acceleration values along the The predominant peak frequency weighted accelerations along the The RMS accelerations were generally between the ISO recommended lower and upper limits for the   Finally, in The present study demonstrates that all drill operators in iron ore mines in eastern India were exposed to a very high total vibration magnitude which is mostly due to the exposure in vertical axis. The exposure level exceeded the ISO upper limit. All the workers in these mines were thus highly vulnerable to an elevated health risk. The exposure along We failed to find an influence of all operators' features considered (weight, height, and drilling experience), except operator's age for WBV This study shows that the age of drills is not a significant risk factor for WBV while manufacturer is an important predictor. One study on highway transport truck operators also found an influence of manufacturers of trucks on WBV exposure Finally, we found that rock density and uniaxial compressive strength were potential predictors of WBV. A compact packing of minerals in rock mass makes the rock mass dense and allows smoother drilling. Thus WBV level decreases with increase of density of rock. It was therefore expected that multivariate analysis retained rock density as a potential factor negatively related with WBV. It is a fact that the stronger the rock material, the more energy is required for drilling. This is reflected in our finding that the compressive strength is a potential predictor positively related to WBV. Rock hardness was also a potential predictor for WBV exposure in The present study had some limitations and strengths. It measured WBV level experienced through summer to spring and did not encompass all seasons of the year. However, we think that the seasonal variations of WBV exposure are small. As in other studies In conclusion, the present study demonstrates that all drill operators in iron ore mines in India are highly exposed to WBV exposure and consequently to an increased risk of health problems as suggested by the ISO 2631-1 (1997) guidelines All authors have no conflicts of interest to declare. The authors wish to acknowledge the support received from the management, staff and workers of the case study mines.