Flooded packed-bed bioreactors, prepared by immobilizing four different species of acidophilic iron-oxidizing bacteria on porous glass beads, were compared for their ferric iron-generating capacities when operated in batch and continuous flow modes over a period of up to 9 months, using a ferrous iron-rich synthetic liquor and acid mine drainage (AMD) water. The bacteria used were strains of Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans, Leptospirillum ferrooxidans, a Ferrimicrobium-like isolate (TSTR) and a novel Betaproteobacterium (isolate PSTR), which were all isolated from relatively low-temperature mine waters. Three of the bacteria used were chemoautotrophs, while the Ferrimicrobium isolate was an obligate heterotroph. Greater biomass yields achievable with the Ferrimicrobium isolate resulted in greater iron oxidation efficiency in the newly commissioned bioreactor containing this bacterium, though long-term batch testing with organic carbon-free solution resulted in similar maximum iron oxidation rates in all four bioreactors. Two of the bioreactors (those containing immobilized L. ferrooxidans and Ferrimicrobium TSTR) were able to generate significantly lower concentrations of ferrous iron than the others when operated in batch mode. In contrast, when operated as continuous flow systems, the bioreactor containing immobilized PSTR was superior to the other three when challenged with either synthetic or actual AMD at high flow rates. The least effective bacterium overall was At. ferrooxidans, which has previously been the only iron-oxidizer used in the majority of reports describing ferric iron-generating bioreactors. The results of these experiments showed that different species of iron-oxidizing acidophiles have varying capacities to oxidize ferrous iron when immobilized in packed-bed bioreactors, and that novel isolates may be superior to well-known species.Iron, the most abundant heavy metal in the lithosphere, can exist in two ionic forms, ferrous iron (iron (II)) and ferric iron (iron (III)), which have very different solubility and stability properties Soluble ferric iron is a powerful oxidizing agent, and is used commercially for a number of purposes, one of which is to accelerate the dissolution of sulfide minerals to enhance metal extraction and recovery (“biomining” A second scenario in which iron-oxidizing bioreactors have potential application is in the remediation of acidic mine waters. Abiotic oxidation of ferrous iron, which is often the dominant soluble metal present in waters draining working and abandoned metal and coal mines, proceeds very slowly in acidic (pH<3.5) mine waters Most reports of ferric iron-generating bioreactors have focused solely on Here, we report the comparative performances of flooded packed-bed bioreactors containing four different species of iron-oxidizing acidophiles, immobilized onto a single-solid support matrix (porous glass beads), and operated in batch and continuous flow modes. The four species of iron-oxidizing bacteria used were all originally isolated from relatively low-temperature mine waters, as the bioreactors were developed, primarily, for the purpose of remediating acid mine drainage (AMD) in temperate zones. These were: (i) Bacteria (i)–(iii) are autotrophic, while The PSTR isolate (iii) has yet to be fully characterized, although it is known to be an obligate autotroph that appears to use only ferrous iron as an energy source, and it is more acid-sensitive than both Porous beads, obtained from Poraver Dennert GmbH, Germany were used as the support matrix for the iron-oxidizing acidophiles. These beads, which are manufactured from recycled glass, have been used successfully as support matrices for sulfate-reducing bacteria in packed-bed bioreactors Two acidic, ferrous iron-containing liquors (one a synthetic “mine water”, and the other actual AMD) were used to test iron oxidation at low pH by the bioreactors. The synthetic liquor (“synAMD”) contained 5 The four bioreactor systems were run initially in batch mode with synAMD as the test liquor. Changes in concentrations of ferrous iron with time were recorded and, once the ferrous iron had been fully oxidized, the spent liquor was drained from the lowest point of the bioreactor and replenished with fresh synAMD. The total number of sequential batch mode tests of the bioreactors ranged from 132 (for Once the time required to oxidize ∼90% of the ferrous iron present in the synAMD had equilibrated at about 30 The integrity of each of the packed-bed bioreactors (i.e. whether single-culture status had been maintained during the course of the experiments) was assessed at the end of the experiment by plating liquid effluents (100 Liquid pH and redox potentials (corrected relative to a standard hydrogen reference electrode) were measured using a “rapid renew” combination glass electrode (VWR, UK) and a platinum combination redox electrode (Mettler-Toledo. Columbus. OH), respectively, both coupled to a Accumet pH/redox meter 50. Ferrous iron concentrations were measured using the ferrozine colorimetric technique Typical ferrous iron oxidation kinetics observed in the packed-bed bioreactors are illustrated in The half-life of ferrous iron present in synAMD declined with each bioreactor as the number of batch runs increased and this trend was far more pronounced with the three autotrophic iron-oxidizers than with the heterotroph, It was noted that residual concentrations of ferrous iron present after extended time periods varied between the bioreactors. To quantify these differences, residual ferrous iron concentrations present after the test liquor (synAMD) had been oxidized for 30 Under continuous flow conditions, greater differences between the performances of the four packed-bed bioreactors were observed as the flow rates and type of influent liquor (synAMD or fsAMD) were changed. As anticipated, the percentage of ferrous iron oxidized at any set time decreased as the flow rate (dilution rate) increased, although the rate of decline differed between the bioreactors ( Two different flow rates were used to monitor the performances of the bioreactors when challenged with actual (filter-sterilized) mine water. At the lower flow rate (396 Iron oxidation in the bioreactors was indicated by a color change of the synAMD or fsAMD, with the ferric iron-rich effluent liquors being orange-colored in contrast to the colorless feed liquors. Analysis of the influent and effluent liquors showed, however, that very little of the oxidized iron was retained in the bioreactors, and that no detectable changes in concentrations of the other major transition metals in Mynydd Parys AMD (zinc, copper and manganese) were apparent in the processed mine water (data not shown). The pH of the oxidized fsAMD was 2.4–2.5, and no hydrolysis of the ferric iron was detected in effluent waters held at ca. 20 A single-batch mode test was carried out following continuous flow operation. Rates of ferrous iron oxidation were found to have increased significantly with all four bioreactors compared to the first phase of testing in batch mode ( Colony forms and corresponding cell morphologies representative of the isolates used to inoculate the bioreactors were obtained from effluent liquors plated onto selective solid media from the post-continuous flow batch mode experiment (corresponding to between 3 and 9 months after the initial commissioning of the bioreactors). Despite the fact that sterile test liquors (synAMD and fsAMD) were used exclusively, it was not possible to operate the bioreactors as aseptic systems throughout the protracted time course of the experiments. However, although some fungal colonies grew from the inocula of all four bioreactors, there appeared to be no cross-over of iron-oxidizing bacteria from one bioreactor to another. The single exception to this was the The packed-bed bioreactors developed in the present study were all effective at oxidizing ferrous iron present in both an acidic iron-rich synthetic liquor and in a complex, polymetallic mine drainage water. The primary objective of the present work was to develop a system for mine water remediation rather than for application in mineral processing, and, therefore, experiments were conducted at relatively low temperatures and low iron concentrations, and at relatively high pH (⩾2.0). Since ferric iron is more readily removed from solution (e.g. as a hydroxide) than ferrous iron, oxidation, which is necessarily biological in acidic waters, is the key reaction in accelerating precipitation of iron in mine waters. Since some acidophiles are able to use the energy derived from oxidizing ferrous iron to support growth, the use of bioreactors containing immobilized iron-oxidizers is essentially a passive technology, and has the considerable advantage over an alternative approach (the use of aerobic wetlands While other reports have described the effects of different support materials and immobilizing techniques (e.g. such as surface biofilms or embedded cells in synthetic gels) on improving the iron oxidation efficiency of Two approaches to immobilize Results from batch mode tests showed broadly similar performances of the four bioreactors in terms of the maximum rates of iron oxidation that were achieved. However, there were differences both in the calculated half-lives of ferrous iron in the bioreactors, and in the residual concentrations of ferrous iron present after protracted treatment of synAMD. The substrate (ferrous iron) affinity of The performances of the bioreactors when operated in continuous flow mode contrasted with results obtained in batch mode operation, in that the PSTR reactor was the most effective at higher flow rates, whether the influent liquor was synAMD or fsAMD. This phenomenon was probably related to the noted characteristic of this isolate to form streamer/biofilm growths, which would have been less subject to erosion and washout than the other three iron-oxidizing bacteria. Another interesting observation was the contrasting performance of the The much faster rates of ferrous iron oxidation (by almost 100% in some cases) recorded in the bioreactors operated in batch mode, following testing in continuous flow, was probably due to the enhanced biofilm development during the latter. Under a continuous flow regime, there would be greater selective pressure for bacteria attached to the beads (in biofilms), since unattached or loosely attached bacteria would have been washed out of the reactors. The enhanced performance in each case is therefore likely to have been due to greater biomass retention in the reactors promoted by the continuous flow cycles, rather than to improvement by strain selection. These experiments have shown that different iron-oxidizing acidophiles have varying capacities to oxidize ferrous iron when immobilized in packed-bed bioreactors. Interestingly, the least effective bacterium overall was OFR is grateful to the Natural Environment Research Council (UK) and Paques b.v. (The Netherlands) for the provision of an industrial CASE research studentship (NER/S/C/2003/11752), and DBJ is grateful to the Royal Society (UK) for the provision of an Industrial Fellowship.