The first consecutive 51 humeral shaft fractures treated with the Russell–Taylor intramedullary nail at Glasgow Royal Infirmary were reviewed in a retrospective study. There were eight iatrogenic nerve injuries- three to the radial nerve which settled spontaneously and five to the lateral cutaneous nerve of forearm of which three have failed to recover completely. The authors feel that the insertion of the distal interlocking screw in the antero-posterior direction puts this nerve at risk. We believe that iatrogenic injury to the lateral cutaneous nerve of forearm during humeral nailing has not been previously reported.The majority of humeral shaft fractures can be treated by conservative means without complication Closed intramedullary nailing theoretically avoids these problems and the use of interlocking screws has helped reduce initial difficulties with rotational control and a tendency of the unlocked nails to back out The Russell–Taylor nail used in this series uses single proximal and distal locking screws. Insertion can be made in either an antegrade or retrograde fashion The case records and radiographs of 50 patients with 51 fractures were examined. All had been treated at the Orthopaedic and Trauma Unit, Glasgow Royal Infirmary with the Russell–Taylor interlocked humeral nail between November 1991 and October 1995. Thirty-one of the 36 patients who had antegrade nailing of non-pathological fractures were subsequently interviewed and examined and nerve injuries highlighted by the case records were confirmed at this time. Fifty patients were treated with 51 Russell–Taylor interlocked nails with one patient undergoing treatment for bilateral pathological fractures. The mean age of the patients was 55.9 years (range 19–86 years) with an equal sex bias. The main indication for surgery was severe displacement or comminution of the fracture (see Reduction and nail insertion was achieved closed in all but seven cases of which three had established non-union. One patient had a large pathological lesion that was opened to allow packing of the defect with polymethylmethacrylate cement. All nails were inserted in an antegrade manner due to concerns about iatrogenic fracture around the olecranon fossa associated with retrograde insertion. The nails were locked proximally and distally in the majority of patients (44). Difficulties with engagement of the interlocking screws were encountered in six patients. Of these one proximal and one distal screw failed to engage the nail completely and another distal screw failed to engage the posterior cortex. Union was achieved in all fractures treated primarily by nailing at a mean of 16.8 weeks (range 5–40 weeks). A significant and worrying number of patients (eight) were noted to have signs of nerve injury in the immediate post-operative period of presumed iatrogenic origin. Three patients with radial nerve injuries recovered spontaneously a few weeks following surgery. Three of the five patients with injuries to the lateral cutaneous nerve of forearm had persistent symptoms at a mean of 18 months follow up (range 16–22). Injuries to the radial nerve were associated with pathological distal third of humerus fractures in two patients, one of whom required open reduction and bone cement for an extensively lytic lesion. The other patient had undergone open reduction of a non-union in the mid-diaphysis. All of the five injuries to the lateral cutaneous nerve of forearm were in patients with acute injuries who had undergone apparently uncomplicated closed nailing of their non-pathological fractures. Two were segmental fractures but the other three either simple or with minimal comminution. The antegrade insertion of intramedullary nails in the treatment of humeral shaft fractures is well established. Iatrogenic nerve injury associated with plate fixation techniques is well described but to date little mention has been made of this complication associated with intramedullary nailing. Cadaver studies carried out in this unit have shown that in 58% of dissections the lateral cutaneous nerve of forearm lay at a point which was less than 3