The martensitic reversion is known to be effective in refining the grain size of metastable austenitic stainless steels. However, severe cold rolling reductions are generally required for this process. In this study, the influence of the degree of prior cold rolling and subsequent annealing on the microstructure and mechanical properties of a metastable high-Mn austenitic steel was investigated. Three cold rolling reductions of 20%, 35% and 50% were applied at ambient temperature before the annealing at 700°C for the durations of 10, 100 and 1000s. Microstructures were examined by optical, scanning and transmission electron microscopes. Mechanical properties were measured by hardness and tensile tests. The microstructure changes were followed by magnetic measurements and X-ray diffraction. It was shown that a relatively small reduction of 35% and 100s annealing could provide efficient grain refinement (the average size of 0.5µm) and accordingly an outstanding combination of strength-ductility properties with the yield strength 890MPa, tensile strength 1340MPa and elongation 41% was achieved. The occurrence of martensite reversion and recrystallization processes with different contributions in dependence on degree of prior deformation before annealing was discussed.It is well established in numerous investigations that the reversion of strain-induced α′-martensite (SIM) to austenite results in significant refinement of the austenite grain size Lower thickness reductions (e.g., 45–77%) have been applied by Rajasekhara et al. The martensitic reversion can be diffusional or shear type. In the former, austenite grains nucleate and grow in the deformed martensite, and in the latter type, martensite transforms by shear to austenite that recrystallizes later The influence of cold rolling reduction can be seen in the morphology of SIM. At small reductions (≈40–50%), martensite is lath-like and the reverted austenite nucleates at lath boundaries in the form of thin plates resulting in the formation of laths and blocks of austenite. Thus, the reverted austenite tends to inherit the morphological characteristics from lath martensite even in a diffusional reversion. At high reductions (90% and 77% in Takaki et al.'s Although applications of lower reductions have succeeded reasonably in grain refinement of Fe–Cr–Ni and Fe–Cr–Mn–low Ni austenitic alloys, uncertainties in Ni-price demand extending these studies towards Ni-free grades. In a previous paper, Behjati et al. In this study, hot-rolled (HR) steel sheets were provided with a thickness range of 1.25 to 2 Volume fraction of ferromagnetic SIM in dependence on cold rolling reduction was measured magnetically using a Feritscope instrument (Fischer Technology model FMP30), as in a previous study The X-ray diffraction (XRD) was used to follow the evolution of the phases, especially the ε-martensite. For the sake of quantitative estimation of the phase fractions, the direct comparison method was applied. This method is based on the principal that the total integrated intensity of all diffraction peaks for each phase in a mixture is proportional to the volume fraction of that phase. The volume fraction of austenite, ε-martensite and SIM can be derived from numerous peaks as An optical microscope (OM; CX51 Olympus) was employed to study microstructure of the coarse grain samples using both the Nomarski and normal modes. The grain size was measured using the intercept method. Specimens for OM and XRD study were first electrolytically polished using a mixed solution containing 60 TEM was carried out for detail analysis of microstructures using a JEOL, JEM-2100F microscope equipped with an energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS), operating at 200 For more detailed analysis of the microstructures, the samples were characterized by a field-emission scanning electron microscope (FEG-SEM; Carl Zeiss Ultraplus) with a backscatter electron diffraction (EBSD) unit. An accelerating voltage of 20 Flat tensile specimens were cut from the annealed sheets using the electron discharge machining (EDM) method, according to the standard technique (ASTM E8, the gauge length 25  According to the results of Feritscope measurements, the volume fraction of SIM increases with the degree of cold deformation, being 21%, 60% and 77% in the 20%CR, 35%CR and 50%CR samples, respectively. However, in addition to RA and SIM, the microstructures contained ε-martensite, too. It cannot be recorded by a Feritscope, hence, XRD was applied to estimate the phase fractions. The reversion of SIM in the course of annealing at 700 Examples of microstructures of the samples, cold-rolled and then annealed at 700   An EBSD orientation image and a phase map are displayed in The progress of microstructure evolution and the related processes can be followed by hardness measurements, even though the interpretation of the hardness data may be difficult in the instance of several phases and active processes like here. We have to realize that upon cooling we get a considerable amount of ε-martensite (see Engineering stress–strain curves of the studied steels are plotted in  In the present study, in accordance with earlier observations for Fe–Mn–C alloys Previous studies concerning the reversion of ε-martensite report a considerably lower temperature range in comparison with that of α′-martensite reversion and austenite recrystallization. For instance, Gauzzi and Montanari The difference in the annealing response of SIM and strain-hardened RA has been reported in some earlier studies. Padilha et al. Recrystallization of the ASSs depends on numerous factors such as the steel type, the heat treatments that the steel might have been submitted before cold working, the quantity, mode, temperature and strain rate at cold working, as well as the heating rate and holding time at the annealing temperature. Due to the large number of variables and the complexity of the phenomena involved, it is not easy to specify a single recrystallization temperature for an ASS. However, the fast kinetics of recrystallization in cold-rolled Fe–Mn alloys and high-Mn austenitic steels has been reported in some earlier studies. Bracke et al. Based on the above discussion, the influence of prior cold rolling on the progress of final microstructure in the present steel can be explained as follows. Annealing of the 20% cold-rolled RA at 700 It is noteworthy that the presence of grains in the recovered stage still containing considerable density of dislocations and LAGBs in the microstructure promotes the strength through dislocation hardening effect. Consequently, for example, the 35%CR-700 Another important microstructural feature of the studied samples is the occurrence of ε-martensite. Regarding the larger Peierls stress for non-basal slip in the HCP (hexagonal close packed) structure and accordingly obstructing dislocations motion in the FCC (face centered cubic) matrix In this work, the influence of the degree of cold rolling reduction and annealing treatment on microstructure and mechanical properties of a metastable Fe–16Mn–4Cr–0.1C austenitic steel was investigated. It was found that: In the 20%, 35% and 50% cold rolled steels, containing 21%, 60% and 77% of α′-martensite, respectively, complete martensitic reversion takes place within 100 At 700 A considerable non-uniform grain size is formed due to reversion and recrystallization processes. In the structure, nano/ultrafine grains are from martensite reversion and larger grains from recrystallization of retained austenite. The average grain size of 35%CR and 50%CR samples after annealing at 700 The 35%CR steel annealed at 700 Intensive grain refinement, occurrence of recovered austenite grains and a high fraction of ε-martensite are the main strengthening mechanisms in the reversion treated steel.