In the three years since the Vision for Space Exploration announcement, NASA has engaged other space agencies in informal discussions on goals, capabilities, and timelines for future space exploration, particularly focused on the Moon. Until recently, most of these multilateral discussions have been organized as one-time activities, occurring as conferences, workshops, and informal meetings. A multilateral international collaboration mechanism for space exploration can formalize the series of informal discussions that have occurred among the space agency community in the past three years. A more formal mechanism can give structure and regularity to nascent international collaboration efforts. This research designs an international collaboration mechanism by copying successful features from existing international collaboration mechanisms. The mechanism also meets a set of desirable criteria for participation by all the major space powers. These criteria were developed by synthesizing information from interviews of space agency and government representatives.In the three years since the Vision for Space Exploration announcement, NASA has engaged other space agencies in informal discussions on goals, capabilities, and timelines for future space exploration, particularly focused on the Moon. Until recently, most of these multilateral discussions have been organized as one-time activities, occurring as conferences, workshops, and informal meetings. Thus far, loose and informal discussions have sufficed because no agency, including NASA, had defined its goals for going to the Moon nor developed an architecture to support those goals. This situation, however, is changing. Throughout 2006, a group of 14 space agencies, led by NASA, worked to develop a Global Exploration Strategy. The core component of the Global Exploration Strategy is a framework document outlining the rationale for space exploration as a global community and why the Moon is a critical first step. Other components of the Global Exploration Strategy include a set of Lunar Exploration Themes and Objectives that answer the questions, “Why explore the Moon?” and “What can we accomplish through lunar exploration?” Using the Global Exploration Strategy as a starting point, NASA during the second half of 2006 defined its priorities for lunar exploration and an architecture baseline for accomplishing these goals. While NASA was the first to develop such plans, unveiling them at the 2nd Space Exploration Conference in December 2006, other agencies are following suit; starting in 2007 many will develop their own proposals for exploring the Moon and other destinations. As more nations create plans for lunar exploration and, hopefully, gain political and programmatic support for their exploration programs, international collaboration for space exploration should increase. The reasons for international collaboration are well known; collaboration can increase the total resource level available, eliminate duplication of efforts, and improve international relationships, among other things. But international collaboration, especially multilateral, does not happen by accident. International collaboration must be initiated by at least one player and can be facilitated by collaboration mechanisms to promote, facilitate, and govern international interactions. To this end, this paper proposes a multilateral international collaboration mechanism to formalize the series of informal discussions that have occurred among the space agency community in the past three years. A more formal mechanism can give structure and regularity to nascent international collaboration efforts. The design of the proposed mechanism draws from the successful features of many existing international collaboration mechanisms and meets a set of desirable criteria for participation by all the major space powers. These criteria were developed by synthesizing information obtained in interviews of space agency and government representatives. For the purpose of this paper, “international collaboration” is used as a general term to mean all types of interactions between space agencies or nations. Interactions could be as loose as coordination of independent missions and roadmaps or as tight as cooperation on specific missions and projects. Where on this “collaboration scale” our mechanism will fall is, in part, determined by the specific criteria outlined here. This paper has two major sections. The first outlines the desirable criteria or features that the major space powers would like the proposed mechanism to have, in order for their space agency to participate. This section first describes the US position, as the US political and programmatic support for exploration is sufficiently unique to warrant a separate section. The paper then describes a “global” position that integrates the comments of all the other governments and agencies contacted for this study. The second section of the paper first describes existing international collaboration mechanisms and features of each that could be copied for the proposed mechanism, to meet the national criteria. The second section concludes by integrating these results and outlining a proposed international collaboration mechanism. The United States and many space-faring nations around the world are currently considering if and how they could be involved in an international collaboration mechanism for space exploration. Currently, no nation has an official position on what the desirable mechanism criteria would need to be in order for it to join. For this section of the paper, therefore, unofficial positions for the United States and other nations are constructed by integrating official government statements and interview responses from individuals representing either space agencies or national governments. The information contained here, while perhaps reflective of what a national position could be, is strongly influenced by the opinion of the interviewees and not intended to substitute for national policy. Additionally, the criteria put forth are only a summation and integration of the data gathered, and may not be the best possible criteria for encouraging fruitful international collaboration. The United States is the only nation that currently has a political mandate to pursue human space exploration beyond low Earth orbit. As such, NASA enjoys a large budget, relative to other space agencies, and NASA is actively developing plans to initiate a new era of manned space exploration with a return to the Moon. NASA has also been actively engaged in discussions of potential international collaboration. Thus far these discussions have been informal and have preceded the release of detailed plans or architectures. Moving forward, the United States will engage in international collaboration on space exploration if the mechanism meets the 10 criteria below. The criteria are not listed in order of importance; they are simply grouped for flow of ideas. All 10 criteria should be met, though likely there will be room to negotiate if necessary. These criteria were developed by synthesizing information from interviews with space experts at NASA and the White House, statements from US policies, such as the Vision for Space Exploration and the 2006 US National Space Policy, and speeches by high-ranking officials, including President Bush, White House Science Advisor John Marburger, and NASA Administrator Mike Griffin  First and foremost, any international collaboration must protect and advance US interests. Likewise, the venue should protect and advance the interests of US allies, wherever possible. The United States will seek international collaboration, but not at all costs. This criterion requires that the objectives and principles of the mechanism be in line with US policy and plans. For example, any mechanism must include exploration to the Moon as part of its mandate, as this is one centerpiece of current US space policy. The mechanism must also enable NASA to meet its program objectives, while advancing general US scientific, security, and economic interests. In other words, the United States will not participate in something simply to promote good will among nations (though, of course, this is part of US security interests). The mechanism must actively enable the United States to achieve its national objectives. Enablers could be specific international cooperation agreements to jointly carry out a particular mission, legal mechanisms that ensure resource utilization rights, or exploration participation and investment by a larger group of nations than the traditional space powers, among other things.  The collaboration mechanism must define and maintain a clear scope or set of objectives toward which the participants are working. Looking at current exploration policies from the world's space-faring nations, there are a wide variety of options for the mechanism's scope. The options range from pure robotic missions to other planets or near-earth objects to manned missions to the Moon or Mars. Any or all of these missions could be encompassed by a sufficiently well-defined scope. What the scope encompasses is not as important, so long as it is clearly defined and maintained over time.  While the United States is certainly interested in collaborations with other countries, it will not engage at a loss to its independence in certain key areas. In this context, independence means two things. First, the United States must retain its independence of decision. At this stage, and probably for the foreseeable future, the United States will not join any collaboration forum that makes programmatic or budgetary decisions by committee. This means that the collaboration mechanism must either not make any programmatic or budgetary decisions, or that any decisions that are made must be treated as non-binding recommendations. This aspect of the criterion is in line with criterion #1. By maintaining its ability to make independent decisions, the United States will inherently have the control to follow its strategic interests, even if they change over time. Second, the United States must retain its freedom of action. The United States is not interested in becoming bound by an international agreement that will commit it to a specific course of action for many years in the future. The United States must be able to pursue its own programs, and change its plans and policies as conditions warrant, irrespective of what other nations want to do. Similarly, other nations must be able to change their plans and policies without totally disrupting those of the United States. In other words, the United States is not ready to agree to another International Space Station-type agreement that ties its hands (and budget) for 25 years or more.  The United States will not engage in international collaboration with any and all nations that are interested in space exploration. The United States must be able to control which nations (or representative space agencies) can become members of the collaboration mechanism. There are two components to this control. First, there must be a set of criteria that interested nations or agencies must meet in order for them to be considered for membership. This would have to include a criterion that potential members have at least modest budgets allocated for exploration activities. Every participant must have “skin in the game.” An additional criterion could be a certain level of technological capability. Every participant must be able to contribute something that furthers the overarching goals. These types of objective criteria ensure that all participants are, in a broad sense, equivalent. Second, existing participants must be able to approve or deny new membership requests. United States action in space does contribute to and must conform to US foreign policy. Even if the mechanism is non-binding (as described in #3), simply the fact that the United States is a member of the mechanism implies a foreign policy alignment with other members. Therefore, all members of the mechanism must be acceptable partners from a foreign policy perspective, in addition to meeting the criteria outlined above. One option for meeting this criterion would be that all membership requests must be approved by a consensus of existing members. This allows the United States to exercise a veto option on states it does not want to participate in the mechanism.  The United States will not provide any other nation with funds in exchange for systems or services. Participants will be expected to fund their own capabilities and, if they so choose, share them via a non-monetary exchange. This criterion ties closely to the previous one by implying that a nation must invest at a certain level in order to be involved in the collaboration mechanism. In addition to ensuring that all nations provide contributing capability, it means that only those with a vested interest in program success will play a role in discussions. Any participant given a seat at the table and a voice in the forum will represent an actual exploration program with a non-zero budget.  In areas where the United States maintains a strategic technology advantage, it will not share detailed technical information with all of its potential partners. This criterion has ramifications for the types of discussions that participants in the collaboration mechanism can have as a whole group. While the United States may be willing to engage in more detailed technical discussions with its traditional NATO or ISS partners, it is unlikely to share with other partners information at any significant level of technical detail. Unless the United States asks its non-traditional partners to “leave the room” during technical discussions or exercises firm control over group membership (as described in #4), the mechanism cannot serve as a cooperation framework for specific projects. Any direct cooperation where two or more agencies are contributing to the same system must be handled by additional bilateral or multilateral cooperation agreements.  The actors participating in space exploration extend beyond national space agencies. Two groups in particular, the private sector and other coordination bodies, should be able to participate in the collaboration mechanism, though not necessarily as “members” meeting the criterion outlined in #3. Traditional aerospace contractors and emerging entrepreneurs will have an interest in the discussions of the national space agencies so that they can understand what capabilities they could provide in both the short and long term. A key charge of the Vision for Space Exploration is to enable these and other commercial firms. Allowing the private sector to listen to discussions and contribute, when appropriate, can facilitate their future success. Other coordination bodies, such as existing space exploration working groups like the Mars Exploration Program Analysis Group or existing international space coordination and regulatory bodies such as the International Telecommunications Union, have both the expertise and international networks that can provide valuable insight, recommendations, and credibility for exploration. These groups could be utilized as working groups for the mechanism, instead of convening fresh groups of experts each time recommendations are needed. The collaboration mechanism therefore must be flexible enough to interface with other groups and, in the case of the international coordination and analysis groups, do so in a way that does not encroach on their established areas of expertise. While the way the mechanism interfaces with different groups may vary, the key criterion is the flexibility to engage outside groups however is most useful.  At this point in time, the United States does not want to sign an agreement that is at the level of a treaty or other government-to-government agreement. An agreement at these high levels would take years to negotiate and sign and not allow for sufficient flexibility in the early stages. Instead, an agreement at the agency or program level agreement would be easiest to implement and most appropriate during these early stages. This criterion, of course, does not mean that actors above the agency level will not need to be involved in agreeing to a mechanism. If NASA wants to become part of an international collaboration mechanism, White House and Department of State staff must concur because of the foreign policy implications inherent in collaboration on space exploration. If NASA as an agency and representative of the US government is a member of a mechanism, other parts of the government must approve.  A key part of the Vision is that space exploration be sustainable over time. Having a more flexible mechanism will allow it to be modified as the types of exploration activities change. If nations, including the United States, change their plans, a flexible mechanism could be reworked to take changes into account. Flexibility also means that the mechanism will not be too organizationally heavy. The United States does not want international collaboration to be burdened by unnecessary rules and bureaucracy. At the same time, the mechanism must have enough structure so that it is real enough and useful enough to ensure members participate in mechanism activities and sustain them over time. At minimum, this criterion implies a regular schedule of meetings and some type of terms of reference, and could imply a standing secretariat is maintained.  Finally, all of the criteria discussed above will change over time, as exploration plans solidify and nations begin developing hardware. If the United States becomes involved in a global exploration architecture where it relies on other nations to provide capabilities (even augmented capabilities such as science labs), it will want to bind participants to better ensure they deliver on their commitments. Any multilateral binding via the mechanism will not occur for at least 5–10 years, beginning once national priorities and national programs are identified, and becoming critical once money is being spent and metal is being cut. Therefore, the other nine criteria will serve as the foundation for designing an international collaboration mechanism that the United States would agree to in the near future. This mechanism will be designed under the assumption that it is an initial structure that will be most useful for the early stages of exploration, particularly the planning and architecture baselining stages. The mechanism will also be designed such that it may evolve over time toward a different type of mechanism suggested by this final criterion. The space agencies of the rest of the world do not yet enjoy the same political support for space exploration, particularly human exploration, as does NASA. Planning for exploration is, in many space agencies, still in its infancy, if it has begun at all. Therefore, the criteria described below are generally not official positions of the different potential participants in space exploration, but rather represent the personal views of the individual interviewed. Like the US criteria, the 10 criteria below would have to be reviewed with changes in national leadership and space policy. Again, the criteria are grouped by flow and do not reflect any prioritization. To generate this set of criteria, interview data from official and unofficial representatives of other space-faring nations and agencies were synergized to create a coherent set of ideas. In many cases, representatives from many different nations offered the same ideas, and so it was relatively easy to combine the data from different sources into one set of criteria. Each nation, however, will likely have its individual priorities during negotiations. The individuals interviewed in this section were the official Washington, DC representatives for the Canadian Space Agency (CSA), European Space Agency (ESA), French National Space Agency (CNES), German Aerospace Centre (DLR), Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO), and Japanese Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA). In addition, general science and technology counselors representing Italy and Russia were interviewed. Finally, a visiting scholar from the Chinese National Space Agency (CNSA), currently at the George Washington University Space Policy Institute, was interviewed for an unofficial perspective on China. Additional research for this section includes papers from the 2005 and 2006 International Astronautical Congresses, presentations from the series of “Spineto” workshops (I and II), findings from the series of AIAA workshops on international cooperation for space exploration, and other relevant speeches and presentations Before laying out the 10 criteria for participation, first there are two preconditions that many space agencies must address before they can consider participation in an international collaboration mechanism.  As mentioned, other space agencies do not enjoy the same national political backing for exploration that NASA does. Before being able to fully engage in collaboration on exploration, other space agencies must receive signals from their political and policy leaders to proceed. Some individuals suggested that an invitation by the US President could increase the likelihood of a commitment by their political leaders, but recognized that may not happen. Europe in particular must decide on its human space flight policy. While Europe does enjoy political support for unmanned planetary exploration, its ability to engage in lunar exploration depends on what its human space flight capabilities are. Europe must decide whether to partner with Russia and/or Japan to develop a parallel capability to the US Crew Exploration Vehicle and associated launch systems. Included in this decision is whether Europe wants to assure access to fly European astronauts.  Many space agencies are considering altering their space programs and plans in order to participate in the lunar exploration plan initiated by the United States. Many space agencies did not previously have plans to explore the Moon, but instead were focused on Mars and other destinations in the solar system. Refocusing their efforts to the Moon will require a shift in policy. In order for space agencies to fully commit to this change in focus, they must be assured that the United States is not going to change its plans following the presidential election of 2008. Space agencies do not want to invest resources in lunar exploration only to find that the major partner, the United States, is no longer interested. In additions, space agencies are waiting to see what the United States’ post-2010 International Space Station policy will be. While they currently feel assured that the United States will meet its obligations to complete assembly of the station, they are not sure whether the United States plans to commit resources to ISS utilization. If other space agencies had to assume responsibility for the whole ISS utilization budget, they likely would not have enough funds to also pursue new lunar exploration programs.   This criterion is virtually identical to that described in the US section. Again, key areas of independence for other space agencies are independence of decision and independence of action. Other space agencies described independence slightly different than the US, but to the same effect. Independence is the ability to make independent decisions to pursue independent national programs. Space agencies do not want all of their funds tied up with exploration, should they choose to pursue other national programs because of national priorities. Each nation has its own strategy, and each wants the ability to follow its own path. Where national priorities yield missions that tie to exploration, space agencies are willing to coordinate with a “system of systems” approach. This attitude does not appear to rule out bilateral cooperation for specific projects or capabilities. However, like the US attitude about independence, other space agencies want the self-determination to make decisions and carry out programs in a manner best suited to them.  Because many space agencies do not yet have a political mandate to pursue human exploration, scientific investigations must be included in the mechanism's purview, in order for some space agencies to participate. This criterion is similar to the first criterion in the US section—that the mechanism must protect the interests of the United States. Similarly, the space agencies insisting on this criterion (mostly ESAs) will not allow their national priorities to be subsumed by the collaboration activities. This criterion also means that scientific investigations of Mars must be included in the mechanism's purview, as many space agencies are more focused on Mars than the Moon. An additional note is that by including robotic scientific investigations in the mechanism's purview, space agencies can gain political backing for participating in the mechanism, which could lead to greater support for exploration in general. The exploration programs of many space agencies are supported primarily by the scientific community. Satisfying the interests of the scientific community will be critical for enabling space agencies to collaborate on exploration.  Almost every interviewee said that a global exploration reference architecture was necessary to define common objectives, develop an overall plan, and provide continuity over time. A global architecture begins by defining common objectives. All space agencies must decide together what the areas of common interest are for space exploration, broadly defined. Then, based on national capabilities and interests, the mechanism participants can develop a plan together to outline roughly how each nation can contribute to the larger plan. Finally, national space agencies can show this information to their politicians and policymakers to demonstrate how their proposed programs will fit into the larger global picture. This could yield sustained funding and support for exploration.  One of the key functions of the collaboration mechanism is that it should identify where particularly capabilities are lacking and serve to influence space agencies or cooperating groups of space agencies to fill those gaps. Without this function, the value of international collaboration is greatly diminished. If participants develop a global reference architecture, as outlined in criterion #3, identifying gaps should be relatively easy. The more difficult part will be to influence space agencies to fill those gaps or provide redundant systems for capabilities on the critical path. This criterion could be satisfied in a number of ways, including treaty-like legal obligations upon joining the mechanism or simply greater political pressure associated with membership. How this criterion will be satisfied will depend on other criteria for the mechanism. An additional point here is that by identifying areas for national contribution, the mechanism can also provide a forum in which to encourage and facilitate bilateral or multilateral cooperation on specific projects. If multiple space agencies are interested in filing the same gap, they could identify that mutual interest through mechanism discussions and then begin negotiations. The mechanism itself does not have to be the forum of negotiation, but it can provide a starting point to initiate them.  Other space agencies recognize that they are not likely to make as large a contribution to exploration as the United States. They still, however, want their contribution to be visible to their citizens because exploration is still a source of national pride. If space agencies are going to invest resources in space exploration, their activities must be seen, in part, as national programs. This means that “international collaboration mechanism” cannot be synonymous with a single US-centric project for which other space agencies provide only augmented capabilities. Instead, the mechanism must either facilitate the coordination of independent programs or provide opportunities for mutually beneficial bilateral and multilateral cooperation projects.  Space agencies want the mechanism to define the principles of their interactions on exploration missions. In this context, interactions cover a variety of topics, ranging from legal interactions such as export control frameworks, to programmatic interactions such as infrastructure sharing, to technical interactions such as interoperability standards. While these types of issues are very different, they all can be defined and agreed upon by the mechanism participants early on in collaboration. No matter what solutions participants agree to, having an established set of “rules of the game” will provide transparency to existing members and potential members. The principles should apply equally to all potential partners, to foster good will and a positive spirit of cooperation. Agreeing to the principles could be mandatory for any nation interested in participating in the mechanism.  Every interviewee who commented on the subject of membership said that any nation should be welcome to participate in the international collaboration mechanism, given that the nation has at least some small budget invested in exploration programs. Many interviewees described space exploration as a way to foster international stability and bring developing space agencies into a common international system. Space agencies do not want to treat space exploration as an area for competition. This criterion runs contrary to one of the criterion of the United States. The United States wants the ability to control which space agencies join the mechanism, whether or not they meet the objective membership criteria (such as investment levels and technical capability, as described in #4 of the US criteria). The United States is not comfortable collaborating with every nation and is not likely to agree to the “everyone is welcome” principle. Resolving this issue will be critical in developing the initial terms of reference of the mechanism and will require NASA (the likely representative for the United States) to consult heavily with the White House and Department of State.  The mechanism must be flexible enough that it allows new space agencies to join, as they become technically capable of contributing, and existing members to leave, as their national priorities change. The first half of this criterion—the ability to accept new members as they become technically capable—recognizes that space capabilities are rapidly proliferating to many more space agencies around the world. Space is no longer the purview of only an elite group of space agencies. If space exploration becomes a long-term endeavor, the mechanism must be able to incorporate the efforts of more space agencies as they become able to contribute. Allowing additional space agencies to participate over time will improve sustainability by increasing the total capabilities devoted to exploration and can foster the international stability described in criterion #7. The second half of this criterion—the ability of a nation to leave the mechanism as their national priorities warrant doing so—was also touched upon in the US criteria. If national priorities change and nations want to discontinue their exploration participation, the mechanism must allow them to leave. Satisfying this criterion may mean that joining the mechanism does not require a nation to contribute capabilities to a larger multilateral exploration architecture. Instead, specific projects may be agreed upon in bilateral or multilateral agreements like the International Space Station. Therefore, if space agencies want to change their contributions, they only disrupt the specific agreements they have made on project cooperation, as opposed to hindering the operation of the mechanism as a whole.  The mechanism must require some participation by higher-level figures, such as the heads of agencies. Recognizing that the majority of the substantive collaboration work will, of course, be performed at the level of working personnel, having political figures involved at some stage in the mechanism's development and operation will give it some political legitimacy. Those who suggested this criterion did not all agree on what the appropriate level of political engagement should be. Some expressed that heads of agency meeting would be appropriate, while others expressed that the mechanism should be kicked off at the ministerial or heads of state level, via a forum such as the G8 meetings. This criterion does not imply that heads of agency or heads of state must sign on to the mechanism as if it were a treaty, though some interviewees did suggest that. The consensus was only that by involving political figures either to kick-off the mechanism or review its progress on an annual or bi-annual basis, collaboration could be much more fruitful. Having political figures involved increases the political pressure on the mechanism to achieve meaningful results.  This criterion is similar to the final criterion in the US section, without the strong call for evolution toward binding agreements. While one interviewee did suggest something very similar as described in US criterion #10, most interviewees simply wanted to ensure that the mechanism could evolve as political and programmatic conditions changed. This criterion recognizes that there will not be one mechanism that is appropriate for all situations. Instead, the mechanism should be built over time and able to grow or possibly scale back as conditions warrant. The mechanism should allow all windows of opportunity for international collaboration to remain open, without tying participants to any one way of working together. As long as there is recognition by the international community that this mechanism is the place for discussions on space exploration, the structure of the mechanism is not of paramount concern. Space agencies will find ways to work together as they have always done, and the particular forum will evolve as need be. An additional point that does not fit with the mechanism criteria nor the preconditions is worth discussion nonetheless. Many interviewees raised the question of leadership. Who will be the leader of the mechanism? Will there be formal leader? How will a leader or leaders affect the functioning of the mechanism? First, many space agencies expressed interest, or at least acceptance, of US leadership of exploration. Given that the United States currently has the most resources invested in exploration, it seems natural that other space agencies would plan their activities around those of the United States. This situation, however, may change over time. If other space agencies begin investing more resources, especially to develop parallel space transportation capabilities, other leaders may emerge. In order to deal with the rise and fall of dominant players, multilateral structures are necessary because they engage all players. Second, leadership question also arose with respect to intra-European relationships. While the interviewees from the ESA member states were generally supportive of ESA representing their interests in the international collaboration forum, they still expressed interest in signing bilateral agreements between their national space agency and others. Whether these two positions are in conflict may not become apparent until multilateral collaboration begins in earnest. As has been alluded to, many of the same criteria are found in both the US and other nations’ sets. While the motivations for specific criterion may differ depending on the nation or agency that proposed it, the end result is a set of mechanism requirements that are very similar. Though some negotiation will be necessary in areas of less synergy, we can propose a mechanism that will meet most of the needs of the current major space actors. The most overlap between the two criteria sets is in the requirements for independence, flexibility, and a clear scope. Almost every agency wants the ability to make independent decisions to join and leave the mechanism as meets their national priorities, contribute program capabilities as they are able to, and shape the mechanism over time as their needs change. Some agencies want this flexibility because they perceive that their national priorities may change in the future; other agencies want this flexibility because they are not yet sure how they might contribute to exploration; and finally some agencies are still grappling with experiences from past collaborative programs such as the International Space Station. And though flexibility can extend to the scope of the mechanism, as it will likely evolve over time as well, all agree that a commonly understood starting point for discussion and collaboration is essential. The only area of disagreement between the US and other national perspectives is which nations will be invited or allowed to participate in the mechanism and what will this participation mean. While most nations want to welcome all interested nations, the United States is more concerned with the foreign policy implications of collaborating with those who may not be preferred partners. Resolving this disconnect will be important in establishing the mechanism's operations and initial membership group. Given the two criteria sets, we now turn to designing a mechanism that meets the needs of the major space powers. The exploration mechanism design will draw on successful features of existing collaboration mechanisms. Where a feature of an existing mechanism meets one of the exploration criteria, that feature will be incorporated, if feasible, into our mechanism design. This section will first provide a brief overview of the existing mechanisms that were considered as models for the exploration mechanism. These models are generally considered successful examples of international collaboration, and all of them enable major scientific or technical development projects. Then we will pull features from each model mechanism to build our exploration mechanism. Those features we are copying both meet the exploration criteria and are considered successful features by an expert who either participated in or studied the mechanism in question. Following is a brief description of the collaboration mechanisms for the Committee on Earth Observation Satellites, the Group on Earth Observation, the Inter-Agency Consultative Group, the International Space Station, the European Space Agency, ITER, and the Antarctica Treaty System Additional models, including IntelSat, Spacelab, NeuroLab, Joint Strike Fighter, and the International Lunar Exploration Working Group were also suggested. Initial research, however, showed that these mechanisms are not useful as models for exploration because either they do not fit the form of large-scale, multilateral, non-profit, government-to-government scientific and technical development collaboration or are not sufficiently developed and utilized to serve as good models. The Committee on Earth Observation Satellites (CEOS) is very often suggested as a model organization for multilateral space mission coordination. Of the mechanisms outlined in this section, CEOS is one of the oldest and thus it can serve as a well-developed model. CEOS was created in 1984 following the recommendation of a panel of experts from a group of seven (now eight) working group on growth, technology, and employment. Though the recommendation came from the G8, CEOS was not created under the umbrella of any other international organization, nor were any formal treaties signed. CEOS was legitimized purely by the participation of the government representatives present and their interest in working together under the framework of the CEOS Terms of Reference. The purpose of CEOS is to serve as a coordination mechanism for international civil space-based missions that study Earth. CEOS itself does not develop or operate any missions; nor does CEOS require that its members cooperate on specific missions. No funds are transferred through CEOS. CEOS only serves as a forum in which national plans, technical standards, and data policy for Earth observation satellites can be shared so as to maximize the overall value of all missions and programs worldwide. CEOS strives to be recognized as the major international forum for the coordination of Earth observation satellite programs and for interaction of these programs with users of satellite data worldwide. The major function of CEOS is to pursue coordination of international Earth observation by sharing national plans for Earth observation satellites, ensuring interoperability of downlinks and ground stations by exchanging technical information, and sharing Earth observation data. Wherever possible, CEOS will identify and suggest areas of synergy and ensure that data utilization and distribution is maximized. The Members of CEOS are representatives of national governments (most are space agencies) who have continuing activity in space-based Earth observation. In order to be considered for membership, a national organization must either operate an Earth observation satellite or have a program in development. To become a Member requires the consensus of the existing CEOS Members. Additionally, Associate Members of CEOS can be national government representatives not yet operating Earth observation satellites or associated national and international organizations such as the World Meteorological Organization. Existing CEOS members must also approve requests for associate membership. Each year, CEOS holds a plenary session, chaired on a rotating basis by different Members. Meeting attendees are generally at the level of program heads, such as the head of NASA's Earth Science Division. CEOS also forms ad hoc committees, staffed by working-level professionals, as needed to address specific coordination issues. CEOS has a virtual standing secretariat (coordinated only via telecommunication) consisting of geographically diverse representatives of some of the largest CEOS members (America-NASA/NOAA, Europe-ESA/EUMETSAT, Asia-MEXT/JAXA). The secretariat is maintained voluntarily by the organizations providing secretariat staff because CEOS has no funds of its own. Participation in CEOS does not demand any financial obligations from Members. The Group on Earth Observations (GEO) is the organizing body established to implement a Global Earth Observation System of Systems (GEOSS) agreement. GEO has a similar organizational structure to CEOS, with some key differences. GEO was formally established at the Third Earth Observation Summit in February 2005 to carry out the 10-Year Implementation Plan of creating a Global Earth Observation System of Systems. Prior to the formal creation of GEO, the Ad Hoc GEO, established at the First Earth Observation Summit in July 2003, met to create the GEOSS implementation plan. The need to create GEOSS was first recognized at the 2002 World Summit on Sustainable Development. Like CEOS, the creation of GEO was kicked off following a G8 meeting in June 2003. The function of GEO is to lead the creation of a Global Earth Observation System of Systems. The purpose of GEOSS is to achieve comprehensive, coordinated, and sustained observation of Earth to aid activities such as disaster monitoring, resource management, and climate change monitoring. Like CEOS, GEO facilitates consultation and coordination among existing national and international earth observation activities, with the goal of synergizing these activities to create more valuable outcomes via GEOSS than any one system could alone. Also like CEOS, GEO recommendations are non-binding. The functions of GEO include collecting, processing, and disseminating data to Members, ensuring technical interoperability among GEOSS systems, and advocating the development of specific systems to minimize gaps in global observation capabilities. All of these functions support the GEOSS Implementation Plan. The members of GEO are states (not agencies, as in CEOS), and membership is open to all UN Member States and the European Commission. Like CEOS, GEO also allows for Participating Organizations (similar to the CEOS Associate Members) to participate as plenary observers and working group contributors. Members are accepted upon their endorsement of the 10-Year Implementation Plan. Participating Organizations must both endorse the implementation plan and receive the approval of the GEO Members. The GEO plenary meets at least annually at the level of senior officials and periodically at the Ministerial level. Whether or not the meeting attendees are Ministers, all those participating in the meetings represent the position of the Ministers, and by extension, state. This is a key difference from CEOS: CEOS participants represent agencies which, though also extensions of the state, do not have the same political visibility. GEO plenary meetings are facilitated by the GEO Executive Committee and the GEO Plenary chairs, which consist of regionally elected representatives. Additionally, GEO convenes ad hoc subsidiary bodies to address specific issues. GEO maintains a standing Secretariat and Director to serve as a focal point for coordinating GEO activities. Unlike CEOS, the Secretariat and Director are housed permanently in Geneva and are not affiliated with any individual Member or Participating Organization. This office is supported by GEO funds, which are not required of any Member, but rather collected through strictly voluntary cash and in-kind contributions from Member states. With the Inter-Agency Consultative Group (IACG), we turn our attention to a different type of organization. While both CEOS and GEO were established to coordinate a set of ongoing activities over an indefinite period of time, IACG was established for a specific purpose at a specific time. While the IACG founders attempted to extend it beyond its original mandate, they were mostly unsuccessful. Here we will primarily consider only the successful Phase I activities of IACG. The IACG was founded in September 1981 to coordinate a set of missions to Halley's Comet as it made a close approach to Earth in 1986. At a meeting following the 1981 International Astronautical Federation, scientists and agency representatives from the ESA, Intercosmos Council of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, Japan's Institute for Space and Astronautical Science (ISAS), NASA, and the International Halley Watch group of professional astronomers established the initial loose terms of reference for IACG. The initial purpose of IACG was to coordinate national missions to rendezvous with and study Halley's Comet. IACG did not suggest new missions, but merely worked to coordinate those that already had the approval of national governments. After the successful coordination of the Halley's Comet missions, IACG decided to adopt permanent Terms of Reference to allow IACG to continue inter-agency coordination of other space science missions. Phase 2 and Phase 3, which were mostly unsuccessful at producing results, operated under these terms of reference. To coordinate the Halley's Comet mission, IACG adopted the Pathfinder plan to optimize the mission objectives of each spacecraft to maximize the scientific value of the spacecraft group. For instance, the first two spacecraft provided data that would allow the following spacecraft to target their instruments as accurately as possible to maximize their scientific potential. This approach allowed each nation to independently design its spacecraft while still enhancing the overall scientific return of the set of missions. The members of IACG were those space agencies convened in the September 1981 organizing meeting. All agencies, with the exception of NASA, had nationally approved missions to Halley's Comet. At the time, NASA was only considering a mission (which was never approved), but the other IACG members felt that NASA's inclusion, regardless of whether it had an approved mission, would bring scientific and technical expertise to the group. The Terms of Reference do not provide any means for bringing in new members. Following the initial meeting in 1981, IACG meetings were held annually among senior scientists, engineers, and managers from member agencies. These individuals represented their respective agencies’ space science programs. In addition, working groups and task groups addressed specific scientific and technical issues. During Phase 1, IACG had no secretariat or official executive secretary. Instead, meetings and their chairmanship rotated among the member agencies, and Dr. Rudegard Reinhard, an ESA project scientist who was personally interested in the success of IACG, created the meeting agendas. The International Space Station (ISS) is the largest international space cooperation program to date, involving 16 nations who will collectively spend over $100 billion throughout the program's lifetime. While many of the interviewees were hesitant about becoming involved in another program structured like the ISS, there are some features of the ISS organizational structure that may still be useful for our exploration cooperation mechanism. The ISS, as it is currently structured, began in 1993 when the United States invited Russia to join what had initially been a program between the United States and its closest Cold War allies. In 1984, US President Ronald Reagan invited Europe, Japan, and Canada to participate in the US Space Station Freedom to show the strength of the Western nations. After the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991, President Bill Clinton revised policy and invited Russia to a reconfigured ISS to demonstrate a new era of post-Cold War US-Russian cooperation. The main partners in the ISS are the United States, Russia, Europe (some of those nations who are members of the ESA), Japan, and Canada. These states are the signatories to a multilateral Intergovernmental Agreement and their representative space agencies are signatories to bilateral Memoranda of Understanding with the United States. Brazil and Italy have also signed separate bilateral agreements with the United States to provide capabilities and utilize the station. The Intergovernmental Agreement does not have a provision for adding additional partners to the program. To add an additional participant with responsibilities affecting all the existing partners would likely require renegotiating all the agreements, similar to what was done when Russia joined the program. To add additional participants providing minor capabilities would likely involve only signing a Memorandum of Understanding with an existing ISS partner. The purpose of the ISS is to be an orbiting microgravity research laboratory. Each of the main ISS partners provides pieces of hardware to contribute to the overall station. Responsibility for the infrastructure elements of the station (the “critical path”), including structural elements and habitation, is split between the United States and Russia. Europe and Japan provide additional scientific facilities, and Canada provides a remote manipulator, important for station assembly and maintenance (also on the “critical path”). Each nation is responsible for developing its own hardware and, for the most part, funds its own contributions. Partners contribute capabilities to the common system, and utilization and transportation services are exchanged via barter. The Intergovernmental Agreement and Memoranda of Understanding outline the contributions of each member, how utilization will be shared, and specify major program milestones and management processes. Each partner has a slightly different legal interpretation of these agreements, which affects whether or not it considers the agreements binding like a treaty. In general, however, the implementation of the agreements has been negotiable when the partners have had trouble meeting their original obligations. The agreement also allows partners to fully withdraw from the program, given appropriate notice to the other partners. Management of the ISS is handled via a number of decision-making bodies, including the bilateral Program Coordination Committees, multilateral Space Station Control Board, and the Multilateral Control Board. These forums periodically convene senior engineers, scientists, and managers to make decisions regarding design, development, operations, and utilization. In the case of the multilateral forums, one member (NASA) is chair and has the authority to make decisions if the partners cannot come to a consensus. In addition, the agency heads for the ISS partners also meet periodically to address major programmatic issues. All of these activities are supported by funds from the partner agencies. The ESA is unique because it is the only multinational space agency. ESA is the only example we will consider of a multilateral space organization that truly integrates the activities and resources of its members. ESA as it is known today was founded with the merging of the European Space Research Organization (ESRO) and the European Launch Development Organization (ELDO). Prior to ESA, these two organizations made up a collaborative European space program. The idea to merge these two organizations was first proposed in 1968; in 1973 the two organizations formally merged; in 1975 the ESA Convention, describing the ESA legal and programmatic framework, was finalized. The Convention was signed by all ESRO and ELDO Member States and opened for signature by all nations then members of the European Union. Over the next five years, it was ratified by its 10 founding members and entered into force in 1980. The purpose of ESA is to propose and execute peaceful-purpose space programs for the group of European countries who are ESA Member States. ESA is involved in a range of projects including space science, human spaceflight, launch vehicle development, Earth science, and satellite applications that bring benefits to European citizens. As part of the ESA Convention, ESA Member States have some choice about which programs to participate in. The ESA Council approves ESA's activities on a five-year basis. The Council is composed of representatives of the Member States. Each Member has one vote, no matter its level of funding contribution. The Council approves by majority what activities ESA will undertake in the coming five-year period and by unanimous decision the overall level of mandatory resources ESA will have for each five-year period. The Council also votes on other things, including ESA policy, general budgets, and annual work plans. The Council may delegate these votes to any subordinate committees it establishes. ESA's activities are either mandatory or optional. All Member States must participate in the mandatory activities, and Member States choose which of the optional activities they will participate in. Both types of activities are funded by Member State contributions to the ESA budget. Each Member contributes a percentage of its gross national product to the mandatory activity fund. Members additionally contribute funds to optional activities they participate in, at a level they choose. For both types of contributions, Members are guaranteed The original ESA Member States were those nations who were members of either ESRO or ELDO. The 10 founding states were Belgium, Germany, Denmark, France, United Kingdom, Italy, the Netherlands, Sweden, Switzerland, and Spain. Since then, Ireland, Austria, Norway, Finland, Portugal, Greece, and Luxembourg have also become members, bringing the total number of Member States to 17. Beyond the founding members, each state has been approved for membership by a unanimous decision of the ESA Council. The ITER Organization The idea for ITER—an international project to develop fusion energy for peaceful purposes—was first proposed in November 1985 by Soviet Premier Gorbachev at a Geneva summit of superpower nations. Beginning in 1988, the Soviet Union, United States, European Union, and Japan jointly funded a study to establish whether designing and building an experimental fusion reactor was feasible. In 2001, an engineering design was complete and the ITER parties began negotiations toward creating the ITER Organization to execute the project. From 2003 to 2006, the ITER Parties cooperated under the transitional agreements. In November 2006, the final Joint Implementation Agreement was signed. During the transitional period from 2003 to 2006, Canada, Europe (represented by the European Atomic Energy Commission, Euratom), Japan, Russia, the United States, China, and South Korea were parties to the negotiations of the final ITER agreements. Activities during this period were governed by the transitional agreement and included finalizing the ITER design, selecting the site for the reactor, deciding how costs would be divided among program participants, and creating the legal ITER entity and its terms of reference. An ITER Preparatory Committee and Transitional Project Team carried out these activities; the former provided strategic direction and coordinated the negotiations of the final ITER agreements, and the latter focused on finalizing technical details and site selection. These groups operated via consensus and without funding. Participants sending representatives to the Committee and members of the Project Team paid for their individual expenses. Due to the variety of issues being negotiated, representatives ranged from technical specialist to high-level political figures. In November 2006 with the adoption of the Joint Implementation Agreement, the nature of the cooperation changed. With this agreement, the ITER Organization was officially formed as a legal entity, able to enter into contracts, acquire property, obtain licenses, and instigate legal proceedings. The ITER participants, now the governments of China, India, Japan, South Korea, Russia, and the United States, and the European Atomic Energy Commission (Euratom), contributed funds directly to the ITER Organization. A Council containing representatives from each of the participants governs the ITER Organization, making decisions on any matter concerning the overall direction and supervision of the project. The Council meets twice annually, with a Ministerial-level meeting when appropriate. Decisions are made via a weighted voting system based on contribution levels. In addition, ITER employs a Director General and staff to manage the ITER project. The final model and second non-space example is the oldest of all the models we consider here. The Antarctica Treaty System (ATS) is the group of treaties that developed around the original Antarctica Treaty that was signed in 1959. Three additional agreements, the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals, the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, and the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, are also considered part of the Antarctic Treaty System. A fourth, the Agreement on the Conservation of Albatrosses and Petrels, was introduced in 2001 with its adoption pending. The Antarctic Treaty was signed in December 1959 by the 12 countries that had been active in Antarctica during the International Geophysical Year of 1957–1958. The Antarctica Treaty was an attempt to formalize and continue the peaceful cooperation that had placed scientific research concerns ahead of territorial disputes. When the Treaty was signed, seven signatories had already claimed territory in Antarctica and five other nations had activities there. The Treaty requires that activities on Antarctica be carried out for peaceful purposes only and promotes freedom of scientific investigation and cooperation to that end. The Treaty requires parties to preserve the resources of Antarctica, and thus non-scientific activities involving minerals extraction or exploitation are prohibited. The Treaty recognizes the existing territorial claims but does not permit new claims or the extension of existing claims. The Treaty also requires that all areas of Antarctica be open to any observers. Most pertinent to our purposes here, the Treaty requires parties to exchange information about scientific activities to ensure maximum economy and efficiency in carrying out Antarctic research. This information exchange occurs at regular meetings. The part of the Treaty that we will consider the international coordination mechanism is the information exchange meetings called the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings (ATCM). While there are 45 Treaty signatories, only 28 are Consultative Parties who participate in the meetings. Consultative Parties are those who demonstrate their interest in conducting substantial scientific activities in Antarctica. Non-consultative parties can attend the meetings, but cannot vote. At the meeting, Consultative Parties exchange information regarding research stations and expeditions to Antarctica, any military personnel stationed in Antarctica, and implementation of the environmental protection provisions of the Treaty. Parties also consult on matters of common interest and formulate possible recommendations regarding Antarctica for members to take to their home governments. In 2004, the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat was established in Buenos Aires, Argentina to facilitate the meetings. Funding for the Secretariat and the Meetings is shared equally by the Consultative Parties. As discussed, there are currently 45 Treaty signatories, or Contracting Parties. Any UN Member State can become a Contracting Party if it signs and ratifies the Treaty. Non-UN Member States can also become Contracting Parties with the consent of the existing Contracting Parties. Any nation can become a Consultative Party by appointing representatives to the regular meetings, once it demonstrates its interest in conducting substantial scientific activities. Having described the models we will consider, we turn toward combining the elements of each to create a new mechanism that matches the criteria described previously. First, we will briefly outline which models meet which criteria. We show the results of this process in the table below. When rating each model by criterion, many did not clearly demonstrate that they met (or did not meet) a particular criterion. In those cases, a decision was made by interpreting whether the organization's framework could meet the needs of the agencies, as described in the individual interviews. Making final determinations required some subjective judgments, but was based on the information available and discussed in the previous section ( Finally, we are ready to describe a proposed international collaboration mechanism that is based on existing international collaboration organizations and meets the criteria of potential participating space agencies. The results in the table above clearly show that no single mechanism will meet the criteria for all nations. Therefore, we will build a new mechanism that incorporates features of multiple existing mechanisms. As the table clearly shows, the two mechanisms that meet the most criteria are CEOS and GEO. CEOS meets all of the US criteria, and GEO meets all of the other nations’ criteria. Neither meets the criteria of both, however, and so a blending of the two will be the baseline for further modifications of the mechanism. A further advantage of using these two as a mechanism baseline is that they mirror the member dynamics expected of exploration, with the United States playing a strong role in both CEOS and GEO, as it likely will continue to do so for exploration. The basic structure of the proposed mechanism is a coordination forum that does not require participants to cooperate on specific missions, but only to share high-level mission plans so that a global exploration reference architecture can be developed. Like CEOS and GEO, participants in the proposed mechanism maintain the ability to make independent decisions on national programs. This feature is important for both the United States and other nations (US criterion #3 and Other Nations (ON) criterion #1). A coordination structure that does not require any cooperation on specific projects also meets the US criterion to operate without an exchange of funds (US #5), as it relates to project execution. Provided that all coordination discussions are kept at a high level without significant technical detail, the proposed mechanism will also meet the US criterion to protect strategic technologies (US #6). The same structure also enables nations to individually execute national programs of interest, in particular any highly visible missions that would generate excitement and support (ON #5). Like CEOS and GEO, participants in the proposed mechanism share their national exploration plans so that they can jointly develop a non-binding global exploration reference architecture to enable planning of future missions. Participants would not be required to execute the missions they proposed in developing the reference architecture, but having a reference architecture that is updated periodically can maximize synergy between national missions by eliminating unnecessary overlap and strengthening redundancies on the critical path. This feature meets criterion #3 for the other nations. In addition, by outlining a roadmap, participants must agree on some common set of exploration activities or destinations that all participants are interested. Assuming that this set is created with the consensus of all or most participants, the United States can ensure that the exploration activities covered by the mechanism both advance US interests (US #1) and have a clear scope, however US representatives choose to define that (US #2), and other nations can ensure that scientific investigations are included as well (ON #2). One criterion that may not be met with this baseline structure is the other nations criterion that the mechanism influence agencies to undertake specific missions (ON #4). While having the reference architecture does create some incentive for participants to follow its plan, it is not accompanied with binding commitments. Making the reference architecture binding, however, would violate the criterion stressing independence. Instead, we will address the lack of “influence” in CEOS with stronger political involvement (as found in GEOS and ISS, for example) in the next section. One noted weakness of CEOS is that it does not require (nor generally invite) political involvement. The founders of CEOS explicitly aimed for this so that the organization would not be hindered by political considerations and instead could be primarily a means to engage working-level managers, scientists, and engineers in earth observation Adopting a GEO-like participant level and representative structure for the exploration mechanism is attractive because it would likely meet the criterion of influencing nations to undertake specific missions (ON #4). Signing an agreement at a government-to-government level and having national representatives to the exploration mechanism come from high levels of government would ensure that political leaders maintain a base of support for exploration. Adopting the GEO model here, however, would break a criterion of the United States that prohibits the agreement from being signed above the agency level (US #8). Instead, to meet all of the criteria related to this topic, the proposed mechanism will adopt the part of the ISS organizational structure that requires a Heads of Agencies meeting on a regular basis. Because Heads of Agencies operate primarily in the political realm, as opposed to the program realm of CEOS representatives, their involvement will give the proposed mechanism more political clout. This should influence each agency to follow the suggestions generated by the reference architecture and other discussions (ON #4). In addition, Heads of Agency involvement meets the other nations criterion to have involvement at the Heads of Agency level or higher (ON #9). Finally, though other nations do request participation at high political levels, they do not require that the mechanism be signed at the government-to-government level of GEO or ISS. Therefore, any terms of reference or memoranda of understanding participants sign when joining must remain at the agency-to-agency level (as in CEOS) to meet US criterion #8. In determining which agencies can become participants in the proposed organization, we encounter a conflict between the US and other nations criteria. Other nations criterion #7 requires the mechanism be open to all space agencies. US criterion #4, however, requires that the US (or existing participants, of which the US would presumably be one) retain control over membership. These two criteria are in direct conflict. Resolving this conflict will require negotiation between those agencies that become the initial members of the mechanism. One recommendation is to follow a CEOS model wherein any agency is eligible to request membership, but existing members must approve all requests. This thereby allows any nation to express interest in joining, forcing the existing members to deny this request if they choose. Politics and international affairs would play a large role here, and existing members could feel pressure to accept virtually all membership requests, without a very compelling reason not to do so. The other aspect of membership we will consider is the US requirement that the proposed mechanism be capable of engaging non-government actors such as commercial firms (US #7). This criterion is easily met by either a CEOS or GEO structure that allows non-agency or government actors to become involved as Associate Members. Associates could participate in discussions and contribute to working groups, but could not vote on matters such as amendments to the terms of reference and agreements on standards and interoperability. An important criterion for other nations is that the proposed mechanism defines principles of interaction such as interoperability standards, utilization rights, and other similar considerations (ON #6). Many of the model mechanisms do this, but in different ways. CEOS and GEO, for example, have technical working groups that define interoperability standards. The ISS, for example, details all utilization rights in the governing memoranda of understanding. The proposed mechanism could take many different approaches to these issues, but here we will propose a model more similar to CEOS or GEO than to the ISS. For the issue of interoperability standards, following the working group model would better enable standards and other technical issues to be modified as necessary because they are not codified in any agreement. Allocating utilization rights as part of the coordination mechanism, however, may not be appropriate. Utilization rights are generally detailed when participants agree to share operational costs for a particular facility. While a cost sharing agreement would probably still meet the US criterion not to exchange funds (because funds are not actually transferred, just shared for a particular facility) (US #5), it does inherently remove agencies’ independence (US #3 and ON #1) by committing them to a joint operation. If when joining the mechanism, agencies are accepting some percent of utilization of their facilities by other agencies and vice versa, this commits them to cooperating with each other. Instead, utilization rights would be laid out in separate bilateral or multilateral agreements between agencies, as they agree to cooperate and perhaps cost share on specific projects. Though the proposed mechanism is primarily an information-sharing forum, inevitably participants will need to make decisions. For instance, participants will need to adopt amendments to the terms of reference, approve new members, agree on technical standards, and create and disband working groups as necessary. For the proposed mechanism, all decisions will be made by consensus, as occurs in CEOS, GEO, and many other model mechanisms. Consensus decision making will enable the US to advance its interests (US #1) because it will always have a de facto veto in decisions. Other ways to ensure US interests are to give the United States veto and tie-breaker rights, as in the ISS agreement. However, while rejecting this “first among equals” model is not explicitly called for in the other nations criteria, a sentiment expressed by many of the representatives of other nations was a desire to have more equality in partnership arrangements. Consensus allows for equality, while providing the United States with a means to freeze action in the event that a proposal dramatically opposes US interests. Other nations, in turn, could do the same. The hope is that requiring consensus will not result in endless deadlock, but instead force participants to find solutions that are mutually acceptable. The last area of criteria requires flexibility and evolution over time (US #9, US #10, and ON #10). Again, many of the model mechanisms (CEOS especially) can meet this criterion simply because their organizational structures are light and easily allow for modifications to the terms of reference. Another option to consider is the ITER structure that explicitly designates an early collaboration phase for project definition and negotiation and a later collaboration phase for project execution. While both these models meet the criterion to evolve over the lifetime of exploration (US #10) and ON #10), only CEOS can be called truly flexible (US #9). Though ITER is set up to explicitly evolve (once in its lifetime), it does not allow for the same flexibility to change once the project execution agreements are implemented. Therefore, the proposed mechanism will adopt the CEOS model for more fluid flexibility. A similar consideration is the other nations criterion that allows members to join and leave easily (ON #8). Joining easily is covered in the membership section above; leaving easily, though technically allowed by almost any of the agreements, is only truly possible when agencies are not committed to joint projects. These requirements again lead the proposed mechanism to follow the CEOS model, whereby participants are not committed to any joint projects via the mechanism. There are a few other features of most of the model mechanisms that we have not outlined here for the proposed mechanism. For instance, many of the models have secretariats with rotating chairmanship that are responsible for preparing the agenda for each meeting. Some of the models collect voluntary and involuntary contributions to help fund meeting activities and pay secretariat staff. And all mechanisms meet on a regular basis, with a time frame usually outlined in their agreements. The proposed mechanism does not cover these features because nothing in the criteria requires it. In addition, these detailed items may need to evolve over time, as discussed in the previous section. Therefore, the only recommendation for the proposed mechanism for these issues is that if the terms of reference stipulate these features, that there also be a means to change them. The proposed mechanism outlined here is only one combination of features that would meet the criteria of both the United States and other nations. Certainly, other structures could be designed that both meet most of the criteria and incorporate successful examples of international collaboration mechanisms. In addition, the criteria outlined in this paper are virtually assured of changing over time, as agency plans develop and national policy positions solidify. Therefore, our criteria and resulting mechanism represents a solution for only as long as these criteria remain valid. What is offered here, therefore, is only a timely example for nations and agencies to turn to as they begin collaborating more closely on space exploration.