At present, the titanium resource from vanadium-titanium magnetite (VTM) has not been used very effectively. With the aim of addressing this urgent problem, the titania slag with over 40 wt% TiO2 was obtained from VTM through gaseous reduction and melting separation in the previous work. In this study, the aluminothermic reduction for the ferrotitanium alloy production was conducted in order to develop a new utilization way for the titanium resource from VTM. CaO and Fe2O3 are extra added to ensure the slag fluidity, alloy quality, and sufficient physical heat. And the addition ratios of Al are optimized by the thermodynamic calculation. At last, the ferrotitanium alloy with 30.5 wt% Ti, 8.4 wt% Al, 3.2 wt% Si content is successfully prepared. However, the macro analysis indicates that some alloy particles with different contents are dispersedly distributed among the slag, and the slag consists of three different phases. It is mainly associated with the reaction intensity and thermodynamic stability, which is detailedly discussed in this paper as well.Ferrotitanium is a kind of ferroalloy mainly consisting of iron and titanium, with a minimum titanium weight content of 20% and a maximum titanium weight content of 75% [ Therefore, the widespread use makes the ferrotitanium preparation become a research focus. However, the unavoidable disadvantages of long electrolysis time and porous structure products in electrochemical reduction currently make the industry prefer to choosing the aluminothermic reduction (ATR) for ferrotitanium manufacture. Using the separated titania slag from smelting reduction of ilmenite as initial material, Pourabdoli et al. [ Titanium deposits are enormous, ranking fourth among metals, behind iron, aluminum, and magnesium. It is estimated that the worldwide reserve of titanium oxides are 650 billion metric tons, among which the rutile (TiO Aiming to address the urgent problem of titanium resource utilization from VTM, the efforts such as enriching the titanium through pre-reduction and melting separation have been made in the previous work [ In previous works, the gaseous reduction and the following melt separation of VTM were studied for the purpose of achieving the qualified hot metal and the slag with highest possible titanium content [ In this study, the initial materials of aluminothermic reduction consist of titanium resource (melt separation titania slag), reductant (metallic aluminum, Al>99.5%, Si<0.2%, Zn<0.04%, Cu<0.04%), flux agent (calcium oxide, >99.9%), and exothermic accelerator (hematite, >99.9%). The CaO and Fe Related studies [ Eqs. From   The aluminothermic reduction slag were also polished and examined with SEM and EDS, as shown in The mixed alloy phase was further studied through partial enlargement of the square label area in  The ferrotitanium alloy has been successfully prepared by the titania slag obtained from the vanadium titano-magnetite through aluminothermic reduction. CaO and Fe None. This work was supported by the