Results of separation can be presented as two-parameter graphs. One of many separation plots is the Fuerstenau upgrading curve, which relates recoveries of components in products of separation. It is demonstrated in the paper that there is a great number of mathematical formulas, which can be used for approximation of data plotted as the Fuerstenau curve. It is also shown that a given set of upgrading data can be approximated with a reasonable accuracy using different mathematical formulas as well different sets of data can be approximated with the same formula. A third option is the approximation of the different separation results with different equations. Depending on the approach and equations used for approximation of separation data, different conclusions may be obtained.Separation relies on splitting a stock material into two or more products ( The most known upgrading curves are yield versus content ( It should be added that all the upgrading curves contain the same information about separation but in different graphical forms. The choice of a particular upgrading curve depends on the aspects of separation we value the most or our esthetic preferences. The upgrading curves can be used for characterization, comparing and analysis of separation process. In certain cases, especially when the data points are scattered, the comparison of results of separation can be performed and evaluated statistically with appropriate mathematical formulas. The formulas for separation curves in the form of upgrading plots for a particular system can be derived from a model of the unit operation based on its physics. For simple systems, for instance, for batch static gravity separation involving a well-characterized feed, the relationships between separation parameters can be easily derived. In practical systems, however, the equations delineating separation are very complex and require many variables ( Various equations are presently available for different upgrading curves. In the case of the Fuerstenau plot only two formulas are available. The first one Considered here, Fuerstenau's curves can be plotted using either various recoveries acquired in continuous separations during the same process or cumulative recoveries of a fractionated batch-type separation test. Our search for mathematical equations, which can be used for approximations of the separation results in the Fuerstenau graph revealed that there is a great number of them. They can be of different character (linear, polynomial, hyperbolic, exponential, etc.,) and can contain different, from one to many, adjustable constants. A list of the collected equations is given in The mathematical formulas given in To test the applicability of different formulas from It results from When one wants to evaluate different sets of separation data with the help of a chosen upgrading curve, it is convenient to approximate them with the same mathematical formula. However, it may appear that a good fit is achieved only when each set of separation data is approximated with different formulas. Results from Results from this paper show that there are many mathematical formulas, which can be used for approximation of results of separation using the Fuerstenau upgrading plot. The fitness of the experimental data depends on the equation used for the approximation as indicated by the statistic parameters (correlation coefficient, standard deviation, etc).