Bubble load and top of froth measurements per size class were carried out in a rougher flotation circuit containing sulphide copper minerals and pyrite. This circuit consists of four parallel banks of seven 130m3 mechanical cells. Results of testing the first rougher cell (approximately 69% Cu recovery), showed that 40–60% of pyrite in the finer class of the concentrate (−45μm) was recovered by entrainment. For the coarser classes, pyrite was preferentially recovered to the concentrate by true flotation or association. These results were validated by batch flotation tests, using the same feed material to the rougher flotation circuit.
                  The bubble load and top of froth measurements permitted the evaluation of the pyrite transport mechanisms at industrial scale, providing estimations of pyrite true flotation and entrainment which are relevant for pyrite depression evaluation.Non-valuable iron sulphides are often associated with valuable sulphide minerals. These iron sulphides are of critical importance in Cu/Mo flotation concentrators because of their impact on product quality (concentrate grade) and efficiency (mineral recovery). For instance, it is well-known that the difficulties in separating valuable species such as chalcopyrite from pyrite lead to a significant decrease of the concentrate Cu grade. Several works ( In various works, pyrite flotation has been studied at the pilot and industrial scale. In this work, the pyrite recovery mechanisms in a Cu/Mo rougher flotation bank were studied based on bubble load and top of froth measurements. The industrial results were corroborated by means of flotation batch tests. Mass balances were carried out in parallel with bubble load measurements in order to determine the pyrite recovery to the concentrate by entrainment or collection processes (true flotation or association). Metallurgical datasets were analysed and reconciled per size class. In addition, the pyrite transported to the concentrate stream in the rougher circuit was evaluated from top-of-froth (TOF) measurements. TOF grades have shown a high correlation with bubble load grades in non-selective froths ( A metallurgical characterisation of a collective Cu/Mo rougher flotation bank was performed. The rougher circuit consists of four parallel banks of seven 130 Three sampling campaigns were carried out in order to determine the pyrite recovery along the rougher banks. Grade data were adjusted to satisfy the total and component mass balances. Chemical assays by elements (Cu, Mo, Fe and insoluble) were conducted and samples were classified per size class (+150 An example of reconciled grade data per size class is shown in Based on the mineral distribution observed in the grinding circuit, it was found that Cu was fed to the flotation circuit mainly as chalcopyrite (70%), bornite (18%) and digenite (11%) minerals, Mo as molybdenite (≈100%) and Fe as chalcopyrite (50%) and pyrite (47%). Notice that under these conditions, pyrite recovered to the concentrate stream can be estimated from the Cu grade data, assuming similar floatability of chalcopyrite, bornite and digenite. Bubble load was measured using the USM bubble load sensor. This device allows bubble load sampling just below the pulp–froth interface in order to calculate the actual mineral transport from the pulp to the froth by true flotation. Thus, using mass balances around a flotation cell along with bubble load results, the froth recovery and particle entrainment can be estimated ( The top-of-froth (TOF) sampler was used for sampling the first layer at the surface of the froth as described by Flotation tests were conducted in order to identify the flotation rate of each mineral species at laboratory scale. Thus, the content of chalcopyrite, molybdenite and pyrite were estimated per size class. The samples were taken from the feed of the industrial flotation plant ( The feed, final tail and concentrate samples were screened in three size classes (+150    To identify the pyrite flotation mechanisms, a comparison between the collected/associated pyrite in the bubble load and the pyrite recovered to the concentrate stream was carried out. The collected/associated minerals were determined from the bubble load measurements whereas the minerals in the concentrate stream were obtained from the mass balance adjustments. From the mass balances in the first rougher cell, the pyrite transported to the concentrate by entrainment ranged from 40% to 60% of the total pyrite recovered in the fine class. To characterise the pyrite floatability along the rougher flotation bank, TOF measurements were conducted in the first four mechanical cells. TOF and collected solid grades were expected to be similar, assuming non-selective froths. The pyrite TOF grade in the −45 Batch flotation tests of the rougher feed from Survey 2 were carried out in three size classes.  Based on the industrial and laboratory results, the pyrite recovery in the finer class corresponds to the sum of pyrite entrainment (e.g., 40–60% in the first rougher cell) and pyrite recovered by true flotation. In the coarser classes, the pyrite was recovered rather by true flotation or association, which was observed at industrial and laboratory scale. Using bubble load measurements along with mass balances at industrial scale (first rougher cell), it was observed that a range of 40–60% of pyrite under −45 From batch tests, it was found that in the coarser classes the pyrite had a kinetic response similar to those of valuable solids, which confirmed that in coarser classes, pyrite was recovered by either association or true flotation. In the finer class, the kinetic response displayed an increasing trend which was related to the significant impact of the fine pyrite entrainment on pyrite recovery. The authors are grateful to El Teniente Division Codelco-Chile and Carlos Torres for providing access to their plant and the valuable assistance in Cristian Carrasco’s thesis development. Funding for process modelling and control research is provided by CONICYT, Project Fondecyt 1130568 and Federico Santa María Technical University, Project 271351.