Organic agriculture is attaining increasing popularity as it sustains crop productivity and soil health without deteriorating climate. But comprehensive information on carbon (C), nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P) and sulphur (S) cycling enzymes, microbial elemental stoichiometry and soil functional diversity are scanty in organic vis-à-vis conventional systems across the globe. The most discriminant biological factor(s) and enzyme activity based quick, effective, sensitive index of soil quality are unavailable for organic agriculture. To address these issues, we considered four major cropping systems of India i.e. soybean-wheat, soybean-mustard, soybean-pea and soybean-linseed under six nutrient management practices, namely, M1 (mineral fertilizers as used by farmers), M2 (recommended dose of mineral fertilizers), M3 (50% Inorganic +50% Organic), M4 (25% Inorganic +75% Organic), M5 (75% Organic + Innovative) and M6 (Organic; 100% Organic) in a Vertisol. Activities of eleven enzymes, soil microbial biomass C, N and P and soil organic C were analysed and geometric mean enzyme activity (GMEA) and other parameters were computed for surface and subsurface soils. Enzyme activities were significantly (P < 0.05) increased by organic amendments (~50–75%). Exceptionally, phenol oxidase and peroxidase activities were ~51 and 50% higher in subsurface than surface soils. Specific enzyme activities were lower in M6; it ascertained the capability of organic system to sequester higher amounts of C than M3 and M1. However, soil functional diversity was nearly 10 and 20% lower for M6 than M3 and M1, respectively. Discriminant function analysis confirmed SOC, arylsulfatase activity and available P to be the most effective discriminant factors between the conventional and organic nutrient management practices in India. The GMEA was ~55% higher for M6 than M1. It was strongly and positively correlated with treated soil quality index. Further, GMEA was cross validated with an independently performed principal component analysis to find its suitability as soil quality index. The GMEA was correlated (P < 0.05) with scores of first component and proved to be consolidative enough for explaining functional distinction between conventional and organic management by reducing the several soil enzyme activities to a single numerical point. Thus, GMEA is proposed to indicate soil quality quickly and accurately in Vertisol. Microbial biomass C to N ratio was correlated with system productivity and GMEA. But, we recommend for its recertification after developing baseline values to use it as a robust indicator of soil productivity.Organic agriculture combining traditional and innovative science can maintain soil health, ecosystems services and social needs. It can enhance the resilience of soils to both water stress and nutrient loss over the conventional nutrient management practices. Soil quality under organic agriculture is determined by biological activities ( Conventionally, a large number of physical and chemical properties like texture, bulk density, water retention capacity, or nutrient availability are required to assess soil quality ( Recently, In sum, comprehensive information on carbon (C), N, P and S cycling enzymes, microbial elemental stoichiometry and soil functional diversity are scanty for organic farming vis-à-vis conventional systems across the globe. It is also unknown whether microbial elemental stoichiometry could predict soil quality and productivity; if so which ratio would be more appropriate. Information is also scanty on the most discriminant biological factor(s) distinguishing the crop productivity in conventional and organic farming systems. This research was carried out to meet the above mentioned gaps. In this study we aim a) to identify changes in C, N, P and S cycling enzymes, SOC status due to different nutrient management options (conventional mineral, integrated and organic) and b) to test the ability of the enzyme activities and microbial elemental stoichiometry to assess soil quality quickly. We hypothesised that a) organic nutrient management would be beneficial in enhancing soil enzyme activity and functional diversity and b) enzyme activity and microbial elemental stoichiometry would be effective for assessing soil quality quickly. For this purpose we considered four major cropping systems of India, soybean ( The experimental site is situated at Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh, India (23°18′N, 77°24′E, approximately 485 m above the mean sea level). The soil texture is clayey ( In October 2018, at soybean harvest, soil samples were collected in triplicates from each plot at two depth layers (0–15 and 15–30 cm) to understand the variations in C, N, P and S cycling enzymes in the plough layer (0–15 cm soil depth) and undisturbed soil layer (15–30 cm soil depth). Each sample was apportioned into two subsamples. One portion was air-dried, ground in a wooden mortar and with a pestle, and sieved to pass through a 4.75-mm sieve (bulk soil) and analysed for soil chemical parameters. A second subsample was kept in a refrigerator (at 4 °C) for assessing enzyme activities and other microbial parameters. The field-moist soil (60% of WHC) was allowed to equilibrate at room temperature for 24 h prior to analysis. Soil organic carbon was determined using K The geometric mean enzyme activity (GMEA) of the assayed enzymes was calculated for each sample as: An enzyme based treated soil quality index was calculated following It was determined using the. Shannon's diversity index (H) Simpson-Yule index (SYI) Alteration index 3 (AI3) values were calculated with the equation ( Equilibrium among three microbially-secreted soil enzymes and changes in soil characteristics due to management practices could be assessed by alteration index three (AI3) ( Data normality was tested using Shapiro–Wilk test (P < 0.05). The effects of management practices on individual soil enzyme activities, SOC and other parameters were tested by ANOVA for a randomized block design. Tukey's Honestly Significant Difference test was used as a post hoc mean separation test (P < 0.05) using SAS 9.1 (SAS Institute, Cary, North Carolina, USA). All figures were drawn using Microsoft Office Excel 2013. A principal Components Analysis (PCA) was performed with mean values of soil biological and chemical properties and soil enzyme activities. But no index derived from soil enzyme activity was included in the PCA. Further, first two principal components (PC1 and PC2) were extracted for the ordination of cases. The vectorial distance (dv) between each pair of organic and conventional farms in the space defined by the PC1 and PC2, was calculated as: Discriminant function analysis (DFA) was performed using soil enzyme activities, available N, P and SOC as grouping variables. Squared Mahalanobis distances between group centroids were also calculated. Two significant discriminatory functions were obtained and the results were presented in a two dimensional space. As impact of soil enzyme activities on nutrient availability and crop yield are not mutually exclusive, a partial correlation was calculated among soil enzyme activities, available N, P and SOC and microbial biomass C, N and P to estimate the interrelationship separately in organic and conventional systems. Simple linear regression equations were analysed to know the relationships among a) C cycling enzymes and SOC concentrations; b) N and P cycling enzymes and available N and P concentrations; c) system yield and C, N and P cycling enzymes in surface soil. System yield was calculated as soybean equivalent yield. Simple linear regression equation was also developed between a) MBC: N, MBC: P and system equivalent yield; b) MBC: N, MBC: P and GMEA to predict whether these elemental ratios could be used for assessing soil quality and productivity. Plots under M6 had ~16, 27, 23 and 29% higher SOC than M5 in surface soils of soybean-wheat, soybean-mustard, soybean-chickpea and soybean-linseed cropping system, respectively ( MBC in M6 was ~22 and 19% higher than M5 in soybean-wheat and soybean-linseed systems, respectively. INM under M4 had ~26, 17, 44 and 27% higher MBC than M2 in those four cropping systems, correspondingly ( DHA activity in M6 was ~33, 19, 26 and 24% higher than M4 in surface soils and 20, 16, 17 and 11% higher than M4 in subsurface soils of soybean-wheat, soybean-mustard, soybean-chickpea and soybean-linseed cropping systems, respectively ( In surface layer, specific DHA activity of M6 was significantly lower than M2 in soybean-mustard and soybean-linseed systems (Fig. S1a). But in subsurface layers, it was lower in M6 than M2 in all systems (Fig. S2a). Specific β-D-glucosidase activities were similar for all management practices in surface soil. But in the 15–30 cm soil layer, it was significantly lower for M5 and M6 than M2 and M3 (Fig. S1a and S2a). Except soybean-wheat systems, specific activities of cellulase and invertase enzymes were significantly lower for M6 than M2 in the 0–15 cm soil layer (Fig. S1b). However, in subsurface layer, their specific activities were significantly lower for M6 than M2 in all systems (Fig. S2b). Contrarily, specific phosphatase activities were lower for M6 than M2 for all systems and in both soil layers (Fig. S1c and S2c). Alike these, the lignin degrading enzyme activities were consistently lower for M6 than M2 and M4 (Fig. S1c and S2c). These observations have great implication for soil C sequestration. In surface soil, GMEA of M6 was 50, 46, 55 and 49% higher than of soybean-wheat, soybean-mustard, soybean-chickpea and soybean-linseed cropping systems, respectively. Similarly, GMEA of M6 was ~25, 21, 24 and 22% higher than M4 of those four cropping systems, respectively. In both soil layers, GMEA of soybean-chickpea was significantly higher than soybean-mustard and soybean-linseed systems in organic nutrient management practices only. The GMEA of surface layer was significantly greater than under subsurface soil layer ( Shannon diversity index (H) was the highest for plots receiving INM practices in both soil layers. In M4, H was ~1.12, 1.12, 1.16 and 1.15 times greater than M6 in 0–15 cm layer in those cropping systems correspondingly. Similar results were obtained for the 15–30 cm layer. However, H values of conventional and organic plots were similar. SYI values of M6 were also significantly lower than M4 and M2 in both soil layers. Contrary to H, SYI values of conventional plots were higher than organic plots in both soil layers. AI3 was the highest under M1 and the lowest in M6 in all cases. AI3 in organic plot was ~20 and 10% lower than conventional and INM plots, respectively ( In conventional systems, DHA was correlated only with C cycling enzymes but in organic systems DHA was correlated with C cycling and lignin degrading enzymes. In both systems, C cycling enzyme activities were positively correlated with SOC and MBC, but lignin degrading enzyme activity was not correlated with SOC. However, protease activity and urease activity did not correlate despite available N was positively correlated with them in both systems. Phosphatase activity was also positively correlated with MBP and available P (Table S1). In conventional systems, crop yield (P < 0.05) was regulated by N, P, S and lignin cycling enzymes. However, in organic systems, yield (P < 0.001) was regulated by C, N, P, S and lignin cycling enzymes ( Eigenvalues of the principle components (PC) indicated that the first two principal components accounted for 90% of the variance of data. SOC, available N, P and MBC significantly correlated with scores of PC1 (R DFA generated two distinct canonical discriminant functions with the analysis variables that can differentiate between the conventional, integrated and organic management systems ( and The microbial elemental stoichiometric ratio of MBC to MBN was significantly and positively correlated with GMEA (R SOC sequestration is controlled by the equilibrium between C inputs from crop biomass, external amendments and outputs via heterotrophic microbial enzymatic decay. Thus, higher amount of SOC in M5 and M6 could be due to (a) larger organic inputs, and/or (b) less proportionate microbial decomposition of lignin like substances over conventional and INM practices. SOC concentrations in M6 and M5 might be improved by ample carbon supply through organic manures, stubble, root biomass and rhizodeposition ( Activation of microorganisms due to external supplementation of C might have enhanced the MBC for M6. Higher metabolizable C, root biomass and root exudates in M6 and M5 obviously enhanced soil MBC ( Significantly greater DHA activity for M5 and M6 over mineral fertilized plots might be due to greater MBC and MBN in those plots ( The higher protease activity in M6 and M4 over control plots might be due to the presence of amino-sugar, amino acid, and protein like nitrogenous compounds in compost; consequently a significant correlation between SOM and protease was observed in organic system only. Its activity increased in M5 and M6 due to increased SOC and microbial population following urease secretion ( Specific enzyme activity (enzyme activity per unit SOC) controls SOC sequestration in agro-ecosystem. SOC is sequestered through accumulation of lignin like substances. Lower specific activities of phenol oxidase and peroxidase in M6 and M5 denote lesser decomposition of lignin like substances per unit SOC over conventional plots. It signifies that higher amounts of recalcitrant pools of SOM will remain undecomposed in M6 and M5. The decomposed parts is substrate of other C cycling enzymes, such as cellulose, β-glucosidase and invertase. Similar or lower specific activities of these enzymes in M6 over M1 or M2 specifies the capacity of M6 to restricts labile C pools from being mineralized to CO Le Chatelier's principle is applicable to a system at constant temperature and pressure. As enzyme activities were determined at 1 atmospheric pressure and at constant temperature ( Substrate quantity, quality and its microbial accessibility controls soil functional diversity ( Alteration or change in the soil system due to over-utilisation or other detrimental practices is responsible for higher AI3 values over soil systems having equilibrium between input and output ( DFA confirmed SOC concentration as the most discriminatory soil indicator (Eqs. GMEA index is computed from soil enzyme activities only and no specific soil physicochemical properties were directly involved in the index. We wished to ascertain that solely enzymatic activity dependent GMEA could be related to nutrient cycling and would summarise the crucial information of entire set of measured variables (known as minimum dataset). To accomplish this, we evaluated the performance of the GMEA with that of a principal component analysis. A significant positive correlation (R Furthermore, PC1 accounted for greater proportion of variance (>73%) and was correlated with GMEA. Hence, the index based solely on enzymatic activity is ascertained to be consolidative enough for explaining functional distinction between conventional or organic management in soybean based diverse cropping systems and it would be able to indicate soil quality quickly and accurately. Additionally, the vectorial distance (between each pair of organic and comparable mineral fertilized systems on the space defined by PC1–PC2) was strongly correlated with the increment of GMEA in the organic farms over comparable mineral fertilized plots ( Microbial biomass C to N ratio was strongly correlated with GMEA of the systems (R Based on statistical analyses, stoichiometric ratio of microbial biomass C to N ratio was proved to be a strong predictor of system productivity in soybean based cropping systems. Clearly, this biological index, being an effective indicator of system productivity would also help us choose management practices. As our results are based on four cropping systems and six nutrient management practices, more soil samples from diverse soil orders, cropping system and management practices need to be considered to recertify the positive correlations observed here. However, to include the microbial biomass C to N ratio into a decision support system, baseline study is required to develop boundary values of this ratio for diverse soil orders, cropping system and management practices. Critically, organic amendments significantly improved the activities of C, N, P and S cycling enzymes and SOC concentrations (by ~16, 27, 23 and 29% over M5 in surface soils of soybean-wheat, soybean-mustard, soybean-chickpea and soybean-linseed cropping systems, respectively). Lower specific activity (by ~25–38%) of lignin degrading enzymes in organically amended plots confirmed their promise to sequester larger amounts of SOC over INM plots. But M6 had lower functional diversity (by ~10–20%). Thus our first hypothesis was partially accepted. We recommend use of enzyme based index (GMEA) to assess soil quality and its relative improvements in organic farming approach due to its ability to measure variability arising from nutrient cycling processes. Although microbial biomass C:N ratio was correlated with system productivity and GMEA, we recommend for its recertification after developing baseline values. Thus our second hypothesis needs to be re-ascertained in future. Our study confirmed probably for the first time that SOC, arylsulfatase activity and available P to be the most effective discriminant factors among the conventional and organic nutrient management practices in Vertisols of India. Thus, the study will be useful for the researchers across the globe to find the most important discriminatory factors to specify management practices. We also ascertained a better insight of enzyme activity and their role in SOC sequestration. Lastly, we developed an enzyme based soil quality index to recommend nutrient management practices. These indices or the discriminant factors could be utilized for supervising real-time soil quality quickly and effectively in diverse cropping systems. The authors declare no conflict. The first author acknowledges the help from administration, supporting staffs and Director of Indian Institute of Soil Science, Bhopal and Director, Indian Grassland and Fodder Research Institute, Jhansi to conduct this study. A special gratitude is accorded to Dr. Asha Sahu, Dr. Sudeshna Bhattacharjya, Dr. Asit Mondal for sharing the facility during laboratory analysis.  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at