Objectives
                  To determine the efficacy of hybrid external fixation in the treatment of tibial pilon fractures.
               
                  Design
                  Retrospective, multicentre study.
               
                  Patients/Participants
                  Adult patients with tibial pilon fractures treated with hybrid external fixation.
               
                  Intervention
                  Fracture reduction with ligamentotaxis and fixation with XCaliber hybrid external fixator.
               
                  Main outcome measurements
                  Fracture union, complications, functional outcome (Mazur Ankle Score).
               
                  Results
                  Union was obtained in 159 fractures at an average of 125days; there were three delayed unions and three non-unions. The most frequent complication was superficial pin‐track infections (48), all of which responded to local wound care and antibiotics. There were no deep infections and no DVT. Only one fracture had loss of reduction that required frame revision. The overall functional scores were 91 (excellent) for AO/OTA type A fractures, 89 (good) for type B fractures, and 75 (satisfactory) for type C fractures.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Hybrid external fixation is an effective method of stabilising tibial pilon fractures, particularly those with marked comminution. The minimally‐invasive technique and stable fixation enable early mobilisation, with good functional results and minimal complications.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  Level IV Case series.Tibial pilon fractures are relatively uncommon injuries, representing only 1% of all fractures of the lower limb and 5% to 7% of those of the tibia Two distinct mechanisms are believed to be responsible for most tibial pilon fractures: low-stress trauma (sports injuries), which is less common and secondary to rotational forces, and high-stress trauma (motor vehicle accidents, falls from height, workplace accidents), which is more common and produces axial transmission of the load with the talus pushed onto the distal tibia, resulting in a multifragmentary implosion of bones and cartilage structures Several classification systems have been proposed for tibial pilon fractures. Rüedi and Allgöwer introduced a classification that divides fractures into three groups according to the degree of displacement and comminution of the articular and metaphyseal fragments, to which Ovadia and Beals added two fracture variants The treatment of tibial pilon fractures, particularly high-stress fractures, is complex and often difficult. The historically disappointing results of conservative treatment and the first attempts at limited internal fixation led the AO to develop guidelines for open reduction and internal fixation The purpose of this study was to determine the effectiveness of hybrid external fixation in the treatment of both high- and low-stress tibial pilon fractures in a large sample of patients (162 patients). To the best of our knowledge, this is by far the largest group of patients with hybrid external fixation of tibial pilon fractures to be reported. A retrospective, multicentre review identified 162 tibial pilon fractures treated with the XCaliber Hybrid External Fixator (Orthofix, Surrey, England, UK) between March 2000 and September 2010 at five trauma centres in Italy. The 107 males (66%) and 55 females (34%) had an average age of 44.2 years (range, 12 to 82 years). A total of 119 of the fractures occurred as isolated trauma, and 43 were part of multi-trauma. Preoperative anteroposterior (AP) and lateral radiographs and CT scans of the ankle were obtained for all patients to enable an accurate assessment of the type of fracture. The fractures were classified according to the AO/OTA system: there were 46 type A fractures, 34 type B, and 82 type C ( The timing of the operation was dictated by the status of the soft tissues. The fractures in 34 patients (21%) were treated as emergencies, with immediate debridement and temporary external fixation, and 12 patients (7%) had immediate definitive treatment. The remaining 116 patients were placed in calcaneal traction with elevation, and surgery was delayed until soft-tissue healing was obtained, an average of 8 days after trauma (range, 1 to 15 days) ( The surgery was performed with the patient supine and the involved limb in transcalcaneal traction. General anaesthesia was used in emergency treatment; in all other cases, spinal anaesthesia was used. The degree of fracture reduction obtained with ligamentotaxis was verified using fluoroscopy. The application of the external fixator was as follows: at least three Kirschner wires, with or without olives and with an angle of 35° to 40°, were placed transosseously distal to the fracture site, respecting the security corridors and with great caution to avoid the neurovascular bundles. Once placed, the Kirschner wires were tensioned to 1400 Newtons to increase the stability of the construct and were anchored to the 3/4‐ring portion of the fixator. Three hydroxyapatite-coated Schanz screws were placed on the anteromedial surface of the proximal tibial fragment and attached with a tubular rod through clamps. When adequate reduction was achieved, the construct was locked and secured. To avoid inadequate anatomic joint reduction, particularly in the more complicated pilon fractures patterns, a 4 to 5 cm long incision was made anteriorly and the ankle joint was inspected to obtain the most satisfactory anatomical reduction of the articular surface. Kirschner wires and/or screws were then inserted for additional fixation of the intra-articular fragments in 50 fractures (1 type A, 6 type B, and 43 type C); 17 were open fractures and 33 were closed ( Postoperatively, all patients had careful dressing of the surgical wounds, antibiotic therapy, and venous thromboembolism (VTE) prophylaxis with low‐molecular-weight heparin (LMWH). Passive and active rehabilitation was started on the second or third day after surgery. Weight-bearing was allowed after an average of 7 weeks, and only when radiographic signs of union were present. In all 162 fractures the external fixator was destabilised approximately 30 days before removal and dynamised about 10 days before. The fixator was removed at an average of 125.8 days after surgery (range, 95 to 143 days) when adequate healing was confirmed. Fracture healing was determined by the presence of a bridging callus in at least three of the four cortices in the AP and lateral radiographs and by the clinical impression of pain-free weight-bearing. The quality of the operative reduction was determined from final intraoperative or initial postoperative radiographs based on the criteria proposed by Ovadia and Beals The functional evaluation of the ankle was obtained with the Mazur Ankle Score, a rating system with a score from 0 to 100, which takes into account various evaluation criteria divided into three sections: pain, joint function, and range of motion All 162 patients were available for clinical and radiographic follow-up at an average of 52 months (range, 12 to 120 months). The patients with intra-articular fractures were followed‐up for a minimum of 24 months to a maximum of 120 months to evaluate the development of tibiotalar arthritis; the follow-up of extra-articular fractures was shorter (12 to 20 months). At final follow-up, the range of ankle motion averaged 10° of dorsiflexion (range, 5° to 14°) and 13° of plantarflexion (range, 5° to 20°). Clinical outcomes, assessed by the Mazur Ankle Score, were graded as excellent (90–100), good (80–89), satisfactory (70–79), sufficient (60–69), or low (<60). Overall, the average clinical score was 87 (good) ( Functional outcomes were statistically significantly better (p Radiographic fracture healing occurred in 95 to 143 days (average, 125 Union of three fractures (1.8%) was delayed, but was obtained at 6.4, 7 and 7.8 months without reoperation. There were three non‐unions (1.8%), none of which was associated with infection of the fracture site. Pin‐track infections were diagnosed in 48 patients (26%); all were effectively treated with local therapy and oral antibiotics. Rupture of anchorage elements of the external fixator occurred in two patients (1.2%), while only one patient (0.6%) had loss of reduction necessitating revision of the frame. Two patients with superficial venous thrombosis (1.2%) were treated successfully with LMWH; no DVT was detected. Distal tibial fractures are a challenge for the orthopaedic surgeon. Management of these fractures is based on the status of the soft tissues and the degree of comminution and articular damage sustained at the time of injury Since the introduction of AO fundamental principles of an anatomic reduction and stable fixation in the mid-1960s, the standard treatment of pilon fractures has been ORIF with plate and screws, with favourable results reported in up to 90% of patients The frequent complications associated with ORIF prompted the use of new treatment options, such as external fixation. External fixation can provide proper fracture reduction (even if indirectly) and drastically reduce damage to the soft tissues, favouring rapid mobilisation of the joint A prospective, randomised study by Wyrsch et al. compared ORIF and external fixation and showed that at 2-year follow-up, clinical and radiological results of the two groups were overlapping, but with a higher rate of complications in the group treated with ORIF, despite an increased number of less severe fractures in the ORIF group Despite the validity of the results obtained with hybrid fixation, most of the studies were based on series of fewer than 50 patients. Therefore, the aim of our study was to further test the effectiveness of this method in the treatment of tibial pilon fractures in a larger number of patients. In all 162 fractures in our study, the hybrid external fixator XCaliber was used. The distal tibial fragment was fixed with a minimum of three Kirschner wires tensioned and fixed to a 3/4 circular ring frame; traditional Shanz screws were used for the proximal fragment. In our opinion, the use of olive wires with an angulation of 35° to 40° and inserted in opposite directions helps achieve adequate interfragmentary compression and good joint congruity. The presence of a 3/4 ring structure improves the stability of the fixation, which enables early mobilisation. In addition, according to the biomechanical study conducted by Scott et al., the increased rigidity of the XCaliber fixator could potentially lead to a decreased union time and a lower incidence of pin loosening In the present series, the complication rate was low and broadly in line with data in the literature: non‐union (1.8%), delayed union (1.8%), superficial venous thrombosis (1.2%) and fixator mobilisation(0.6%) Although a comparison between different study results is difficult because of the variability of samples examined, the different types of classification used, and the various systems of clinical evaluation applied, our findings appear to confirm, in a wider sample, the validity of hybrid external fixation as a method of treatment for pilon fractures, particularly those with extensive comminution. The hybrid external fixator is a minimally-invasive technique that provides stable fracture fixation, which enables more rapid fracture healing and early mobilisation and significantly reduces postoperative complications. Shorter hospitalisations also reduce healthcare costs. No funding was received in support of this study. None of the other authors have any conflicts of interest to declare.