The “smart grid” represents one of the greatest potential advances in electricity delivery infrastructure in the past century. While the technologies that collectively comprise the smart grid have existed for decades, the potential for changing the way that electricity is generated, delivered, utilized and priced is revolutionary. Not surprisingly, many countries have undertaken initiatives to rollout smart grid infrastructure at an aggressive pace. Understanding the fundamental changes that the smart grid is likely to introduce is important for the development of future energy scenarios and the environmental, social and economic implications of these scenarios. Here we present an overview of the emerging smart grid and outline a few implications for the energy modeling community. Specifically, we discuss the potential for the smart grid to act as an enabling technology for renewable energy integration, price-responsive electricity demand, electrified transportation and distributed energy production as examples of how the smart grid may fundamentally change future energy system scenario development. The smart grid is being deployed and implemented much faster than we are able to fully consider its implications, and in some cases public policy has a long way to go before it catches up with the pace of smart grid technology deployment.The electric power industry worldwide is facing challenges on a seemingly unprecedented scale. For decades, the goal of the electricity industry was to produce electric power reliably and at a reasonable cost (which, until liberalization of electricity markets began with force in the 1990s, was usually determined by the state The United States and other developed nations have focused on the development of a “smart” electricity grid as the keystone to addressing the Energy Trilemma, and have moved aggressively to deploy smart grid technologies in existing electricity grids. The US, for example, has devoted tens of billions of dollars in the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (the so-called economic stimulus bill of 2009) for research and deployment of smart grid technologies. The large amount of federal funding has served to augment policies by individual states and utility companies. As we explain in Section The term “smart grid” has become so ubiquitous that the actual transformation of the electricity system has been somewhat lost in translation. Section That a smarter grid is clearly preferable to a dumber grid is such a seemingly obvious proposition that to question it seems both foolhardy and wasteful. To be sure, the potential of a fully-enabled smart grid to revolutionize the way that electricity is produced, delivered, utilized and priced is immense. As this article discusses in Section The “dumb grid” architecture served the utility industry well for over one hundred years and presided over the growth of electrification to near-universal access in developed countries over the course of the 20th century. Roughly speaking, the existing electric power supply chain has three links: generation, transmission, and distribution. Generators are electric power stations that produce electricity by various means, including the burning of fossil fuels or waste products, harnessing kinetic energy of water and wind, and nuclear fission. The various generators, which are often located large distances from consumption centers, connect to a high-voltage transmission network. Closer to the point of consumption, the transmission network is connected (through a series of step-down transformers) to a lower-voltage distribution network. A second series of transformers connects individual customers to the distribution network. The operators of the “dumb grid” were primarily concerned with the stable and reliable operation of the system. Supply and demand had to be continuously balanced in real-time, and the system had to be continually monitored. The grid itself was operated using a combination of command-and-control actions and hierarchical decision-making. Perhaps most importantly, the preferences of the customer were largely left out of the planning and operations process. Electricity consumers would respond to changes in the weather or other variables by adjusting their demands for electricity, and grid operators would respond by dispatching additional generating capacity up or down, following customers’ loads. While such a system appeared to be operating in response to the needs of the customer, the fact that the customer could not play a role in influencing operational decisions or express preferences for varying levels of service quality or reliability suggests instead that customers were forced to be as “dumb” as the grid serving them A large North American blackout in August of 2003 turned public attention to the state of the electric grid in the United States and Canada, with prominent public officials comparing US electricity infrastructure to that of a developing nation. First, the August 2003 blackout highlighted the fact that despite major advances in industry coordination and planning, electric reliability has not improved. Recent studies Second, more than half of U.S. states have adopted so-called Renewable Portfolio Standards, which mandate investments in low-emissions electric generation resources such as wind, solar, geothermal and others. The trouble for system operators arises when a large fraction of the system’s generation supply is intermittent and “non-dispatchable” by system operators, as is the case with wind and solar energy. Analysis suggests that the fluctuations in wind and solar energy are more pronounced than fluctuations in electricity demand, and compensating for these variations may be more complex than simply assigning backup generators to perform “wind-following” operations Third, the lack of customer-side participation in the “electricity marketplace” The U.S. and other nations believe that these challenges can be overcome by investing in a smarter grid. The smart grid itself is simply the application of modern communications infrastructure to various segments of the electricity grid. Few technological hardware advances are required to make the smart grid functional and useful, but the software, control systems and policies necessary to fully realize the smart grid vision are still in development. One aspect of the smart grid would improve monitoring and operating the high-voltage transmission grid. In many countries, electricity is generated at large power plants and moved long distances to the location of the end-use customers. There are some economic advantages to such a system, even though it introduces energy-inefficiencies (resistive losses along transmission lines). Smart grid technologies would enable system operators to control energy flows on the grid with more precision, through the widespread deployment of Flexible AC Transmission Systems (FACTS). FACTS devices could allow for the optimization of the transmission topology in near-real time or in response to conditions on the system. Situational awareness for the system operator, and thus the reliability of the electricity system, would be enhanced through the deployment of sensors known as “phasor measurement units” throughout the transmission grid. A second aspect of the smart grid would increase automation and control of substations on the distribution network. Such “distribution system automation” would allow utility companies to increase the connectedness of distribution networks (most of which are currently structured as radial or tree networks) and reduce the number of customers interrupted when small-scale contingencies occur, such as localized storms or other accidents that topple power poles or damage substation infrastructure. Smart distribution system automation could also allow for remote or automated control of individual customer loads. While such control naturally raises privacy issues at the level of the customer (see The final aspect of the smart grid, and perhaps the most widely known, is the customer-side “smart meter.” The smart meter is simply a digital electric meter that has the ability to store and time-stamp electricity usage. Most smart meters also allow for bi-directional communication between the utility and the customer. Thus, the utility company could read electric meters remotely and automatically, and could also send information on electricity prices or system conditions to customers, to help customers make more informed decisions. The smart meter may also work in concert with distribution system automation to enable direct control of customer loads. While the smart grid hardware itself is not revolutionary, a fully-realized and implemented smart grid would fundamentally change the way that electricity is generated, delivered, consumed and priced. Incorporating the development of the smart grid into modeling broadens the number of future energy scenarios that can be considered. In the United States, many (if not most) electricity customers face electricity prices that do not change with the time of day or even the time of year. As some U.S. states more fully transition into deregulation, retail electricity prices will more closely reflect market conditions, so some aspects of California’s electricity crisis can be averted. The use of smart meters also means that consumers will be able to see how electricity costs vary with the time of day and can potentially reduce or shift electricity usage. The emergence of “price-responsive” demand, enabled by the smart grid, has important implications for future energy scenario development, particularly related to achieving social environmental or reliability goals. The shifting of electricity demand away from peak periods and toward off-peak periods has significant implications for electricity-sector emissions. Recent scenario analyses of real-time and time-of-use pricing Small reductions in peak-time electricity demand could yield more than-proportional decreases in the need for peaking electricity generation. Spees and Lave Utilizing the smart grid to enable demand response is not limited to peak demand reduction goals or the implementation specifically of price-based programs. Advanced metering can be viewed as a platform for providing informational or other services to consumers, beyond simply the price of electricity. The use of in-home displays (IHDs) to provide usage or other information to consumers has been implemented in a number of U.S. pilot projects Energy policies in the United States and other developed nations have been encouraging the growth in renewable electricity generation, particularly wind and solar energy. The U.S. has laid out a road-map of sorts for an energy future in which 20% of the nation’s electricity is generated by wind power The load-control abilities offered by the smart grid could help system operators compensate for wind and solar variability more cheaply, cleanly and easily. Thermal storage is already in limited use in the Northeastern United States as a “load sink” for wind energy produced at night A shift away from liquid petroleum fuels to electrified transportation would effectively couple these two infrastructures, which in the United States had been previously de-coupled (because the U.S. primarily uses fuels other than petroleum for electricity generation). Previous work While sufficient generation capacity exists to charge a large fleet of electrified vehicles, it is less clear that the transmission and distribution infrastructure will be able to handle the added strain without some sort of coordinated charging strategy. Charging electric vehicles at night, for example, would flatten the daily electricity load curve, but because of off-peak demand augmentation rather than peak-time load curtailment. According to some models, the results could involve more frequent failures of equipment such as substations and transformers The automated coordination of electric vehicle charging, through a combination of command-and-control actions and economic incentives (such as time-based pricing) Even a moderate shift away from petroleum-based transportation fuels and toward electricity would have significant consequences for peak-oil future energy scenarios. Hall and Day Distributed generation (DG) and micro-grids represent an alternative architecture for the production and delivery of electric power. There is no universally accepted definition of distributed generation, but the term is generally used to describe small-scale power generation or storage that is located close to the point of consumption. The concept of DG could thus include a wide range of technologies, from small diesel- or gas-fired plants used by a utility to serve peak electricity demand, down to kilowatt-sized photovoltaic or small wind installations serving a single household. The ability to take advantage of combined heat and power (CHP) or combined cooling and power (CCP) increases the overall efficiency of a distributed energy system dramatically. While a typical modern gas-fired combustion turbine might attain 60% efficiency, the ability to capture and use the waste heat for hot water, process heat (or steam), or adsorptive cooling could increase the overall efficiency of the system to around 90%. CHP or CCP is generally more advantageous with distributed generation, since the user controls the waste heat stream, and the heat (in the form of hot water or steam) cannot be transported long distances. Large industrial and commercial users have been taking advantage of CHP for many years, and report significant cost savings Technological advances have brought down the cost of distributed generation resources, but in most cases the levelized cost of a new DG unit is still higher than the levelized cost of a new central-station generator with an identical fuel source. Regions with high electricity prices but low natural gas prices, for example, could find distributed generation to be an economical alternative to purchasing power from the grid The rollout of smart grid hardware is proceeding at a rapid pace. Lagging behind is our understanding of the complexities that the smart grid will introduce. The scope of social benefits may in some cases require careful analysis and thought. Lagging even further behind are public policies relevant to the utility industry. Electricity policies were developed during the age of the dumb grid and are thus contextually biased toward the existing infrastructure and institutions. Halting the rollout or development of the smart grid, in order to allow existing knowledge and policy to catch up, seems unwise and impractical. The policy process, as well as specific policy initiatives at multiple levels of decision-making, will likely need to become more adaptive and flexible at least four broad areas. First, implementation of smart grid systems should be undertaken with clear awareness of the benefits and costs. Section Second, researchers and policymakers need better models to evaluate the performance of smart grid systems, and to tie performance back to deployment goals. The notion that layering a network of sensors and communications on top of the existing “dumb grid” will reduce the frequency of large blackouts has not been verified or validated. The smart grid will effectively increase the complexity of an already-complex system in which large-scale failures are likely inevitable Third, regulatory policy needs to acknowledge fundamental changes in the utility industry that are likely to be brought about by the smart grid. In the U.S., state policy in particular has been slow to adapt to changes in the number and types of players that make up the electricity-sector and the fact that deregulation and the smart grid have brought an increase in distributed decision-making. This is particularly evident in the case of distributed generation and micro-grids. A recent survey of state-level public utility regulators in the United States Comparing state policies on distributed generation or micro-grid net-metering tariffs and interconnection standards is an inherently subjective exercise. The Interstate Renewable Energy Council (IREC) has assessed state-level policies relevant to distributed generation and micro-grids Fourth, the evolution of the smart grid requires engineering choices with security and privacy implications. Issues such as whether customers or utilities are ultimately in charge of controllable electric loads have not yet been fully fleshed out in all countries. (The Netherlands, in which the utility has explicit control over the smart meter, may be an exception). Ownership of the customer-level data produced by the smart grid is another issue that has yet to be decided in policy or legal circles, despite the large numbers of smart meters that are currently being deployed in the United States and other countries We do not mean to undermine or understate the promise of the smart grid in addressing the Energy Trilemma. In fact, achieving our energy-efficiency, security and environmental goals related to electricity consumption (and potentially transportation), while maintaining anything near our current levels of economic wealth, is probably impossible without the smart grid. The pace of development of the smart grid, however, has been moving faster than our ability to understand the technical and social implications of such a complex system. Public policy as well as systems research needs to be allowed to catch up. The authors would like to thank two anonymous referees, and participants at the 2010 Advanced Energy Studies conference in Barcelona, Spain. Support through the