The objective of this study was to gather pilot data of the pullout strength of intraosseous wire for fixation of fifth metatarsal avulsion fractures and to compare intraosseous wire fixation with tension-band wiring. Osteotomies consistent with fifth metatarsal avulsion fractures were created in 5 matched pairs of cadaver limbs. One limb of each pair underwent fixation with intraosseous wiring and the other with tension band wiring. Metatarsals were then loaded to failure, defined as the maximum force achieved before the slope of the load curve moved from a positive to a negative value. Tension-band wiring showed a mean strength of 164.5 ± 103.7 N compared with a mean strength of 113.7 ± 46.6 N for intraosseous wiring. No significant difference in strength was shown between methods of fixation. Although the power of this data is small (.143), the data indicate that intraosseous wiring shows similar pullout strength when compared with tension-band wiring for fixation of fifth metatarsal avulsion fractures.Avulsion fractures of the tuberosity account for 45% to 93% of all fractures of the fifth metatarsal The majority of avulsion fractures present with minimal displacement and can be treated conservatively with either cast immobilization or compressive dressings. Although most avulsion fractures are extraarticular, some extend into the metatarsocuboid joint. Surgical reduction has been recommended for those fractures involving ≥30% of the metatarsocuboid articular surface Methods of fixation include percutaneous pinning by using Kirschner wires or open reduction and internal fixation. Several different methods of internal fixation can be used for these fractures. The most common technique is tension-band wiring, as described by Pauwels Internal fixation with intraosseous wiring was originally described by Robertson Gorosh and Page The technique of intraosseous wire fixation has not been described previously for fixation of fifth metatarsal tuberosity avulsion fractures. Most clinical and biomechanical studies of fifth metatarsal fractures have focused on the more proximal Jones fracture. Few studies have examined fixation pullout strength for fifth metatarsal avulsion fractures. Husain and DeFronzo This study was performed as a pilot study to obtain introductory data for the use of intraosseous wiring for fixation of fifth metatarsal avulsion fractures, a technique commonly used at our institution Seven matched pairs of fresh-frozen cadaveric limbs that had been disarticulated at the knee were obtained from the University of Michigan Ann Arbor Anatomical Donations Program and were stored at −40°C. All pairs were matched to eliminate the variability of osteoporosis and radiographs were obtained in standard anteroposterior, lateral, and oblique views. Exclusion criteria for the specimens included any skin or soft-tissue damage over the lateral border of the foot, radiographic evidence of fifth metatarsal deformity or previous fracture, or radiographically evident discrepancies with regard to osteopenia in sets of matched limbs. One specimen did show evidence of fifth metatarsal deformity and this pair was eliminated, leaving 6 pairs for experimentation. All cadaveric dissection was performed by the same investigator (A.R.G.). The fifth metatarsal tuberosity, lateral plantar aponeurosis, and peroneus brevis insertion were carefully exposed and left intact. To create an osteotomy that closely mimicked an avulsion fracture, 30 radiographs of avulsion fractures had been reviewed before the study. More than 90% of these radiographs exhibited avulsion fractures that exited medially at the fourth metatarsocuboid articulation. Therefore, the osteotomy was created 1 cm distal to the tip of the fifth metatarsal tuberosity, exiting medially at the fourth metatarsocuboid joint articulation, using a micro-sagittal saw One limb of each pair was then fixated by using the tension-band wire technique, with the other limb fixated by using intraosseous wiring. For the tension-band technique, a drill hole was placed 1 cm distal to the osteotomy by using a 1.5-mm wire-pass drill bit. Two 0.062-inch Kirschner wires were placed across the osteotomy, exiting the medial cortex of the metatarsal without engaging the fourth metatarsal cortex. A standard figure-of-eight configuration was then created by using 24-gauge monofilament wire. For intraosseous wire fixation, a second drill hole was created 0.5 cm proximal to the osteotomy. A 24-gauge monofilament wire was passed through the distal drill hole; the inferior portion of the wire was brought superiorly and proximally and then passed through the proximal drill hole from dorsal to plantar. The wires were then twisted, creating a figure-of-eight configuration To ensure that an equal amount of tension was applied to both limbs, the osteotomy sites were compacted and the monofilament wires twisted until the conjoined knot of the wire contacted the cortex of the bone. Once twisting of the wire was noted to begin compressing the osteotomy, 5 full 360° rotations were performed. The wires were then cut and placed flush against the bone. The specimens were then loaded into an Instron Model 5866 servohydraulic materials tester (Instron, Canton, MA). Each specimen was placed onto a small platform that allowed the fifth metatarsal and lateral border of the foot to overhang the edge. The upper and lower portions of the tibia were secured to the materials tester. A jig was then fastened onto the proximal fragment. This device had been specially created to maximize stability, such that it held the proximal aspect of the metatarsal stable while the distal shaft was loaded to stress its flexural integrity and to create fixation failure. To create a loading force, a steel rod was suspended from a load cell on the biomaterials tester. The distal end of the rod was bent to fit behind the fifth metatarsal head. During testing, the load cell pulled the rod upward, creating a vertical force to bend the metatarsal and to stress the fixation to failure As specimens were loaded at 1 cm/second, data were recorded and load curves were generated, with the force of the load in N plotted against the vertical extension of the load cell in mm. Failure was defined as the transition point in which the slope of the plot underwent a significant change from a positive to a negative value. During testing of 1 specimen, the plotting software failed to record a load curve. This matched pair was thus eliminated, leaving 5 final matched pairs for statistical analysis. Load curves were created by using Merlin (Instron, Canton, MI) plotting software. Failure occurred in the intraosseous wire specimen at approximately 69 N and at approximately 87 N for the tension-band wire. To closely mimic physiologic loading, we chose a cantilever method of loading for this study. Landsman Comparison of our findings with those of previous studies is difficult, primarily because of the fact that other studies concentrating on pullout strength of the fixation have used markedly different testing methods. Vanik et al In the study by Husain and Defronzo In our study, we wanted to maintain the most physiologic load possible. Cadaveric specimens were left entirely intact, removing only enough soft tissue to create and fixate simulated fifth metatarsal base avulsion fractures. Physiologic loads were created Our hypothesis was that no significant difference existed between both testing groups. We wanted to compare this new approach for fixation of fifth metatarsal avulsion fractures with the established method of tension-band wiring. Although our sample size was small, there was no significant difference between these 2 methods. We have used a variety of methods of internal fixation for treatment of these fractures including screws, tension-band wires, and intraosseous wires. Clinically, we have noted no difference in time to healing with any of these methods of fixation, and we have had fewer complications with intraosseous wire compared with other types of fixation. Despite the low power, we believe that the intraosseous wire has shown considerable strength at a mean 113 N. Further clinical studies are needed in addition to this pilot laboratory study to establish the benefits of this technique compared with other methods. There are several weaknesses with this study. In the operating room, the amount of tension applied to the wires during fixation is based on surgeon discretion. For this study, an attempt was made to apply consistent tension in the wires by performing 5 full 360° rotations to all specimens. However, it is unknown whether the tension was truly consistent and interspecimen variability may have occurred. The sample size is also extremely small, resulting in the low power of this study. It was determined that a power of .79 could be reached in this study by testing 15 pairs of limbs, or 30 total cadaveric limbs. However, we were unable to perform this number of trials because of financial constraints. Despite a low observed power, these data suggest that intraosseous wiring is comparable in strength with tension-band wiring for open reduction and internal fixation of fifth metatarsal avulsion fractures.  The authors thank Steven Schwartz, PhD, for help with statistical analysis and Kurt Miller, PhD, and Larry Maciag of Axel Products (Ann Arbor, MI) for the use of their facility, equipment, and help with the design and testing during this project. The authors also thank John Harris, DPM, for help with cadaver dissection and technical assistance.