An attempt to design a sensorially attractive product addressed to consumers with Inflammatory Bowel Disease was made. Potato juice, in fresh and spray-dried forms, was chosen as bioactive agent, and the quality of finely comminuted frankfurter sausages produced with its addition was evaluated. The obtained products were analyzed for their proximate composition, textural properties, microstructure and water dynamics.
                  The results indicate that sausages produced with potato juice addition find satisfactory consumer acceptance and do not differ significantly in terms of protein, fat, salt and water content. Nonetheless, the form in which the juice was applied significantly influenced texture, microstructure and water dynamics of the final product. While the results obtained with native potato juice addition indicate that it can simply be used in exchange of water in the recipe, the addition of spray-dried juice impacted free water content and fat emulsification enough to significantly change the texture of the ready frankfurters, better dispersion and smaller size of fat droplets were observed. This was accompanied by increased maximum shear force.Consumers’ expectations of food in countries with high Human Development Index value have expanded from simple satisfaction of hunger to proper nutritional value, or even health-promotion. This tendency is associated with the dynamics of occurrence of diet-related diseases. Beside lifestyle diseases, such as diabetes, hypertension and obesity, diseases affecting the gastrointestinal (GI) tract should also be considered important, with cancer and Inflammatory Bowel Disease (IBD) among them ( Meat is rich in iron in a form that is efficiently assimilated. Easily digested meat products enriched with natural substances proven to relieve the inflammatory condition could be helpful. Fortification of such products with plant-derived substrates has lately been gaining attention as a way to improve their nutritional value ( Finely comminuted frankfurters are cooked smoked sausages of a homogeneous and smooth texture that results from using bowl cutter for preparation of the raw material ( Potato juice has been long present in the traditional European folk medicine as a cure for gastric ulcer, it has potential to be used as an inflammation revealing additive. The functional effectiveness and safety of potato juice were verified at the turn of the 21st century. It activity was clinically confirmed ( Potato juice is a by-product generated periodically during starch production season, practically only in September and October. As already mentioned, it is an unstable material, thus if continuous production of supplemented frankfurters is to be considered, the juice has to undergo stabilization. As exposure to high temperatures does not exert negative effect on its biological activity, it is possible to utilize it in both fresh and spray-dried form ( Freshly squeezed juice from potato variety “Agatha” and spray-dried powder obtained from it were used for fortification of frankfurters. Dried juice was obtained according to the procedure described in Polish Patent Application ( The sausages were prepared using meat from turkey shank (without skin) and pork jowl. The raw materials used, as well as the formulation, complied with dietetic recommendations addressed to patients suffering from inflammatory bowel disease and were consulted with the Regional Branch of the Polish Association Supporting People with Inflammatory Bowel Disease. These are in accordance with the current clinical knowledge ( Water content was determined according to The texture was analysed using Warner–Bratzler shear test, often employed to test the tenderness of meat products ( Before the texture assessment 15 cores of 50 For the purpose of histological analyses frankfurter samples were collected after 24 Images were taken using Axiolab microscope (Zeiss) with a CCD camera and analyzed using MuliScan v.13.01 software. For all preparations a uniform procedure of object identification and analysis was developed. All the preparations were examined at 200× magnification factor. The following parameters were determined: area of fat fields, the number and the percentage of fat fields in the analyzed field of vision. The samples of 1.5 The inversion-recovery (π–TI–π/2) impulse sequence ( Calculations of the spin–lattice relaxation time values were performed with the assistance of the CracSpin program ( A monoexponential magnetisation recovery was found, which means that the system relaxes with one Measurements of the To calculate the spin–spin relaxation time values, the authors applied the adjustment of values of the echo amplitudes to the formula ( Consumer rating was performed using the 10-centimeter unstructured line scale. 50 people were asked to rank the following characteristics: appearance, taste, fragility and an overall rating. Selected distances are shown in numerical values, assuming that the entire range of the scale is 10 arbitrary units. All measurements were done in six repetition, unless stated otherwise. One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was conducted independently for each dependent variable. Post-hoc Tukey HSD multiple comparison test was used to identify statistically homogeneous subsets The composition of the tested sausages was designed so as to allow constant elementary composition. The results of proximate analyses confirmed that this goal was achieved ( Though no significant differences were observed in free water, fat, protein and salt content between the variants, the results of texture analyses varied ( Values of As determined, the addition of potato juice, in any of its forms, resulted in decreased spin–lattice relaxation time Water mobility is another parameter influenced by the addition of potato juice. This is illustrated by the values of the long components of the spin–spin relaxation time Furthermore, the short component of the spin–spin relaxation time The conducted low field NMR analyzes indicate that the addition of fresh potato juice caused free water content to decrease (lower Fat, besides protein and water, is one of the main components of meat-derived products that has been shown to be crucial in forming their structure ( Whenever new functional ingredients are utilized for modification of conventional products it is vital to not only determine the necessary amount of these, but also to verify whether the acceptance of potential consumers has not been affected ( Finely comminuted frankfurters fortified with potato juice are products with physiochemical properties similar to that of the standard product that find consumer acceptance. The form in which the juice is introduced into the recipe influences the texture, microstructure and water dynamics of the final product. The effects were more significant when the products were fortified with spray-dried juice. While native potato juice can be simply applied in exchange of water, the addition of spray-dried juice has been shown to have influence on textural parameters in Warner–Bratzler shearing tests. Further analyzes indicated that the observed differences result from changes that the potato juice undergoes while exposed to elevated temperatures during the spray-drying process. These changes triggered a decrease in the free water amount in the final product determined by low field NMR that showed as decreased spin–lattice relaxation time accompanied unchanged long component spin–spin relaxation time. The effects are also associated with better emulsification of fat in the final product visible in microscopic images as greater amount of smaller sized droplets compared to control. The work was financially supported by the Grant POIG 01.01.02-00-061/09 “Bioactive food” implemented within the Programme Innovative Economy 2007–2013.