Hypophosphatasia (HPP) is a rare disease caused by a genetic metabolic defect biochemically characterized by low serum activity values of alkaline phosphatase. It is caused by mutations in the gene encoding the It should be noted that there are 4 genes encoding alkaline phosphatase: The dominant or recessive inheritance of this disease, with more than 300 mutations described to date in the gene The accumulation of other TNSALP natural substrates such as pyridoxal 5′-phosphate can have important clinical consequences in the neonate, causing seizures, since this circulating form of vitamin B6 is necessary for the synthesis of neurotransmitters. In the adult, determining their plasma concentration is very useful in the diagnostic suspicion of HPP. Finding low serum alkaline phosphatase (hypophosphatasaemia) levels is not synonymous with HPP. Thus, a study that evaluated the genetic abnormalities of a group of patients between 20 and 77 years of age who had inexplicably low alkaline phosphatase levels, detected that only half of them had a mutation in the gene encoding TNSALP, with the majority being asymptomatic or with mild symptoms. It is important to note that the most severe forms of HPP occur during childhood, and that the clinical expression of this disease in adults varies greatly, from less symptomatic to more severe forms. The typical symptom is recurrent stress fractures predominantly in metatarsals and, occasionally, HPP can be manifested by proximal femur pseudofractures. In severe, sporadic adult forms, HPP may manifest by fractures anywhere in the skeleton. In general, the most severe manifestations of HPP occur in patients with the lowest values of alkaline phosphatase. The diagnosis of HPP in clinical practice is a challenge. Its low prevalence makes identification difficult, especially when there is overlapping of symptoms with other more prevalent diseases. In addition, the little importance given in clinical practice to decreased serum alkaline phosphatase activity, in contrast with the high regard given to an increase in alkaline phosphatase, is another limiting factor for diagnosis. In fact, it has been estimated that in patients admitted to a tertiary hospital the prevalence of persistently low alkaline phosphatase is 0.13% and that, in addition, it is only recognized in 3% of cases. The diagnosis is of particular relevance due to the potential severity of the disease, the significant impact on the quality of life that many of the patients may experience, or the possible iatrogenesis that can determine a wrong diagnosis. Along with this, the recent availability of an enzyme replacement treatment specific to HPP, The objective of this article is to provide an eminently practical document with general recommendations to facilitate the identification and diagnosis of adult patients with HPP. The clinical manifestations of the adult form of HPP are very variable, requiring a high index of suspicion for its diagnosis. Consequently, this is probably the most underdiagnosed form of HPP. The delay in diagnosis is common and most of the patients diagnosed report having experienced symptoms of rickets or premature loss of primary teething in childhood. A deficiency in mineralization is the cause of the development of the most common bone manifestations in adult patients, such as stress fractures that are difficult to consolidate (non-traumatic recurrent fractures are the key element of HPP in apparently healthy adults). The most commonly described radiological manifestations in the adult form of HPP are metatarsal stress fractures, femoral pseudo-fractures (Looser-Milkman syndrome, typical of osteomalacia), osteopenia, chondrocalcinosis ( In some adults there are calcium pyrophosphate crystal depositions and subsequent chondrocalcinosis. Other manifestations of this metabolic abnormality are multiple calcific tendinitis and ligament ossification, Contrary to what has been observed in other forms of rickets or osteomalacia, patients with HPP frequently (around 50%) have high serum phosphate values, due to an increase in tubular phosphate reabsorption (increased TmP/GFR). On the other hand, hypercalcemia is very rare in adults, which can complicate the most severe forms of HPP. The elevated plasma concentrations of pyridoxal-5′-phosphate are a sensitive and specific biochemical marker of HPP. The total activity of alkaline phosphatase in healthy adults is considerably lower than that observed in children and adolescents. The reference values for the determination of the total activity of alkaline phosphatase in adult patients vary, depending on the technique used for its analysis, ranging from 34 to 150 A key element in the diagnosis of adult HPP lies in the fact that the overlap between its clinical manifestations and those of other skeletal diseases can lead to wrong diagnoses and inadequate treatments. Thus, the low bone mineral density that may occur in adult patients with HPP, together with stress fractures, usually leads to the diagnosis of osteoporosis and treatment with bisphosphonates, which may increase the risk of atypical femoral fractures. Other diseases may present osteomalacia by inducing hypocalcaemia, hypophosphatemia or direct inhibition of the bone mineralization process by different mechanisms. In addition, osteogenesis imperfecta must be part of the differential diagnosis of HPP in adults with low bone mineral density and fragility fractures, and may require a molecular diagnosis. Increased substrate levels and clinical signs suggestive of HPP will support the diagnosis of the disease, which can be confirmed by molecular analysis of the There is currently no established pharmacological treatment for adult HPP, Isolated cases of HPP treated with teriparatide (PTH 1–34) or PTH 1–84 have been described, An enzyme replacement treatment with  HPP is a rare disease of bone and mineral metabolism characterized by a deficiency in alkaline phosphatase activity due to mutations in the Depending on the underlying genetic basis and the age of onset, HPP comprises a broad phenotypic spectrum that encompasses serious life-threatening forms of early onset, in the neonate, to less symptomatic and nonspecific forms of later onset. The diagnostic strategy in adult patients with a high index of clinical suspicion of HPP should include the observation of low levels of serum alkaline phosphatase activity, radiological abnormalities, the accumulation of substrates of alkaline phosphatase (particularly pyridoxal-5′ phosphate) and molecular analysis. The development of specific algorithms allows a better approach to the diagnostic challenge posed by HPP, especially in the adult form, whose phenotypic overlap with other forms of bone fragility can lead to inadequate treatments that worsen the prognosis. Teriparatide is a therapeutic option for the treatment of bone manifestations of this disease in adults, although the results have not always been positive in the long term. The recent approval of Document endorsed by the Spanish Society of Bone Research and Mineral Metabolism (SEIOMM). The authors declare that they have received fees from Alexion Pharmaceuticals as consultants. The authors wish to thank Alexion Pharmaceuticals for the logistical support given to the working group meeting (the contents of which are the sole responsibility of the authors). The authors also wish to thank Ogilvy Healthworld for the editorial support.