The paper is focused on the use of solvent extraction for purification of leach liquor solutions obtained by leaching of NiMH spent batteries: dissolved nickel is separated from manganese and zinc by liquid–liquid extraction using D2EHPA. Two extractants were investigated: D2EHPA and Cyanex 272 in n-dodecane, and the preliminary tests suggested that D2EHPA is more efficient to separate Mn and Zn from the leaching solutions. Under the optimized conditions it is observed that in extraction circuit a recovery >99% of zinc and >95% of manganese is archived. The experimental results suggested that two cross-flow liquid–liquid extraction steps are adequate to extract 100% of Zn and about 95% of Mn while the residual Ni was about 80% of its initial content. The extracted elements are stripped using a 4M sulfuric acid solution and the stripping yields were very high, >99% for Ni and Zn and about 98% for Mn. Finally, a possible process flowsheet to separate Mn and Zn from leach liquor of NiMH spent batteries by solvent extraction is proposed. The process includes two stages of extraction with 20% v/v of D2EHPA in n-dodecane (O/A=1/1, room temperature, 30min of contact, pH≤2.5) and one stage of stripping with 4M of H2SO4 (O/A=1/0.5, room temperature, 15min of contact). The raffinate rich in Ni has the following composition: 32g/L of Ni, 0.87g/L of Mn, and the aqueous liquid from the stripping step had the following concentrations: 9.86g/L of Zn, 18g/L of Mn and 7.33g/L of Ni. The first solution could be treated to recover Ni, for example by precipitation, whereas the second liquid could be recycled in electrolytic section to recover metallic zinc and manganese oxide.Solvent extraction is one of the most efficient methods used to remove, separate and concentrate metallic species from aqueous media. The use of liquid–liquid extraction technology in industry has increased rapidly since 1970, and in the last 10       The solvent extraction technology is widely used to recover metals from different kinds of waste (i.e. electronic devices, spent catalysts, spent batteries). NiMH spent batteries represent an important source of metals that can be recovered. These batteries consist of a nickel metal hydride negative electrode and a nickel hydroxide positive electrode. Anode, used as hydrogen storage, constituted by alloy based on mischmetal (mainly Ce, La). Recycling of NiMH spent batteries reduces the environmental impact and it is also important for valorization of secondary raw materials (for example rare earths, nickel). Many processes were developed to treat these wastes. Generally speaking, the hydrometallurgical processes provide leaching of NiMH spent batteries with different kind of acids and further recovery of rare earths and other metals by precipitation or solvent extraction technology. Various hydrometallurgical treatments for recycling of NiMH spent batteries foresee a liquid–liquid extraction to recover metals (     The present paper describes in detail the experimental tests carried out on pregnant solutions simulating the leach liquors of NiMH spent batteries to separate manganese and zinc from nickel by solvent extraction. The study is part of a research project on the development of a process that treats NiMH spent batteries in sulfate medium and presented in our previous work ( The previous work showed that the NiMH spent batteries could be leached with sulfuric acid solution and lanthanum and cerium were recovered by precipitation with NaOH; as regard to other metals, contained in leach liquors, this recovery was not efficient. In this present paper solvent extraction is investigated to separate contaminants like Mn and Zn from leaching solutions, so that Ni containing in leach liquor can further be processed for nickel recovery. Sulfuric acid (CARLO ERBA, 96%) and citric acid (CARLO ERBA, 99.5%) were used as leaching reagents whereas sodium hydroxide (FLUKA Chemika, ≥ Aqueous pregnant solutions were used for solvent extraction experiments containing nickel, manganese and zinc with similar concentrations of real leaching solutions of NiMH spent batteries. Typical values considered were 40 Spent NiMH batteries powder was obtained by grinding NiMH spent batteries with an industrial shredder and sieving process and was analyzed by X-ray fluorescence (SPECTRO XEPOS) and atomic absorption spectrometry (VARIAN AA240FS) after chemical attack of the solid samples in order to evaluate percentages of various elements in the powder. Several leaching tests were carried out using grain size Details of experimental procedures for characterization of spent NiMH powder, leaching and precipitation tests are described in our previous work ( Three series of tests were carried out to define the optimum conditions for zinc, manganese and nickel separation by solvent extraction. In preliminary experiments the aim was to study extraction of Ni–Mn–Zn and to choose the best extractants between two organic extractants: Cyanex 272 and D2EHPA. In the second series of tests, several experiments were carried out to investigate the influence of % v/v of D2EHPA in n-dodecane, O/A volume ratio and pH values on extraction yields of metals. Finally, other experiments were performed to examine the number of extraction stages which could be sufficient to purify leach liquors from Mn and Zn. Each test was carried out in separator funnels, at room temperature at desired O/A volume ratio for 30 Two different types of tests were carried out to evaluate the stripping efficiency of sulfuric acid to extract manganese and zinc from the organic phase. The organic liquid from extraction tests contacted with sulfuric acid in separating funnel for about 15 In the first experiment 2 X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy (XRF, SPECTRO XEPOS) method was used to determine metal concentration in solid material samples, while concentrations of Ni, Mn and Zn in the aqueous phase were determined by atomic absorption spectroscopy method (AAS, VARIAN AA240FS). Concentrations of these metals in the organic phases were deducted by subtracting the refined concentrations from initials g/l in the aqueous solutions. XRF analysis of initial washed powder showed that nickel, manganese and zinc are predominant metals in the analyzed powder (14.3% Mn, 11.7% Ni, 5.30% Zn). Lanthanum and cerium are also found in significant concentration (3.65% La and 1.68% Ce). Results of quantitative analysis by AAS indicate a metal content of about 29% Ni, 13% Mn and 8% Zn. The results of leaching tests permitted to highlight that the most suitable conditions for leaching process were 2 The leach liquors after RE precipitation are collected in order to carry out a further selective precipitation step. The aim is to evaluate if other base metals could be selectively removed from the leach liquor. Precipitation of base metals is carried out adding further NaOH and investigating larger pH levels: after reaching a pH value the suspension is filtered, the solid recovered and further NaOH is added to reach the next pH level; this procedure was repeated at three times 2, 5 and 7 as pH levels.  From the solution obtained after RE removal it is possible to collect some rich fraction (with Ni, Mn, and Zn) by selective precipitation. Nevertheless, in order to obtain high purities and base metal separations a liquid–liquid process seems to be necessary. The details of experimental procedure for characterization of spent NiMH powder, leaching and precipitation tests are described in a previous work ( The first series of test was carried out to investigate the extraction of Ni, Mn and Zn and to choose the more efficient extractant between D2EHPA and Cyanex 272. Metal ions extraction with these organic phases is described by the following theoretical reaction, assuming that the organic species as dimer in alkaline solutions: metal ions in aqueous liquid; organic species. The mechanism of extraction considers only the extraction of each metal ion, assuming that: the metal species (Zn, Mn and Ni) are divalent ions; the mechanism of extraction is described by reaction the transfer of the metal in the organic phase is not influenced by other metal ions present in the aqueous phase, i.e. it is assumed that there is not co-extraction of metals; there is no formation of metal–extractant complexes, undissociated molecules of extractants or molecular of diluents; the formation of intermediate complexes not extractable is negligible. The first test was performed with a solution with concentration close to those obtained after leaching and precipitation step ( The influence of pH on the extraction by using D2EHPA in n-dodecane is shown in The maximization of the extraction differences ΔE reported below implies the optimization of the extraction pH: E refers to the extraction percentage for each pH value. The second test was performed with aqueous solution in the same conditions of the first experiment, while the organic phase consisted of theoretical stoichiometric concentration (Eq. Several equilibrium models for solvent extraction of metals by D2EHPA have been proposed in the literature ( This mechanism describes the extraction of single metal ion (for example only Zn) with D2EHPA. The reaction The generic reaction metallic species (Zn/Mn/Ni); extractant (D2EHPA) in organic phase; number of moles; metallic species in organic phase. To determine exact real moles of D2EHPA in the experimental conditions investigated with real concentrations of metals in the aqueous phase, the distribution ratio of each metals is considered: distribution ratio of metal; equilibrium constant of reaction. The results obtained from the first experiment with D2EHPA (2.42 Several tests were carried out to determine the best conditions for extraction of Mn and Zn from aqueous phase. The aim of this series of experiments was to investigate the trend of extraction of metals by changing three factors: % v/v of D2EHPA (10–55% v/v) in n-dodecane, O/A volume ratio (0.5–1.5) and pH (1–5) of extraction. In each test concentrations of metals were 40 Where X  The best operating conditions to maximize the extraction of Mn and Zn and to minimize the extraction of Ni are: pH 20% v/v D2EHPA in n-dodecane; O/A volume ratio These conditions were adopted for solvent extraction test. Solvent extraction tests were carried out with D2EHPA (20% v/v) in n-dodecane and at pH less than 2.5 because the results of preliminary test showed that these were the more efficient conditions to extract Mn and Zn from aqueous phase. The experimental temperature was set at 25  Data for the first stage are similar to those expected from the mathematical models and this confirms that relations The results of this test suggest that two steps are adequate to extract 100% Zn, 95% Mn and whereas the residual aqueous phase contains about 80% of Ni. Total organic phase has the compositions of 5 In the first stripping 2 The stripping yields are > According to experimental results obtained in the experimental campaign a possible process for treatment of NiMH spent batteries was developed. washing of initial NiMH spent batteries powder to remove soluble compounds like KOH and chlorine compounds. The washing could be carried out using 20% pulp density at room temperature for 1 first leaching of the powder with 2 second leaching of solid residue with 1 precipitation step with NaOH until pH of 1.6 to precipitate and recover La and Ce. The recover yields of rare earths are estimated about 99%; liquid–liquid extraction with D2EHPA (20% v/v) in organic solvent like kerosene or n-dodecane in two stages to obtain refined rich in Ni with traces of Mn and Zn. This solution is sent to a step to recover nickel; stripping of organic phase with 4 The characterization of NiMH spent batteries showed that Ni, Mn and Zn were the most concentrated metals in this type of batteries, but also important were La and Ce (about 29% Ni, 13% Mn, 8% Zn, 5% La and 2% Ce). The previous tests described in our previous work ( It is possible to conclude that: The order of extraction is Zn Two stages of extraction are enough to remove Zn and Mn. The conditions for each step are O/A Stripping tests demonstrate that sulfuric acid solution is very efficient to remove metals from organic phase and one stage of stripping is enough if 4 The stripping yields are very high: 99% Zn, 94% Mn and 92% Ni whereas the aqueous phase contains 9.86 In conclusion, from these results it can be inferred that a suitable recovery process provides 2 stages of extraction with 20% v/v of D2EHPA in n-dodecane (O/A A possible future work will be aimed at minimization of the co‐extraction of Ni to lose less nickel during extraction of manganese and zinc. The authors acknowledge Mrs Fabiola Ferrante and Marcello Centofanti for their assistance in XRF characterization and AAS analysis. The authors especially thank the Cytec company for giving a free sample of Cyanex 272 that was carried out in the experiments.