In atmospheric direct leaching of sulphidic zinc concentrates, oxygen acts as an oxidant in the dissolution. The amount of oxygen in the solution has an important effect on the kinetics of the whole process. In this paper, four laboratory scale equipment are used for studying the gas mass transfer in the leaching process. With each experimental set-up it is possible to analyse some of the factors affecting the k
                     L
                     a, k
                     L and a coefficients. The gas flow rate and mixing intensity increased the k
                     L
                     a as expected. Also the k
                     L value was increased with mixing intensity, but increasing salt concentration had an opposite effect. Lowering the surface tension and increasing the density of liquid decreased the bubble Sauter mean diameter and therefore the total gas–liquid interfacial area a was increased. Oxygen consumption into solution was slightly increased with temperature. On the other hand the effect of pressure and mixing was notable. By combining the results of different equipment enables us to study the mass transfer as a function of parameters such as: temperature, pressure, liquid properties and mixing conditions. Knowing the mass transfer coefficients is essential for process development and design.In atmospheric leaching, the zinc concentrates are oxidised in sulphuric acid media, where iron couple Fe Gas–liquid mass transfer has been widely studied and a great deal of published information can be found. Volumetric mass transfer coefficient In this paper, four laboratory scale equipment are used to determine the gas–liquid mass transfer coefficients Chemical engineering operations can be divided into three different transfer phenomena: momentum, heat and mass transfer, which are presented with the same basic formula Mass transfer rate of gas Increasing salt concentration, the gas solubility is nearly always found to decrease due to “salting-out effect” of the ions. At moderate high salt concentrations, the effect of salt concentration, Solubility of oxygen in water and in salt solutions containing 1 Calculated solubility values are used in the further calculations together with the experimental results. The pilot water model The volumetric mass transfer coefficient was determined using dynamic pressure method, which has been widely used in air–water systems The values represent the average of three experiments. Volumetric mass transfer coefficient measured from the point 2 with a gas flow rate of 2.5 The effect of liquid properties on bubble size was analysed in square 0.6 Increasing the gas flow rate increases the bubble diameter as pointed out earlier by O’Connor et al. (1989), The effect of surface tension of liquid on bubble size was determined with water containing frother DowFrother 250A, chemical formula CH The composition of the liquids used in the experiments for determining the affect of surface tension and density on the Sauter mean diameter at 80  Decreasing the surface tension from liquid 1 to 6 decreases the bubble diameter. Also the increasing of liquid density decreases the bubble diameter in orders 1, 2 and 3, respectively. The effect of density on bubble size is not straightforward and therefore also the effect of viscosity should be examined more closely. The valence combination of the salts 3–1 and 2–2 electrolytes begin to prevent coalescence at ambient temperature in the concentration range 0.03–0.036 The following experimental set-up was designed for determining the mass transfer coefficient The gas–liquid interface inside the cup was controlled with a mercury regulator, see The reproducibility experiments were carried out by measuring the mass transfer coefficient The liquid phase was stirred with a four-blade straight impeller ( The values of mass transfer coefficient Mass transfer experiments at higher temperatures and pressures were carried out in an autoclave with total reactor volume of 30 The air was removed from the reactor with a vacuum pump before the experiments. Experiment was carried out with a solution containing 50 The oxygen consumption rate in the reactor was measured by recording the absolute pressure drop in the container. As the oxygen was consumed in the leaching according to reactions 1, 2 and 3, the pressure in the container decreased from where the rate was calculated, see The leaching experiment indicated three clearly different stages, and which were divided into times between 0–6, 6–72 and 72–144 The liquid samples analysed with atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS) was used to determine the recovery of zinc, see Iron couple Fe Values calculated from the experimental results for oxygen consumption in test and real process solution are collected in Increasing temperature from 50 to 90 Four different types of equipment have been demonstrated for describing the mass transfer between gas and liquid in leaching of sulphidic zinc concentrates. According to experimental results presented following conclusions may be drawn: In water model the increasing of gas flow rate and mixing speed of the impeller increased the volumetric mass transfer coefficient In most cases the values of mass transfer coefficient The average and Sauter mean diameter of bubbles decreased significantly with decreasing of surface tension or increasing of density causing increasing in total interfacial area The experiments carried out in autoclave for process solution at elevated pressure, temperature and variable stirring speeds gave oxygen consumption rate values of 0.018–0.075 [mmol/s The experimental techniques developed can be considered suitable for determining the gas–liquid mass transfer in atmospheric direct leaching of sulphidic zinc concentrates. The author is grateful to Outokumpu Foundation, Finnish Cultural Foundation and Ella and Georg Ehrnrooth Foundation for the financial support and to Outokumpu Research Oy and Kokkola Zinc Oy for the contribution to this research work. Also the important assistance of Prof. Juan Yianatos and Mr. Nicolas Bergh at the Technical University of Federico Santa Maria and Mr. Esa Antila and Mr. Rodrigo Grau at Helsinki University of Technology is gratefully acknowledged.