Application of the thin-layer wicking (TLW) technique on powdered minerals is useful for characterizing their surfaces. Albite (Na-feldspar) and orthoclase (K-feldspar) are feldspar minerals which are frequently found in the same matrix. Despite similarities in their physicochemical properties, separation of these minerals from each other by flotation is generally possible in the presence of monovalent salts such as NaCl. Both albite and orthoclase exhibit the same microflotation properties and rather close electrokinetic profiles in the absence of salt. In this study, contact angles of albite and orthoclase determined by the TLW technique yielded close values in the absence and presence of amine collector. While the calculated surface energies and their components determined using contact angle data reveal that the energy terms remain farther apart in the absence of the collector, the differences narrow down at collector concentrations where full flotation recoveries are obtained. However, the effect of addition of NaCl on contact angles and surface free energy components at constant amine concentration indicates that albite is significantly affected by salt addition, whereas orthoclase remains marginally affected. This interesting finding is explained on the basis of ion-exchange properties, the stability of the interface, flotation data, and zeta potential data in the presence of NaCl.Feldspar is a basic raw material used in the glass and ceramics industries. In a significant proportion of feldspar ores, Na-feldspar (albite, NaAlSi Measurement of contact angles and surface/interface energies provides a better understanding of interactions between solids and liquids. These interactions are important in a wide variety of industrial applications involving hydrophobicity, such as adhesion, coating, printing, deinking, lubrication, and flotation. The most common measure of hydrophobicity is the contact angle, which is usually determined on very smooth or polished flat surfaces. However, it is usually an exhaustive procedure to obtain perfectly smooth surfaces with some minerals. Also, polishing itself in some cases may distort the atomic rearrangement on the surface as abrasive materials are used for cutting and polishing. For this reason, in recent years numerous methods, e.g., capillary rise, thin layer and column wicking, and heat of immersion methods have been developed to measure contact angles on powdered minerals Washburn, about a century ago, developed the Washburn equation for capillary and friction forces The contact angle of a liquid on a solid for thin-layer wicking measurement is given by the Washburn equation Until today there has been no exact measurement technique to directly measure the solid surface free energies (surface tensions). For this reason, in recent years, some techniques using the surface tensions of known liquids have attempted to determine solid surface free energies. The calculated values of surface free energies and their components are only approximations. Experimental and theoretical determination of the surface free energies of solids has been a difficult matter. Contact angles obtained by the TLW technique are often criticized for yielding inconsistent results, particularly in the calculation of energy components. Van Oss and his associates in the 1980s were the first to calculate the surface free energy of a solid as the sum of Lifshitz–van der Waals ( The interface energy between solid and liquid is a cumulative expression obtained by substituting acid–base and Lifshitz–van der Waals force components (work of adhesion) into the surface free energy sum of each material; this function is shown as In this study, the contact angles of powdered feldspar (albite and orthoclase) samples were measured using the TLW method in the absence and presence of amine collector and NaCl. The surface free energies, particularly in the presence of NaCl, are analyzed to see if the selective separation of these feldspar minerals can be correlated with the corresponding flotation conditions. Albite of the Cine–Aydin and orthoclase of the Gordes–Manisa regions were received as pure crystals 2–3 cm in size. These crystals were crushed by a hammer and ground in an agate mortar, followed by screening to produce a sample for microflotation studies ( The apolar liquids heptane, octane, decane, and dodecane and the polar liquids bromonapthelene and ethylene glycol are of Merck analytical grade. Distilled water used in the experiments has a conductivity value of The electrokinetic measurements were performed by a Zeta Meter 3.0 which was equipped with a microprocessor unit to directly calculate the zeta potential. A sample of 0.2 g feldspar in 50 ml of solution was conditioned for 10 min. The suspension was kept still for one additional minute to let the larger particles settle in a cell. All measurements were made at ambient temperature and converted to Microflotation tests were carried out in a 150-ml column cell ( Contact angle measurements were carried out by the TLW method. An aqueous suspension of albite and orthoclase was prepared by dispersing a known amount of sample in distilled water. The suspension was agitated to keep the particles in suspension. An appropriate solids concentration was found to be 5% by weight after a series of trial tests. Approximately 4 ml of suspension was withdrawn with a pipette and sprayed over a glass slide The wicking experiments were performed by immersing the coated glass slides in the vertical position to a depth of about 5 mm in a test liquid, using a 50-ml beaker. Before actual immersion, the coated slide was kept inside the closed container for about 1 h to allow the powder to come to equilibrium with the vapor of the wicking liquid. This procedure was followed to equalize the spreading pressure, which can disturb the measurements. The slide was then immersed into the liquid, and the vertical movement of the liquid through the particle bed was observed. After the liquid traveled to the required distance (e.g., between 1 and 3 cm), the experiment was stopped by removing the slide from the glass container. Each sample was repeated at least three times. All experiments were conducted at a room temperature of The value of The surface of feldspar is composed of positive and negative sites. The positive sites are mostly Na  Microflotation studies were initiated to determine the flotation recoveries of both minerals albite and orthoclase versus reagent concentration. TLW experiments yield linear plots of The effective pore radius was used in the determination of contact angle for polar liquids by immersing mineral-coated glass slides into water, 1-bromonaphthelene, formamide, and ethylene glycol. The wettabilities of both albite and orthoclase minerals for polar liquids are summarized in Contact angle, together with collector adsorption, is a major indicator for identifying whether flotation conditions are capable of separating the two feldspar minerals. Contact angle also yields important information on the extent of hydrophobicity of minerals. Many researchers have reported contact angles for water on different minerals using TLW; the contact angle for water on calcite was found to be approximately 77°, that on talc 84°, and 75° for amine-activated anatase In flotation, relatively fine particles are used to induce selective separation, as hydrophobicity is usually claimed to increase with decreasing size. Therefore, in this study, the TLW method was utilized on particles having a mean size of 9 μm. The results are listed in The difficulties observed in selective recovery of albite and orthoclase by flotation have been noted As is evident from  It is well known that surface tension and surface free energy are very important parameters in flotation. Both albite and orthoclase minerals used in the experiments are hydrophilic. In order to float these minerals their surfaces are covered with a hydrophobic reagent so that they can attach to the bubble and rise to the top of the froth zone. The surface energy of minerals decreases with increasing hydrophobicity; this relation is investigated in this study for both albite and orthoclase in the absence and presence of a cationic collector. The surface free energies can be derived from contact angle ( Contact angle data with water and three different polar liquids given in As shown in  The values of Calculation of interface energies in Eq. Surface free energy components for calcium carbonate determined using the TLW technique (based on Washburn's equation) show that the Lifshitz–van der Waals interaction for this solid, Introduction of NaCl into the feldspar flotation system at constant amine concentration (0.3 mg/L) improved the relative selectivity of the two minerals. Duran et al. TLW is a powerful method of determining the wettability and surface energies of minerals in their powder form. Measurements of contact angles using TLW on albite and orthoclase in the absence and presence of amine resulted in similar values. The contact angles on untreated albite and orthoclase surfaces in water were 43° and 45°, whereas those samples treated with 0.1 and 0.8 mg/L amine concentrations yielded values of 57°–76° and 67.5°-074.9°, respectively. The advancing contact angles, a measure of hydrophobicity, of albite and orthoclase, are strongly dependent upon amine concentration. However, the increase in hydrophobicity with increasing amine concentration is not significant to induce a selective separation between these two feldspar minerals. These results correlate well with microflotation and zeta potential measurements. The increase in the surface hydrophobicity of feldspar and the decrease in the values of total surface free energy The addition of NaCl on contact angles and surface free energy components at constant amine concentration indicate that albite is significantly affected by salt addition whereas orthoclase remains less affected. The type of Na ion adsorption in the form of ion adsorption or exchange adsorption, and the water structure making ability of ions dictate the stability of feldspar/water interface. The structure-maker Na The TLW method, together with zeta potential and microflotation data, reveals important quantitative information on the mode and extent of adsorption of salt ion and collector. Future studies will focus on determining the magnitude of hydration forces in electrolyte solutions by utilizing atomic force microscope and the DLVO theory.