The degradation of model dark brown colored coffee effluent using photocatalyst zinc oxide (ZnO) has been systematically studied by varying ZnO dosage from 0 to 4000 mg L−1, coffee loading from 0 to 90 mg L−1 and intensity of UV light having the radiation peak at 352 nm from 0 to 18 W(m-lamp length)−1. Almost complete decolorization was achieved after 180 min for the initial coffee concentration of 50 mg L−1 with ZnO dosage of 3000 mg L−1 and three UV lamps. The dissolved oxygen (DO) largely affected the photodecolorization process. Without air sparging or with oxygen supply only through the free-surface, the DO concentration significantly decreased during the initial decolorization process and then increased to the saturated DO concentration after about 80% decolorization was achieved. Under the anoxic condition with nitrogen gas sparging, the efficient color removal was not obtained unlike the decolorization without air sparging or under the oxic condition with air sparging. These findings suggest that the change in DO concentration was controlled by the oxygen consumption for the formation of oxygen adduct intermediates such as organoperoxy radicals. The mineralization rate of model coffee effluent was rather slow as compared with the decolorization rate and it was insignificantly affected by anoxic and oxic conditions. The present results indicate that ZnO photocatalyst has potential for treatment of coffee processing wastewaters.Coffee processing plants release large volumes of dark brown colored coffee effluent containing many different macromolecules ( Advanced oxidation processes (AOPs) have been developed for the degradation of toxic and biorefractory organic pollutants in wastewaters and have become more attractive than the conventional treatment technologies ( In our previous papers ( The ZnO photocatalytic process can be represented as a number of reaction steps. It has been suggested that the hydroxyl radicals and superoxide radical anions are the primary oxidizing species in the photocatalytic oxidation processes ( Formation of electron–hole pair: A photo–excited ZnO generates an electron and an electron–hole (e.g., The electron and hole may migrate to the ZnO surface where they participate in redox reactions with adsorbed species. Formation of superoxide radical anion Water is dissociated into ions. Dissolved oxygen acts as an acceptor species in the electron-transfer reaction (e.g., Superoxide radical anions generated by Photoconversion of H In the presence of oxygen, Formation of hydroxyl radical by photo-holes: Electron transfer from adsorbed water or OH Decolorization and mineralization of dark brown colored coffee effluent: The direct oxidation of ROH by photo-generated hole forms an intermediate radical.  The In the decolorization process of coffee effluent by ZnO, as described below, the oxygen consumption by The oxygenated radical intermediates or intermediates are decomposed further and finally mineralized. The resulting intermediates further react with Oxygen is an indispensable molecule in semiconductor photocatalytic reaction pathways ( ZnO powder (LPZINC-2, the purity of 99.9% and the average particle diameter of 1.73 μm) was obtained from Sakai Chemical Industries Co. Inc. (Japan). Model brown colored coffee effluents were prepared by dissolving commercial instant coffee powder, Nescafe Gold blend (Nestle Japan Group, Japan), in distilled water as well as the study of Experiments were carried out in a Pyrex glass cylindrical photoreactor of 0.09 m diameter and 0.20 m height ( It was found that the compounds were adsorbed from the solution onto the photocatalyst surface and adsorption equilibrium was reached in about 30 min. In order to eliminate the effects of adsorption on ZnO catalysts, the solution and catalyst particles were stirred for 30 min in the absence of the UV light irradiation prior to the start of the photodegradation experiments. Therefore, the photodegradation was verified to be the major route for removal of the compounds in the model coffee effluent. Except as otherwise specified for gas injection, the experiment was conducted without gas injection. Without aeration, oxygen transferred only through free surface. For oxic or anoxic condition, air or nitrogen gas was injected through a sintered glass ball sparger installed near the reactor base at the flow rate of 3 or 0.8 L min Duplicated data were taken to ensure reliability of the experimental results. The effect of initial concentration of coffee in the range of 30–90 mg L At the beginning of the decolorization process, the color of the solution immediately increased from the initial absorbance, ( The photocatalytic degradation can be described by the pseudo-first order kinetics ( Integrating Eq. According to Eq. The change in dissolved oxygen concentration was monitored during degradation process. In In order to elucidate mechanism for change in DO concentration during the photocatalytic decolorization process, for reference, the data without coffee or colored compounds are plotted in Catalyst loading is an important factor which can significantly influence the photocatalytic decolorization rate. The effect of initial ZnO concentration on decolorization was investigated by varying its amount from 0 to 6000 mg L In the absence of photocatalyst, the slow increase in coffee color was observed. The direct photolysis of colored compounds in the model coffee effluent occurred but it was rather weak. As a result the photolysis could slowly decompose them to colored intermediate compounds like quinones but further degradation to the colorless compounds did not take place. Effects of ZnO dosage on the pseudo-first order reaction rate constant The DO concentration profiles are presented in The influence of UV light intensity on the decolorization of model coffee effluent was examined at constant initial coffee concentration of 50 mg L It can be seen from As shown in During the photodecolorization process, as described above, significant decrease and increase in dissolved oxygen concentration were observed. In order to elucidate effects of dissolved oxygen on degradation of colored compounds in coffee effluent, the decolorization experiments were conducted under both oxic and anoxic conditions. The oxic and anoxic conditions were provided with air sparging and nitrogen gas sparging, respectively. In the experiments with three UV lamps, the initial coffee concentration and ZnO loading were 50 mg L When air was continuously supplied to the solution, the DO concentration was almost constant at the initial or saturated DO concentration ( We obtained the interesting result for TOC. As seen in Present study suggested that ZnO photocatalyst is effective for decolorization of coffee processing wastewaters. The color removal efficiency of model dark brown colored coffee effluent increased and decreased with increasing the ZnO dosage and the coffee loading, respectively. However, higher ZnO dosage than 3000 mg L Under the anoxic condition where the DO concentration was remained almost zero, the color removal efficiency was rather lower as compared with that under the oxic condition where the DO concentration was constant at the saturated DO concentration. It could be concluded that the oxygen consumption during the photocatalytic degradation is mainly due to the formation of oxygen adduct intermediates. The mineralization rate of model coffee effluent was rather slow as compared with the decolorization rate. About 80% mineralization of the initial coffee concentration of 50 mg L