The controlled visible-light mediated conversion of nitroaromatics to versatile nitrogen-containing intermediates is of great significance but still remains a challenge. Herein, we report for the first time a facile visible-light-initiated one-pot strategy for clean and efficient synthesis of nitrone from nitrobenzene and benzyl alcohol. It integrates the controlled photocatalytic reduction of nitrobenzene to phenylhydroxylamine by photogenerated electrons with the selective photocatalytic oxidation of benzyl alcohol to benzaldehyde by photoinduced holes over a low-cost CdS photocatalyst with a suitable reduction capability, followed by spontaneous condensation of the as-formed hydroxylamine and aldehyde at ambient pressure and room temperature. Furthermore, by modulating cocatalyst and illumination time, for the conversion of the same reactants, the other two useful nitrogen-containing compounds, imine and secondary amine, were also successfully synthesized. The reaction mechanisms for flexible synthesis of the three target products are proposed.The nitrogen-containing compounds including nitrones, imines and secondary amines, etc. are versatile organic building blocks for the synthesis of fine chemicals, pharmaceuticals and agricultural chemicals Up to now, nitrones are commonly prepared by the following traditional synthetic routes ( Heterogeneous photocatalysis has been considered as one of the most promising alternatives for selective synthesis of organic chemicals Herein, for the first time, we report a facile visible-light-initiated one-pot strategy for efficient synthesis of nitrone with 91% selectivity at 77% conversion after only 25 min of illumination by visible light (89% selectivity at 91% conversion, 30 min) by using nitrobenzene and benzyl alcohol as starting reactants. This method integrates the controlled photocatalytic reduction of nitrobenzene to phenylhydroxylamine by photoinduced electrons over a low-cost CdS photocatalyst with a suitable reduction capability and the photocatalytic oxidation of benzyl alcohol to benzaldehyde by photogenerated holes, followed by a spontaneous condensation of the as-formed phenylhydroxylamine and benzaldehyde. Both photocatalyzed reduction and oxidation half-reactions can be efficiently promoted each other owing to the efficient recombination inhibition of photogenerated charge carriers. In addition, by tuning cocatalyst and illumination time, for the conversion of the same reactants, the other two versatile nitrogen-containing intermediates, imine and secondary amine, have been successfully synthesized. Finally, the tentative reaction mechanisms for flexible synthesis of the three target products by the developed visibly-light-initiated one-pot synthetic strategy are proposed. This work not only presents a novel and efficient method for a facile synthesis of nitrone, but also reveals the relationship between the properties of different CdS-based catalysts and the selectivity to nitrone, imine and secondary amine. Cadmium acetate (Cd(CH The CdS NPs were prepared according to the previously reported literature with some modifications The MoS According to Ref. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images were obtained on a JEOL JSM-5600LV SEM instrument. X-ray diffraction (XRD) was conducted on a D/Max 2400 diffractometer with monochromatic Cu Kα source. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements were performed on an ESCALAB 250 XPS system with a monochromatic Al Kα X-ray source. All the binding energies were referenced to the C 1s peak at 284.8 eV. The Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) method was utilized to calculate the specific surface area, and the pore size distributions was calculated from an adsorption branch of the isotherm via the Barrett–Joyner–Halenda (BJH) model (3H-2000PS, BeiShiDe Instrument). The UV–vis diffuse reflectance spectra (DRS) were recorded on a JASCO V-550 UV–vis spectrometer. The Mott-Schottky plots measurements were performed on an electrochemical workstation (CHI660e) in 0.2 M Na A flask (10 ml, Synthware) was used as the reaction container, and after 0.2 mmol nitrobenzene, 3 ml benzyl alcohol and 10 mg catalyst had been added, the flask was sealed and thoroughly replaced the air by N CdS nanoparticles (NPs) were synthesized by a previously reported solvothermal method with some modifications The photocatalysis is strongly dependent on light absorption capacity and the charge-carriers separation efficiency, mainly affected by the energy band structure of photocatalyst. Furthermore, the position of valence band (VB) and conduction band (CB) of a photocatalyst determines its oxidation and reduction capability, which is crucial to the product distribution of photocatalytic organic reactions. The band gap and the positions of VB and CB were determined by combining UV–Vis diffuse reflectance spectroscopy and VB-XPS ( Based on the results of controlled experiments, both imine and nitrone can be formed by the spontaneous condensation of benzaldehyde with aniline ( By using nitrobenzene and benzyl alcohol as reactants, the reaction properties of CdS, MoS It can be clearly observed that the main product is imine but not nitrone over MoS Distinct from CdS and MoS In summary, we for the first time realize the visible-light- initiated one-pot synthesis of nitrone from nitrobenzene and benzyl alcohol under ambient pressure and room temperature conditions. Thanks to the suitable reduction capability of CdS photocatalyst and efficient inhibition of recombination of photogenerated charge carriers by the integrating effect of the spontaneous photoreduction of nitrobenzene and photooxidation of benzyl alcohol half-reactions, 91% selectivity to nitrone at 77% conversion (89% selectivity at 91% conversion) has been achieved after only 25–30 min of illumination by visible light. Furthermore, by tuning cocatalyst and illumination time, for the conversion of the same reactants, the other two useful nitrogen-containing compounds including imine and secondary amine have been successfully synthesized. The tentative reaction mechanisms for flexible synthesis of the three target products are proposed. In addition, the relationship between the properties of different CdS-based catalysts and the selectivity of nitrone, imine and secondary amine has been revealed. This work not only presents a new and efficient method for the synthesis of nitrone, but also opens a new avenue for a facile one-pot synthesis of the other chemicals. This work was financially supported by the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: