Millimeter-sized spheres were prepared in this work as potential solid sorbents for industrial-scale CO2 capture due to their low cost, excellent adsorption capacity and reusability characters. The naturally abundant palygorskite was smashed with jet pulverization, and then acid treated to increase its surface area from 148 to 390 m2/g. Then the tetraethylenepentamine (TEPA) functionalized acid-modified palygorskite (MPA) was synthesized via chemical impregnation. In addition, MPA spheres (MPAS) with average size of ∼3.6 mm were produced by a pellet machine. The prepared solid sorbents were characterized using X-ray diffraction (XRD), Fourier transformation infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), and N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms treated by BET (Brunauer-Emmett-Teller) analysis. The thermogravimetric analysis indicated that the CO2 adsorption capacity of nature palygorskite (0.63 mmol/g) could be enhanced through amine modification. The MPAS-50 had the best CO2 adsorption capacity (2.63 mmol/g) and excellent repeatable adsorption ability, according to the CO2 adsorption tests. The results indicated that the TEPA-functionalized palygorskite sphere is a promising solid sorbent for CO2 capture in industrial green house gases controlling fields.Carbon dioxide (CO On the other hand, to improve the affinity between the solid absorbent and CO Among the different kinds of matrix materials for grafting or impregnating of liquid amine molecules, nature clay minerals have attracted much attentions in recent years, and were predicted as the most promising substrate material for the solid adsorbent, due to their inherent advantages, such as the abundant reserves, simple mining conditions, low cost, high chemical stability, etc. Palygorskite (abbreviated as Pal) is a trioctahedral 2:1 hydrated magnesium silicate with chain structure and fiber-like morphology. Fully developed nano-size zeolite channels exist inside the crystal structure, yielding the naturally occurred high inner surfaces as well as outer surface area The aim of this work is to develop an amine impregnated millimeter sphere made by modified palygorskite for high effective CO The nature Pal clay was obtained from Jiangsu, China. The typical chemical formula is Mg The millimeter-sized MPA spheres were prepared by two steps: Firstly, a designed amount of TEPA was dissolved in 0.1 L methanol under ultrasonic dispersion for 15 min. Then 50 g modified Pal (or MP) powders were put into the mixture solution and ultrasonic stirred for 2 h and then dried at 60 °C for 24 h to remove methanol in a vacuum oven. The samples with different TEPA loadings of 30, 40, 50, and 60 wt% were named as MPA-30, MPA-40, MPA-50, and MPA-60, respectively. Micrometer scale spheres composed of the samples were prepared through a typical rotation method. The prepared MPA powder was mixed with deionized water at a rate of 10:1, then stirred to be a mud-like suspension. The humid mud was huddled into a strip with the extrusion of a screw propeller, then the strip passed through a knife wheel to product some spheres with uniform size. The spheres were labeled as MPAS-30, MPAS-40, MPAS-50, and MPAS-60, respectively based on the different powder resources. XRD patterns were collected on a RIGAKU D/max-2550VBR+ 18 kW powder diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.5418 Å) at a step width of 0.02°. All XRD patterns were obtained from 3° to 80° with a scan speed of 5°/min. The particle size distribution before and after jet pulverization were characterized by LS-pop laser particle diameter analyzer using the laser scattering principle with the test range from 0.2 to 500 μm. The Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) were obtained on a Shimadzu Iraffinity-1 FTIR spectrometer in the wavenumber range of 4000–400 cm CO  FTIR spectra in The textural properties of prepared raw Pal, P-Pal, MP and MPA samples were detected by nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherms and pore size distributions ( The thermal behavior of raw Pal was investigated by TG/DSC in The TG curves of P-Pal, MP, and MPA samples from room temperature to 800 °C were monitored to evaluate the thermal stability of the raw material, matrix and the products. As were shown in Typical morphology and compositions of the Pal, P-Pal, MP and MPA-50 samples are shown in Typical image of millimeter scale spheres prepared through mechanical huddling and cut shaping of the TEPA loaded MPA powders is shown in High adsorption capacity is a crucial property for an ideal solid sorbent to assess the economic feasibility of the sorbent system. Detailed schedule to measure the CO Adsorption temperature is another important factor that will affect the CO  To make a deeper insight into the sorption process of the prepared sorbents, dynamic parameters calculations based on the following three kinds of adsorption kinetic models were conducted to assess the CO The fitting results of the fractional-order kinetic model of MPAS with different TEPA loading were summarized in Cycle performance is another important factor to determine the industrial application prospect of the solid state adsorbents. Based on the optimized CO A schematically illustration to modulate the structural transformation and surface assembly procedure in the synthesis of MPAS from Pal as the raw source was detailed in In summary, a low-cost solid amine adsorbent based on TEPA-impregnated acid modified palygorskite spheres was prepared for CO This work was supported by the