In this first issue of 2007 we would like to take the opportunity to provide readers with an up-to-date list of members of the EFCE Executive Board and a list of the EFCE Working Parties and their Chairmen. An executive board of chemical engineers from industry and academia oversee the activities of EFCE, which range from world renowned congress to technical meetings on specific topics. Dr. Wridzer Bakker Dutch Separation Technology Institute, The Netherlands Prof. Dr.-Ing. Vladimir Bales Slovak Technical University, Slovakia Dr. Ir. Jacques, Bousquet Total Fina Elf, France Dr. David Brown ( Institution of Chemical Engineers (IChemE), UK Prof. Dr. Jean-Claude Charpentier ( ESCPE Lyon, France Prof. Dr.Jiří Drahoš ( Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, Czech Republic Prof. Dr. M. Angel Galán ( Universidad de Salamanca, Spain Prof. Dr. Rafiqui Gani Technical University of Denmark, Denmark Prof. Dr. John Garside ( University of Manchester Institute of Science and Technology, UK Prof. Dr. Zelijko Knez University of Maribor, Slovenia Prof. Dr. Gerhard Kreysa DECHEMA e.V, Germany Dr. Ching Pong Mak Novartis Pharma AG, Switzerland Dr. Ing. Martin Molzahn  Prof. Dr. S. Pierucci Politecnico di Milano, Italy Prof. Dr. Ryszard Pohorecki ( Warsaw University of Technology, Poland Prof. Dr. Fermando Ramoa Riberio Instituto Superior Tecnico, Portugal Prof. Dr. Francois Tailly ( Société de Chimie Industrielle, France Prof. Dr. Dimitrios Tassios ( National Technical University of Athens, Greece The EFCE has working parties covering all areas of chemical engineering. Contact details for the Chairman of each party are given below:  Prof. Agba Salman University of Sheffield, UK E-mail:  Prof. Dr. John Dodds École des Mines d’Albi, France E-mail:  Prof. Dr. Gabriel Wild ENSIC CNRS, France E-mail:  Prof. Eric Forssberg Lulea University of Technology, Sweden E-mail:  Prof. Rafiqul Gani Technical University of Denmark, Denmark E-mail:  Prof. Dr.-Ing. Joachim Ulrich Martin-Luther-Universität Halle-Wittenberg, Germany E-mail:  Prof. Dr. Evangelos Tsotsas Universität Magdeburg, Germany E-mail:  Dr.-Ing. Martin Molzahn  E-mail:  Dr. Francois Lapicque CNRS-ENSIC, France E-mail:  Prof. Dr. Bozenna Kawalec-Pietrenko Gdansk University of Technology, Poland E-mail:   Prof. Dr. Helmar Schubert Universität Karlsruhe, Germany E-mail:  Prof. Richard Darton University of Oxford, UK E-mail:  Prof. Dr. Zeljko Knez University of Maribor, Slovenia E-mail:  Prof. Howard Barnes University of Wales, Aberystwyth, UK E-mail;  Dr. Georg Suter Basel, Switzerland E-mail:  Dr.-Ing. Hermann Feise BASF Aktiengesellschaft, Germany E-mail:  Prof. Dr. Enrico Drioli Universita di Calabria, Italy E-mail:  Prof. Joël Bertrand ENSIGC, France E-mail:  Prof. Philipp Rudolf von Rohr E-mail:  Prof. Timothy McKenna Villeurbanne, France E-mail:  Prof. Dr. Andrezej Stankiewicz Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands Email:  Prof. Giancarlo Baldi Politecnico di Torino, Italy E-mail:  Dr. Martin Glor Schweizerisches Institut zur Forderung der Sicherheit, Switzerland E-mail: The European Federation of Chemical Engineering has the pleasure to announce that Dr Hermann J. Feise, from Germany, will be the new EFCE Scientific Vice-President for a two-year term of office from 1 January 2008 to 31 December 2009. Dr Feise will succeed Professor Ryszard Pohorecki in this position whose term of office was prolonged for another year (1 January 2007 to 31 December 2007). The EFCE General Assembly confirmed the extension of Professor Pohorecki's term of office and elected Professor Feise by postal ballot in August 2006. Dr. Hermann J. Feise studied mechanical engineering at Technical University of Braunschweig, Germany, completing his Masters (Dipl.-Ing.) degree in 1990. In 1996 he obtained his PhD for his thesis From 1990 to 1996 he worked as a lecturer at the Technical University of Braunschweig, Institute of Mechanical Process Engineering. After two years as principal investigator in particle science and technology at the DuPont Central Research & Development, Wilmington, DE, USA, he returned to Germany in 1998 and was appointed Senior Research Engineer at the Process Engineering Department of BASF AG, Ludwigshafen. Since 2003 he has been Senior Research Manager in Particle Formation and Handling at the above department of BASF AG. His scientific areas of responsibility are drying, solids handling, agglomeration, and mixing and coating of particles. He is the author of 48 research publications and 28 conference presentations. Currently, he is co-author of the online Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems – EOLSS. In 1999 he was awarded the ‘Johannes MoellerPreis 1999’ of the Moeller-Stiftung fuer Wissenschaft und Forschung, of which he has been a prize committee member since 2004. Since 2001 he has been a delegate to the EFCE Working Party on Mechanics of Particulate Solids, and in 2002 he was elected its Chairman. He is the Vice-Chairman of the Working Party on Agglomeration and Solids Handling of the German VDI Gesellschaft Verfahrenstechnik und Chemieingenieurwesen (GVC) and a member of the Forschungs-Gesellschaft Verfahrens-Technik (GVT). In 2006 he was appointed a member of the International Editorial Board of the journal The European Federation of Chemical Engineering extends its best wishes to Professor Pohorecki and Dr Feise for successful terms of office.