Introduction
                  This study aimed to compare the effects of a novel magnetic palatal expansion appliance (MPEA) during the expansion and maintenance period with that of a screw expansion appliance.
               
                  Methods
                  Based on previous research, the MPEA had a reactivation system that was modified for a broader working range and more stable expansion. Thirty-six male beagle dogs were assigned to a magnetic expansion (ME; n = 12), screwed expansion (SE; n = 12) or control (n = 12) group. Half of the dogs from each group were evaluated only during 5 weeks of activation, whereas the rest were evaluated for 5 weeks of activation and 8 additional weeks of retention. Nonmagnetic metal marking implants were implanted on both sides of the midpalatal suture of all dogs. Three-dimensional assessment of treatment and posttreatment dental and skeletal effects were conducted using cone-beam computed tomography. The width of the midpalatal suture, mineralization and deposition rate of bone, and fluorescence integral optical density were calculated during the expansion and retention periods using tetracycline fluorescence labeling.
               
                  Results
                  There were increases in the value of all cone-beam computed tomography parameters in the SE and ME groups during the expansion period, and the increase was significantly greater than that of the control group (P <0.01). However, there was no significant difference in the values of any parameters during the retention period. The width of the midline sutures, mineralization and deposition rate of bone, and integral optical density in the 2 experimental groups were significantly higher than those of the control group (P <0.01), and there was no significant difference between the SE and ME groups. After the retention period, the values of all tetracycline fluorescence evaluation parameters of the experimental groups decreased significantly.
               
                  Conclusions
                  The novel MPEA with a reactivation system was able to expand the midpalatal suture effectively. Dental and skeletal expansion effects are similar to those of the screw expansion appliance. Wearing the appliance as a retainer can effectively maintain the expansion effect. The new bone formation rate was accelerated during the expansion process and decreased to normal levels during the retention period.Palatal expansion (PE) is one of the most frequently used orthodontic treatment strategies in the correction of malocclusion. It is applied for the correction of posterior crossbites occurring as a result of constricted maxilla, mainly mechanical and magnetic expansions. Mechanical expansion is widely used in clinical settings, but it requires frequent reactivation, complicated operations, and a considerable initial force, which may cause the patient to be prone to root resorption, alveolar dehiscence and fenestration, and additional side effects. The new magnetic palatal expansion appliance (MPEA) developed through our previous research applies repulsion forces from third generation high-energy rare-earth permanent magnetic alloy neodymium-iron-boron magnets, combined with a reactivation system, in order to overcome the limitation of the magnetic force decreasing along with distance. Reactivation can be performed through limiting grooves and central release links. Thus, the operation is more convenient, and the orthodontic force is more stable than that of earlier magnets. Indeed, this method has been shown to expand the maxilla in animal experiments effectively. In this study, we have made some improvements to the magnetic expansion appliance, based on the results of our previous study. The squared housing box was changed into a middle track-type housing box, in order to make it smaller and easier to clean, whereas the limiting grooves were replaced with a locking clasp device so that reactivation was more convenient and reliable during clinical applications. Long-term stability after maxillary expansion is one of the research hot spots of orthodontics. The stability of PE has been studied and shown that without retention, relapse immediately occurs and may reach 45%. In this animal experiment, we aimed to compare the treatment and posttreatment effects of the novel MPEA with that of a mechanical screw expansion device using cone-beam computed tomography (CBCT) and investigate the mineralization and deposition rate of new bone in the midpalatal suture, during the expansion and retention phases, using a tetracycline fluorescence labeling method. The novel MPEA was designed and manufactured with a reactivation system. The former MPEAs ( All animal work was performed using protocols approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the Medical College of Nanchang University. Thirty-six male beagle dogs (aged 6 months; equivalent to 9-11 years for humans) weighing 8 kg each were used in this study. Two percent sodium pentobarbital (1 ml/kg, intraperitoneal) was used to anesthetize the dogs. After we drilled guide holes in the palatal bone at low speed, we inserted 4 pairs of nonmagnetic metal bone implants (diameter, 0.7 mm; length, 5 mm) approximately 3 mm and 6 mm lateral to the palatal suture and in line with bilateral first and fourth premolars, respectively. Bone markers were used to quantify palatal expansion during radiological procedures. The dogs were randomly divided into 3 groups, 12 of which were assigned to the magnetic expansion (ME) group and received magnetic expanders, 12 dogs were assigned to the screwed expansion (SE) group and received jackscrew expanders, and 12 dogs were assigned to the control group and received no expander but were maintained under the same conditions as the other animals. The palatal expansion device was customized for each animal. The expansion appliance was placed at the midline between the left and right third premolars, about 3 mm away from the palatal mucosa ( All CBCT images were acquired at the Affiliated Stomatological Hospital of Nanchang University (Nanchang, Jiangxi, China). CBCT images were obtained at baseline (T0), after 5 weeks when expansion was achieved (T1), and after 8 weeks of retention (T2) using a three-dimensional (3D) exam CBCT scanner (KaVo Dental, Biberach, Germany). During the scan, the head of each dog was positioned in a customized plastic fixture. The scan parameters were 120 kVp, 20.27 mAs, 14.7 sec per revolution, pixel size 0.25 mm, and a reconstruction interval of 16 × 16 × 10 cm. All operations were performed by 1 technician. The CBCT images were saved as digital imaging and communications in medicine files and reconstructed into 3D volumes using in-vivo software (version 5.1.10; Anatomage, San Jose, Calif). The CBCT measurement method refers to the preliminary study conducted by our research group. The distance between the bilateral canines (DC) was determined by measuring between the cusp tip of the bilateral maxillary canines in the 2D coronal images through the tip end of the left canine. The distances between the bilateral fourth premolar and the first molar (DPM4, DM1) were determined by measuring between the mesiobuccal cusp tip of bilateral teeth in the 2D coronal images through the mesiobuccal cusp tip of left fourth premolar or first molar. The distances between implants adjacent to the first premolar (DIPM1) were measured. Because the hard palate of beagle dogs was flat and had a low thickness (about 1 mm), horizontal images can be obtained using 3D adjustment by passing through the hard palate to a maximum extent. The distance between each marking implant on both sides of the midpalatal suture between the first premolars was measured. The distance of the same pair of implants can be measured and compared at different times. The distances between implants adjacent to the fourth premolar (DIPM4) were measured. The distance between each marking implant on both sides of the midpalatal suture between the fourth premolars was measured on a horizontal image. The distance between the same pair of implants was also measured and compared at different times. Angulations of the fourth premolar and first molar (APM4, AM1) were measured. The measurement of the angle was obtained through the long axis of the fourth premolar or the first molar (from the tip end to the apex). The axial plane of the 2D coronal images was made through the distal apex of the fourth premolar or the first molar. The bilateral angles of the fourth premolar and the first molar were measured and then averaged. All CBCT measurements were taken 3 times by a single-blinded examiner (Z.M.) under the same conditions and then averaged. Intraexaminer reliability was within ± 5% for all measurements, as determined by data replications taken 2 weeks apart. Method error was calculated according to Dahlberg's formula. After 15 days, 29 CBCT radiographs were re-measured in order to evaluate intraexaminer measurement error (DC, 1.356 mm; DPM4, 1.65 mm; DM1, 1.675 mm; DIPM1, 0.863; DIPM4, 0.969; APM, 1.658; AM1, 1.743) using Dahlberg's formula, (S One percent tetracycline hydrochloride solution was intramuscularly injected (1 ml/kg) into dogs of subgroup A at the beginning of placement and 3 days before the end of expansion, whereas for dogs in subgroup B it was injected 3 days before the completion of extension and 3 days before the end of the retention period. Subgroup A was killed during the T1 phase and subgroup B during the T2 phase through an overdose of sodium pentobarbital. Bone tissue between the second and third premolars of the maxilla was quickly resected in order to remove surface mucosa and muscles and then fixed in 70% ethanol for 3 days. The tissue was gradually dehydrated using alcohol (80%, 90%, 95%, and 100% for 12 h). After the xylene was transparent, the tissue was immersed in permeates I, II, and III for 24 hours, then embedded in methyl methacrylate. An SP1600 hard tissue microtome was used to obtain slices that were perpendicular to the tarsal plate at the horizontal line of the third premolar, with a thickness of 30 μm. After polishing using P1200-P2000 sandpaper, the nondecalcified bone tissue grinding plate was made by removing the knife marks that were on the surface of the tissue. The grinding plate was magnified 40 times under a fluorescence microscope (with the wavelength of 360-400 nm) for observation and photographing. Image-Pro Plus image analysis software (version 6.0; Media Cybernetics, Inc, Md) was used to analyze the images, which were taken under the fluorescence microscope. A blinded evaluator (X.Z.) traced the bone labels. The widest 3 pairs of fluorescence bands were selected from the edge of the midline palatine suture and were measured in each sample, and each pair of fluorescence bands were automatically measured at each 10-μm interval between the leading edges of the label pairs. The distance between the frontal edges of 2 bands was measured in triplicate and averaged ( The SPSS 19.0 software (IBM, Armonk, NY) was used for statistical analysis in this study. The data are expressed as mean ± standard deviation. One way analysis of variance was used to compare the CBCT measurements of the 3 groups, in order to obtain phase differences at T0-T1 and T1-T2. In addition, the independent-samples The force-deflection curves of MPEA after 5 loadings of a distance of 1.5 mm were similar. This suggests that the mechanical properties of the MPEA were approximately the same after each activation. The range of forces at intervals between 0 and 1.5 mm varied from 10.7 to 5.5 N, respectively. All 36 beagle dogs survived until the T2 period. In the experimental group, the dogs lost weight within 1 week of expansion, which may be related to eating during the initial period of wearing the expansion appliance, which returned to normal after the second week. A few implants fell off during the experiment. However, there were no dogs that lost both implants on the same side of the midpalatal suture, adjacent to the first or fourth premolars. Therefore, there was no effect on the measurements. According to the CBCT examination, the midpalatal sutures of the ME and SE groups had expanded during T1 ( The measurements of the tetracycline fluorescence markers in each group are shown in It is of vital importance to maintain a sustainable, stable, and gentle force during orthodontic procedures. The biggest difference between the ME and SE groups is that the magnetic force generated by the former is sustainable and gentle, whereas the mechanical force generated by the latter is an intermittent heavy force. According to the CBCT measurements, the maxillary width can be effectively expanded by the methods used in the ME and SE groups. The measurements of the ME and SE groups significantly increased during the expansion period, and this increase was larger than that of the control group. At the same time, no statistical differences were observed in the increase of DC, DPM4, and DM1 between the 2 experimental groups, indicating that the effects of these 2 methods were similar regarding the total amount of expansion. The maxillary expansion effects included skeletal and dental effects. In this study, 4 pairs of nonmagnetic metal bone marker implants were placed on either side of the midpalatal suture to prevent a loss of experimental data that may be caused by the loosening of implants. The change in the distance between bilateral implants reflects the amount of palatal suture expansion, that is, the skeletal effect. In the previous study, the skeletal effect of the ME appliance was smaller than that of the SE appliance, whereas in the present study, the increment of DIPM4 in the SE group was 3.34 mm, and was 6.40 mm for DPM4, indicating that the skeletal expansion effect (the expansion of midpalatal suture) was 52.2% of the total expansion effect. In the ME group, the increment of DIPM4 was 2.96 mm and DPM4 was 5.85 mm, showing that the skeletal expansion effect was 50.6% of the total expansion effect, indicating that there was no significant difference in comparison with the SE group, implying that the skeletal effect of the novel MPEA was similar to that of the SE appliance. This effect may be related to a relatively small magnetic force and faster attenuation of the previous magnetic expander, whereas the magnetic force exerted in this study was relatively stable. By simulating clinical expansion using the method of 3D finite element analysis, Gautam et al During the retention period, both the SE appliances and MPEA had a positive effect without releasing an expansion force. There was no statistical difference in the measurement of all parameters in the ME and SE groups, indicating that the SE and ME appliances can be used as retainers to maintain the expansion effect effectively. However, when Lione et al In our study, tetracycline fluorescence labeling was used for the evaluation of the skeletal effect of expansion, to complement the CBCT measurements. Several large and continuous tetracycline fluorescent bands were observed in the ME and SE groups near the midpalatal suture under a fluorescence microscope, and the new bone at the midline of palatal suture showed a long finger-like protrusion pointing to the middle, whereas there was no expansion in the control group. In addition, the tetracycline fluorescent bands at the edge of the palatal suture were formed because of natural growth and reconstruction of bone tissue, so the fluorescence band was narrow. At the end of expansion, the width of the palatal suture was greater in the ME and SE groups, in comparison with that of the control group, indicating that these 2 methods can effectively expand the midpalatal suture, which was consistent with CBCT measurements. After the retention period, the width of the midpalatal suture reduced in all 3 groups, whereas the width of the control group was smaller than that of the experimental groups. When no major change in the distance between implants was observed using CBCT measurements, a decrease in the width of the palatal suture, as represented by the intertetracycline bandwidth was observed. This finding indicates the presence of mineralization and deposition of the bone on both sides of the midline suture during the retention period. At the same time, there was no significant difference between the midpalatal suture width of the SE and ME groups during the retention phase, indicating that the amount of bone deposition on both sides of the midline of the magnetic group was similar. At the same time, tetracycline fluorescence IOD was also used to evaluate new bone formation at the edge of the palatal suture. One of the potential limitations of this study is that the sample size in each subgroup is relatively small. Therefore, further research with larger sample sizes is needed to obtain more information about the expansion and retention efficiency of MPEA. In addition, this is part of a series of studies, and follow-up studies on the comparison of the skeletal effect between an MPEA group and a palatal expansion group with miniscrews will produce more interesting results.  The novel MPEA with a reactivation system can effectively expand the midpalatal suture. The dental and skeletal expansion effects of the novel MPEA with a reactivation system are similar to those obtained with a screw expansion appliance. Wearing the appliance as a retainer can effectively maintain the expansion effect. The new bone formation rate was accelerated during the expansion process and decreased to normal levels during the retention period. The authors thank Associate Professor Huiqiang Yu of the Public Health College of Nanchang University for his assistance in planning and processing the statistical analyses of this study.