Background and hypothesis
                  The majority of distal clavicle fractures are displaced fractures and constitute a treatment challenge because they have a 30% chance of delayed union or nonunion. Although several options for surgical reconstruction have been described, in patients with a comminuted and/or small distal fragment, these reconstructive options have proved to be prone to failure. Moreover, secondary surgery for removal is necessary in most cases. We hypothesized that the LockDown device, a braided synthetic ligament device, combined with resection of the distal fracture fragment is a suitable alternative in specified patients with distal clavicle fractures.
               
                  Methods
                  Eleven patients with distal clavicle fractures were treated with distal fracture resection and the LockDown procedure. All patients underwent regular follow-up with data collection; additionally, 7 were assessed at 1-year follow-up according to the study protocol. On the basis of radiography, these patients had a clear coracoclavicular ligament disruption and subsequent cranial dislocation of the medial fragment. Regular follow-up was performed at 6 weeks, 3 months, and 6 months. Control radiographs were taken at 3 and 6 months. Furthermore, the 7 enrolled patients were assessed at 1 year, when the Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand score, Constant shoulder score, Nottingham Clavicle Score, and range of motion were recorded. Residual pain was ascertained by a visual analog scale score.
               
                  Results
                  In total, 11 patients were treated with distal clavicle resection and the LockDown procedure. Eight patients underwent surgery within 3 weeks after presentation at the emergency department. The other 3 patients were operated on after a trial of conservative treatment (due to persisting pain and delayed union). None of the patients had postoperative complications. At 3 months, 9 of the 11 patients had made a full recovery.
               
                  Discussion
                  All 11 patients had good short-term clinical outcomes. None showed acromioclavicular instability. Furthermore, secondary surgery was avoided, and hardware complications did not occur. In low-demand patients or patients with a high risk of nonunion, this technique may be a favorable alternative to other known techniques.Distal clavicle fractures account for 17%-30% of all clavicle fractures. Distal clavicular fractures are classified according to Neer We hypothesized that the LockDown device (LockDown Surgical, Chanhassen, MN, USA), a braided synthetic ligament device, combined with resection of the distal fracture fragment would be a suitable alternative in older patients with distal clavicle fractures with CC ligament disruption, Neer type 2 ( Since 2016, 11 patients have been treated with distal fracture fragment resection and the LockDown procedure. The indication for this treatment was based on the fracture configuration on radiographs (Neer classification). Patients with CC ligament disruption and considerable cranial dislocation of the distal fragment were selected. When the size or amount of comminution of the distal fragment was unclear, a computed tomography scan was performed. In cases deemed unstable (Neer types 2, 4, and 5), when the distal fragment was <3 cm in size and osteoporotic, or when the fragment was severely comminuted ( In 2019, we approached all 11 patients with distal clavicle fractures treated with the LockDown device to obtain final measurements. Of these, 7 patients agreed to participate and signed the informed consent form ( Statistical analyses were executed by descriptive statistics. IBM SPSS software (version 26; IBM, Armonk, NY, USA) was used. The LockDown device is a braided polyester augmentation device originally used to treat AC joint dislocations. The arm was rested in a sling for 1-2 weeks for wound healing, allowing rotational shoulder exercises. Subsequently, a 4-week period of passive and active non–weight-bearing motion in the horizontal plane was allowed, preferably guided by a shoulder physical therapist. At 6 weeks, patients returned to the outpatient clinic. Routine radiography was performed to evaluate congruency of the AC joint and to ensure there was no implant failure ( The patient characteristics of all patients treated with distal clavicle resection and the LockDown procedure are shown in One patient with diabetes was included in our population. Three patients used anticoagulants, and 2 were heavy smokers. Eight patients were scheduled for surgery at presentation in the emergency department. They had clear disruption of the AC capsule and CC ligament, with superior displacement of the medial clavicle, and therefore a high likelihood of nonunion if left unstabilized. In 3 patients, surgery was performed after failed conservative treatment; due to persisting pain and delayed union, resection of the distal clavicle fragment was planned. The fragment size ranged from 13 to 30 mm. As the size of the fragment in all cases exceeded 10 mm, the clavicle was stabilized with the LockDown implant. No postoperative complications occurred. At 6 weeks, all patients complained of slight discomfort and limitation in active abduction and anteflexion. At 3 months, 9 of the 11 patients were complaint free. Two reported slight anterior discomfort at the level of the screw, and 1 patient still complained of pain. We could not relate this to the procedure. This patient had a good postoperative outcome, but after a second fall on the same shoulder, brachial plexopathy was diagnosed after consultation with a neurologist. At 6 months' follow-up, there was no change or increase in complaints in all 11 patients. The 7 patients included in the case series were assessed after 1-year follow-up ( Eleven patients with Neer type 2 distal clavicle fractures or painful delayed union of distal clavicle fractures (2 Neer type 1 and 1 Neer type 2) were treated with distal fragment resection and LockDown stabilization. They have shown good short-term clinical outcomes. Secondary surgery following either discomfort due to the device or hardware complications has not been necessary thus far (median follow-up period, 27.3 months), in contrast to the frequent necessity for secondary surgery after distal plating and hook plate procedures. Although the AC capsule provides horizontal stability, Mazzocca et al However, Gokkus et al When instability occurs after over-resection, there are a variety of surgical options with modifications to Weaver-Dunn reconstruction, including the addition of CC stabilization with a screw, suture, or graft. With resection of the distal clavicle and use of the LockDown device, the biomechanical function of the AC joint is not restored. This may hypothetically cause a 5°-8° reduction of forward elevation and abduction of the arm as compared with the other side. This is supported by the results of our case study. The minimal functional loss is, in our opinion, acceptable in a lower-demand patient group, but it should be taken into consideration in younger patients and athletes. If dyskinesis of the scapula was at all present, it was not evident during the regular follow-up of the outlined patients. However, we did not specifically test scapular function, and it is possible that subtle dyskinesis was missed. As suggested in the literature addressing this issue, physiotherapy is usually sufficient in compensating for subtle scapular dyskinesis. Because all patients received physiotherapy after surgical treatment, patients learned how to use and train the slightly altered mobility in case of subtle dyskinesis to obtain a normal functional outcome. In an earlier study in which the surgical procedure was similar—although performed in 2 steps and in patients with chronic instability—Baxter et al Although our study focuses on distal clavicle fracture segment resection and stabilization by the LockDown device in patients with distal clavicle fractures, other studies have shown the effectiveness of the LockDown device in patients with AC dislocation. Some surgeons are reluctant to use the ligament as it does not provide exact anatomic reconstruction. Careful dissection is of major importance. The dissection and LockDown device should leave the coracoacromial ligament intact by tunneling the device posterior to this ligament. Placing the LockDown device too medially across the clavicle will leave a craniocaudal dislocation, although it will still stabilize the joint. Placing the LockDown device too distally will result in forward translation of the clavicle. Pulling the clavicle too far caudally (over-tightening) may cause screw cutout. Meticulous technique is mandatory. Furthermore, early postoperative mobilization may reduce stiffness and the chance of early adhesive capsulitis. To our knowledge, no studies have described the use of the LockDown device for an indication other than pure AC joint disruption. In low-demand patients with a high risk of nonunion and persisting pain and in patients with comminuted or osteoporotic distal fragments, distal clavicle fragment resection with LockDown device stabilization may be a suitable alternative to osteosynthesis or hook plate fixation. Obviously, a prospective comparative study with a longer follow-up would be necessary to confirm the superiority of this treatment. In low-demand patients or patients with a high risk of nonunion, removal of the outer fracture segment in distal clavicle fractures, followed by placement of the LockDown device, appears to be a suitable treatment option for distal clavicle fractures. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.