Understanding the mechanical properties of rocks is crucial not only for academic research but also for various industrial applications. For many decades, the mechanical properties of rocks have been studied with various techniques. While many studies have been conducted on the effects of physical properties of metals, composites, and ceramics on their dynamic mechanical properties, not as many investigations have been reported on rocks and geomaterials that employed dynamic tests. In this study, three different dry and saturated sandstones (Red, Berea, and Buff) were tested under static and dynamic loading conditions. Red, Berea, and Buff sandstones containing small amounts of clay minerals (5.7–7.6%) primarily consist of quartz with ~ 5.6%, 16.0%, and 22.7% porosity, respectively ( In this investigation, the static compressive, static tensile, dynamic compressive, and dynamic tensile strengths of the rock samples were measured with uniaxial compressive strength (UCS), splitting tensile strength (STS), and split Hopkinson pressure bar (SHPB) machines. The results demonstrated that the mechanical properties of sandstones were significantly correlated with their physical properties and that the equations obtained from these static and dynamic measurements can be used to predict how changes of density, porosity, and water content affect the mechanical properties of sandstones, contributing significantly to the improvement of the cost-effectiveness of mining processes and safety of geostructures. Red, Berea, and Buff sandstone blocks were collected in Utah and Ohio (USA) and were kept in a relaxed condition at least one year prior to coring and testing. The sandstones were prepared with ~2 The porosities of the Red, Berea and Buff sandstones were determined from the weight difference of the samples before and after water saturation ( The bulk density values of Red, Berea, and Buff sandstones were determined according to ASTM D4543. The mineral and clay compositions of Red, Berea, and Buff sandstones were analyzed with a Rigaku Ultima III Advance X-ray diffractometer from 2 to 36 degrees two-theta (2 For the static compression tests, a uniaxial load was applied to a cylindrical sandstone sample under standard conditions. In this experiment, sandstone samples having a 2:1 ratio of a length-to-diameter ( For the indirect tensile strength measurements, the sandstone samples were tested with a splitting tensile strength (STS) device with a ~0.06–0.08 Dynamic compression and indirect tensile measurements for the Red, Berea, and Buff sandstones were conducted using a split Hopkinson pressure bar (SHPB). In brief, the SHPB apparatus primarily consists of two long steel rods (bars) with strain gages, a gas gun, a projectile (striker) and a data acquisition system ( In this study, the effects of the bulk density and porosity of Red, Berea and Buff sandstones on the mechanical properties and behaviors were examined under static and dynamic loading rates. These sandstones showed relatively homogenous grain and pore sizes with different bulk density and porosity values. Initially, the effects of the bulk density and porosity on the compressive strength and Young's modulus were examined with the dry and water-saturated sandstones under a static loading rate. The compressive strength (MPa) and Young's modulus (GPa) values increased with increases of the bulk density in both the dry and saturated samples ( In contrast, increasing porosity values induced reductions of the static compressive strength and Young's modulus values in both the dry and water-saturated sandstones ( Murphy et al. Water molecules can be occupied within clay layers, resulting in the strength reduction of rocks containing clay minerals. The correlation of the physical properties with the dynamic compressive strength was examined using an SHPB apparatus. The bulk density and porosity exhibited weak correlations with the dynamic compressive strength value of the dry sandstones when compared with the static compressive measurement results ( Additionally, the bulk density effect on the maximum stress was only detected in the dry sandstones under the dynamic compressive loading condition, but was not observed in the saturated samples as the P-value was higher than 0.05 ( Tensile tests can exhibit rock failure mechanisms that are different from those that occur under static compressive loads. Thus, it is necessary to examine the bulk density and porosity effects of the sandstones on tensile strength under the static tensile loading. The results of the static tensile tests show that the increasing bulk density increased the static tensile strength in the both the dry and saturated samples ( The results obtained from the static tensile measurements are consistent with the static compressive testing data as the correlations of the bulk density and porosity with mechanical properties are observed in the both static measurements regardless of the presence of water. Thus, these results support that both the compressive (UCS) and tensile (STS) tests are useful techniques to study the bulk density and porosity effects on the mechanical properties and behaviors with varying water content under static loading conditions. In the dynamic tensile tests, the correlations of the bulk density and porosity with the maximum stress were remarkable in the dry sandstones ( The results can be explained by the fact that the energy absorbed by water differs among Red, Berea, and Buff sandstones especially in the dynamic tests as the porosity of the sandstones differs from one another, resulting in significant variations of the mechanical properties and behaviors. Additionally, as more energy is applied to the rock samples in the dynamic tests than in static ones, the more energy is used to generate more bifurcated cracks in the dynamic tests than used in static tests, Previous work has shown that water substantially reduced the mechanical strength of sandstones. In addition, the mechanical strength values of sandstones were higher under dynamic conditions than under static conditions. In summary, the results of this study provide insights into understanding the correlations between the rock physical and mechanical properties with varying loading rates and water contents. Importantly, some equations having remarkable correlations between the physical and mechanical properties can be used to predict how changes of the bulk density and porosity affect the mechanical properties of dry and water-saturated sandstones or other sedimentary rocks. Because rock mechanical properties are critical parameters for practical applications, the understanding of the rock mechanical properties and behaviors is important. In this study, the effects of the bulk density and porosity on the mechanical properties and behaviors were examined with dry and water-saturated Red, Berea, and Buff sandstones containing small amounts of clay minerals under static and dynamic loading conditions. The main findings of this study are as follows: (1) the bulk density and porosity were correlated with the static compressive and tensile strengths of both dry and saturated sandstones, (2) in the dynamic compressive tests, the bulk density effect on the maximum stress was significant only in the dry sandstones but statistically insignificant in the saturated samples, and (3) in the dynamic tensile measurements, significant correlations of the bulk density and porosity with the maximum stress were observed in the both dry and saturated sandstones. The results of this study offer insights into how changes of bulk density and porosity in sandstones or sedimentary rocks can affect their mechanical properties and behaviors with or without water at various loading rates, contributing significantly to the improvement of safety and cost-effectiveness of practical applications.