This paper presents a fundamental study on dewatering characteristics of filter cakes. Laboratory-scale batch pressure-filtration experiments were conducted on quartz, dolomite and andesite samples, having Gates–Gaudin–Schuhmann type of size distributions with different distribution parameters. The residual cake moisture and cake dewatering kinetics data were collected for filter cakes dewatered at varying applied pressure. Correlations for the entry pressure, residual saturation, pore size distribution index, and cake desaturation kinetics were studied in relation with particle size distribution characteristics. An assessment of previously recommended values of dewatering parameters and predictive correlation equations was presented with regard to their validity or limitations, and refinements were proposed for those giving poor fit.Cake dewatering is a post-filtration process in which the filtrate trapped in the pores of filter cakes is removed by some mechanical or hydrodynamic means to save energy in thermal drying or to improve handling qualities of filter cakes. Mechanical means are used to compress the cake and bring the particles closer in order to squeeze out the excess liquid. Displacement of the retained liquid by sucking or blowing air through the cake, the subject of this paper, is probably the most common method of cake dewatering in the mineral and coal industry. A minimum driving pressure difference across the cake, called the entry pressure, is required for the displacement of liquid by air at the filter cake surface. Once this pressure is overcome, the cake dewaters at a gradually decreasing rate, and the cake moisture, or more fundamentally the cake saturation, defined as the fraction of pore volume filled with liquid, approaches to an irreducible level (residual saturation) for a given set of operating conditions. The residual saturation results from a state of equilibrium between the driving pressure differential and the moisture-retaining capillary forces. There are two distinct regimes through which filter cakes are dewatered to their residual saturation levels ( It is desirable to be able to predict the equilibrium dewatering characteristics (the entry pressure and residual saturation) of a filter cake as well as the saturation (or moisture) vs. time profile, in particular when subsequent processing steps impose moisture limitations. The entry pressure has been correlated by an equation of the following form ( The value of Prediction of residual saturations of filter cakes have been based on empirical correlations with the capillary number which is a dimensionless group expressing the ratio of forces driving the liquid from the cake to the capillary forces retaining the liquid in the cake ( A generalized dewatering-rate-correlating factor which does not require the availability of air rate data was formulated on the basis of capillary flow dynamics, and shown to produce a single curve for combined data of air-flow and no-air-flow cake dewatering with hematite samples of various size distributions and applied vacuum ( More sophisticated semi-empirical models of cake dewatering rate ( The objectives of the experimental study presented here were (i) to test the validity of the previously recommended values of the cake dewatering parameters, namely, the entry pressure coefficient and the pore size index, for particulate samples of relatively wider size distributions; (ii) to assess applicability or limitations of existing predictive correlations for cake residual saturation and desaturation kinetics; and also (iii) to propose modifications or new correlations if necessary. One-kg batches of − The filter unit used for cake dewatering experiments was a Plexiglas tube with 4.4-cm internal diameter and 10-cm height, tightly enclosed between a metallic base and a Plexiglass cover plate. A clean Whatman No. 1 filter paper, placed on top of a support screen, was used as the filter medium. The filtration slurry was prepared by dispersing 30 g of particulate test samples in Filter cakes were characterized by their thickness, porosity, moisture content and saturation. Cake thickness was measured at various locations of the cake, and these readings were then averaged, which allowed the calculation of the wet cake volume. The cake porosity was calculated from the difference between the wet cake volume and dry solids volume. The cake moisture was reported on wet-cake-weight basis. The fractional cake saturation, The experimental residual cake saturation values as a function of the applied pressure are shown in The initial sharp decrease in the residual moisture at relatively lower applied pressures (less than about 30 kPa), corresponding to residual saturation values greater than about 0.60, was a characteristic of equilibrium dewatering runs in which no air breakthrough was observed, confirming our previous findings ( Calculation of the entry pressure requires apriori knowledge of the parameter The residual saturation data from the present work plotted against the the capillary number,   One potential cause of this insufficiency of This study was carried out to ascertain the dewatering behavior of filter cakes. A considerable amount of data was collected for correlating the residual moisture and desaturation kinetics of the filter cakes of quartz, dolomite and andesite particulate samples having varying size distributions. Following is a list of significant conclusions drawn from the study: Applied pressure differential is more effective in reducing the residual saturation of filter cakes when there is no significant air flow through the cake and the medium. If the air flow is observed, increasing the applied pressure differential becomes progressively less effective in reducing the residual saturation, probably because the dewatering effects under such cases have to be attributed to local pressure gradients inside the cake rather than the overall applied pressure. The cake pore structure is as important as the cake porosity in determining the amount of residual saturation for a given applied pressure. A higher cake porosity does not necessarily lead to a lower residual saturation. The entry pressure coefficient, The residual saturation correlation of Wakeman ( The determined value of the pore size distribution index, The desaturation kinetics correlation of