Bi-condylar tibial plateau fractures are demanding to treat due to the complex geometry and the articular comminution. The presence of a coronal fracture line plays a crucial role in the fixation strategy. Disregarding this fracture line in previous biomechanical studies and established fracture classifications resulted in a lack of detailed knowledge regarding the influence of medial-posterior fragments on implant load sharings. This study aimed to evaluate the effects of coronal splits on stress distributions within the implants using the finite element analysis (FEA). FE models with (Fracture C) and without the coronal split (Fracture H) were developed and validated in order to assess stress distributions within the implant components. Comparing FE outcomes with biomechanical experiments indicated that both fracture models were well validated. FE evaluations demonstrated that the coronal split caused destabilization of the medial tibia, as well as a shift in the peak-stress areas from the middle part of the plate to the proximal section, and a 61% increase in the maximum stress of the kick-stand screw. Therefore, FE models based on clinically-relevant fracture morphologies can provide a reliable tool to assess implant failures as well as to compare different fracture fixation techniques.Bi-condylar tibial plateau fractures characterized by destabilization of both medial and lateral proximal condyles represent 35% of all tibial plateau fractures Previous experimental studies on tibial plateau fractures have largely been based on the model developed by Horwitz et al. that emulates a Schatzker Type VI fracture The finite element analysis (FEA) has proven to be an extremely useful tool for the development and correct applications of fracture fixation implants when simulations were properly verified and validated Due to the lack of adequate models for the fixation of tibial plateau fractures, there is still a lack of understanding about the impact of the coronal fracture line on the load sharing within the bone-implant constructs. Such detailed knowledge would provide mechanical justification and educated evidence for implant selection. Therefore, this study used FEA to evaluate the effect of the coronal fracture line on the load distributions within fixation construct and fracture stability. To do so, FE models with and without a coronal fracture line were developed, validated, as well as compared with respect to stress distributions within the implants. We hypothesized that our coronal fracture model would exhibit higher stresses with distinct stress distributions within the implant compared to the traditional Horwitz model. FEA was utilized to assess the effect of the fracture morphology on implant stress distributions by comparing two different fracture models simulated on synthetic tibia models fixed with the lateral locking plates: a traditional Horwitz fracture model (Fracture H) and a novel coronal fracture model (Fracture C). The FE models were validated with mechanical tests executed on synthetic samples under static single and semi-physiological loading conditions. Initially, the FE model of Fracture C was assessed with respect to simple single loading cases in five different force positions and in the axial direction. Then, the load case was extended to represent a semi-physiological loading scenario. The FE model of Fracture C was calibrated using both load cases, and afterwards the validity of FE simulations was assessed for the FE model of Fracture H. Subsequently, validated FE models were compared under semi-physiological loading regarding total deformations of bone-implant structures, load sharings between the medial and lateral tibial plateaus, as well as von-Mises stress distributions within the implant components. Fracture samples were prepared using two synthetic tibial bones (#3406 left large tibia, 4 A board-certified orthopedic trauma surgeon fixed both fracture models using titanium locking plates (AxSOS Proximal Lateral Tibia Plate, left, six-hole length, Stryker, Selzach, Switzerland) and locking self-tapping screws of 4 mm diameters (four articular screws with 70 to 85 mm lengths, as well as six shaft screws with 20 to 32 mm lengths). A 3D-printed template was utilized to insert implants in both fracture models identically. The distal end of the tibia was embedded vertically in an aluminum box to a depth of 50 mm using a three-component casting resin (RenCast FC 53 A/B + Füller DT 082, Gößl + Pfaff GmbH, Karlskron/Brautlach, Germany). The box was fixed via a bench vise and a cross table to a testing machine (Zwick 010, Zwick GmbH & Co. KG, Germany) to provide the possibility for shifting the sample position from one loading point to another one in the single loading cases ( Validation consisted of single and semi-physiological loading cases. In single loading, six static displacement-controlled ramps (10 mm/min) up to 350 N were applied at five different points (LA, LC, LP, MA, and MP) on the tibial plateau to cover a representative area for knee joint contact forces ( For semi-physiological loading, the axial force was introduced through artificial femur condyles of unilateral knee replacements embedded in polyurethane blocks. These blocks were attached to the actuator of the testing machine with a hinge joint, which allowed the femur condyles to tilt in the frontal plane. To provide physiological load distribution with 60% loading on the medial tibial plateau An optical measurement system (ARAMIS 5M, GOM GmbH, Braunschweig, Germany), with measurement error < 0.1% and 2%%for relative translational and rotational movements, respectively Axial stiffness and local marker displacements were experimentally evaluated to validate FE models. The axial stiffness was defined as the ratio of the applied load to the displacement of the load applicator in the axial direction. The geometry of FE models corresponded to the prepared samples for Fractures H and C. The CAD model of the intact tibia with a differentiation between cortical and cancellous bone was first generated from the CT data of the tibial Sawbone (SOMATOM Definition AS, Siemens Healthcare GmbH, Erlangen, Germany), with the following CT imaging parameters: peak voltage 120 kVp, tube current 106 mA, 0.75 mm slice thickness, pixel spacing 0.227\0.227 mm. Using AMIRA software (Visage Imaging GmbH, Berlin, Germany) the CT data were segmented to obtain a 3D reconstruction of the bone surface. Then, the segmented CT data were converted into a NURBS solid model with Geomagic Studio software (V.12, Geomagic, Morrisville, USA). The fracture models were simulated in computer-aided design (CAD) models of the intact tibia by slicing the aforementioned fracture lines for Fractures C and H. Then, the CAD model of the AxSOS proximal lateral tibia plate, provided by the company, was virtually implanted in both fracture models ( Static FE models were computed in ANSYS® Workbench (ANSYS Academic Research, Release 19.3, ANSYS, Inc., Canonsburg, USA). By implementing a best-fit algorithm (GOM Correlate software), the position of the tibia bones relative to the testing machine as well as the initial positions of the load applicators and the distal clamps were spatially determined. Then, the required transfer matrices were calculated to corespond the spatial positions of the model components as well as the loading and boundary conditions between the FE models and experimental tests. The positions of the optical markers considered for validation of local displacements were also extracted from the GOM Correlate software and imported into ANSYS® Workbench The material properties for the synthetic tibia were assigned according to the manufacturer's specifications for the fourth-generation Sawbones (model 3406, Malmö, Sweden). The Young's modulus was set to 16.4 GPa and 155 MPa for the cortical and cancellous bone analogue, respectively, and a Poisson's ratio of 0.3 for both materials. For locking plates and screws, the material properties of TiAl6V4 with the Young's modulus of 110.4 GPa and the Poisson's ratio of 0.33 were employed. All materials were assumed to be homogeneous, isotropic, and linear elastic. For the embedding part and the distal aluminum cast, the Young modulus was set to 3.1 GPa and 700 GPa, respectively, and Poisson's ratios of 0.3. The semi-physiological load applicator was assumed as a rigid body. The FE model of Fracture C was designed with different contact types to determine which contact behavior was the most suitable to provide higher accuracy for numerical predictions, compared with experimental data ( By omitting screw threads, bone-screw interfaces were simulated as bonded contacts The validation step consisted of two single and semi-physiological loading cases. For both static scenarios, the directionsand magnitudes of the external forces, as well as boundary conditions were applied equivalent to experimental tests ( The solid models were meshed with 10-node tetrahedral elements including quadratic displacement functions. Convergence tests were executed to assess that a fine enough element discretization was used for FE analysis. For each part of fracture models (i.e. cortical and spongy bones, plate, screws, embedding material, and embedding cast), the element sizes were reduced until a convergence of the global axial displacement as well as the individual maximum von-Mises stresses for each specific part. In this regard, the node numbers of each part were increased by almost 30%, and if the numerical results of the global displacement and individual maximum von-Mises stress did not respectively change more than 3% and 5%%in three subsequent steps of sufficient mesh refinement, then the convergence element sizes were determined. A subsequent coarsening of the converged element size was carried out for all parts to check whether bigger element size can be selected for some parts if the changes in the global displacement and individual maximum von-Misses were less than 0.5% and 1%, respectively For each optical marker, the numerical local displacement was defined as the total displacement of the closest node to the location of the marker ( The overall axial stiffness was defined as the external axial load divided by the displacement of the load applicator projected in the loading direction. The global as well as local corroborations between FEA and the experiment were respectively assessed by regression analyses regarding the axial stiffness and the marker displacements as well as by root-mean-square errors (RSME) calculated for the marker displacements of each fracture fragment ( Moreover, the deviation of the numerical axial stiffness from the experimental measurements was evaluated in terms of percentage error to check the local accuracy of the FE models The global mechanical response of fracture models was assessed by analyzing the total displacement contours under semi-physiological loading. In addition, the medial and lateral contact reaction forces of the tibial plateaus were assessed to investigate the effect of the coronal split on the load shared between the tibial plateaus. Afterwards, von-Mises stress distributions within the lateral locking plates and screws were evaluated for both fracture models. Stress singularities due to sharp re-entrant corners or constraining points such as bonded contacts between locking screws and plates were ignored, and stress values were reported some nodes away from the local peak areas. Axial stiffness demonstrated a very strong agreement between numerical results and experimental measurements for Fracture C (R FE analysis of total deformations indicated that Fracture C showed 73% higher overall deformation, compared to Fracture H. The coronal fracture line resulted in instability which rotated the medial-anterior fragment in the frontal plane and tilted away its posterior counterpart in the transverse plane. The medial section of Fracture H, however, is mainly displaced in the frontal plane ( The effect of fracture morphology on the load shared between the medial and lateral sides of the tibia was also interesting. In Fracture H, the external load was shared almost equally on both tibial sides (56% on the lateral and 44% on the medial tibial plateau), while the lateral fragment of Fracture C carried 61% of the axial external load as well as the medial-anterior and medial-posterior fragments transferred 23% and 16% of this force, respectively. Von-Mises stress contours of the inner surfaces of the plates indicated that for Fracture C, the peak stress, which occurred around the proximal-inferior and proximal-threadless holes, was almost 70% higher than that of Fracture H, which was observed around the kick-stand hole. At the outer surfaces of the plate, Fracture C demonstrated an almost 62% higher peak stress, compared to that of Fracture H. The high-stress areas at the outer surface of the plate were mainly in the vicinity of the proximal-threadless hole for fracture C and around the kick-stand hole in Fracture H. Therefore, in Fracture C, the main load is transferred through the proximal part of the lateral locking plate, while for Fracture H, the middle section of the plate is the main load-bearing part ( Comparing von-Mises stress distributions in screws, Fracture C revealed a 61% higher maximum stress than that of Fracture H. For both, the peak stress areas were found in the inferior surface (compression side) of the kick-stand screws which is in contact with cortical tibial bone ( The crucial role of the posteromedial fragment for the fixation of bi-condylar tibial plateau fractures has been clinically well recognized Numerical simulations are reliable if their outcomes are appropriately justified by verification and validation Some previous studies conducted FE analysis regarding tibial plateau fractures, but none of them were validated against experimental data The total deformation of bone-implant structures revealed that the presence of the coronal fracture line destabilized the medial side of the tibia which was inadequately fixed with single lateral plating only. This outcome is in agreement with previous clinical studies indicating that the clinical failures of complex tibial plateau fractures mainly occurrs at the medial side The numerical evaluations of the axial reaction forces on the tibia plateaus illustrated that since the lateral side of Fracture C was stiffer than its medial counterpart, the lateral tibia plateau transferred 61% of the external load. Previous FE studies regarding tibial plateau or proximal tibial fractures, however, mainly applied the knee contact forces as simple pressures on the tibial plateau with 60% distribution on the medial side Our results regarding implant stress distributions are helpful in improving plate designs or fixation methods for this complex fracture. The locations of maximum von-Mises stresses are the potential failure points in cases of repetitive loading. All peak stress values were smaller than the yield strength of Ti6Al4V (800 MPa) Stress distribution contours indicated that the coronal fracture line resulted in altering the potential failure points of the lateral locking plate from the middle section (in Fracture H) to the proximal part (in Fracture C) as well as remarkably increasing the peak von-Mises stress of the kick-stand screw. In Fracture C, the kick-stand and proximal-dorsal screws were the main load-bearing screws, while in Fracture H, the load was mostly transferred by the kick-stand screw. Therefore, disregarding this crucial fracture line leads to distinct predictions about the failure sites of the lateral locking plate under fatigue loading or the failure loads of the kick-stand screw. According to the obtained values for maximum von-Mises stresses of the lateral locking implantation in Fracture C, in the case of full-weight bearing, in which peak of knee contact forces increased to almost three times of the body-weight, approximately 2500 N This study also had some limitations which should be mentioned. First, although our models were validated in terms of axial stiffness and marker displacements, stress contours of the implant components were not verified. Nevertheless, we assume that stress calculations in the metallic components to be reliable. Its supporting reason is that the applied loads did not result in plastic deformations or screw loosening. Also, displacements and stiffness which both primarily result from implant deformation were very accurately predicted, providing sufficient trust in the numerical model. As another limitation, due to FE simplifications regarding the bone-screw and the screw-plate interfaces, the mentioned stress results were just estimations to assess the effects of fracture morphology. However, it is expected that the real patterns of stress contours for the plate and the screw shank would remain about the same. In addition, the FE models were based on Sawbones instead of human bones. It has been shown that mechanical properties of the fourth-generation Sawbones are very close to cadaveric bones. Since the geometry and the mechanical properties of synthetic bones are constant In conclusion, outcomes of this study reveal that the coronal splits of complex tibial plateau fractures remarkably affect the stress distributions within locking implants in addition to destabilizing the medial side of the tibia. Therefore, the potential fatigue failure points of lateral locking plates and screws depend on the fracture morphology, and a clinically-relevant fracture model such as Fracture C should be considered to accurately assess fixation methods. The presented validated FE model of bi-condylar tibial plateau fractures including coronal splits provides the potential to assess the effects of implant designs, plate positions, and screw orientations on the fixation stability of these clinically-challenging fractures. The authors’ research institution received institutional research support by Stryker Company, Selzach, Switzerland. None. Not required. German Academic Exchange Service (DAAD), Bonn, Germany.