In this paper, the effects of the surface electrical property and solution chemistry on the fine wolframite flotation were investigated by zeta potential measurement and the modified concentration logarithm diagrams. Based on that results, the flotation effects of different monominerals, including wolframite, scheelite, fluorite, calcite and quartz, were studied using different single collector, including sodium oleate, salicylaldoxime, benzohydroxamic acid and fatty-acid collector GYR. However, the wolframite recovery was low, and thus the mixed collectors were used to improve the recovery using benzohydroxamic acid as main collector and other collector as additional collector, including sodium oleate, salicylaldoxime, benzohydroxamic acid, fatty-acid collector GYR and fatty-acid collector TAB-3. The results show that the maximum recovery of wolframite exceeded 86% using GYB and TAB-3 as mixed collectors, which was up 13% compared with single GYB. These results could be explained in terms of the modified concentration logarithm diagrams in conjunction with the IEP values of different monominerals mentioned in this work. The infrared spectrogram indicated that because of different structures and properties of GYB and TAB-3, GYB could be complementary with TAB-3.At present, world’s reserves of tungsten are estimated to be 3 Flotation is widely applied in the mining and metallurgical industry all over the world. It is often employed to separate hydrophobic particles from an aqueous suspension by introducing air bubbles A few studies have been conducted for the recycling of tungsten. Some of the studies have focused on the flotation reagents, such as salicyhydroxamic acid, N-(6-(hydroxyamino)-6-oxohexyl)octanamide fatty-acid collector GYR, fatty-acid collector TAB-3, sodium oleate and benzylhydroxamic acid as collectors, sodium carbonated, sodium silicate and lead nitrate as regulators The present work aims to build a foundation for the efficient recovery of fine wolframite by analyzing the flotation behaviors of different monominerals. Wolframite and scheelite are the main valuable minerals, calcite, fluorite and quartz are the main gangue minerals in the tungsten ores. Zeta potential measurement infrared spectrogram and the modified concentration logarithm diagrams were used to analyze the flotation behaviors. Tungsten concentrate were obtained from Zhangyuan Tungsten Company of Jiangxi province in China. It was processed according to the flowsheet shown in Monomineralic scheelite (92.79% purity), fluorite (99.06% purity), calcite (99.68% purity) and quartz (99.15% purity) from the mines in China were used in this study. Samples were milled to particle sizes between 0.038 Sodium oleate, salicylaldoxime and benzohydroxamic acid from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd were used as collectors. HCl and NaOH solutions were used to adjust the pH value. The deionized water was used for all the experiments. Flotation tests were conducted on a XFGC-II flotation machine (mechanical agitation) with a 40 Zeta potentials of the monomineral were measured by DELSA-440SX electrophoresis apparatus trophoresis. (Malvern Instruments Ltd., United Kingdom). 30  The monomineralic flotation behaviors using different collectors, including sodium oleate, salicylaldoxime, benzohydroxamic acid and fatty-acid collector GYR, were investigated based on above research, and the results were presented in  The main hydrolysates of Because GYR, sodium oleate, salicylaldoxime acid and benzohydroxamic acid used in the experiments are anionic collectors, the positively charged surfaces are favorable for wolframite flotation, such as in the pH range of 7–9.9 for It can be seen from   For these four collectors the adsorption effect of benzohydroxamic acid on wolframite surfaces are better, but it also easily adsorbs on other minerals surfaces. This resulted in that the grade of concentrate decreased. For GYR the flotation recovery of wolframite is low in highly alkaline aqueous, but it is very effective to scheelite, fluorite and calcite. Therefore, it can be used to separate wolframite and other minerals. The flotation effect of the wolframite using single collector was not very good in Section Due to the synergy of mixed collectors the flotation effect went better as shown in The infrared spectrograms of wolframite using GYB, TAB-3 or the mixture of GYB and TAB-3 as collectors are shown in It also can be seen from   In conclusion, the recovery of wolframite is much higher than those of other minerals using TAB-3 as additional collector. Therefore, TAB-3 is most efficient to separate wolframite from other minerals. Moreover, the difference in recovery between wolframite and other minerals becomes smaller with increasing the dosage of TAB-3. This paper is an attempt to provide information on the flotation behavior of monomineralic wolframite, scheelite, fluorite, calcite and quartz. The conclusions were summarized as follows. The IEP values of monomineralic calcite and fluorite used in this paper by zeta potential measurement were are about 8.0 and 8.5 in deionized water, and the IEP values of monomineralic wolframite and scheelite used did not appear. Huebnerite and ferberite are mainly activated by the adsorption of Pb The maximum recovery of wolframite exceeded 86% using GYB and TAB-3 as mixed collectors, which was up 13% compared with single GYB. In addition, the mixed collectors of GYB and TAB-3 was very effective to separate wolframite and other minerals mentioned in this work. The infrared spectrogram indicated that because of different structures and properties of GYB and TAB-3, GYB could be complementary with TAB-3. This work was financially supported by the Projects of