Quartz undergoes a reversible change in crystal structure from α to β-quartz during its thermal treatment. Present study explored applicability of the phenomenon to break the phase interfaces between the quartz and other minerals present in siliceous manganese ores. Microscopic studies revealed that volume expansion of quartz initiates the fracture at phase interfaces. Detailed microscopic studies of fracture patterns reveal that these fractures can reduce the energy consumption during grinding and improve liberation of pyrolusite and quartz also. This approach is useful for processing of siliceous manganese ores and can be vital for processing of other siliceous ores also.Quartz is the second most abundant mineral in the Earth’s continental crust. There are many varieties of quartz, which occurs in nearly all types of igneous, metamorphic and sedimentary rocks. Hence, it found as a main impurity in all kinds of valuable ore deposits. Comminution is most preferred operation to liberate the valuable minerals from gangue phases but effectiveness of separation process depends on mineral characteristics. Although fine grinding enhances mineral liberation but it adversely affect the efficiency of beneficiation circuit and also increases operating cost of the plant. A pre-treatment method is required to enhance the liberation of valuable minerals from quartz with minimum energy consumption. Thermal treatment of ores is an age old age technique to change the physical and chemical properties of ores to improve the comminution and beneficiation process effectiveness ( Quartz undergoes a reversible change in crystal structure at 573 Particles of 10–25 Although fracture detection in coarser sizes is easy but it is difficult to provide the same energy inputs during grinding of this size particles for comparative studies. So, samples of finer and narrow size range (0.5–1 Siliceous manganese ore fines selected for study contain Mn: 27.51%, SiO Microscopic analysis is most reliable tool to study the fracture pattern and mineral liberation. Microscopic images of the samples were captured before and after the thermal treatment to compare the pre-existing and newly developed fractures on any mineral interface. It was found that size of micro-cracks is very small and at lower magnification (20 and 50×) it is difficult to produce a clear image. Higher magnification (100×) using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) is required to visualize these cracks. Optical and SEM micrographs of samples are shown in Grinding of the thermally treated samples was done to estimate the effect of fractures during thermal treatment on fineness and liberation. Ten Joules/drop energy was given for 200 times and a product was screened. Feed sample contains 80% particles between 0.5 Liberation studies of pyrolusite and quartz was carried out using QEMCSAN. QEMSCAN provided quantified data about the liberated mineral particles. Particles are classified in different liberation classes based on mass percentage of the targeted mineral out of the total particle mass. Significant amount of quartz is present in the form of smaller grains and clearly indicates the imperfect breaking at phase interfaces. These smaller particles will be more vulnerable for liberation and detachment from the mother particles during the thermal treatment. Quartz inversion is a well established phenomenon in ceramic industry and its applicability in mineral processing industry can be explored to enhance mineral liberation as well as to minimize the energy consumption in comminution. Studies carried out on siliceous manganese ores reveal that, volume change in quartz can initiate the fractures at phase boundaries of the quartz particles to enhance the liberation of quartz and valuable minerals. It can reduce the energy consumption during grinding as well as enhances liberation of pyrolusite and quartz. Process can be explored in future to upgrade the banded hematite quartz (BHQ), banded hematite jasper (BHJ), siliceous phosphate, siliceous manganese ores, siliceous limestone, chromite and other precious metals.