In-situ preparation of nanocomposite including a shape memory alloy (Ni-Ti) as reinforcement in the Ni amorphous matrix is the subject of this content. Firstly, the amorphous alloy has been prepared using high-energy ball milling of pure elements, i.e., Ni, Nb, Ti and Si as alloying elements. Then, by the employment of kinetic modeling, the crystallization process (i.e., as a two-step phenomenon) of prepared amorphous alloy has been controlled in a way that provides the possibility of the formation of Ni-Ti as the reinforcement within the Ni amorphous alloy matrix. Also, the kinetic modeling revealed that the crystallization can be explained using the Johnson-Mehl-Avrami (JMA) model. Also, the crystallization phenomenon started by interface controlled with one-dimensional growth of nuclei at first and followed by interface controlled with two and three-dimensional growth of nuclei.Amorphous alloys or metallic glasses are a wide category of engineering materials, that prepared by structural deviation of constituents from long range order of crystalline arrangement of the same constituents [ To the best of our knowledge, the development of metallic amorphous materials including Fe based, Ti based, Cu based, Ni based and Zr based alloys were the subject of many researches [ There are two main approaches for the preparation of amorphous alloys including rapid quenching and mechanosynthesis [ Mechanical alloying is one of the most common technique for the preparation of nanocrystalline materials amorphous structure as well as the extended solid solution. In this technique, the fracturing and cold welding of the precursor were performed simultaneity as a function of milling time [ Shape memory alloys (SMAs) are a wide category of materials with the ability to retain its first geometry in front of the external driving force, e.g., thermomechanical or magnetic force. In this regards, SMAs have wide usages in various category of engineering application [  For the formation of martensite in the Ni-Ti crystalline phase, the prepared composite must be chilled below the martensitic starting temperature (M During the reheating of the prepared structure above the austenitic starting temperature (A The advanced properties of the amorphous matrix are significantly related to the preparation method and the amount of crystalline phase that existed in the matrix. In this study, a novel approach was proposed for in-situ preparation of Ni-Ti shape-memory alloy as reinforcement by controlling the crystallization process of Ni amorphous alloy that prepared by mechanical alloying. Controlling of annealing process was carried out by the employment of the crystallization kinetic modeling as a guideline. Ni Phase and structural evolution of prepared samples were studied using X-ray diffraction (XRD), in the range of 2θ = 20–100 The microstructures of prepared samples were investigated by a high-resolution transmission electron microscope (HRTEM) (FEI Tecnai G2 F30 S-TWIN) and a selected area diffraction pattern (SADP) with an acceleration voltage of 300 kV with a resolution of 0.19 nm. The rate of solid state phenomena can be described by a fundamental kinetic equation as [ In this equation, The variation of To determine the model and complexity of the reaction, an advanced method on the base of the variable activation energy concept that is proposed by Arshad and Maaroufi was used [ In this equation, a good agreement between the experimental data (The right-hand side of the equation) and the model data (the left-hand side of the equation) can determine the proper kinetic model(s). A set of Also, the The samples were taken at different milling time to study the progress of the milling process. The XRD patterns of Ni The TEM analysis was used to confirm the formation of the amorphous phase. The DSC analysis at different heating rate was used to study the kinetics of crystallization of amorphous phase. The DSC curves of the sample at various heating rates, i.e., 5, 10, 20 and 30 °C/min, in Ar atmosphere were shown in The reaction fraction (α) variation by temperature can be calculated by Eq. Eq. To determine the reaction model, Eq. In which m is the Avrami exponent and estimated by Eq. in which Fracturing as well as cold welding are the administrated phenomena during the amorphization of Ni According to literatures, vacancies, dislocations and grain boundaries are the main portion of imperfections in crystalline materials. While, amorphous alloys including of some planner defects as quasi-dislocation dipoles that formed from deterioration of three-dimensional cluster of vacancies during the preparation of amorphous alloy [ The most appropriate sites for the nucleation of the crystallization phase during the amorphous phase crystallization are quasi-dislocation dipoles and can save the elastic stresses within the matrix, effectively [ The changes of Avrami exponent (m) can be used to explain the variation of the crystallization mechanism.  It was worth to note that, within the crystallization of Ni Kinetic triplet, viz., activation energy, Avrami exponent and pre-exponential factor of the proposed mechanism for crystallization of Ni Eq. In the present context, as the first step the Ni The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.