We examine the economic viability of three multi-effect distillation (MED) based processes against the MED as a benchmark, when they are driven by low grade heat. We model and compare the Boosted MED (BMED), Flash Boosted MED (FBMED) and Distributed Boosted MED (DBMED) processes with the MED in terms of waste heat performance ratio, specific capex and opex. All three new configurations generate significantly higher productions than MED with higher capex and opex investment. We provide the corresponding cash-flow analyses using such financial metrics as the Net Present Value (NPV) and Internal Rate of Return (IRR). This study leads to the conclusion that the DBMED process is the superior scenario up to an interest rate of 12.5% at 65 °C heat source supply temperature which then drops to 8.4% at 90 °C heat source supply temperature. Also, the analysis shows for the high interest rates (above 8.4% at 90 °C), MED has higher NPV compared to other MED based processes.A reliable supply of freshwater is undoubtedly a necessity of the modern world. The worldwide water consumption rate had surged from 340 million litter per second in Jan 2016 to 351 million litter per second in March 2018 (an annual increase rate of 1.6%) [ Desalination and water recycling are the only available commercialised solutions to overcome the water scarcity problem. In the desalination market, the global contracted capacity has augmented from 95.6 million m Reverse osmosis (RO) desalination and thermal desalination generate >90% of the desalinated waters globally [ Electricity and heat source, whether steam or hot liquid, are the main sources of energy for desalination projects. Therefore, any attempt to decrease the operating cost or increase the efficiency of desalination process is important. Among the commercialised steam driven thermal desalination processes, the multi-effect distillation with Thermal Vapour Compression (MED-TVC) process consumes the least electrical energy [ Based on a case study for an alumina refinery in Western Australia [ In this paper, we present the thermoeconomic study of the new MED based processes (namely BMED, FBMED and DBMED) benchmarked against an MED process. Low temperature waste heat from 65 to 90 °C, which is generally available in many industrial sites and geothermal fields, is used as the heat source. In those industrial sites, for example in thermally intensive mineral refineries [ Accordingly, a comprehensive capital and operating cost model is developed for the MED based processes. In addition to the unit product cost metric, we compare the MED based desalination processes driven by low grade heat resources via Net Present Value ( The multi-effect distillation (MED) process produces freshwater via evaporation using a heat source and saline feedwater ( The heat source leaving a MED process typically still contains a considerable amount of useful enthalpy. In the context of waste heat sources, the BMED, DBMED and FBMED are capable of further extracting the enthalpy of the heat source. Boosters (for BMED and DBMED) or an assembly of liquid-liquid heat exchangers and flash chambers (for FBMED) are used to evaporate more feedwater, engendering a greater enthalpy reduction for the heat source medium. The additional steam production is introduced into the judicious effects, thereby giving rise to higher freshwater production and heightened waste heat performance ratio (  In the optimised BMED configuration with a 70 °C heat source temperature ( In our previous work [     While the FBMED configuration has the highest production rate for temperatures beyond 75 °C, for a given heat source temperature it is not necessarily evident which process is the most economical over the useful life of the plant. We need to provide the streams of cash flow for each process and compare the economic viability of the various MED based processes. The capital and operating costs are the critical parts of the streams of cash flow. The next section is devoted to the capital cost function of the various processes, consistent with the assumptions in The capital cost of a desalination process is a major consideration for economic viability. The capex of commercialised This function was developed based on the IDA database and covers the engineering, equipment supply, erection and instrumentation and control of the desalination plant. We had earlier adapted the abovementioned capital cost function to estimate the capital cost of the new MED based processes as follows [ In Ref. [  The higher waste heat performance ratio for the DBMED and FBMED designs ( This paper presents a new approach to address the impact to the capital cost for the recently developed DBMED and FBMED processes when Δ In accordance to the relation between the overall heat transfer coefficient ( To this end, the concept of an equivalent effect with a 7 °C heat source temperature drop is defined to arrive at a rational estimate of the increase in heat transfer area and therefore capital cost for the 1st effect and booster(s). For the DBMED and FBMED designs, the equivalent effects are defined for the 1st effect and boosters with their heat transfer rates, heat source and feed inlet temperatures being identical to the original designs and a constraint imposed by the top-brine temperature (70 °C) when the heat source temperature decrement is set to 7 °C. To illustrate, For the defined equivalent effect, the Accordingly, the modified capital cost function, expressed as Eq. In Eq. The auxiliary equipment cost coefficient ( Note that when the heat source temperature difference in the 1st effect and in the booster(s) exceeds 7 °C, Eq. We rely on cash flow and net present value analyses to analyse the economic viability of the new designs. To this end, in addition to the capital cost, the operating expenses should be evaluated conservatively, as will be explained in the subsequent sections. The annual operating costs ( Assuming one full time trained personnel per 4543 m Chemical additive costs ( Electrical expenses ( Heat source pressure decrement across the first effect, liquid-liquid heat exchangers or booster(s) are calculated based on the Jensen number ( The Over the useful lifetime of the MED plant, which is assumed to be 30 years, the annual cash flows includes cash flow from operation, investing and financing. It covers annual operating expenses, incomes, income taxes, and loan repayment. Cash flows are used to calculate the Net Present Value ( The market price of water in a specific market (Australia in this manuscript) is used to compare the profitability of each MED-based configuration. The annual income of the plant is the price of the total production of the plant sold at the average market price, as follows: A simple straight line depreciation is assumed for the capital cost of the design. Half of the initial investment is covered by bank loan as a realistic assumption, so that the Loan to Capital Cost ratio ( The ratio of a constant payment to the present value of getting that payment is the capital recovery factor ( For the income tax a flat 30% corporate tax rate has been considered [ In addition to the cash flows and net present value analyses which include asset depreciation, taxation, benefits and other factors that change profitability, the unit product cost (  In accordance to the process modelling equations as in The equivalent effects with the heat source temperature drop being 7 °C are developed for the 1st effect and booster(s) individually for costing purposes. In the DBMED design, for heat source supply temperatures above 75 °C because Δ In the FBMED design, for heat source supply temperatures beyond 80 °C, which are above the maximum top brine temperature (70 °C), the brine temperature for the equivalent effect is set equal to the actual brine temperature for the first effect of FBMED. So, in contrast, for the corresponding equivalent effect, the heat source temperature drop of 7 °C actually In accordance to the modified capital cost function consistent with the IDA database (Eq. Due to the use of booster(s) for BMED and DBMED and flash chambers for the FBMED, the MED has the minimum capex compared to all other processes, with the overall trend increasing with heat source temperature on account of greater distillate production. On the other hand, the specific capex is the minimum for FBMED, with the overall trend decreasing with heat source temperature. The normalised pumping power consumptions ( As shown in In accordance with the assumptions in   We have performed a comprehensive thermoeconomic analysis of a suite of recently proposed low grade sensible heat driven desalination processes. We propose a generalised method for estimating the capital costs of optimised multi-effect distillation (MED), boosted multi-effect distillation (BMED), distributed boosted multi-effect distillation (DBMED) and flash boosted multi-effect distillation (FBMED) configurations. Our results specify that the augmented production capacity and thermal efficiency of the MED based processes overtake the increased capital and operational requirements essential to these processes as compared to the MED configuration. In terms of Net Present Value, the DBMED configuration emerges as the superior option over the entire range of heat source supply temperatures based on assumptions consistent with the Australian market situation. Over the entire range of heat source supply temperatures from 65 to 90 °C, our analyses indicate that the unit product cost of all the configurations is between 0.9 and 1.3 US$/m  heat transfer area (m average market price of water per cubic meter (US$/m boiling point elevation (°C) annual cash flow capital cost (US$) annual chemical cost (US$/yr) specific heat capacity (kJ/kg⋅K) capital recovery factor total plant production rate (m production rate of the 1 annual electrical cost (US$/yr) Electricity Unit Price (US$/kWh) plant availability as a percentage of the year (%) constant enthalpy (kJ/kg) enthalpy of saturated liquid (kJ/kg) latent heat (kJ/kg) enthalpy of saturated steam (kJ/kg) heat transfer coefficient (kW/m interest rate (% p.a.) first year income installation factor Internal Rate of Return Incremental Rate of Return (%), the value of interest rate which yields an Jensen number equivalent MED cost coefficient thermal conductivity (W/m⋅K) constant annual labour cost (US$/yr) Logarithmic Mean Temperature Difference fixed loan payments Loan to Capital Cost ratio auxiliary equipment cost coefficient mass flow rate (kg/s) total mass flow rate (kg/s) annual maintenance, spares, and insurance costs (US$/yr) desalination plant operating life normalised pumping power consumption (kWh/m Net Present Value (US$) Number of Transfer Units operating expenditure (US$/year) power demand (kW) waste heat performance ratio heat transfer rate (kW) supplementary bank fees percentage temperature (°C) top brine temperature (°C) total capital cost (US$) overall heat transfer coefficient (kW/m unit product cost (US$/m volumetric flow rate (m year of plant operation the heat exchanger plate thickness (mm) pressure drop (Pa) augmentation factor for the 1 augmentation factor for the boosters added heat transfer area efficiency capital cost function  average ancillary equipment brine booster boosted MED system cold condenser distillate steam generation by ancillary equipment (m MED, MSF, DBMED or FBMED approach total daily plant production rate (m Distributed Boosted MED configuration equivalent feedwater Flash Boosted MED system hot heat source effect number inlet booster number liquid-liquid heat exchanger Logarithmic Mean Temperature Difference conventional multi-effect desalination configuration minimum multi-stage flash distillation total number of boosters total number of effects total number of liquid-liquid heat exchangers units total number of pumps outlet reference saturated vapour seawater total liquid-liquid heat exchanger unit vapour water waste heat (heat source) vacuum pump year of plant operation Eqs. For the DBMED process, heat transfer rate of the first effect is calculated as follows: The latent heat of evaporation ( The number of effects and boosters are The ratio between the required energy for the produced freshwater and the maximal available energy from the heat source is defined using the waste heat performance ratio as follows.