Anatomic reduction of femoral neck fractures is difficult to obtain in a closed fashion. Open reduction provides for direct and controlled manipulation of fracture fragments. This can be accomplished via multiple approaches. The anterolateral, or Watson-Jones, approach or Smith-Petersen, or direct anterior, approach are the two most frequently used. Percutaneous techniques have also been described, though they lack the visual confirmation of reduction of a traditional open approach. These can be performed using a fracture table or with a free leg on a radiolucent table in either supine or lateral positions. Knowledge of the hip and pelvis anatomy is crucial for the preservation of critical femoral neck vasculature. Intra-operative fluoroscopy together with direct visualization provides the framework for successful manipulation of the fracture fragments, temporary stabilization, and ultimately fracture fixation.The key to the perfect reduction is approaching the fracture with the understanding that if an anatomic reduction cannot be obtained closed, direct visualization of the fracture is mandatory. Multiple studies have documented improved outcomes with anatomic reduction To obtain the desired perfect reduction one must enter the operating room with all needed information to have a clear operative plan in place (and a backup plan) such that no surprises are encountered during surgery. Therefore all patients need pre-operative anterior–posterior (AP) pelvis, AP hip, and lateral hip radiographs. The AP pelvis radiograph provides an uninjured contralateral hip to judge the reduction, off set, neck-shaft angle, angulation, and length that one should aim to achieve. In addition to radiographs, a pre-operative CT scan will visualize the area of comminution that may not be seen with routine radiographs ( Before beginning any reduction manoeuvres, visualizing the fracture in the AP and lateral planes is paramount. One must be able to see the fracture in multiple views to judge reduction ( Patient positioning and table choice are paramount for a perfect reduction. The surgeon needs direct access to the fracture site and limit the need for “hands on” constant fracture reduction. Multiple table options exist: fracture table with traction, fracture table without traction, or using a radiolucent flat top table with the leg draped free. Additionally supine versus lateral position is possible for all tables. All options need to be considered with the goal of having direct access to the fracture with the ability to obtain a perfect reduction. Supine positioning will allow you direct access to the femoral head, neck, shaft, and pelvic brim. Additionally it will allow fixation to be placed from lateral to medial. Performing the anterolateral approach, the Watson-Jones, can be performed in the lateral position; however, gravity may cause medialization of the operative extremity and impact the femoral neck/head reduction. Using a table with traction and a perineal post will allow a temporary or permanent reduction to be obtained. With constant traction pulled through the operative extremity and the counter-force at the perineal area, the femoral neck can be reduced. One must be cautious to limit the amount of time in traction to help reduce the risk of pudendal or femoral nerve palsies and compartment syndrome It is always important to discuss the surgical plan in terms of paralysis with the anaesthesia team. General anaesthesia with endotracheal intubation allowing for complete muscle relaxation is needed during the case. Fighting soft tissue tension from non-relaxed muscles can result in a malreduction or a loss of reduction. A wide array of treatment algorithms have been described in the literature when deciding between closed reduction and percutaneous fixation and open reduction internal fixation of a femoral neck fracture The decision to abandon closed reduction and proceed to the open approach to achieve the desired reduction must be balanced with the cost of the dissection and the potential insult to the vascular supply to the femoral head. An accurate reduction and stable fixation reduce the relative risk of fracture healing complications by a factor of 13 The Watson-Jones anterolateral approach, usually performed in a lateral position, starts with an incision just posterior to the anterior superior iliac spine (ASIS) The Smith-Petersen or direct anterior approach Routt et al. At our institution we use another variation of the Smith-Petersen Approach. The lateral window of the ilioinguinal approach is made to identify the ASIS, sartorius, tensor fascia lata, and lateral femoral cutaneous nerve. The tissue around the sartorius is dissected so the muscle belly and the origin at the ASIS is visualized. The sartorius is then taken off sharply from the ASIS and a tagging suture is placed in it to aid in retraction. Next, the rectus femoris is seen deep to the reflected sartorius. It is sharply taken off from the anterior inferior iliac spine (AIIS) and the anterior acetabulum, tagged, and reflected. The hip capsule now is clearly visible. After fixation the rectus and sartorius are repaired back to the pelvis with suture anchors ( For all approaches when a capsulotomy is performed, the step off between the acetabular wall and the femoral neck should be palpated. This allows for direct observation of the spatial relationship between the labrum and articular surface of the femoral head. The capsule is sharply incised with a “Z” or “T” shaped incision. It is critical that the capsulotomy remain anterior to the lesser trochanter at all times to avoid injury to the medial femoral circumflex artery. The capsulotomy is performed with a scalpel rather than electrocautery, avoiding thermal injury to the cartilage of the femoral head. Prior to fixation, thorough irrigation with removal of haematoma and any devitalized pieces of bone and cartilage is necessary. Take note of any injury to the cartilage of femoral head, as this is a risk factor in the development of osteoarthritis To obtain an excellent reduction, control of both the proximal fracture and distal shaft must be obtained to allow for successful manipulation. For the proximal segment, 2.0 A percutaneous reduction manoeuvre is also described Once the fracture is reduced, definitive fixation can commence, usually though a separate lateral incision. This allows for direct visualization of the fracture site during implant placement. Methods of fixation are discussed in detail in further sections. Obtaining a perfect reduction of a femoral neck fracture with adequate planning and surgical technique will provide the patient the best possible outcome. Gudrun Mirick, John Kurylo and David Templeman have no conflicts related to this publication. Dr Templeman is on the Board of the American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons and has been a paid consultant for Zimmer, OrthoFix, and Stryker.