Here a new automated and inexpensive atomic simulation approach including sequential oxygen diffusion and simplified reaction was created to explore the char reactivity and combustion behavior during oxy-fuel combustion. Two large-scale (>40,000 carbon atoms) coal chars (higher- and lower-porosity chars) that differ primarily in pore volume and pore size distribution were evaluated against graphite with similar number of carbon atoms. The structural transformations, total atoms, reactive atoms, their location, conversion, rate (number of atoms reacting), size of the char, and apparent density were captured. Post analysis evaluated the total porosity, micro/mesoporosity volume, and atomic surface area. The higher porosity char burn-off was ∼38% more rapid than the graphite (number of steps), similar to the lower porosity char (∼33% faster). The peak reactivity followed the maximum atomic surface area (with a delay of 5–10% conversion) than decreased—as there were fewer reactive carbons. Porosity volume increases with conversion until 50–70% where the porosity declines. For both chars the microporosity contribution increased until 30–35% conversion then the pores either grow or coalesce into the mesoporous classification. The chars burning modes are initially changing density (pore growth accompany mass loss) until ∼50% conversion when the mode became a combination of changing density and shrinking core. Graphite was less reactive and followed a shrinking core consistent with the simulation restrictions. This approach is likely to aid in the exploration of the influence of char structure and conversion conditions upon reactivity and char behavior in combustion and gasification.Coal char conversion is the rate-determining step in combustion and gasification There are numerous mathematical approaches based on pore structure development models Marzec Atomistic approaches using molecular reaction dynamic offer insight into transformations and the mechanisms involved To better inform reaction models there is a need to enable (a) char construction strategies that capture distributions of structural features at a scale than can incorporate pore influences and (b) an approach that informs behavior using inexpensive simulation approaches. To overcome this limitation on control of scale, order, and porosity, Wang et al. Char models were constructed in earlier work Oxy-fuel combustion simulations were performed using Material Studio software. While oxy-fuel combustion usually occurs with flue gas dilution for high-temperature material concerns, here we used a simulation with only oxygen. Other reactive and non-reactive gases may be added but at the expense of increased computation requirements. Automation scripts were created to allow sequential steps and data capture within the study table component. Given the relatively large-scale low-level modeling approaches were utilized to provide a rapid but informative simulation. Edge carbon atoms were defined as the potentially reactive sites. The differences between reactivity of edge and chair sites was not considered as the simulation was considered to be at a high enough temperature that these differences were muted. Atom typing distinguishes the reactive/non-reactive atoms and an energy calculation was performed for molecular dynamics. Reacting carbon atoms were determined after each diffusion step utilizing a close contact calculation to identify reactive carbon atoms within 3.2 Diffusion of products out of the structure is not considered. Hydrogen atoms were removed during the simulation. Similarly, the simultaneous CO To aid in visualization of the process 2D views were created where the reacted atoms were identified by stages of removal. The centroid of the char structure was set to 0, 0, and 0 Cartesian coordinates. Reacted atoms were placed in the 2D ( The Supplemental Material contains further information on the repeatability of the process, a sensitivity analysis for the reactive distance and extent of oxygen penetration (dynamics temperature and time step). Char structure is dependent upon the coal, the time-temperature history, and gas pressure The automated simulation approach was used to explore the char transformation in oxy-fuel combustion utilizing the large-scale char models and graphite (  Unfortunately no study has combined an in-depth char structure evaluation coupled to burn-off behavior. Thus, the behaviors here are dependent on the values selected and it is not known if these simulations capture the appropriate behavior. Until the appropriate evaluations can be performed the approach serves as a means to evaluate different char structures with the same simulation to gain behavioral insight. However, the general behavior is generally consistent with experimental observations. Senneca and Cortese To evaluate why the rate changes occur, the atomic surface area (  The burning mode behavior influences the energy release and thus is used in combustion modeling. Two modes are generally recognized: random pore and shrinking core models. The simulations here are many orders of magnitude smaller than char particles and do not include char morphology aspects yet due to the scale challenges but this may well be possible in future work. Thus the small scale endeavor here is not directly related but we can demonstrate the ability to evaluate this process. To visualize this process movies were created that showed the char structure rotating 15% with each step showing both the char and the location of the atoms to be deleted in that step (see Supplemental Materials). These visuals aided the rationalization of the char behavior. To show this progression in a publication a 2D plot was created for the higher-porosity char and compared to the behavior graphite ( A new automated and inexpensive atomic simulation approach was created to explore the char reactivity and oxy-fuel combustion behavior of two chars. The large-scale char structures (higher- and lower-porosity chars) and graphite (all >40,000 carbon atoms) were compared. The chars had a similar distribution of structural features but differed in pore volume and pore size distribution (one being meso/microporous and the other microporous only). The structure transformations, total atoms, reacting atoms, their location, conversion, rate (number of atoms removed), size of the char, and apparent density were determined. Post analysis evaluated the helium density, total porosity, micro/mesoporosity volume, and atomic surface area. The char reactivity was compared using a simplified oxy-fuel combustion simulation and was aided by visualization approaches. The higher porosity char was ∼38% more rapid than the graphite (number of steps), similar to the lower porosity char (∼33% faster). The conversion profile was similar in shape to experimental observations in the literature. The peak reactivity followed the maximum surface area (with a delay of 5–10% conversion) then decreased—as there were fewer reactive carbons. Porosity volume increases with conversion until 50–70% where the porosity declines. For both chars during conversion the microporosity contribution increased until 30–35% conversion then pores either grow or coalesce into mesopores. The micropore behavior followed an expected trend consistent with literature observations. The burning modes were initially changing density (pore growth accompany mass loss) until ∼50% conversion (by mass) when the mode became a combination of changing density and shrinking core. Graphite was less reactive and followed a shrinking core consistent with the simulation restrictions. This approach is likely to aid in the exploration of the influence of char structure and conversion conditions upon reactivity and char behavior in combustion and gasification. This work was supported by the Analysis of char behavior sensitivity to simulation values: the reactive distance and oxygen penetration extent (diffusion temperature and time step) and an example movie showing conversion progression. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 