Purpose
                  Acetabulum fractures are being increasingly seen with low impact injuries in elderly patients. This article aimed to study systematically literature on geriatric acetabulum fractures. Objectives of this systematic review were to study (1) demography of patients, common mechanisms of injury and types of fracture patterns commonly seen in elderly patients, (2) treatment used for these fractures in literature and (3) mortality rates in elderly with these fractures.
               
                  Methods
                  Systematic search was carried out in May 2020 using predefined search strategy for all studies published in the English language in last 20 years. Literature search and data abstraction was done by two independent reviewers.
               
                  Results
                  After screening of all abstracts, a total of 48 studies were included in the systematic review. In total there were 7876 geriatric patients with acetabulum fractures. Mean age of the patients was 72.47 years. There were 4841 males (61.5%). Fall from low heights was the most common mechanism of injury, present in 47.12% patients followed by motor vehicular accidents in 28.73%. Most common fracture pattern was both column fracture, seen in 19.03% patients, followed by anterior column and posterior hemitransverse fracture in 17.23%, anterior column fractures in 17.13%, and posterior wall fractures in 13.46% patients. Out of total 5160 patients for whom details of treatment were available, 2199 (42.62%) were given non-operative treatment, 2285 (44.28%) were treated with ORIF of acetabulum fracture, 161 (3.12%) were treated with percutaneous fixation and 515 (9.98%) were treated with primary THA. Gull sign, femoral head injury and posterior wall comminution were associated with poorer prognosis after ORIF and may form an indication for a primary THA.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Literature on treatment of geriatric acetabulum fractures is not enough to draw any definite conclusions. There is limited evidence from current literature that surgery could be considered a safe treatment option for displaced acetabulum fractures in elderly. Primary THA can provide early mobility and reduce chances of resurgery in fracture patterns where restoration of joint surface may not be possible.Acetabulum fractures were initially discussed in context to high energy trauma in adults, but are now becoming increasingly common with low impact injuries in elderly. Three most common treatment modalities for these fractures are nonoperative treatment, open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) and primary total hip arthroplasty (THA). Previous reviews on acetabulum fractures in elderly were not systematic and also included studies not restricted to elderly population. Systematic search was carried out in confirmation with Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines. Literature search was carried out in May 2020 by two different reviewers using four different online databases: PubMed ( We included studies whose study-population was limited to elderly patients, defined as more than 55 years of age (based on a preliminary review of literature on age cut-offs used in different studies), or studies from which information on elderly population could be extracted separately. We excluded studies on pelvic fractures, case reports, conference abstracts, case series with less than 5 cases, review articles and articles on surgical techniques. There were no randomized studies available on this topic. A broad variety of studies were included, like prospective and retrospective studies, observational and experimental studies. If there were more than one studies by the same author or the same center, the latest study was taken for pooling the data. Data was extracted from the included studies by 2 independent reviewers using a pre-determined form. Information was abstracted on age, gender, fracture classification, treatment, outcomes and complications. Continuous variables were extracted as means and standard deviations wherever available. The total number of abstracts screened initially was 2352. Mechanism of injury was presented in 29 studies ( Elderly patients are more likely to sustain injury from low injury mechanisms. Chakravarty et al.  Interesting, it was seen that some authors with high-energy mechanism of injury in their patients had higher numbers of posterior fracture patterns. There is no consensus on ideal treatment for geriatric acetabulum fractures, and they have been treated using different methods in different studies. Treatment can also be individualized according to the fracture pattern and health and fitness of the patients. Of the 5160 patients for whom details of treatment were available, 2199 (42.62%) were given nonoperative treatment, 2285 (44.28%) were treated with ORIF of acetabulum fracture, 161 (3.12%) were treated with percutaneous fixation and 515 (9.98%) were treated with primary THA. Distribution of studies in terms of patients in each group is summarized in Many elderly patients with acetabulum fractures may be high risk surgical candidates. Their functional demands may be less. They may have poor bone stock making fracture fixation difficult. Since they are low energy injuries, proportion of undisplaced fractures may be high. Anterior fracture patterns are more likely to be managed conservatively than posterior fracture patterns. Patients receiving conservative treatment were, in general, older than those receiving operative treatment. Schnaser et al. Presence of significant co-morbidities may also be a deciding factor for nonoperative treatment. Wollmerstädt et al. It is not clear whether outcomes differ between operative and nonoperative treatments. Similar outcomes have been reported by several authors for operative as well nonoperative treatment of these fractures, particularly in anterior fracture patterns. Herath et al. On the other hand, poorer functional outcomes of nonoperative treatment have also been reported. Boudissa et al. Elderly patients have limited functional demands. Operative treatment may not always achieve good articular congruency in these patients. This may partly explain these findings. Thus in elderly, low demand patient who are not surgical candidates due to associated co-morbidities, conservative treatment appears to be appropriate. ORIF is the preferred treatment for displaced acetabulum fractures in younger patients. In elderly patients there are concerns regarding higher risk of perioperative complications and poorer bone quality. Walley et al. Giannoudis et al. Schnaser et al. Zha et al. Operated patients and nonoperatively treated patients are often not comparable in terms of fracture pattern, and it is difficult to generalize conclusions from these studies. Displaced fractures should be operated as far as possible and aim should be to achieve early mobilization. It should be understood that ORIF may not provide advantage of earlier mobilization as compared to conservative treatment. This is an infrequently performed procedure for geriatric acetabulum fractures. Since displacement is expected to be less, these patients may be more amenable to percutaneous reduction and fixation. Gary et al. Percutaneous fixation may have a role in treatment of acetabulum fractures in elderly. Careful patient selection is required for this procedure. Percutaneous fixation can also be used to stabilize the columns before a primary THA. Combined hip procedure refers to one-stage management of these injuries. 29 studies had used primary THA as a method of treatment in some or all of their patients. A total of 515 patients underwent primary THA in all the studies. Management of fractures during surgery in these patients is summarized in Primary THA in conjunction with ORIF would require posterior approach alone for fractures amenable to fixation using posterior approach. Failure of ORIF needing THA is well known in acetabulum fractures. Similar to the concept followed in proximal femoral fractures, treatment should be a safe and definitive surgical procedure, with low risk of re-surgery. Another important aim of treatment of elderly patients with acetabulum fractures is early mobilization. Identifying patients who might need an arthroplasty after ORIF is important. Patients with these poor prognostic factors for outcomes after fracture fixation should be offered primary arthroplasty. There is some evidence in literature that THA after a failed ORIF has poorer outcomes as compared to a primary THA. Borg et al. Boelch et al. Boudissa et al. Due consideration should be given to fracture characteristics, and weather it can be reduced anatomically. If fracture cannot be reduced well, primary THA may be a promising option in elderly patients with acetabulum fractures. Mobilization after primary THA for acetabulum fractures appears to be earlier as compared to ORIF. Boraiah et al. Further studies with sufficient sample size are required to compare complication rates between ORIF and primary THA. Primary THA is an acceptable method for treatment of some of these injuries. Important challenge is to identify patients who will be better served by THA rather than internal fixation. Several radiological findings have been associated with poorer clinical outcomes. Zha et al. Anglen et al. A displaced quadrilateral plate fracture does not appear to be associated with poor outcomes. Archdeacon et al. Posterior wall comminution and extension of fracture to weight bearing dome was associated with poorer outcomes in posterior wall fractures. Carroll et al. Early mobilization is one of the primary goals in managing lower limb injuries in elderly. It aims to avoid complications of prolonged recumbency. Traction is poorly tolerated by elderly patients. Elderly comply poorly with partial weight-bearing protocols and weight-bearing may be guided by limits of pain. Return to baseline ambulation was overall poor after acetabulum fractures. Elderly patients with trauma have high in-hospital mortality rates. Associated injuries may have a significant contribution to mortality in these patients. Bible et al. Schnaser et al. Sarcopenia, or age-related decrease in muscle mass, has also been associated with increased mortality. Mitchell et al. Acetabulum fractures in elderly is a growing problem. Herath et al. Low injury mechanisms are predominant in geriatric fractures. Difference in fracture pattern in elderly patients can be explained by the difference in mechanism of injury in those patients. Though there is no study correlating mechanism of injury with pattern of fracture, it can be postulated that fall in these patients produces an impact on the greater trochanter which fractures anterior column and pushes it superiorly, and displaces the quadrilateral plate medially. There may be articular depression at the edge of the fracture and impression fracture on the head of femur. Hip fractures in elderly are common and have received a major attention. Similarly, acetabulum fractures in elderly have a major impact on mobility and longevity of elderly patients and need more attention. Although, mortality rates of acetabular fractures treated operatively was lower than mortality of hip fractures treated operatively in elderly, Reported outcomes of ORIF for acetabular fractures are variable. Outcomes of ORIF in acetabulum fractures in elderly was considered to be unsatisfactory by several authors. Huge differences have been seen in proportions of geriatric fracture treated operatively in different institutions. Thus, the choice of treatment appears to be based on choice of the surgeon and prevailing practices rather than on evidence. Studies included in this review are retrospective and heterogenous in respect to patient population, fracture characteristics, treatment given and outcomes measured. The comparison groups, if present are not uniform in respect to patients and fracture types. Selection of treatment chosen has been arbitrary and non-uniform. For example, patients with less displaced fractures, severe co-morbidities and extreme age were often chosen for nonoperative treatment in most series. Clear criteria for division of patients in different treatment arms was mentioned in only a few studies. Studies did not mention clinical outcomes according to fracture types. Primary THA was often carried out for fractures not considered to be amenable to fixation by the operating team. Most studies had small sample size and were at best retrospective case series. Hence data from these studies cannot be combined for further analysis. But a useful glimpse of current knowledge on geriatric acetabulum fracture is presented to highlight lacunae in current knowledge. Literature on treatment of geriatric acetabulum fractures is not enough to draw any definite conclusions. There is limited evidence from current literature that surgery could be considered a safe option for treatment of displaced acetabulum fractures in elderly. Primary THA can provide early mobility and reduce chances of resurgery in fracture patterns where restoration of joint surface may not be possible. The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.