Recently, integrated and sustainable methods for extracting active substances from plant materials using green solvents, i.e., ionic liquids, have gained increasing attention. Ionic liquids showsuperiority over conventional organic solvents; however, they also exhibit negative factors and problems, such as high viscosity, poor water intermiscibility, intensive foaming and poor affinity for fat-soluble substances. The proposed method utilizes ultrasonic-enhanced surface-active ionic liquid-based extraction and defoaming (UESILED) to improve the extraction efficiency of ionic liquids. Single-factor experiments and a Box-Behnken design (BBD) were utilized to optimize the extraction procedure. The optimal conditions were as follows: extraction solvent, [C10MIM]Br; ultrasonic treatment time, 28 min; ultrasonic irradiation power, 437 W; liquid–solid ratio, 10 mL/g; particle size, 60 ~ 80 mesh; ultrasonication temperature, 313 K; and [C10MIM]Br solution concentration, 0.5 mol/L. In comparison with those of other reference extraction methods, the proposed method exhibited higher yields of two furocoumarins and operational feasibility. Moreover, the mechanism of UESILED was elaborated in terms of accelerating infiltration, dissolution and defoaming. The feasible and efficient ultrasonic-enhanced ionic liquid-based extraction established in this study strongly contributes to overcoming the limitations of ionic liquid solvents. The present research indicates that this improved process will be beneficial for the extraction of other fat-soluble substances and provides promising concepts and experimental data.Ionic liquids are liquid at room temperature and composed of anions and bulky organic cations. As a type of green solvent, ionic liquids have been widely used in many fields and have rapidly developed into a research hotspot Although ionic liquids were shown to be superior to traditional extraction solvents in many extraction studies, their deficiencies are also evident in the solid-liquid extraction of natural products Second, binary ionic liquid-water solvents are more suitable for the extraction of compounds with higher polarity. Therefore, from the perspective of solvent polarity, the selectivity of ionic liquids is greatly affected. For non-polar or weakly polar target compounds, the affinity of ionic liquids will decrease, and the partition coefficient and extraction capacity of the solvent will be adversely affected. Many studies have found that increasing the cationic carbon chain length of methylimidazolium-type ionic liquids improves their dissolving capacity for fat-soluble compounds. This is attributed to the unique properties of ionic liquids and their capacity to interact with target compounds by means of hydrogen-bonding and π···π and n···π interactions Moreover, it is worth noting that the viscosity of ionic liquids increases with increasing cation alkyl chain length, which often leads to poor water intermiscibility. Some ionic liquids are also known as ionic liquid surfactants because of their amphiphilicity. Taking imidazole ionic liquids, those containing [C However, in practice, the presence of foam from surfactants can be adverse. In the processes of extraction, filtration or solvent concentration, a large amount of foam is generated when using surfactants, which can bring inconvenience subsequent operations. Mass foaming in the extraction processes has negative consequences, including the loss of products, difficulty in extracts collection, reduction of useful volume of the extraction equipment and a decline in equipment productivity A major innovative approach to extracting bioactive compounds from a complex matrix in a feasible way has been to integrate physical techniques, including microwave-assisted extraction (MAE) Ultrasonic-assisted extraction (UAE) affords the opportunity to apply green solvents by enhancing their extraction performance. It is worth noting that high-intensity ultrasonic waves provide a satisfactory method for foam breaking or defoaming. Ultrasonic-based defoaming not only provides a suitable defoaming effect by cavitation effects without heating or evacuation but also requires little time and energy consumption. This makes UAE appropriate for simultaneous extraction and defoaming in actual operations and very adaptable to the food and pharmaceutical industries. As far as we know, the majority of extraction operations using long-alkyl-chain ionic liquids have been achieved by ultrasonic-assisted extraction procedures  In the present study, ultrasonic-enhanced ionic liquid-based extraction and defoaming (UESILED) was proposed for facilitating the mass transfer process and simultaneously resolving the undesired foaming of surfactant ionic liquids. The feasibility of ionic liquids as green solvents in the UAE of psoralen and isopsoralen from  A KS-100AL ultrasonic instrument (Shenkejie, Guangdong, China) with a maximum power of 800 W was used. The instrument was a rectangular container (50 × 30 × 20 cm), to which 40 kHz transducers had been annealed to the bottom For HPLC analysis, the mobile phase was methanol–water (55:45, v/v). Psoralen and isopsoralen were quantified by UV detection following HPLC separation at a wavelength of 245 nm. The flow rate was 1.0 mL/min, the injection volume was 10 μL, and the column temperature was maintained at 30 °C. Under these chromatographic conditions, baseline separation of the target analytes was achieved. Qualitative analysis was conducted by comparing the retention times of psoralen and isopsoralen in samples to those of standard substances. Quantification was carried out using the external standard method. Ionic liquid aqueous solutions were pre-prepared with the aid of ultrasonic processing for solubilization. 1.0 g of treated Plackett–Burman design is a two-level factor design with a relatively small number of experiments, which mainly aims at screening out a few important variables from multivariable system. PBD was carried out by taking two levels of each factor for analysis, and to compare the difference between the two levels of each factor to determine the significance of the factor After screening out the significant extraction variables, Box–Behnken design was employed to further optimize the extraction conditions according to the scopes of the obtained significant factors from PBD. Response surface methodology was used to identify optimum parameters of three variables: liquid-solid ratio, ultrasound treatment time and ultrasound irradiation power regarding of response average yield of psoralen and isopsoralen. To estimate the model coefficients, a three-factors Box–Behnken design was carried out (17 experimental runs). Independent variables (liquid-solid ratio, ultrasound treatment time and ultrasound irradiation power) were standardised to the interval (1, −1). The ranges of the independent variables and experimental design levels are listed in For the UAE, pure water, 1.0 mol/L sodium bromide and 80% ethanol were selected for use as reference solvents for the UAE of psoralen and isopsoralen from For the conventional methods, operating conditions were appropriately adjusted according to the preliminary experiments. Maceration extraction (ME) was performed in aqueous ionic liquid solutions at room temperature for 12 h. For ethanol-based heat-reflux extraction (HRE), a flask was suspended in a water bath heater with a reflux condenser for 120 min of extraction at 353 K. For microwave-assisted extraction (MAE), a flask was irradiated in a microwave oven for 20 min at a radiation power of 385 W. For the homogenate-assisted extraction (HAE), a suspension was extracted with a Waring blender at a The effect of the ionic liquid structure on the extraction of natural active ingredients is mainly affected by the type of cations, the length and volume of the alkyl chain, the type and volume of the anions, and the hydrophilicity of the target molecule. Ionic liquid structure also affects its intermiscibility with water, the poor The behaviour of an anion is strongly associated with an ionic liquid’s properties. For the ionic liquids A series of 1-alkyl-3-methylimidazolium cations from C In the preliminary work, we found that different parameters of the UESILED procedure have a dominating effect on the extraction yield of target analytes. Ultrasonication has special functions, such as cavitation, emulsification, stirring and diffusion. The factors that affect ultrasonic extraction include acoustic parameters (frequency, sound intensity, treatment time, mode of action, etc.) and process parameters (raw material texture, particle size, liquid-solid ratio, temperature, etc.) Therefore, comprehensive consideration of factors that we can evaluate in actual operation is important, so the influential factors of the UESILED procedure, including the liquid-solid ratio, ultrasonic irradiation power, ultrasonic treatment time, ionic liquid concentration, ultrasonication temperature and particle size, were investigated. The liquid-solid ratio is a fundamental parameter and was studied to optimize the extraction process. Large solvent consumption could make this procedure difficult and result in unavoidable waste, while insufficient volumes may lead to incomplete extraction. To examine the effect of the liquid-solid ratio on the yields of psoralen and isopsoralen, a series of experiments were performed with different liquid-solid ratios (6, 8, 10, 12, and 14 mL/g). The ultrasonic irradiation power used during UESILED is critical for achieving effective extraction, and the effect of this variable was examined. Experimental operations were carried out at 0, 200, 400, 600 and 800 W ( The appropriate ultrasonic treatment time must be selected to ensure that the extraction is complete. However, increasing treatment time also increases energy consumption. Experimental operations were carried out at different times, e.g., 10, 20, 30, 40, and 50 min, and the results are shown in When the extraction time was increased from 10 to 30 min, the extraction yield of psoralen and isopsoralen increased sharply. When the time increased from 40 to 50 min, little yield enhancement was observed. Therefore, 30 min was selected for the following experiments. In fact, ultrasonication time is connected with ultrasonic power; at higher ultrasonic intensities, the optimal extraction yield can be achieved in a shorter amount of time than at lower ultrasonic intensities. The optimum [C The effect of ultrasonication temperature on the yield of the two furocoumarins was studied at various levels, including 303, 313, 323 and 333 K. In Current extraction methods demand plant material to be broken down into small particles before extraction to enhance permeability of the plant material and dissolution of the target components. Furthermore, the particle size of the plant matrix is related to the contact area of the cavitation bubbles coming from the ultrasonic waves and thus affects the efficiency of the extraction. The effect of particle size on the yields of psoralen and isopsoralen was examined, including powders with sizes of 20 ~ 40 mesh, 40 ~ 60 mesh, 60 ~ 80 mesh, 80 ~ 100 mesh and higher than 100 mesh ( The experiment design matrix with In general, variable with confidence level above 95% (P < 0.05) is considered as a significant parameter. According to the ANOVA of the experimental design, liquid-solid ratio, ultrasonic irradiation power and ultrasonic treatment time contribute to the yield significantly (P < 0.05), whereas other factors contributed non-significantly. Therefore, in consideration of both yields of psoralen and isopsoralen, liquid-solid ratio, ultrasound treatment time and ultrasound irradiation power were selected as the important parameters for further optimization. The ultrasound irradiation time and liquid-solid ratio have also been taken as the important parameters in other extraction process A Pareto chart ( The t value of ultrasound treatment time and liquid-solid ratio were above Bonferroni limit line, and t-value of ultrasound irradiation power was above t-value limit line, both of which indicated that the three factors were considered as significant factors. The result implied that liquid-solid ratio, ultrasound treatment time, and ultrasound irradiation power were three important factors and selected in the follow-up experiments. The effects of other non-significant parameters were also investigated in the preliminary experiments. Although ionic liquid concentration, ultrasound temperature and particle size showed no significant effect in the setting ranges on the extraction yield of psoralen and isopsoralen, the results of pre-experiments indicated that plant materials with small particle size contribute to enhance contact area between matrix and extraction solvent. In addition, a certain high ultrasonic temperature may help increase the contact chance between plant materials and ultrasonic energy, thereby enhancing the yield of objective analytes. Higher ionic liquid concentration could increase the solubility of solvent, however, accompanying large economic consumption and producing bubbles. Taking into account the yield of objective analytes and low cost consumption, we used samples of 60–80 mesh particle size, 313 K ultrasound temperature and 0.5 mol/L ionic liquid concentration in further experiments. On the basis of PBD experiments, we screened out the significant extraction variables: liquid-solid ratio, ultrasonic treatment time and ultrasonic irradiation power. To obtain the optimum extraction process parameters, the above variables were further optimized by Box-Behnken design. To further study the interactions between the various factors, parameter optimization was performed with a Box-Behnken design to investigate the effects of the three selected variables (ultrasonic treatment time, ultrasonic irradiation power and liquid-solid ratio) on the average yield of psoralen and isopsoralen. The experimental design, variables, coded and decoded levels, and predicted and actual responses are shown in The second-order polynomial equation developed for the average yield of psoralen and isopsoralen is listed as follows: Response surface plots and contour plots were adopted to determine the most favourable UESILED conditions. To investigate and visualize the effects of factors and their associated interactions on the average yield of psoralen and isopsoralen, contour and three-dimensional plots were generated for each set of variates, including the response ( The interactions between ultrasonic treatment time ( As the ultrasonic irradiation power increased, the average yield of psoralen and isopsoralen increased significantly and then tended to plateau; a similar result was also achieved in seed oil from The 3D response surface for the interaction of ultrasonic treatment time ( Based on the above findings, an optimization study was performed to evaluate the optimal operating conditions for the target response. The target was to obtain a high average yield of psoralen and isopsoralen with the given extraction parameters, where consideration of the efficiency, energy conservation and feasibility of the experiment were considered. The validity of the response surface analysis method was evaluated by extracting psoralen and isopsoralen in triplicate under the optimum conditions: ultrasonic treatment time, 28 min; ultrasonic irradiation power, 437 W; and liquid–solid ratio, 10 mL/g. The actual average yield of psoralen and isopsoralen was 7.56 ± 0.32 mg/g. The actual yield was near the calculated value (7.83 mg/g), which implied that the BBD was reliable. In the present study, UESILED and the reference methods were compared in terms of two aspects: extraction solution and extraction method. The extraction yields of psoralen and isopsoralen from Water is the most common and inexpensive solvent and is therefore often selected as a co-solvent in various extraction processes. We compared the extraction capacities of ionic liquid solutions with those of pure water. As seen from In the present study, HRE, ME, MAE, HAE and NPCE techniques were compared in terms of extraction yield. The extraction time of HRE and ME were 2 and 12 h, respectively. The extraction temperature of HRE was approximately 353 K (for 80% ethanol), while the extraction temperature used for UAE and ME was room temperature. ME, a less dramatic method than UAE, was performed with the same solvent as that of UAE but did not achieve the desired effect because the high viscosity of 0.5 mol/L [C The results of the MAE, HAE and NPCE techniques are dissatisfactory when applied in the extraction psoralen and isopsoralen from In summary, in contrast to regular and innovative techniques, the proposed UESILED method using surface-active ionic liquids of [C The extraction of target components from plant matrices generally include three stages: wetting and infiltration, desorption and dissolution, and diffusion and replacement of the target components. The following is a brief description of the process of ultrasonic-enhanced, solvent-assisted extraction of target compositions from plant cells. The effect of ultrasonic in this process was reduced to three aspects: infiltration, dissolution and defoaming. Schematic diagram of UESILED was shown in the Wetting and infiltration as the first stage have an important influence on the extraction. The infiltration effect of extraction solvents on medicinal materials is related to the surface properties of medicinal materials and the infiltration ability of solvents. The addition of ionic liquid surfactants can change the surface tension between the medicinal materials, making the medicinal material more permeable, and the solvent easily penetrates into the plant cells, thereby improving the extraction efficiency. The addition of ultrasonication at this stage enhances the infiltration effect and prompts the solvent to penetrate quickly into the internal cells. In the next two stages, the ultrasonic vibrational effects (mechanical effects), thermal effects, and cavitation effects play a positive role in increasing the mass transfer rate of the target compounds. The dissolution rate of the solute in the solvent is related to the mass transfer coefficient, the inter-contact area and the driving force. Any method of increasing the mass transfer coefficient, the inter-contact area and the driving force can increase the rate of the mass transfer process. The vibration effect and thermal effect of ultrasonic waves increase the mass transfer coefficient, and the strong shock waves or micro jets help to increase the interphase contact area of the solute. The amount of solute dissolved is a function of temperature, pressure and concentration. Ultrasonic cavitation causes the solvent near the action point to form a supercritical state, which causes the solubility of the solute to increase significantly, causing the solute to become supersaturated under normal conditions. Furthermore, according to the Gibbs-Thompson effect, even if the solvent reaches equilibrium saturation, very small solutes will continue to dissolve, which is due to the interface pressure difference between the large volume solvent and the small particle size of the solute. Therefore, the action of ultrasonic waves can increase the driving force, thereby enhancing the mass transfer efficiency as a whole. The actual results of water solubility and the foaming of ionic liquids are exhibited in The defoaming principle of ultrasonic waves is determined by two characteristics a). Ultrasonic waves have relatively high power When a sound wave reaches a certain substance, the substance molecules also vibrate due to the action of the sound wave. The frequency of molecular vibrations determines the speed of molecular vibrations; that is, the higher the frequency is, the faster the speed. The energy obtained by the vibration of a molecule is related to the mass of the molecule and to the square of the molecular vibration velocity. Therefore, the higher the frequency of the sound wave is, the higher the energy obtained by the molecule. For example, the energy of an ultrasonic wave with a frequency of 1000 kHz is one million times larger than the energy of a sound wave with a frequency of 1000 Hz. The mechanical energy of ultrasonic waves causes a large acceleration of the material molecules. If ultrasonic waves are applied to a liquid, the acceleration reached by the liquid particles may be several hundred thousand times greater than gravity acceleration, if not more. Such a large acceleration would cause the liquid particles to move rapidly, causing, for example, foam to burst. b). Sound pressure When sound waves pass into the foam, the pressure on the foam will change due to the compression and sparsity of the material molecules caused by the vibration of the sound waves. Since ultrasonic waves contain a large amount of energy, the foam generates high sound pressure. When a general-intensity ultrasonic wave is introduced into a liquid, an additional pressure of 0.3 to 1 MPa is generated. The foam is only subjected to atmospheric pressure before it is subjected to ultrasonic waves. When ultrasonic waves are applied to the foam, if the sound wave vibrates to compress it, the pressure increases, causing the foam to rupture; if the sound wave vibration causes the molecules to be sparse, the pressure on the foam is less than the atmospheric pressure, and the foam expands and ruptures. This rupturing is particularly likely to occur where impurities or bubbles are present in the liquid because the strength of the foam is particularly low in these places. In the present research, we introduced a  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was supported by Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: