In the present work geomaterials (Fe3+ modified clinoptilolite (C—Fe), Fe3+ modified clinoptilolite heated at 200 °C (C—Fe 200), montmorillonite (M) and Fe3+ modified montmorillonite heated at 200 °C (M-Fe 200)) were studied to evaluate their efficiency on the removal of fluoride from water. Clinoptilolite (C) and montmorillonite (M) were treated with Fe3+ under reflux conditions and heated at 200 °C in order to improve their adsorption properties. They were characterized before and after fluoride adsorption by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR). Adsorption experiments were carried out in batch systems considering the effect of contact time, initial concentration of fluoride and initial pH. Experimental data were well adjusted to pseudo-second order kinetic model that assumes chemical interaction between adsorbent and adsorbate. Fluoride adsorption on C—Fe and M-Fe 200 were well described by a linear isotherm equation where the adsorption capacity increases as the initial fluoride concentration increases. The adsorption of fluoride by C—Fe 200 was described by Freundlich model that suggests a multilayer adsorption and the isotherm of M was well fitted to Sips model indicating a heterogeneous surface of the material. The adsorption capacities of the materials followed the order: M > C-Fe > C-Fe 200 ≈ M-Fe 200. Finally, the possible mechanism of fluoride adsorption was also discussed.More than 740 million people around the world do not have adequate and safe water resources and over 2.5 million people have access to meagre water supply due to over population and inadequate administration of water ( Physicochemical methods have been tested for fluoride removal from water like coagulation with aluminum salts, ion exchange, adsorption, reverse osmosis, nanofiltration, precipitation and electrodialysis ( Clinoptilolite with formula (Na, K, Ca Although there are many papers in the literature on the removal of fluoride from aqueous solutions using metals modified materials, most of them do not analyze those metals in the remaining solutions after adsorption. In a previous paper ( Clinoptilolite (C) was from Etla, Oaxaca, México and montmorillonite (M) from Fluka, Sigma-Aldrich. All the chemicals used (NaCl, FeCl Clinoptilolite rocks were crushed and sieved to get a particle size from 0.42 to 0.84 mm, the solids were washed with distillated water and dried at room temperature. Clinoptilolite (C) and montmorillonite (M) were conditioned with 1 M NaCl solution under reflux, then the materials were washed and dried at 50 °C for 24 h. The materials were put in contact with a 0.2 M FeCl In a previous work reported by Analysis were performed by using a Nicolet Magna-IR 550 spectrometer in the range of 4000–400 cm SEM analyses of the solids were carried out by using a scanning electron microscope JEOL JSM-6610LV operated with low vacuum mode. Modified materials were attached to an aluminum stub using carbon double-stick tape to perform the SEM observations. The micrographs of the materials were collected before and after fluoride removal process. Fluoride measurements in aqueous solution were carried out by using a selective ion electrode with a pH meter PHM29, pH-stat controller Copenhagen. Samples and standards were conditioned with a total ionic strength adjusting buffer (TISAB) and 0.1 M KNO Adsorption experiments were carried out in batch systems and a 1000 mg/L solution of fluoride was prepared with NaF salt. The adsorption capacity where Adsorption kinetics were studied under the following conditions: 100 mg of C—Fe, C—Fe200, M-N or M-Fe200 were put in contact with 10 mL of a 10 mg/L of F    Equilibrium studies were carried out at the following initial concentrations: 2, 5, 10, 15, 20, 35, 50, 75, 100 and 150 mg/L of F     Chi-square and Root Mean Square Error were calculated for each experiment to select the kinetic and isotherm models that best describe the fluoride adsorption processes. Chi-square ( Root mean square error (RMSE) test: RMSE test was carried out using the following expression: A species distribution diagram was obtained by using Medusa software ( FTIR spectra of C—Fe, C—Fe 200 and those saturated with fluoride (C-FeF and C-FeF 200) are shown in the In the range between 1060 and 1040 cm SEM analyses were carried out to determine the morphology of the adsorbents before and after F The effect of contact time on the fluoride adsorption was studied under controlled conditions at a pH value of 5.8 (pH of the 10 mg/L of F In order to determine the kinetic adsorption parameters, the experimental data were treated with the intraparticle diffusion kinetic models ( The parameter k Considering the values obtained of In order to study the equilibrium of the adsorbate in the liquid and solid phases, adsorption experiments were carried out considering different initial concentrations of F Isotherm data for C—Fe 200 were well described by the Freundlich equation, it suggests a multilayer adsorption on rough surfaces ( According with the parameters R The adsorption capacity of F Based on the results shown in the   Non-specific adsorption is promoted by pH values less than pzc, and therefore it does not take place in the present adsorption systems. Therefore, one possible mechanism for fluoride removal that could take place is ion exchange ( Chemical treatments with Fe Overall, the mechanism of F None The authors are grateful to CONACYT for the financial support of this research, project 254665 and scholarship 415136 for NGCC.