Accurate assessment of the transport properties of porous media (in our case, filter cake) is of major importance in the development of improved filtration processes. Implications from these studies are important in the design and operation of filtration equipment in order to enhance the efficiency of this important solid–liquid separation process. The microstructure and connectivity of pore space are important features to describe detailed fluid flow phenomena in filter cake during fine particle filtration. In this regard, 3D characterization of pore structure is essential. The pore structure has to be described by parameters which are of special relevance to the interpretation of fluid transport phenomena. These parameters should be based on directly measured variables of the pore system and not inferred from indirect variables (such as those determined empirically from transport processes) valid only for a particular pore structure. In this way, fundamental relationships between pore structure and fluid transport at the microstructure level can be described. In order to achieve this level of sophistication, the three-dimensional interconnected pore structure of filter cake must be determined.
                  Study of fluid transport phenomena in filter cake using X-ray microtomography (XMT) to characterize the complex three-dimensional pore geometry is discussed. On this basis, the lattice Boltzmann (LB) method is used to simulate fluid flow and to begin to establish a fundamental relationship between pore microstructure and effective transport coefficients. For example, can network analysis using skeletonization procedures be used to confirm fundamental relationships that might be developed? Eventually then, with this detailed model, design and operating variables could be optimized for improved filtration efficiency.Filtration processes are widely used in different industrial applications including water treatment and reclamation, water purification for the pharmaceutical, micro-electronic, chemical and mineral industries, separation of hazardous solids from chemical wastes and removal of deleterious components from paper pulp. Filtration of fine particles involves filter cake formation and removal of surface moisture by drawing air through the porous structure. Typically, the phrase “fluid flow in porous media” is commonly used to describe this phenomena. Porous media can be considered as a mixture of solid and pore frameworks. It is known that macroscopic flow properties are related to microscopic (pore level) properties. In this regard, the geometry, both the microstructure and the connectivity of pore space, plays a fundamental role in governing fluid transport through porous media. This is especially true for single-phase, incompressible flow where the dominant flow factor is the fluid-wall surface tension. In general, the macroscopic quantity of interest is more or less influenced by the microscopic properties of the structure and the connectivity of pore space and is obtained by a spatial integration of the local field. Most efforts for detailed model development are to establish the relationship between the geometrical properties of the pore microstructure and the bulk flow properties of the media. Direct measurement of the pore space and random nature of its microstructure are the major obstacles for model development. Before the 1980s, most of the porous media models focussed on the bulk average quantities such as porosity, specific surface area and tortuosity; however, due to the random nature of the pore space, geometric descriptive parameters need to be established to understand the complex, random spatial distributions of porous media and the correlation between parameters. The Until the 1990s, most direct measuring methods used to characterize the pore microstructure and the connectivity relied on the microscopic observation of a series of thin sections or polished sections of the porous media Besides the characterization of pore structure for completely interconnected filter cake structures, an understanding of how flow transport properties, such as permeability, depend on pore microstructure is of significance. Various approaches based on experimental, theoretical, and computer simulation methods have been applied to study flow phenomena in porous media. Details of these models have been reviewed and are discussed in the literatures Capillary network models, one of the pore structure models, has been used to mimic porous media. For capillary networks, the pore structure is modeled by arrays of capillary tubes. The pore structure of filter cake can be thought to consist of an interconnected three-dimensional network of voids, pores or capillaries. This three-dimensional network usually has irregular geometry, with different shapes and sizes of capillary segments distributed over the network in irregular fashion. A schematic network model for a complex pore structure is shown in Originally, skeletonization During the last decade, rapid development of computers and computational algorithms has made possible direct simulations of complicated fluid flow phenomena. Among the promising new methods are lattice-gas automata (LGA) and lattice Boltzmann (LB) methods that can be applied to a large variety of fluid flow problems. The geometrical versatility of these methods makes them particularly useful in simulating flows in irregular geometries First, in the LGA method, a discrete set of fluid particles moves in a discrete space (lattice) in discrete time. The particles undergo collisions at the lattice nodes according to a certain set of collision rules. These collision rules are set in a way that conserves mass (i.e. particle number) and momentum. The microscopic dynamics of such a model of a fluid are simple, but the macroscopic dynamics contain essentially the same complexity as hydrodynamics itself. Momentum and particle averages for single-phase LGA models, taken over many sites or many time steps, obey the equations: The LB method is a probabilistic equivalent of the LGA method, where the discrete fluid particles are replaced with the respective values of their mean population. The LB method circumvents two major shortcomings of the LGA method: intrinsic noise and limited values of transport coefficients, both due to the Boolean nature of the LGA method. For application of flow through porous media, the LB method is easier to implement in 3D. The LB methods with a simple BGK collision operator This paper presents the study of fluid transport phenomena in filter cake using X-ray microtomography to characterize the complex three-dimensional pore geometry. On this basis, the Lattice Boltzmann (LB) method is used to simulate and to establish a fundamental relationship between pore microstructure and effective transport coefficients. In this regard, 3D digital maps of samples obtained from both the simulated cake (packed bed of spherical particles) and the irregular interconnected pore structure of actual particle beds obtained from X-ray microtomography (XMT) analysis are studied using the lattice Boltzmann method for flow simulation. The classical approach Presently, LB models are used as common tools to study transport phenomena through pore space The permeability of a simple cubic array of spheres, at low First, we check the accuracy of the LB model for this study by examining the estimated permeability of a simple cubic array of spheres The sets of pore space we consider are associated with the packing of spherical particles Only the interior 200×100×200 blocks, from height at 10 pixels (or 50 μm) located above the center, are sectioned and used for the calculation of permeability,  As mentioned previously, connectivity plays an important role in the distribution of flow inside porous media. It seems that several main channels carry almost all the flow. This can be attributed to the flow becoming increasingly controlled by narrow pore throats, so that the fluid picks out a continuous path connected by the largest pore throat sizes. In this regard, a 3D skeletonization process  The main object of this study is to establish the relationship between the geometrical properties of the pore microstructure and the bulk flow properties of the media. In this regard, permeabilities are estimated from LB simulations of flow through the packed beds (samples A and B). As mentioned previously, the estimated permeabilities from LB simulations are normalized by the mean sphere diameter. This is the only way to compare permeability values between granular materials with different pore scales. The microstructure and the connectivity of pore space are important to describe fluid flow in filter cake during fine particle filtration. In this regard, characterization of pore structure based on parameters permitting inferences on the fluid balance is of particular interest. The pore structure has to be described by parameters which are of special relevance for the interpretation of fluid transport phenomena. These parameters should be based on directly measured variables of the pore system and not indirect variables (such as those determined empirically from transport processes) valid only for a particular pore structure. In this way, fundamental relationships between pore structure and fluid transport at the microstructure level can be described. Thus, it is desired to be able to directly measure the three-dimensional interconnected pore structure of filter cake. Two 3D reconstructed images of complex filter cake pore structure obtained from high-resolution 3D X-ray microtomography measurement were used for this study. The voxel size for the first set of data, namely sample C, for a packed bed (with particle size of 210×150 μm) is 17 μm. Details procedures and characteristics of the first sample can be found in our previous pore geometry study To illustrate the feasibility of the lattice Boltzmann (LB) simulation for fluid flow through a packed bed of particles, simulation was done using a reconstructed 3D data set obtained by XMT  In order to gain a better understanding of the complex transport phenomena that occur in a filter cake, study of the effect of three-dimensional pore geometry on the effective transport properties of the filter cake is necessary. Transport calculations have been carried out for both simulated and actual three-dimensional porous media (in our case, filter cake) using the lattice Boltzmann method. Accuracy of the estimated permeabilities from LB simulations were checked and compared with results found in the literature. Results indicate that good quantitative agreement can be achieved for flow simulation through complex porous media using the LB method. Velocity distribution profiles obtained from LB simulations indicate that most of the flow occurs through major flow channels which have the distribution of large pore throat diameters. A 3D skeletonization process was performed to confirm the observation of major flow channels. Quantitative correlation between the major flow channel and network skeleton of pore space is in progress. The authors would like to thank Dr. Harlan W. Stockman, Sandia Laboratory, for help with the lattice Boltzmann simulation.