The resistance to abrasive wear can be effectively raised by hard particles embedded in a metal matrix. Powder metallurgy allows to admix larger particles than those precipitated from the matrix. To save costs ferrotitanium (FeTi) particles are admixed to a tool steel powder and are transformed in situ into titanium carbonitrides during compaction by supersolidus liquid phase sintering (SLPS) instead of hot isostatic pressing. Pin-on-abrasive paper-tests as well as scratch tests reveal an increase in wear resistance of in situ SLPS–metal-matrix-composites (MMC) over hot isostatic pressing (HIP)–MMC, which is linked to the large size of precipitated hard particles in the former. The application of these laboratory results is seen in reinforcing inserts of wear parts.The microstructure of most abrasion-resistant alloys consists of hard phases (HP) embedded in a hardenable steel matrix (MM). To be most effective, the HP (a) should not be grooved and therefore be harder than the abrasive particles (AP), (b) have a higher fracture toughness K The structure of solidified alloys as in castings or hard facing weldments and even in hot worked ledeburitic steels usually do not live up to all the requirements (a–d). Especially (d) is hard to realize with common solidification rates. Therefore work on powder metallurgical (PM) abrasion-resistant metal-matrix-composites (MMC) started by mixing coarse HP powder with finer hardenable steel powder to make up the MM after hot isostatic pressing (HIP) In a first attempt to save costs expensive HP as WC/W Volume fractions of powders given in Graphite was added to provide the in situ transformation of the FeTi particles into TiC during SLPS which was carried out in alumina crucibles ( After sintering at 1260 The as-sintered samples were hardened in argon from 1050 MMC specimens made of different powders or by a different hot compaction, tested earlier under the same conditions, were taken for reference. Their designation consists of the MM composition in mass% and the admixed HP in vol%, e.g. a high speed steel powder with fused tungsten carbide: W6Mo5Cr4V3C1.3 Light optical microscopy (LOM) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) with energy dispersive X-ray analysis (EDX) were employed to characterize the initial microstructure as well as the scratched and worn surfaces. A polished surface was scratched at room temperature with a speed of 2 The end face of a slowly rotating pin of 6 The microstructure of CWS and CWS 20, sintered to full density, is shown in Some details on the microstructural constituents are given in Both types of precipitated HP are the larger the earlier they are formed during solidification. Their size is reduced by an order of magnitude within the areas of residual melt close to the eutectic temperature. The size of about 250 precipitated HP of either type was measured along straight lines drawn on micrographs. The result of a scratch test is presented in The spalling increased as the following in situ HP were hit and the test results were no longer valid. The initial specific scratch energy of the matrix amounted to In the short wear test the grooves are cut by the abrasive particles of 80 mesh flint. The mean groove width on CWS amounts to 5.6 Microcutting prevails along the groove edges with only occasional microploughing in the matrix While CWS contains only precipitated HP, CWS 10 and CWS 20 are also reinforced by larger in situ HP which stem from the admixed FeTi particles. These in situ HP increase the wear resistance and the more so, if the attacking AP are softer and smaller in size ( The precipitated HP protrude from the worn surface of CWS ( The wear resistance of six reference materials described in Let us start with the matrix materials without admixed hard particles. Number 6 represents a martensitic matrix of 660 HV30, which is free of precipitated HP and reveals W Powder compaction, transformation of FeTi particles into in situ HP, and precipitation of HP within the matrix occur during the SLPS cycle depicted in Holding at the sintering temperature enhances compaction and the interdiffusion between the phases present. In CWS 10 and CWS 20 vanadium contributes to the redistribution of elemental concentrations. It moves from the steel powder into FeTi particles to replace iron in the TiN/TiC layer. During subsequent slow cooling of CWS the fraction of austenite increases, the MX precipitates grow to a maximum size of about 12 Matrix, precipitated HP and in situ HP contribute to the resistance of MMC to grooving wear. The hardened matrix supports the HP and is sufficiently tough not to suffer from microcracking. However, cracks are observed in the HP and especially in the large in situ HP. Their fracturing under the diamond indenter ( A hot compaction by SLPS instead of HIP provides a larger size of the precipitated HP. A good fraction of these are larger than the mean groove width of 5.6 The in situ SLPS–MMC is seen as a reinforcement of wear parts. As an example, a wear plate is shown in The steel substrate with cast holes should be alloyed to such an extend that is copes with grain coarsening and reaches a hardness of >600 To improve handling and save costs the sintering temperature should come down and the vacuum furnace be replaced by a chamber furnace filled with N The following conclusions can be drawn from the experimental results on PM–MMC: Hot compaction of a tool steel powder by supersolidus liquid phase sintering allows an in situ transformation of admixed ferrotitanium particles into titanium carbonitrides. Due to the higher compaction temperature of SLPS–MMC the precipitates of MX and M The in situ hard particles are even larger and harder than the precipitated ones, which further enhances the wear resistance. The use of in situ hard particles may save costs just as the compaction by SLPS. The application of the new material is seen in reinforcing inserts for wear parts. The support of this work by the German Research Foundation (DFG) is gratefully acknowledged.