In order to evaluate the differences and similarities between the liposoluble constituents in Cynomorium songaricum populations, stem liposoluble constituents in five populations of C. songaricum collected from three different geographic regions and four different hosts were obtained by solvent extraction and analyzed by GC–MS. Cluster analysis of the percentage composition of 80 compounds showed differences in chemical composition which were related to the geographic origin rather than the host. Hexadecanoic acid was the most abundant compound in the essential oils of C. songaricum from hosts Nitraria sibirica and Nitraria tanguticum. Whereas (Z)-9-octadecenoic acid was accumulated in the oils of C. songaricum from Zygophyllum xanthoxylum and Peganum harmala. Four of the five populations had characteristic components, which were specific to each population. As a medicinal material, the chemical composition of the plant is very important. Earlier studies have identified the presence of organic acids In this study, five populations of Petroleum ether (30–60 Stems of Following desiccation and comminution, powdered samples were obtained. The powdered crude drug (20 A HP 6890 gas chromatograph equipped with a HP 7683 auto injector and a HP 5973 MSD (Agilent Technologies, Palo Alto, CA, USA) were used for GC–MS analysis. Gas chromatographic separation was carried out with a HP-5 capillary column (30 Samples (1 The compounds were identified by comparing their retention indices and mass spectra with those of the NIST02L mass spectral library (National Institute of Standards and Technology) provided by the software of the GC–MS system. Compound concentrations were calculated from the GC peak areas of the total ion current (TIC). The key components found in the non-polar polar fractions included stigmast-3,5-diene in population 1 (P1), P3 and P5, and The percentage composition of essential oil samples was used to determine the relationships between the different populations of From the soak extraction, clear to light yellow liposoluble constituents were obtained in yields of 0.135–0.304% ( A total of 80 compounds were identified in the stem extracts, including 22 non-polar compounds, 37 weak polar compounds and 21 polar compounds, which amounted to a total percentage of 97.66–98.19%. The identified components in the stem extracts and their percentages in the respective fractions are shown in 70 compounds were found in all analyzed samples (five populations). However, there were characteristic components which were observed in some populations but not in others. These characteristic components were only found in the weak polar fractions, and included urs-12-en-3-one (0.23%) and 4,4-dimethylcholest-7-en-3-one (0.17%) in P1, stigmast-4-en-3-one (0.37%) in P2, β-sitosterol (6.96%) and 22,23-dihydrostigmasterol (1.36%) in P3, and stigmast-3,5,22-trien-7-one (0.62%) in P5. Based on the number of chemical components, P3 with 76 components contained the most complex oil. P4 and P5 with 73 components contained the simplest oil. In terms of percentage amounts, hexadecanoic acid and ( The results showed that The three main grouped components were found in the essential oils of all five populations of Cluster analysis of all identified components grouped the stem oils from the five populations into two main clusters ( In addition, the cluster formed by P1 and P2 showed similar high levels of hexadecanoic acid (38.49% and 39.79%, respectively). High levels of 9,12-octadecadienoic acid in P3, P4 and P5 from Alxa zuoqi were found compared with P1 and P2 from Golmud and Guazhou. Chemical polymorphism was found in the liposoluble constituents from the stems of five populations of We are grateful to Dr. Yongzhen Tian (Cold and Arid Regions Environmental and Engineering Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Sciences) for his assistance in offering partial testing materials as well as help given in the sampling process, and to Qianxiang Meng (Key Laboratory of Gas Geochemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences) for identifying chemical constituents.