The corrosion behaviour of pure magnesium, Mg–Cu (0.3, 0.6, and 1vol.%) and Mg–Mo (0.1, 0.3, and 0.6vol.%) composites has been studied in 3.5% NaCl solution by weight loss and polarisation methods. Corrosion rates determined by weight loss method were considerably higher than that determined by polarisation method. The corrosion rate increased with increasing volume fraction of reinforcement in Mg–Cu and Mg–Mo composites. At the same volume fraction of reinforcement, molybdenum reinforced composite corroded faster than copper reinforced composite. The galvanic current density between Mg–Cu and Mg–Mo couples has been experimentally measured using zero resistance ammeter technique. The experimentally observed galvanic current densities were in close agreement with those obtained using mixed potential theory analysis. SEM observation of corroded samples confirmed microgalvanic activity at the matrix/reinforcement interfaces. The poor corrosion resistance of composites has been attributed to microgalvanic effects between the matrix and reinforcements and inferior quality of surface films.The steadily growing demand for lighter materials for structural applications has propelled the development of high performance materials with lightweight characteristics Metal matrix composites (MMC) provide an alternative by reinforcing the conventional materials with suitable reinforcements to achieve enhanced mechanical properties While considerable work has been performed on the physical and mechanical properties of MMCs, the corrosion behaviour of metal matrix composites has not been thoroughly studied The aim of the present study was to understand the corrosion behaviour of molybdenum reinforced and copper reinforced magnesium matrix composites in 3.5 Pure magnesium and magnesium-based composites were synthesized at National University of Singapore. Magnesium based composites containing different amounts of molybdenum particulates were synthesized using the disintegrated melt deposition technique followed by hot extrusion Mg-based composites containing 0.3, 0.6, and 1 A 3.5 Samples for weight loss and electrochemical tests, in the form of discs, were sectioned from the as-received rods. The samples for electrochemical tests were mounted in epoxy after providing an electrical connection by soldering a copper wire on the back face of the sample. The working surface, of 0.5 Weight loss test coupons were immersed in the electrolyte maintained at a temperature of 30 Electrochemical experiments were performed in a round bottom cell of 700 The galvanic corrosion currents flowing between equal areas (1 The nature of the corroded surfaces was studied in a FEI Quanta 200 scanning electron microscope (SEM). Local compositions were obtained using the energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) unit attached to the SEM. The corrosion rates estimated from weight loss data for pure Mg, Mg–Mo composites and Mg–Cu composites for four different immersion periods (1 The corrosion rate of pure Mg was lower than the composites for all the time periods. In the case of pure Mg, the corrosion rate continuously increased with increasing immersion time. Song et al. The corrosion rates of the composites were higher than that of pure Mg. Molybdenum reinforcements were more detrimental than copper. The high corrosion rate of corrosion of the composites was noted for all the testing periods. The marginal decrease in the corrosion rate in later stages can be attributed to build-up of thick layers of corrosion product. However, this decrease in corrosion rate is a small fraction of total corrosion rate and, it can be concluded that the porous films formed on the surface failed to protect the underlying surface. SEM observations revealed the porous nature of the corrosion product on the composites. Even though the reinforcement particles on the surface may detach during dissolution of the matrix, the underlying particles will be exposed as the corrosion proceeds through the porous layer. These newly exposed particles continue to serve as efficient cathodes promoting active dissolution. This was substantiated by observation of vigorous bubbling of hydrogen gas beneath the corrosion product layers during the immersion test. The variation of FCP as a function of immersion time for Mg–Cu and Mg–Mo composites is shown in Polarisation curves for pure Mg and the composites are presented in On comparing the corrosion rate obtained by weight loss and polarisation methods, it can be noted that the corrosion rates obtained by weight loss method were higher than the rates obtained from polarisation plots. Song et al. have discussed the pitfalls of using polarisation techniques to predict corrosion rate of magnesium-based materials The following assumptions apply to the evaluation of corrosion rate by polarisation method A single anodic and cathodic reaction exists for the electrode under study. Electrode surface does not change during polarisation. At a given scan rate, the electrode reactions reach equilibrium at every value of applied potential. Corrosion current density is uniform over the entire surface. In the case of Mg-based materials, especially the composites under study, these assumptions are violated. Song et al. In view of these factors, the corrosion rates predicted by polarisation plots cannot be considered as true values and can only be used to understand trends. The corrosion rates obtained by weight loss method are most appropriate in case of Mg-based materials. The variation of measured galvanic current density as a function of time for Mg–Cu and Mg–Mo couples is shown in Mixed potential theory predicts the galvanic current density between two members of galvanic couple at the intersection point of the cathodic polarisation curve of nobler metal with the anodic polarisation curve of less noble metal. At the point of intersection, the total rate of oxidation reaction (i.e. corrosion of the active member) is equal to the total rate of reduction reaction (i.e. reduction reaction on nobler member). It is to be noted that the area effect can be considered in theoretical polarisation diagrams by utilising current rather than current density. A large area of cathode will result in large cathodic current and this will reflect in higher anodic current The cathodic polarisation curves of Cu and Mo are presented in The galvanic current density between Mg and SiC was reported to be in the range of 0.23–9.78 The surface morphologies of pure Mg and composites were observed after immersion in 3.5 SEM micrographs of Mg–0.6% Mo immersed in 3.5% NaCl solution for 5 The corrosion attack was promoted by microgalvanic corrosion effect. When viewed at low magnifications, at several locations (marked ‘a’, ‘b’, and ‘c’ in In case of Mg–Cu composites, the Cu particles were finer compared to Mo reinforcements. The nature of corrosion attack in case of Mg–Cu composites was similar to that seen in Mg–Mo composites. The higher measured galvanic corrosion current of the Mg–Mo couples by the ZRA technique and mixed potential theory analysis indicated firmly the importance of galvanic corrosion effect in the corrosion behaviour of these composites. This has been further confirmed by the above microstructural analysis. The corrosion behaviour of pure magnesium, Mg–Cu (0.3, 0.6 and 1