Distal humerus fractures are common and represent 2% of all fractures and approximately 30% of those affecting the humerus. The management of distal humerus fractures is complicated by the complex 3-dimensional anatomy of the elbow, the limited bone stock for internal fixation, and often comminuted and osteopenic nature of the articular segment. Surgical treatment should be conducted in a systematic manner to minimize complications. Using the principles of anatomic articular reconstruction with stable fixation to allow early range to motion, good to satisfactory outcomes can be expected in most patients.Fractures of the distal humerus represent challenging problems to the modern orthopaedic surgeon. Important factors to consider are the 3-dimensional geometry, limited peri-articular bone stock for internal fixation, intra-articular comminution, and the need for early mobilization. The increasing incidence of this fracture in the elderly patient in association with poor bone quality and comminution has introduced a significant challenge to the reconstructive surgeon. Historically, distal humeral fractures (DHF) were treated nonoperatively A single synovial joint encompasses 3 separate articulations; ulnohumeral, proximal radioulnar, and radiocapitellar. These articulations permit elbow flexion-extension, pronation-supination, and to a minimal extent varus–valgus. The distal humerus can be thought of as a 2 column structure supporting the articular segment. The distal portion of the lateral column (capitellum) projects anteriorly approximately 35 to 40 degrees. The medial column terminates at the medial epicondyle and, in contrast, does not curve anterior. The anatomy of the trochlea is analogous to that of a spool with distal articular segment oriented at 4 to 8 degrees of valgus relative to the long axis of the humerus. Furthermore, this distal articular segment is internally rotated 3 to 4 degrees relative to the trans-epicondylar axis. Understanding the ligamentous anatomy is critical during exposure and plate application to avoid iatrogenic injury. The anterior bundle of the medial collateral ligament, a primary elbow stabilizer, originates on the anteroinferior aspect of the medial epicondyle and inserts onto the sublime tubercle of the ulna. The medial column and medial epicondyle, therefore, can accommodate plate placement without impinging on the MCL origin. The lateral ulnar collateral ligament, the primary lateral stabilizer, originates and inserts on the lateral epicondyle and crista supinatoris, respectively. Identification and protection of the lateral collateral ligament origin allows visualization of the posterior aspect of the radiocapitellar joint and safe lateral plate application. Distal humerus fractures represent 2% of all fractures and approximately 30% of those involving the humerus. Commonly mentioned classification systems for distal humerus fractures include the Riseborough and Radin, The AO/OTA classification is an alphanumeric system dividing fractures according to degree of articular involvement. The humerus is labeled as 1 and as 3 (which identifies the distal segment of all long bones). This is further subgrouped into A (articular), B (partial articular), and C (complete articular). Each subgroup can be further classified on the basis of the fracture line and comminution where 1 represents minimal fragmentation and 3 severe comminution. The Jupiter and Mehne Standard anteroposterior and lateral radiographs are sufficient for classification and preoperative planning. Computed tomography with 3-dimensional reconstructions, although not required for all cases, can improve fracture identification and classification. Doornberg et al The selection of a surgical approach for the management of distal humerus fractures is dependent on several factors. These include the surgeon's experience and preferences, fracture pattern, degree of articular involvement, associated soft tissue injury, rehabilitation protocols, and whether intraoperative conversion to arthroplasty is contemplated. The ideal approach for each individual fracture should provide adequate visualization to allow anatomic reduction and the application of internal fixation to maintain elbow stability with minimization of soft tissue and bone disruption to permit early motion. Several surgical approaches will be discussed with their strengths and limitations highlighted. Approaches to the distal humerus can be categorized into olecranon osteotomies, triceps sparing (triceps-on), triceps splitting, and triceps reflecting (triceps-off). Visualization of the distal humerus articular segment varies with each approach. The triceps splitting, triceps reflecting, and olecranon osteotomy expose 35%, 46%, and 57% of the distal articular segment, respectively. With several modifications of MacAusland's Alonso-Llames Campbell The Bryan-Morrey The triceps reflecting anconeus pedicle approach, as its name implies, reflects the anconeus and entire triceps insertion proximally without violating the olecranon. Non-operative care in the management of distal humerus fractures was recommended as 1969 by Riseborough and Radin. To appreciate current trends in distal humerus fracture management, an understanding of implant biomechanics is required, including plate configuration and fixation type. Although percutaneous Kirschner wire fixation has been regarded as the treatment of choice for pediatric supracondylar fractures, Several different plate types have been used in the past, presently 3 general options exist, 3.5 mm standard straight plates that are intraoperatively contoured, fracture specific precontoured plates, and precontoured locking plates. Thinner plates (one-third tubular) or screw-only fixation are not recommended. The use of locking plates in other fractures, such as fractures of the proximal tibia, The lack of specific recommendations regarding optimal plate type and configuration is inherent in the literature. However, adherence to a principle-based approach with emphasis on articular reduction and double column rigid fixation to the metaphyseal segment is highly recommended. A principle-based approach to the management of distal humerus fractures is recommended. This form of treatment relies on 2 basic principles: articular reconstruction followed by column reconstruction. The principles of peri-articular fracture fixation include restoration of the articular segment, column realignment and rigid fixation to allow for early mobilization. Preliminary fixation of the articular segment may be performed with Kirschner wires (K-wires) ( Coronal shear fractures of the capitellum, trochlea, or both may occur in association with distal humerus fractures. These coronal shear fragments can be visualized by internally rotating each condyle. This allows fixation of the coronal shear fracture and than subsequent fixation of the primary sagittal plane articular fracture. In situations where articular segments are absent, a principle-based approach is once again important. Restoration of joint range of motion is primarily dependent on the medial and lateral ridges of the trochlea. Therefore, loss of the midportion of the trochlea or the posterior articular surface, although important, is not entirely necessary for stability. Once the articular segment has been provisionally fixed, it must be rigidly linked to the humeral diaphysis. Provisional fixation of the articular segment to the diaphysis may be performed with K-wires inserted retrograde from distal to proximal. As mentioned, several different plating techniques exist, including orthogonal plating (90:90), parallel plating, and triple plating. All 3 techniques have been supported clinically and none have demonstrated clinical superiority. Following surgery the elbow is placed through a range-of-motion to ensure there is no impingement, hardware prominence or instability. Intraoperative fluoroscopy is also recommended to ensure all hardware is extra-articular. The AO group has recommended an orthogonal (perpendicular or 90/90) plate configuration to maximize stability and allow early mobilization. This plating technique also involves bicolumn fixation, however, the plates are applied in a parallel fashion rather than orthogonally. In comparison with posterolateral plating, the lateral plate is applied along the supracondylar ridge in the sagittal plain and is contoured in a “J” distally to accommodate the anterior angulation of the lateral epicondyle. The position of the plates is not directly medial or lateral, rather they are offset dorsally. Triple plating is a combination of the above techniques. It is used in cases with severe comminution where additional fixation is required. Typically, the third plate is placed laterally to provide additional support for the lateral column. In special circumstances with severe metaphyseal bone loss, strategies, such as bridge plating, bone grafting, or supracondylar shortening ostectomy may be used. TEA may be considered in the management of DHF. TEA has been successfully used in distal humerus fractures in the elderly patients, patients with rheumatoid arthritis, Due to the heterogeneous nature of DHF management, the literature must be reviewed with caution. Reports must be evaluated for plate orientation, plate types, and patient characteristics as all these factors contribute to the outcomes of the specific treatment. As such, the reported outcomes following DHF fixation have been variable. Doornberg et al A study by Greiner et al One of the most common complications following DHF fixation involves the ulnar nerve. The incidence of ulnar neuropathy in the literature has been reported between 7-15%. Ulnar neuropathy following ORIF of DHF has been mentioned in the literature between 7% and 15%. The elbow reacts poorly to any form of trauma and prolonged immobilization leads to stiffness. Almost all patients following fixation of distal humerus fractures develop some stiffness, yet only a small portion ultimately require secondary surgery. Functional range of motion is defined between 30 and 130 degrees of elbow motion, or an arc of 100 degrees. A range of motion less than that would be considered nonfunctional may benefit from surgical intervention. Studies have quoted approximately 15-20% of patients undergoing DHF fixation will have less than 100 degrees of motion. Hastings and Graham The complex geometry of the distal humerus compounded with the increasing number of fractures in the elderly patients will continually challenge orthopaedic surgeons. Advancements have been made in imaging, surgical techniques, and fracture specific implants, however, time will determine whether patient outcomes have been improved and complications decreased. The management of distal humerus fractures should be approached in a systematic way, understanding the fracture type, its natural history, using the principles of fracture care and incorporating patient-related factors. The goals of treatment are an approach that provides adequate exposure, anatomic reduction of the joint, stable fixation to allow for early rehabilitation, and the minimization of complications.