Bioleaching of ground rock pyrite by two novel strains of Sulfobacillus-like acidophilic bacteria was examined in shake flask and bioreactor cultures. The Gram-positive prokaryotes differed from known species of mineral-oxidising Sulfobacillus in being mesophilic and in their tolerance to extreme acidity (pH<1). The oxidative dissolution of pyrite by one of the novel Sulfobacillus strains was stimulated by yeast extract, though the second strain (L-15) was equally effective in organic-free medium. Pyrite dissolution by Sulfobacillus L-15 was compared with that by the strain type of Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans and a Leptospirillum ferrooxidans isolate, in media set at different initial pH values. All three bacteria leached the mineral in media set at pH 2.5 and pH 1.5, but at pH 1.2, mineral oxidation (at a rate similar to the maximum recorded for At. ferrooxidans) was observed only in cultures of Sulfobacillus L-15. Pyrite leaching by Sulfobacillus L-15 and At. ferrooxidans was compared in bioreactor cultures, at different and controlled pH values. Lowering bioreactor pH from 1.5 to 1.0 resulted in the cessation of biologically accelerated pyrite oxidation by the At. ferrooxidans culture and rapid mortality of the bacteria. In contrast, Sulfobacillus L-15 continued to leach the mineral when the pH was lowered to 1.0 and (after a short lag period) to pH 0.8. In contrast to the At. ferrooxidans culture, large numbers of viable Sulfobacillus L-15 cells were recovered, regardless of bioreactor pH. Redox potentials and ratios of soluble ferric/ferrous iron in the Sulfobacillus L-15 culture were significantly lower (by about 100–150 mV) than values found typically in Gram-negative bacterial leaching cultures, and that recorded in the (active) At. ferrooxidans culture in the present work. The potential advantages of using microorganisms that can leach sulfidic minerals effectively at pH<1 and at low redox potential are discussed.The use of acidophilic bacteria and archaea to accelerate the oxidative dissolution of sulfidic minerals and ores and, thereby, to facilitate the extraction of occluded gold (“biooxidation”) or to solubilise base metals such as copper and cobalt (“bioleaching”), is now established as an economically important biotechnology The mechanism by which bacteria oxidise sulfides has been much debated (e.g. Temperature and pH optima for regeneration of ferric iron will be determined by the characteristics of the iron-oxidising acidophile(s) present, while the relative slowness of the abiotic oxidation reaction may be improved by leaching minerals at temperatures above those at which biological systems are active. On the other hand, formation of “passivation layers” of ferric iron precipitates (such as jarosites), which deposit on the surfaces of sulfide minerals impeding their oxidation, may be minimised by maintaining reactor conditions at extremely low pH and low redox potentials, though such conditions (in particular solution pH of<1) may not be conducive to biotic iron oxidation. The oxidative dissolution of sulfide minerals has been studied most extensively with the mesophilic iron-oxidising acidophiles Recently, there have been reports of mesophilic,  Shake flask cultures were prepared with pyrite-rich rock obtained from the Cae Coch mine, North Wales, which contained 80% FeS The effects of organic carbon on pyrite oxidation by Leaching of Cae Coch pyrite by Total soluble iron was determined by atomic absorption spectrophotometry, and ferrous iron using the ferrozine assay The two Montserrat Culture pH was found to have a major and differential impact on pyrite leaching by Mean mineral leaching rates (calculated from the main linear phases of mineral oxidation) by the three iron oxidisers are shown in Leaching of pyrite by At day 12, the pH was lowered and fixed at 1.0 for both cultures. In the case of The third phase of the fixed pH pyrite leaching experiment was different for the two cultures, in view of the differential patterns that had emerged during phase 2. In the case of It is now recognised that a wide range of acidophilic bacteria and archaea can accelerate the oxidative dissolution of sulfidic minerals due to their abilities to oxidise reduced iron and/or sulfur. The two known  Shake flask leaching studies, using media set at different pH values, showed that only The different abilities of During pyrite leaching, Adibah Yahya is grateful to the University Technology Malaysia for providing a research studentship.