Pyrolysis residue, with the porous structure similar to activated carbon, was proposed as a material to remove heavy metals with low levels from synthetic flotation wastewater in the work. The effects of the dosage on removal efficiency, adsorption kinetics and isotherms were studied. The adsorption mechanism was also discussed. The results showed that pyrolysis residue could remove effectively Cd2+, Pb2+ and Cu2+ from the flotation solution and increase simultaneously its effluent pH. The removal efficiency of Cd2+, Pb2+ and Cu2+ was 99.3, 98.9 and 99.4%, and the corresponding solution pH was 9.79, 9.12 and 8.45 when pyrolysis residue dosages was 1, 0.8 and 0.8 g/L with same 20 mg/L concentrations of Cd2+, Pb2+ and Cu2+ and natural synthetic solution pH, respectively. The pseudo-second-order rate constant (k2) and the qmax
                      of Cd2+, Pb2+and Cu2+ were 0.05, 0.03, 0.04 g/(mg·min) and 106.16, 140.65, 128.04 mg/g. Heavy metals was mainly removed by formation of stable metal sulfides and hydroxides on the surface. The above results have uncovered that pyrolysis residue was viable for removal of heavy metals with low levels from flotation wastewater for the first time.The large amount of industrial wastewater, with a variety of toxic heavy metal ions with low levels such as Cd The commonly applied techniques to remove the toxic metal ions from industrial wastewaters cover chemical precipitation, coagulation, adsorption, membrane filtration, ion-exchange ( Adsorption based on adsorbent materials is the superlative technique owing to its selectivity, simplicity and ease of application for removal low levels of heavy metals. The activated carbon is a most extensively utilized and popular adsorptive material, but it is not economic for the industrial scale application for removal of the heavy metal ions. Now, cost-effective adsorptive materials, such as magnetized activated carbon ( The pyrolysis residue, a novel carbonaceous material (NCM) with the porous structure similar to activated carbon ( Materials used in the work included pyrolysis residue and synthetic flotation wastewater solution containing Cd Synthetic flotation wastewater containing Cd The effects of pyrolysis residue dosage on heavy metal removal and effluent pH, as well as adsorption kinetics and isotherms were studied experimentally. Simply, a known mass of pyrolysis residue was thoroughly mixed with 100 ml artificial solution with 20 mg/L initial concentrations of Cd The experimental data for adsorption kinetics was simulated by The experimental data for adsorption isotherms was simulated by Langmuir Phase changes of pyrolysis residue before and after adsorption heavy metals were analyzed by X-ray powder diffraction method (XRD) using Cu-Kα radiation (40 kV, 100 mA) at the scanning rate of 3° /min from 10° to 100° and the valent states of pyrolysis residue surface elements were identified by X-ray photoelectron spectrometer (XPS) using a VG 250 Escalab spectrometer coupled with an Al anode (Al-Kα=1486.7 eV) as an X-ray source before and after adsorption of heavy metal ions. Pyrolytic residue was a kind of carbonaceous material without special smell ( Obviously, pyrolysis residue had porous internal structure similar to activated carbon. 22 kinds of inorganic elements were detected by XRF analysis, as shown in The inorganic elements were mainly Fe, S, Ca, Al and Si, and some toxic heavy metals with low levels such as Zn, Ni, Cu, Cr, Pb and As were also presented in pyrolysis residue. The leaching concentration of these heavy metals were tested using HJ 557–2010 “Solid waste-Extraction procedure for leaching toxicity-Horizontal vibration method” and HJ/T 299–2007 “Solid waste-Extraction procedure for leaching toxicity-Sulfuric acid & nitric acid method” respectively, and its toxicity was judged according to GB8978–1996“integrated wastewater discharge standard”. The results were revealed in Obviously, the leaching concentration of heavy metals in pyrolysis residue was very different with different extraction procedure. The leaching concentration using HJ/T 299–2007 procedure was significantly higher than that using HJ 557–2010 procedure, but their leaching concentration both were far lower than discharge concentration limited by GB8978–1996. Clearly, the heavy metals in pyrolysis residue were very stable even in acid medium, which would not cause secondary environmental pollution. Based on our previous research ( Effect of pyrolysis residue dosage on removal efficiency of heavy metals in synthetic flotation wastewater and effluent pH at the treatment time of 45 min were indicated in As showed in Under optimum dosage of pyrolysis residue with maximum removal efficiency of Cd From The capacity ( The experimental results of adsorption isotherm of Cd From As seen in The comparison of adsorption conditions and corresponding isotherm parameters for the removal of Cd The The In order to reveal the removal mechanism, pyrolysis residue before and after used to remove Cd The phase compositions of heavy metals on pyrolysis residue surface, before and after used, were analyzed by XRD in The main phase compositions of pyrolysis residue before and after removal of Cd The precipitates formed by the above reactions were directly deposited on the surface of pyrolysis residue in situ, and decrease the concentration of Cd The XPS spectra of pyrolysis residue before and after used to remove Cd From The characteristic peak of O 1s at 531.7 eV in The contents of H The characteristic peaks of S 2p at 161.93 eV in The valent state of S 2p on pyrolysis residue surface changed evidently before and after adsorbed by Cd In conclusion, Cd The pyrolysis residue could effectively remove heavy metals such as Cd The kinetic results of Cd The removal of Cd The above results indicated to be feasible for the pyrolysis residue to remove heavy metal ions with low levels from flotation wastewater. None. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from State Key Laboratory of Mineral Processing (BGRIMM-KJSKL-2019–15), and also gratefully thank Beijing Yanshan Petrochemical Company in China, which provided us samples and other technical help.