In this study, porcine bone collagen peptide (CP) was phosphorylated with sodium tripoly phosphate (STP) in order to improve its calcium binding capacity and osteogenic activity. Firstly, the phosphorylation process were optimized by an orthogonal experiment. Then, the effects of CP, phosphorylated CP (PCP), CP-calcium chelate (CP-Ca) and PCP-Ca on proliferation, differentiation and mineralization of MC3T3-E1 cells were investigated. The results showed that all of the CP, PCP, CP-Ca and PCP-Ca could enhance the proliferation, differentiation and mineralization of MC3T3-E1 cells by increasing the mRNA expression levels of alkaline phosphatase (ALP), Runt-related transcription factor-2 (Runx2), osteocalcin (OCN), osteopontin (OPN) and collagen type I (Col I), as well as the protein expression levels of Runx2 and β-Catenin. Especially, PCP-Ca had the greatest and significant effect on mineralization of MC3T3-E1 cells (P < 0.05). These results suggested that phosphorylation is a promising method to improve the calcium binding capacity and osteogenic activity of collagen peptides.The cellular components of bone tissue mainly include pre-osteoblasts, osteoblasts, osteocyte, and osteoclasts. Osteoblasts are the material basis of bone formation and play a key role in bone remodeling and formation. Osteoblasts undergo four stages of proliferation, extracellular matrix maturation (differentiation), mineralization and osteoblast apoptosis during bone formation. Among them, the successful differentiation of precursor cells into mature osteoblasts is a key step in bone formation ( Collagen peptides, the mixture of polypeptides produced by hydrolysis of collagen, have been shown to possess a variety of physiological functions including antioxidant, antibacterial, anticancer, immunomodulatory, antiinflammatory, and mineral binding ( Phosphorylation modification is the most common chemical modification of proteins. It is speculated that the phosphate group can interact with the oxygen atom in the In our previous research we have found that pig bone collagen peptides could bind with calcium and promote calcium absorption in Caco-2 cells ( Fresh pig bone was bought from a local market. Alcalase (≥200,000 units/g) and Neutrase (≥100,000 units/g) were purchased from Shanghai Yuanye Biotechnology Co., Ltd. Alpha-minimum essential medium (α-MEM) was purchased from Gibco (Grand land, NY, USA). Fetal bovine serum (FBS), penicillin and streptomycin, β-glycerophosphate and ascorbic acid were obtained from ZOMANBIO (Beijing, CHINA). Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity kit and BCA protein assay kit were obtained from Jiancheng Biotech (Nanjing, China). All other reagents were of analytical grade. The CP was prepared according to the method used in our previous research ( Lyophilized peptides was dissolved in deionized water (1%, 3%, 5%, 7% and 9%, w/v) and STP was added to the final concentrations of 2%, 4%, 6%, 8% and 10% (w/v). The pH of the solution was adjusted to 7, 8, 9, 10 and 11, and the mixture was continuously stirred at different temperatures (20 °C, 30 °C, 40 °C, 50 °C and 60 °C) for 1 h, 1.5 h, 2 h, 2.5 h and 3 h. After reaction, the pH of solution was adjusted to 7 and the solution was dialyzed against distilled water at 4 °C for 24 h to remove free phosphate. Phosphorylated collagen peptide was freeze-dried and marked as PCP. Lyophilized CP or PCP was dissolved in deionized water, and CaCl The degree of phosphorylation was determined according to the method of The calcium binding capacity was determined as previously reported ( Samples (CP, PCP and PCP-Ca) were mixed with dry KBr and triturated, then a transparent piece of the mixture was loaded on the FTIR spectrograph. The spectra was recorded in the wavenumber range of 4000–400 cm The mouse pre-osteoblast cell line MC3T3-E1 (ATCC CRL-2593) was grown in α-MEM supplemented with 10% FBS, 100 U/ml penicillin and 100 µg/ml streptomycin. The cells were maintained in a humified incubator at 37 °C and 5% CO The cells were seeded at 1 × 10 MC3T3-E1 cells were seeded in 12-well plates at a density of 5 × 10 MC3T3-E1 cells were seeded at 2 × 10 The expression levels of mRNA of osteoblast differentiation markers were determined by RT-PCR, including ALP, Runx2, OCN, OPN and Col I, and the amplification of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) was used as control. MC3T3-E1 cells were seeded at 1 × 10 MC3T3-E1 cells were seeded at 1 × 10 All experiments were carried out in triplicate, and the results were presented as the means ± standard deviation. The orthogonal experiment data was performed range analysis. And the order of factors in terms of their influence was evaluated by comparing the value of R The effect of CP concentration on the degree of phosphorylation was shown in It can be seen from As presented in As the reaction time prolonged, the degree of phosphorylation and calcium chelation rate increased slightly, reaching a maximum at 2 h and then remained unchanged ( As the temperature increased, both of the degree of phosphorylation and calcium chelation rate increased gradually and reached a maximum at 40 °C, and both decreased as the temperature continued to rise ( According to the results of single factor test, four factors (A-CP concentration, B-pH, C-temperature, D-STP addition) were chosen as independent in orthogonal test to optimize the conditions of phosphorylation. The experimental design and result analysis were shown in As can be seen from the results in the tables, the order of for processing factors affecting the degree of phosphorylation was: C > A > D > B, in which the CP concentration, temperature and STP addition had a significant effect on the degree of phosphorylation, while the effect of pH was not significant, and the optimal process was A Infrared spectroscopy can effectively analyze the spatial structure changes of proteins after phosphorylation ( As can be seen from The ALP activity of MC3T3-E1 cells after CP, PCP, CP-Ca and PCP-Ca treatment for 7 days and 14 days were determined by ALP assay kit, and the results were shown in RT-PCR was used to detect the mRNA expressions of ALP, Runx2, OCN, OPN and Col I in MC3T3-E1 cells treated with CP, PCP, CP-Ca and PCP-Ca for 7 days and 14 days, respectively, and the results were shown in The protein levels of Runx2 and β-Catenin were examined by western blotting using MC3T3-E1 cells cultured for 7 days and 14 days respectively. Compared to the blank control, CP, PCP, CP-Ca and PCP-Ca could significantly up-regulate the protein expression of Runx2 and β-Catenin in MC3T3-E1 cells in a time-dependent manner ( Mineralization is the final step in the differentiation of osteoblasts and can visually reflect the extent of bone formation. The complexation of calcium ions in the mineralized nodules with alizarin red S shows a deep red color, and the absorbance is proportional to the amount of calcium deposited. Mineralization of MC3T3-E1 cells was determined by Alizarin Red S staining at 21 days. As shown in In this paper, the preparation conditions of PCP were optimized (peptide concentration of 5%, STP addition of 8%, reaction time of 2 h, temperature of 40 °C and pH 9), and the degree of phosphorylation and calcium chelation rate were 12.11 mg/g and 88.09%, respectively. The results of FTIR spectroscopy showed that phosphate groups had been introduced to peptide, and the phosphorylated peptide could bind to calcium by carboxyl oxygen atom, amino nitrogen atom and PO No human or animal experiment in our study. We just done cell experiment. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was supported by the fund of the Beijing Laboratory for Food Quality and Safety,