The effects of dietary supplementation with Antarctic krill oil (AKO) on longitudinal bone growth in adolescent male Institute for Cancer Research (ICR) mice for 21 days were investigated. Histological results showed that AKO promoted longitudinal bone growth, increased skeletal mineral content and strength, enhanced entochondrostosis supported by higher longitudinal bone growth rate and growth plate height. Then, the potential mechanisms responsible for these observations were measured, results showed that AKO increased the secretion of the GH-IGF-1 pathway and entochondrostosis-related factors in serum increased the expression of IGF-1 in the liver and bone, which promoted proliferation and differentiation of chondrocytes, vascular invasion and bone formation related gene expression. AKO promoted longitudinal bone growth, using the GH-IGF-1 pathway, suggesting that AKO might be a potential functional food to improve growth potential of adolescents.Short stature is defined as a height that is two standard deviations smaller than the average height of the same age and gender crowd ( There are two ways in which bone grows. One is endochondral ossification, the other being intramembranous ossification ( The reserve of Freeze-dried Antarctic krill powder was provided by Liaoning Province Dalian Ocean Fishery Group Co. (Dalian, Liaoning, China). Food-grade ethanol (95%) was obtained from Qingdao Superri Biological Equipment Co. (Qingdao, Shandong, China). The standard AIN-93 feed (comprised 450 g/kg maize starch, 245 g/kg casein, 249 g/kg corn oil, 43 g/kg mineral mix and 12.3 g/kg vitamin mix) was obtained from Medicience Ltd. (Yangzhou, Jiangsu, China). The edible soybean oil was obtained from Shandong Luhua Group Co. Ltd. (Yantai, Shandong, China). A triglyceride reagent kit was obtained from Nanjing Jiancheng Bioengineering Institute (Nanjing, Jiangsu, China). An ELISA kit for GH was obtained from BioSource (Nivelles, Belgium). ELISA kits for IGF-1, bone morphogenetic protein-2 (BMP-2) and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) were obtained from the R&D Co. (Minneapolis, MN, USA). An ELISA kit for alkaline phosphatase (ALP) was obtained from BPB Biomedical Inc. (Stroughton, MA, USA). TRIzol reagent and Maxima SYBR Green qRT-PCR Master Mix were obtained from Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd. (Basel, Switzerland). RNase free water, deoxy-ribonucleotide triphosphate (dNTP), moloney murine leukemia virus reverse transcriptase (M-MLV), random primer and the PageRuler prestained protein ladder were from TaKaRa Bio Inc. (Otsu, Shiga, Japan). FastStart Universal SYBR Green Master (Rox) came from Roche (Mannheim, Germany). The primers for β-actin, IGF-1, Aggrecan, BMP-2, Runt related transcription factor 2 (Runx2), Indian hedgehog (Ihh), collagen type X alpha 1 (Col10a1), VEGF and ALP were synthesized by Sangon Biotech Co. Ltd. (Shanghai, China). The preparation of AKO was done according to a previous report with slight modification ( This study was approved by the Ethical Committee of Experimental Animal Care at Ocean University of China (certificate no. SYXK20120014). Three-wk-old male ICR mice (18 ± 1 g) were purchased from Vital River Laboratory Animal Center (Beijing, China; licensed ID: SCXK2012-0001). The mice were given the standard AIN-93 feed and water After a 7-day acclimatization period, the experimental mice (n = 32) were randomly divided into two groups: normal group (administered edible soybean oil) and the AKO group (supplemented with AKO, 100 mg/kg). The AKO were dissolved in edible soybean oil and diluted to corresponding concentration. The animals were administered orally once daily a fixed dose of 1 mL/kg body weight for 21 days. During the experiment, the mice were weighed every 3 days and body length measured every wk. Tetracycline hydrochloride (20 mg/kg, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) was injected intraperitoneally to mice (n = 16, n = 8/group) 48 h before sacrifice to allow measurement of longitudinal bone growth rate. Twenty 4 h after the final administration of AKO or edible soybean oil, the mice were euthanized using CO Body length was measured as the distance from the tip of the nose to the anus and the femoral and tibial lengths and the widths of the distal femur and proximal tibia (n = 32, n = 16/group) using a INOX IP54 vernier caliper (Micro Precision Calibration Inc., Grass Valley, CA, USA) whose resolution was 0.01 mm. The Ca and P concentrations of the right tibia (n = 16, n = 8/group) were measured using a previously reported method ( Bending stiffness was measured by a three-point bending test using a YLS-16A bone strength tester (Yiyan, Hunan, China) ( Concentrations of GH-IGF-1 pathway related indicators (GH and IGF-1) and entochondrostosis-related factors (including BMP-2, VEGF and ALP) in serum (n = 20, n = 10/group) were measured using ELISA kits, according to the manufacturers' instructions. Briefly, 100 μL of assay diluent was added to each well, and 100 μL of standard or sample were added and incubated for 2 h at room temperature (28 °C). Each well was washed 4× with washing buffer, and mixed with 100 μL of conjugate antibody. After incubation for 1 h at room temperature, each well was washed 4× with washing buffer. Then, 100 μL of substrate solution were added to each well and incubated for 15 min, followed by the addition of 100 μL of stop solution. Finally, the absorbance was measured using a Spectramax 190 microplate reader at 450 nm. Tetracycline hydrochloride was used as a fluorescent marker to label the bone growth line on the surface of the femur. The distal part of the right femur (n = 16, n = 8/group) was fixed in 95% ethyl alcohol for 24 h, then decalcified in 10% EDTA for 3 h. Demineralized tissues were then washed, dehydrated using an alcohol gradient (10–95%), embedded in paraffin, sectioned longitudinally into sagittal sections with a thickness of 40 For each experimental mouse the distal part of the left femur (n = 16, n = 8/group) was fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin for 24 h, then decalcified in 10% EDTA for approximately 7 wk, dehydrated using a gradient of alcohol (10–95%), embedded in paraffin, sectioned longitudinally to give sagittal sections with a thickness of 4 μm, which were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) prior to observation of the growth plate with an Olympus BH 14 light microscope. For each sample, the overall heights of the growth plate, and the proliferative and hypertrophic zones were measured in three different areas using Image J software, and their mean values obtained. The mRNA expression levels of the key factor of the GH-IGF-1 pathway (IGF-1) and β-actin were measured in liver samples and the left distal end of the femur, and entochondrostosis-related genes (including Aggrecan, BMP-2, Runx2, Ihh, Col10a1, VEGF and ALP) in the distal end of the left femur (n = 16, n = 8/group) were measured using qRT-PCR. Extraction and amplification of RNA were done as described in a previous report ( Data were shown as mean ± standard deviation. Statistical comparison of means among multiple groups was done using one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey's test with the Statistical Package of the Social Sciences (SPSS) software (version 17.0, SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). Significant differences were accepted with a p-value < 0.01 or 0.05. Increase in height is closely related to increased body length and longitudinal bone growth. After treatment with AKO, body length increased significantly compared with the normal group at the first (p < 0.01) and second wk (p < 0.05) ( Bending stiffness is an important biomechanical property of bone ( GH and IGF-1 are key factors in the GH-IGF-1 pathway and have an important role in the regulation of entochondrostosis. VEGF, BMP-2 and ALP are key factors in the regulation of vascular invasion and bone formation during entochondrostosis. The GH, IGF-1 VEGF, BMP-2 contents and ALP activity in the AKO group increased significantly by 34.8 (p < 0.01), 14.4 (p < 0.01), 4.4 (p < 0.05), 15.7 (p < 0.01) and 10.6% (p < 0.05), respectively ( To evaluate the rate of longitudinal bone growth, tetracycline was injected into the mice, which chelates free Ca and is deposited into newly formed bone, causing fluorescence under ultraviolet illumination. The distance between the fluorescent line and the growth plate intuitively reflects the mineral apposition rate and indirectly reflects the rate of longitudinal bone growth ( Longitudinal bone growth rate depends on the height of the growth plate ( The GH-IGF-1 pathway has an important role in the regulation of entochondrostosis of the growth plate with promoting chondrocyte proliferation and differentiation, vascular invasion and osteoblast differentiation ( In this study, results from serum analysis, bone length and width measurements, analysis of Ca and P concentrations in bone, biomechanical evaluation, bone growth rate measurements, histological observation and quantification of mRNA expression showed that AKO could promote chondrocyte proliferation and hypertrophy, vascular invasion in addition to osteogenesis, using the GH-IGF-1 pathway, to enhance endochondral ossification that promotes longitudinal bone growth in adolescent male mice. The length of the body, femur and tibia intuitively reflect the growth of bone ( The mineral content of bone comprises approximately 80–90% Ca and P. Eighty-five percent of bodily P is located in bone ( To evaluate the longitudinal rate of bone growth, studies have reported the use of tetracycline as an intravital marker of the growth process to label newly formed mineralized bone ( During childhood and adolescence, longitudinal bone growth occurs at the growth plate due to endochondral ossification ( To explore the possible underlying mechanisms behind the elevation of proliferative and hypertrophic zone heights in the growth plate observed in the AKO group, analysis of serum and gene expression was done. The GH-IGF-1 pathway has been found to be closely related to the pathogenesis of congenital short stature ( IGF-1 controls bone growth mainly by regulating the proliferation and differentiation of chondrocytes and vascular invasion in the growth plate ( In conclusion, AKO enhanced the process of entochondrostosis which promoted longitudinal bone growth in adolescent mice, using the GH-IGF-1 pathway, suggesting that AKO might have important potential as a functional food for promotion of longitudinal bone growth in children and adolescents. The role of the BMP signaling pathway will be investigated in future work to improve the mechanism of AKO promoting longitudinal bone growth in adolescent mice. All authors declare no conflicts of interest. This study was supported by