The catalytic ethanolysis of microcrystalline cellulose in supercritical ethanol is examined over a sulfonated hydrothermal carbon catalyst (SHTC). SHTC is amorphous carbon containing −OH, −COOH and −SO3H groups with total acidity of 7.15 mmol/g and −SO3H acidity of 1.72 mmol/g. SHTC shows high catalytic activity towards the ethanolysis of cellulose in supercritical ethanol. Complete conversion of microcrystalline cellulose with high yields of ethyl levulinate and ethyl glucoside is obtained. The reaction temperature, time and catalyst amount have significant effects on the catalytic performances of SHTC. Appropriate reaction time and less catalyst amount are favorable for the production of ethyl glucoside, while prolonged reaction time and appropriate catalyst amount favor the production of ethyl levulinate. The highest yield of ethyl glucoside as 420.9 mg/g cellulose is obtained over 0.1 g SHTC at 245 ºC for 1 h. The highest yield of ethyl levulinate as 817.6 mg/g cellulose is achieved over 0.3 g SHTC at 245 ºC for 1 h. SHTC shows good stability in the recycle experiments with slight loss of catalytic activity.Cellulose is a macromolecular polysaccharide composed of glucose units covalently linked with β-1,4-glycosidic bonds [ Hydrolysis of cellulose to glucose is a key process for the efficient use of cellulose and a practical entry point of cellulose biorefinery [ Carbon-based solid acids prepared by sulfonation of commercially available carbon materials or incompletely carbonized natural organic compounds such as sugar, cellulose and starch with concentrated sulfuric acid exhibit high catalytic activities equaling to sulfuric acid as well as good recyclability in a wide range of applications [ To sum up, pyrolysis of biomass at 450–550 °C under N The microcrystalline cellulose (product number C104841, particle diameter 25 μm) was purchased from Aladdin Industrial Co. Ltd and was dried at 110 °C overnight before use. Analytic grade ethanol and fuming sulfuric acid (20 wt% SO Hydrothermal carbon (HTC) was obtained by heating the microcrystalline cellulose and water at 240 °C for 15 h and used as a precursor for carbon catalyst. Afterwards, 5 g of HTC and 100 mL of fuming sulfuric acid (20 wt% SO Ultimate analysis of SHTC was recorded on Vario MACRO cube Elemental analyzer equipped with a TCD detector (Elementar Analysen system, Germany). The powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the samples were recorded with a D8 Focus diffractometer (Bruker Corp., Germany) ﬁtted with a Cu-Kα radiation source at 40 kV and 200 mA with a scanning rate of 8°/min in a 2θ range from 10 to 90°. The morphology of the catalyst was obtained using a scanning electron microscope (SEM; S-4800, Hitachi, Japan). The Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) spectrum was recorded from 4000 to 400 cm The cellulose conversion experiments were carried out in a 300 mL batch reactor (Parr 4560, Parr Instrument Company). In a typical run, 1.0 g of microcrystalline cellulose, 0.1 g of catalyst and 100 mL of ethanol were loaded into the pressure reactor. After sealing, the reactor was purged by N The liquid products were qualitatively analyzed with GC–MS (Agilent 6890N-5973) equipped with an Agilent HP-5MS (30 m × 0.25 mm × 0.25 μm) capillary column and a quadrupole analyzer operated in electron impact (70 eV) mode. The column temperature was increased from 45 °C to a final temperature of 250 °C at 10 °C/min and then held at the final temperature for 2 min. Compounds were identified by comparing the mass spectra with NIST 11.0 library database. The concentrations of products were quantitatively calculated by means of standard curve method. The standard curve between product concentration and peak areas was determined by analyzing standard solutions of ethyl glucoside and ethyl levulinate with different concentrations at the same measurement conditions. The conversion of cellulose, the yield and the selectivity of each product were calculated by the following Eqs. ( As shown in Complete conversion of microcrystalline cellulose was achieved in supercritical ethanol over a SHTC catalyst and no tar or char was formed during the reaction. Reaction temperature has a significant effect on the ethanolysis reaction and decides the product distribution. Cellulose showed indistinctive depolymerization with cellulose conversion lower than 20% when the reaction temperature was below 200 °C (   The recyclability of SHTC for the ethanolysis of cellulose in supercritical ethanol was examined with using the recovered catalyst without regeneration for three consecutive runs. Above 98 wt% of the catalyst was recovered after each recycle. Complete conversion of cellulose was still achieved during the third run. As shown in Complete conversion of microcrystalline cellulose was achieved in supercritical ethanol over a SHTC catalyst, leading to high yields of ethyl levulinate and ethyl glucoside. Four kinds of ethers, diethoxymethane, 1,1-diethoxyethane, 1,1-diethoxybutane and 1,1,2-triethoxyethane, were also formed in the liquid products. The blank experiments ( Just above the supercritical condition is favorable for the catalytic depolymerization of cellulose as well as the production of ethers from ethanol. Obviously, SHTC exhibited completely different catalytic performances in subcritical ethanol (240 °C) and supercritical ethanol (245 °C). The results showed that ethyl glucoside and ethyl levulinate were formed in supercritical ethanol at 245 °C with yields of 348.0 and 285.6 mg/g cellulose and a total selectivity of 59.2% ( As the reaction time prolonged, the yield of ethyl glucoside first increased and then decreased, while that of ethyl levulinate showed the steady uptrend. Note that the total yield of ethyl glucoside and ethyl levulinate maintained within a stable range, indicating that the conversion of ethyl glucoside to ethyl levulinate occurred during the process. Appropriate reaction time is favorable for the production of ethyl glucoside, while a prolonged reaction time is favorable for the production of ethyl levulinate. Neither ethyl glucoside nor ethyl levulinate was detected in the liquid products with cellulose conversion below 50% when the amount of SHTC catalyst was lower than 0.05 g. Within certain range of catalyst amounts, less catalyst is favorable for the production of ethyl glucoside and appropriate amount of catalyst enhances the production of ethyl levulinate. The mass ratio of catalyst to cellulose in previous studies was generally in the range of 0.5–12. In this work, ethyl glucoside and ethyl levulinate with yields of 420.9 and 233.6 mg/g cellulose were obtained at 245 °C for 1 h ( Complete conversion of cellulose with high yields of ethyl glucoside and ethyl levulinate was still achieved during the third recycle. The slight decrease of ethyl levulinate and ethyl glucoside was mainly attributed to the leaching of the −SO SHTC was demonstrated as a highly efficient catalyst for ethanolysis of cellulose under supercritical conditions. Complete conversion of microcrystalline cellulose in supercritical ethanol with high yields of ethyl levulinate and ethyl glucoside was obtained over a SHTC catalyst in supercritical ethanol. SHTC is demonstrated to be amorphous carbon containing −OH, −COOH and −SO Financial supports from the