Flour quality is important to improvements in breadmaking, and this in turn means that the milling process is critical to bread quality. Even though flour milling is mankind's oldest continuously practiced industry, transformative developments have taken place within the last 25years that have led to significant implications for breadmaking. After reviewing the modern flour milling process and recent innovations, we examine how flour milling governs flour quality and the technological developments that a mill will employ to holistically integrate process and product.Introduction Flour milling The evolution of modern flour milling The modern flour milling process Debranning Other milling developments The double-grinding roller mill Pin mills Flour cooling On-line process control Flour milling and flour quality Quality components Manipulating flour quality Technological developments affecting flour quality Automation and testing Product delivery Recent outputs from milling research Grain properties Particle properties and millstream flows The future of flour milling Conclusion Acknowledgments References The authors are grateful to Aytun Erdentug, Director of Branscan, Ltd., Pershore, UK, for providing images from their Fluoroscan F4000 and to Martin Clare, Instrumentation Specialist, and Andrew Bailey, Projects and Technical Manager, Satake Europe, Ltd., for technical information and for providing Fig. 8.3. As the principal component of bread, flour is vitally important; improving breadmaking requires an understanding of the origins of flour and the role of the flour milling process. The grinding of wheat into flour is mankind's oldest continuously practiced industry ( The prime objective of producing flour is to render cereal grains into forms that allow further processing into a diverse range of palatable baked products, the most important of which is bread ( Flour production consists, principally, of grinding (milling) and sifting (separation) of the grain components. In the modern mill, however, much of the process is dedicated to so-called cleaning operations. These are necessary to ensure that only the desired grain is milled. Almost all stages of the modern process are carried out dry, using mainly mechanical techniques. The quality of the flour produced through the flour milling process depends on the sequence of operations carried out and the degree of separation achieved. The definition of quality also varies according to the intended end-use, whether for large-scale production of white bread, wholemeal, or handcrafted artisan breads. Ideally, flour milling would isolate the starchy endosperm in as pure a state as possible, uncontaminated by either germ or bran. While some of the details of the process are specific to flour milling, many of the basic principles are such that any chemical, mechanical, or process engineer would be familiar with them. Roller mills are used for grinding, sieves are used for size separation, air is used for density- and drag-based separations, and pneumatics are used for conveying. Power consumption, yield, and losses are all terms used in flour milling that would be familiar to engineers of most disciplines. Historically, flour milling and mechanical and process engineering have been intimately connected, with power generation, transmission, and control all originating from the demands of flour milling. Oliver Evans, American designer of the original highly automated flour mills, has been described as “the first thoroughgoing plant engineer” ( Flour manufacture is characterized as a process industry since it transforms a basic raw material, via a primary process, into a product of value to a wide range of other processors, such as bakers, as well as to home consumers. The other features of flour milling that place it into the process industry category are that operations are carried out on a large scale and, via a series of interacting unit operations, on a continuous basis. The history of flour milling is a story of incremental innovation over millennia to develop increasingly sophisticated technologies to break wheat grains and separate the endosperm material efficiently from the bran and germ. As remarked by While separating the distinct parts of the broken grain is an integral operation, the breakage of wheat grains is the primary focus, such that “milling” refers to the entire process, as well as to the specific operations of breakage. The technology of breaking wheat by pounding grains between two stones has over time moved through saddlestones, slab, push and lever mills to the more sophisticated hourglass mill introduced by the Greeks and evolving into the rotary quern. The quern was eventually scaled up to millstones, and these were mechanized over time via water, wind, steam, and electrical power. Millstones continue to be used by some millers, serving a small but now growing specialist market. Modern flour milling has three defining features ( As discussed later, the breakage of wheat grains differs substantially depending on the wheat's hardness. The British climate suits the production of soft wheats, while the flours produced from the imported American hard wheats tended to be better suited to breadmaking. The hard wheat imports cultivated in the public a taste for superior breads and added to the pressure on millers to acquire foreign wheats and process them into a flour of consistent quality. The gradual reduction approach using millstones was partially successful in processing the hard wheats of Hungary and the new world, particularly in combination with air classification for separating flour stocks. However, the successful invention in Hungary of an alternative approach to millstones for opening up the wheat grain was very quickly adopted globally, and particularly by British millers. This technology diffusion was driven by the push resulting from the increasing availability of hard wheats and the need to process them, combined with the pull of expanding markets for the excellent breadmaking flour that hard wheats, suitably processed, can yield. In addition, roller mills offered great advantages over millstones in terms of versatility and control of the milling process. Thus from the first installations by about 1880 of modern flour mills as defined earlier, the roller mill had essentially displaced millstones completely by the turn of the century. The factors of wheat hardness, the international grain trade, and bread quality that gave rise to modern flour milling are still those that dominate its practice today. The advantage of the newer, more elaborate process was that higher yields of quality flour could be produced. The cruder older processes typically produced only 10% high quality flour from the wheat grain compared with more than 70% in roller milling plants. The remaining flour was of poor quality, being heavily contaminated with bran and germ particles. Many variations in the detail of the process flow sheet emerged in the years after the perfection of the gradual reduction system due to the varying requirements of customers and even political directives. For example, in times of war, the British government ordered millers to produce high extraction flour in order to extend supplies and to supplement people's diet with the essential vitamins and minerals found in the outer layers of the wheat grain ( There are a number of aspects of the overall process of flour milling that are not found in other industries. This section provides a brief introduction to the process and the terms employed to describe aspects of it. Flour milling is the continuous process by which raw wheat grain is transformed into a form that is of use to the baking and other industries as well as to the domestic consumer. A smaller portion of mill production is geared toward whole-wheat flours, employing a simplified process flow sheet, and in the last 20 The success of the flour milling process depends on an efficient, economical separation of starchy endosperm from the rest of the grain. It will be appreciated from the section on the evolution of flour milling that the process has developed along very specific lines toward achieving this goal. The gradual reduction system enables the production of flours of low ash content and high yield. Specialist high-quality flours are produced by extracting high-purity subproducts from within the process. The outer bran layers become the coproduct of the process designated as coarse bran or wheat feed depending on their origin in the process. Many operations also separate the embryo (germ), a high value coproduct when a market exists. Where a market for germ does not exist, it is sold for animal feed with the wheat feed. These coproducts contribute significantly to the financial viability of milling operations. The flour milling process can be represented by a simple block diagram ( Before the wheat reaches the first milling stage, it has to undergo several preliminary operations that ensure the correct performance of the main process. The first of these is wheat cleaning. The grain, having been received at the flourmill, analyzed and stored in a silo, must be separated from contaminants prior to preparation for milling. The contaminants removed during the cleaning process include burnt, immature, sprouted or shriveled grains, other seeds, sand, straw, and stones. Simple sieving removes materials that are smaller or larger than grains, aspirated sieving removes lighter materials, and sieving on inclined screens separates denser materials such as stones. Strong air currents remove lighter impurities in aspirated systems, while with inclined systems advantage is taken of the effects of gravity to separate dense from less dense materials as they are shaken along the screen. Disc separators remove impurities of a similar size and cross-section to the wheat grains, such as oats, barley, and other seeds. The discs have small pockets on both sides and revolve partly immersed in the grain, picking out particles small enough to enter the pockets and discharging them into troughs between the discs on the downward side. Ferrous metal particles that might be present are removed by magnetic separators. Scourers, consisting of a stationary cylindrical wire or perforated screen, and a few rotating surfaces (beaters) are used to scour off impurities such as dirt trapped in the crease. The ever increasing emphasis on food safety by mill customers and the public has led to greater efforts to remove impurities, either to reduce overall microbiological counts, or to eliminate perceived health threats such as pesticides and heavy metals. In some systems, this additional scouring operation is performed after tempering. After cleaning, the wheat is tempered (or conditioned) prior to the milling operation itself. Tempering is one of the most important parts of the flour milling process; the moisture content of the grain is increased by the addition of water and the grain sits for a period of time. This tempering process toughens the outer layers of the grain to minimize the production of bran powder during grinding, thus simplifying the physical separation of endosperm from the bran. The tempering also softens the endosperm, thereby affecting how endosperm particles are broken in the subsequent milling steps and the extent to which mechanical starch damage is achieved. However, if the wheat is overdampened, the flow of particles across sifters is impaired and mill capacity is reduced. The amount of water added during tempering depends both on the existing moisture content of the wheat and the hardness of the grain. Hard wheats are typically tempered to 16.5% moisture and softer wheat to 15.0%–15.5% moisture. Durum wheat, being very hard, is tempered to a higher moisture content. The time required for the grain to reach an optimal distribution of moisture depends on the hardness of the grain rather than on the characteristics of the bran layers. For hard wheat, the time required for tempering varies and can be from 10 to 36 The cleaned conditioned wheat grains are at this point ready to pass to the first break rolls for milling. Referring again to The amount of material released at each break passage is controlled by adjusting the gap between the rolls. The term “break release” is often used to represent the percentage of material released at each particular rollstand that no longer continues on in the break system. The aim of the break system is to attain minimal disintegration of the bran while releasing sufficient material that mill balance is maintained in the purification and reduction systems. The purification system is comprised of three machine types: purifiers, roller mills, and sifters. Purifiers are machines that separate particles on the basis of differences in size, density, and air resistance, simultaneously. The purifier is essentially an inclined sieve of increasing aperture size from head to tail, which is oscillated, and through which an air current passes upwards. The heavier particles of endosperm stay on the sieve until they reach apertures big enough for them to fall through, while air currents lift out the lighter branny material to convey it out of the system. The streams feeding the purification system come from the break system discussed earlier. They are classified on a size basis prior to entry to the purification system, and contain a mixture of pure endosperm and particles of intermediate purity. Particles of low air resistance that are pure enough are separated immediately, leave the purification system, and are passed to the reduction system for further processing. The remaining particles are processed on roller mills whose surfaces have a fine saw tooth profile. Further bran and endosperm separation is possible as a result of this grind. Ultimately most of the material that enters the purification system is passed on to the reduction system. The remaining material is sent back to the break system. Generally, purification of the stock obtained after first and second breaks results in almost pure endosperm (low ash), while purification of the stock obtained from later breaks results in material containing a higher proportion of bran. Because the aim of the purification system is to rid the milling streams of impurities, almost no flour is produced here. The reduction system is the main flour-producing part of the process. It is also where another desirable flour property is manipulated. Induction of mechanical starch damage during size reduction increases the water-absorbing capacity of the flour, which in turn improves bread yield ( The starch damage induced in the flour particles is achieved through the application of shear and pressure to the starch granules that constitute the major part of the endosperm. The shear stresses are enhanced by virtue of the differential speeds employed by the grinding rolls. The mechanical linkage that supports the grinding rolls applies the pressure to the particles, and the strengthening of this mechanical linkage has been the objective of a number of mill manufacturers. Flour separation takes place in the plansifters. Any material that passes through the finest sieves is, by definition, flour. All other material is returned to the appropriate point of the system for further processing. Flour is produced at each stage, although quality differs depending on the system in which it is created, and even the rollstand within a given system. For example, later stages of the break system are likely to be contaminated with fine bran particles. The result of the iterative grinding and sieving operations described earlier is the cumulative release of endosperm from the wheat grain, followed by the cumulative release of flour from this material. The actual quantities released at each stage vary widely between particular mills. An example of the proportion of flour released at different stages is given in Typical overall releases for a flourmill in the UK are as follows: A—Cumulative release from the break system: 89% B—Rejection from the purification and reduction systems: 10% Cumulative flour release (A While no two mills are the same, the differences between them occur in the intensity with which the processes described earlier are applied and the particular machine configurations used. This same process has been applied for more than 100 A notable process development in flour milling has been the introduction of the debranning of wheat before it enters the main milling process ( The anatomical difference between wheat and rice, with the former having a crease, has led to different approaches to milling these two cereals for separation of bran from endosperm. Rice can be simply pearled or polished to remove the bran, but pearling is unable to remove crease bran from wheat, which can ultimately only be removed by a more demanding process involving breaking the wheat grain open. However, in the late 1990s the Satake Corporation of Japan (following earlier work by Tkac) applied their rice pearling technology to wheat, to develop and commercialize the PeriTec system ( Although such systems were initially intended to simplify the milling process and increase mill capacity, bread bakers quickly noticed the superior product resulting from the flour supplied by those millers who had invested in the new technology. Pearling wheat prior to milling gives superior breadmaking performance in terms of organoleptic quality (larger loaf volume, more uniform crumb texture, extended shelf life), nutrition (inclusion of the aleurone layer in flour), safety (removal of undesirable surface-borne contaminants), and consistency, particularly in evening out year-to-year variations. All the major UK millers have invested in the new technology, such that it quickly came to account for the majority of UK premium flour production ( The introduction of pearling (debranning) has consequences for wheat breeding programs and agriculture (to develop and grow varieties that perform well in pearling systems) and for bakery ingredient functionality (ingredients may respond or perform differently in doughs made from pearled flour compared with conventional flours). The change also demands a revisiting of flour milling and breadmaking processes to understand and exploit fully the benefits of the new process. This is a challenging task, as the distance between the applied change (pearling of wheat at the beginning of milling) and the observed effect (better bread) is separated by two highly complex and interacting processes ( The double-grinding roller mill is a recent development in milling. A variation on the double high rollstand theme is the six-roller mill, which has been used in the malting industry for many years. The configuration of the double-grinding or six-roller roller mill enables mill stocks to be ground twice without intermediate sifting or grinding, considered by some to be an heretical concept in a gradual reduction process where coarse and fine material should be separated after each size reduction step, this development significantly reduces sifting and conveying requirements within the process. As a result, considerable capital savings can be made in equipment purchase requirements and the size of building required to house the machines. Pin mills have also been adapted for use throughout the milling process. Pin mills consist of a rotor with a series of pins attached revolving around a stator with its set of pins. The material to be comminuted enters the mill at the center of the rotor and is thrown toward the periphery by centrifugal forces. Pin mills are standard machines, but the innovation is in the process locations where they have been applied. When high grinding pressures lead to the production of endosperm flakes, it is important that they are broken up to create flour-sized particles. Accomplishing this with roller mills would unduly raise starch damage levels in the flour. Pin mills are favored where starch damage of the bulk flour will not be adversely affected or where flour production rates are relatively low. In those parts of the world which experience high ambient temperatures, the potential for flour cooling has been much discussed. It is inevitable that the energy involved in the milling of grain involves the generation of significant quantities of heat. In the flour milling process, as such there is not a great deal that can be done to cool the flour and in many ways warm flour does not represent a quality issue in the mill, though the evaporation of moisture will increase so that flour reaching the bakery may well be lower in moisture content. This will certainly increase the water absorption capacity of the flour but may be bring with it technical problems for the bakery. The action of simply bringing together flour and water generates some heat; this is known as the heat of hydration and is directly related to the moisture content of the flour—the drier the flour the greater the heat of hydration ( The need to control final dough temperature is critical in the breadmaking process ( The need for low-cost production has implications for mill manpower. Accordingly, tasks that were performed in the past by mill operators are now performed automatically. As well as cost savings over the long term, the continuous nature of data recording from multiple locations in the mill confers advantages in mill and operator safety (e.g., by monitoring the temperature of high-energy-consumption machines), in consistency of flour quality (since machines can be adjusted in real time in response to transducer signals), and in helping to formulate robust corrective action procedures when a product is recalled (since data records can be scrutinized for anomalous behavior). Many types of sensors are in place in flour mills. Throughout the mill gravimetric and volumetric flow rates are monitored, not just to act as electronic yield control systems, but also for ensuring that a good balance of stock flow occurs within the mill, while ultrasonic, radiofrequency, or capacitive sensors ensure that levels in hoppers feeding machines are maintained. Incoming wheat grains can be evaluated for color using high resolution cameras, ( The product itself—the flour—has its properties measured on-line and in real time. This involves primarily the use of NIR techniques, but fluorescence methods are also available commercially for monitoring and controlling flour extraction and purity. The well proven abilities of NIR for on-line determination of protein and moisture content mean that flour protein content can be monitored continuously and the reading used to control gluten addition to the flour automatically to attain desired protein specifications, thereby permitting mill managers to optimize wheat purchase for gristing based on protein content and protein losses in the mill. The versatility of spectral and image analysis when combined with computer technology for controlling flour quality is illustrated in The on-going implementation of Computer Integrated Manufacturing (CIM) and Programmable Automation (PA) in the food manufacturing industry continues to drive embedding of process control tools in the milling and baking industries. Benefits of CIM include quality improvement and enhanced production control as a result of system diagnostics, energy management, and downtime analysis (so that weak points or bottlenecks in the process can be identified and rectified). Many CIM processes also have features that enhance hygiene aspects in flour manufacture. In addition, data collection and analysis as well as product traceability are elements of CIM that are readily exploited by processors to ensure optimum quality for customers and as tools to enhance profitability. Improving control saves energy and improves product consistency by ensuring key process variables are more stable, thus allowing comfort margins to be reduced. Processes may also be operated closer to optimum values or constraints. Although sophisticated approaches are often employed, in many cases a simple control system will achieve the desired effect. Quality is a term that encompasses a large number of parameters with respect to the product delivered from the flourmill to the baker. Essentially, it means satisfying the baker's requirement for consistent performance from the flour. The challenge for millers is to achieve this while maintaining acceptable performance from the mill. Factors influencing flour quality before wheat processing occurs include wheat variety, the presence of impurities, and the drying and storage conditions that the grains were subjected to prior to processing. Parameters influencing flour quality during processing include the flow sheet employed, the condition of the roller mills and other processing equipment, the settings of the roller mills, atmospheric conditions, and the selection of flour divides. Obviously, the extraction rate has a major impact on the performance of the flour, because it dictates to a significant extent the amount of bran that contaminates the final flour. The miller's role is clearly defined given the earlier influencing factors: a product must be supplied to the customer that will satisfy their requirements. In the context of breadmaking this means the miller must supply a flour that will produce a loaf of bread with a good crumb structure, an appropriate volume, and a desirable color (of both crust and crumb). The miller must also supply flour that will allow the baker to attain adequate yield, i.e., a flour that has sufficient, but not excessive, water absorption. The miller has many choices to make if these requirements of the customer are to be satisfied, although these choices are made in an evolutionary style in many mills. In other words, the customer may start with a standard flour from the mill's product range and over time the baker will ask the miller to change some parameters in order to deliver enhanced performance. Thus one can appreciate that the means by which a customized flour develops is a two-way process, with the miller and baker in regular communication. Producing flour for a particular application begins with the choice of wheat to be used as the basis for the flour. This is usually, but not always, a blend of different wheats. The resulting blend is commonly known as the grist, hence the common phrase “grist to the mill.” Wheat types dramatically affect flour characteristics, particularly in the context of the wheat gluten that is responsible for the film-forming capacity of the dough. For many bread flours produced in the UK, a certain amount of North American wheat in the grist is considered desirable. In fact, in a reverberation of events of 150 Water absorption capacity is a key parameter in the purchase of flour for breadmaking because of its direct link to bread yield. Water absorption is influenced by wheat variety in the grist but also by the amount and type of grinding performed during milling. Water absorption in flour is manipulated by disrupting the starch granules that constitute most of the endosperm of the wheat grain, and the extent of disruption depends on mill settings (e.g., shear vs compression vs impact) but also on the particle sizes generated from those mill settings ( Color and ash content of flour are loosely related because both reflect the amount of bran powder present in the flour as a result of break-up of some of the outer layers of the wheat grain by the milling process. Generally, this material is considered undesirable in white flour and is regarded as a contaminant. It is, however, impossible to produce flour without some bran particles, so the objective is simply to keep them to a minimum. Acceptable levels are generally stipulated in flour trading specifications between miller and baker. This last point is very important because excessive levels of bran particles affect the baking characteristics of white flour. However, assuming that the mill is being operated efficiently, bran contamination is directly proportional to the flour yield from a given grist. Thus flour with more bran is higher-yield flour and is therefore flour that has been produced at a lower cost per tonne. This should be reflected in the price paid by the baker for the flour. It is therefore in the interest of the baker to know the level of contamination that is acceptable for his or her requirements. The baker will then be in a position to purchase the highest extraction (most profitable) flour that will produce a good product. The consequent saving could be significant. A point that may not be considered in terms of flour quality is the amount of contamination inherent in the wheat used to produce the flour. The immediate impact is that impurities alter the ash and color of the flour, but there may be a number of far more serious consequences; for example, ergot is poisonous, as are the metabolic by-products of Fusarium-infested grains (e.g., deoxynivalenol (DON)) ( There are a number of ways that flour properties and quality can be manipulated during processing. Particle size is dictated by the amount of grinding and the choice of sieve apertures employed throughout the process ( In practical terms the mill operator will manipulate flour particle size by controlling the extent of grinding on the roller mills and by choosing various aperture size combinations in the sieving equipment. Adjusting roller mills has a complex effect on the process because adjustments influence the particle size distribution of the material produced and hence the quantities of material passing to other areas of the process. Thus the setting of subsequent machines must also be taken into account in adjusting the degree of breakage on a given rollstand. In practice, it is almost impossible to consider all the consequences of such adjustment, and mill operators generally assess the impact based on changes in the end product. A tool that is used by flour millers to great effect is flour dividing. This is a simple concept that has been around for almost as long as flour has been produced on a large scale. In a modern mill, flour is produced after each processing step, of which there can be 15 or more; therefore, a “straight run” flour might consist of at least 15 component flours, each of which has slightly different characteristics, see White bread flour is generally made up of Flour One, Flour Two, and most of Flour Three combined. However, sending some components to wheat feed or to flour varies the exact composition. When all other options have been exercised, the miller will manipulate these streams in order to meet customer specifications. While it is highly undesirable for a miller to send flour to wheat feed, it is an efficient and instant way of manipulating product quality. In fact, many mill operators analyze the properties of the individual flour streams on a routine basis and know the effect that inclusion or exclusion of certain streams will have on the quality of the final flour produced ( The principle of flour dividing has also received attention outside the main milling process. Many new mills constructed today incorporate flour blending in their silos. This allows millers to create composite flours by blending different mill products either continuously or in batches. The resulting composite flours can thus be tailored to match specifications for specific customers that would be impossible to satisfy by milling alone. Flour blending is also advantageous for mill operators because base flours can be milled from a limited number of wheat types and these flours are blended after milling to produce a myriad of products. Thus product possibilities are extended while production runs on the mill are lengthened. Blending of the flour can also redress deficiencies in flour quality from a given mill run arising from milling irregularities or from protein losses in the mill. The divide principle is also widely used in the manufacture of wholemeal and brown (wheatmeal) flours. In this instance diverter valves are used to send the bran fractions present in the process directly to product streams or on to further processing. In the production of wholemeal flour the entire content of the wheat grain is included in the product, while wheatmeal flour may exclude some parts of the mill product. Although the milling process still employs the same principles as it did 100 New mills are designed with hygiene as a primary focus and the grain entering today's mills is better cleaned than in the past. Machines scour the surface of the grain to remove microbial and fungal contaminants, while separations based on density remove shriveled grains that may possess elevated DON levels. Machines installed in modern mills are often self-cleaning and have product hold-up areas reduced to a minimum. After processing, products bound for storage in product silos are passed through infestation destroyers ( Hygiene considerations have even impacted on the new generations of mill processes where debranning machines have now been adapted for use in flour milling. The logic behind the approach to “peel” off the outer bran layers from the wheat grain is two-fold. The outer layers of the wheat berry are porous and so contamination with molds, fungi, and bacteria is more prevalent. Removal, therefore, influences the microbiological quality of any subsequent products in a positive manner. The debranning process also removes the bran layers from the wheat grain before any comminution is performed. In principle this ensures that the resulting flour contains less bran with its associated microbial contaminants. Although debranning is the most radical of new technologies to affect flour milling and flour quality, flour millers have had to adapt their processes to ensure a consistent product after incorporating other technological advances. These include double-grinding roller mills, pin mills, and on-line process management. For example, double grinding simultaneously generates high levels of flour release and starch damage. However, the aggressive grinding also grinds down any bran particles present and so streams processed by double grinding passages need to be quite pure for effective and efficient processing. This can, at times, be a challenge for the miller since purifiers must be optimized to minimize impairment of product streams by excessive bran particle size reduction. Smaller bran particles are also likely to influence the quality of wholemeal breads. On-line process management has transformed the quality of flour being delivered to bakeries today. Every aspect of the art of milling is now scrutinized in a routine and scientific manner. Each consignment of raw material is tested as it passes from site reception right through to processing. All process operations, from grain moisture addition to flour blending, are monitored either manually or, increasingly, automatically. Machine settings can be automated and are often logged. Improver addition is typically microprocessor controlled and flour blending may be centrally controlled. Increasingly, these foci of product quality and process efficiency are being supplemented with quantitative data on the proximity of flour to legislated safety thresholds. Computers and their use in conjunction with standards such as ISO 9000 have resulted in products that are traceable, not just in terms of raw material origins, but also in terms of processing conditions and process settings. With this level of monitoring and control, incidences of nonconformance in flour products are rare and it is without doubt a major contributory factor to the successful development of the automated plant bakery. These plants simply cannot function without flour that performs consistently. A final area of note in terms of milling and flour quality is delivery of flour to the customer. Generally, delivery is the responsibility of the miller who will have the capability to deliver product in a number of pack sizes and also in bulk. The latter option is by far the most desirable from a quality perspective because the mechanical elements involved in the transfer from miller to customer are fewer, physical hazards arising from stray packaging materials are absent, and waste and contamination issues are minimized. Indeed, in this era of greater environmental awareness, the removal of packaging from the flour production equation is an enormous step forward, and so the argument for bulk products from a quality and environmental perspective is compelling. Milling research can be divided into two categories, commercial and academic. Commercial research tends to be confidential in nature, but the results can be seen in the new products and processes marketed by manufacturers in the field. Some of these developments have been discussed earlier. In academic literature, research has been directed to many of the salient features of milling that affect flour quality. The geometrical attributes and the properties of wheat grains (either as a whole or as the sum of constituent parts) figure prominently. Studies of the application of stress by the rollstand during the milling process are relatively rare. This is somewhat surprising when one considers that the establishment of strain energy within the endosperm is the prerequisite for the fracture initiation and propagation that are the determinants of many of the attributes of the progeny particles arising from milling processes. Because the progeny particles dictate the properties of the flour, the characterization of the new particles, either individually or as a stream that must be redirected to other parts of the milling process, has also been the focus of extensive research. Characterizing the geometrical attributes of wheat grains such as size and shape continues to be a research focus, because size and shape affect how the grain is stressed in a given piece of size reduction equipment. Image analysis is a common tool for quantification of grain geometry. However, geometry has been researched much less than the material properties of wheat grains and their constituents. The link between grain material properties and flour quality, as focused on baking performance, has been a long-standing topic of research interest, but the current dual foci of food safety and nutrient optimization have led to renewed interest in conducting a thorough characterization of the properties of tissues within the grain. New Analytical tools, such as the Single Kernel Characterization System ( The richness and diversity of nutrients in wheat grains is a strong motive for understanding how such nutrients might be best extracted in various streams, either for breadmaking purposes, or for creating novel value-added products. In turn, this has motivated systematic studies of the mechanical properties of various tissues within the grain. Numerous studies can be cited, but certainly noteworthy is the concerted effort led from Montpellier in France on the material properties of endosperm ( The focus on the properties of the outer regions of the grain is also relevant to food safety, since many by-products of intensive modern agriculture, such as pesticides, reside on the grain's outer tissues. The issue of fungal infection, and the associated metabolic by-products that are harmful to animal and human health, has also driven examination of the properties of these infected grains with a view to implementing solutions in the mill process flows that will reduce the risk to health ( Measuring the properties of the grain as a whole is a less protracted means of relating the material properties of the grain to the performance of the mill and to flour quality. Grain density and grain vitreosity have been investigated by numerous research teams in order to understand better the relationship of grain properties to grain fragmentation patterns ( Numerous hardness tests have been developed over the last century, broadly divided into the power or time required to grind a wheat sample to a given particle size, or the particle size resulting from grinding a sample under standardized conditions. Until relatively recently, hardness tests were applied to bulk samples of wheat, so that an average hardness value was reported. In recent years, the measurement of the hardness of each individual grain has been emphasized so that the distribution of hardness values in a sample can be quantified. The most well developed commercial example of this wheat testing approach is the Single Kernel Characterization System (SKCS) which crushes 300 individual grains within 5 Hardness has been strongly linked to genetic control mechanisms, and in particular the presence of endosperm-specific proteins called puroindolines. Grains with a significant amount of puroindolines have poor breadmaking qualities ( Breakage of wheat grains during First Break roller milling evidently depends on the characteristics of the grain (including the distributions of grain size, hardness, and moisture content) and on the design and operation of the roller mill. The effects of these factors are manifest in the particle size distribution exiting First Break, the compositional distribution of those particles (as large particles tend to be richer in bran), the power required to mill the wheat, and the rate of roll wear. These interrelationships are illustrated in Work at the University of Manchester has led to the introduction of the breakage equation for First Break roller milling of wheat based on the paradigm of flour milling as “the evolution of the particle size distribution” ( Based on the Kumaraswamy probability density function, Consistent flour quality will be attainable with the extension of this unit operations-based analysis of particle breakage to all of the break subsystems ( The particles created from the fragmentation of the grain dictate the properties of the flour, and so particle properties have been characterized, both individually and collectively. Analysis of particle size is a mature subject, especially since sieving is the easy and established means of particle separation. Therefore few studies of particle size employing alternative research techniques have been attempted. Particle shape is also a restricted topic from a research perspective ( Because of its usefulness in examining fragmentation patterns, it is not surprising that there has been a considerable amount of research conducted in the last 15 The studies of particle breakage during roller milling described earlier are generally consistent with insights from other research that has examined particle size and composition arising from breakage. For example, In a study on a reduction rollstand, the amount of bran particles in the final flour, as indicated by both ash content and color, was manipulated by rollstand operating conditions ( In terms of progeny particle composition, the beneficial nature of aleurone as a source of antioxidants ( The aspects of milling discussed earlier highlight the way in which this sector of the cereals processing industry has developed to date and how it may potentially develop in the future. Increases in machine capacity have been dramatic, but progress in this area is likely to be limited by the material properties of the grains and stocks. Exploiting that capacity to optimize the nutrient profile, the safety, and the properties of millstreams arising from particle breakage has moved to the forefront of both commercial and academic research. Some of that effort has resulted in commercial applications, such as the adoption of computer control to facilitate longer operational runs in plants as well as minimizing downtime, and the incorporation of the on-line assessment of flour properties to allow millers to conduct short milling runs so that the flour specifications of small volume customers can be met accurately. However, sophisticated strategies for control of particle size and composition have yet to make a real impact in the sector, despite significant research in the application of breakage matrix approaches to characterizing particle breakage and progeny particle characteristics. On-going commitments to the milling industry from both large and small companies are inevitably shaping the industry into one where advanced control systems and optimization algorithms will be an important aspect of commercial milling operations. In addition to process developments, external economic and societal influences will continue to have a significant impact on the manner in which mill processes are operated. For example, new products and product specifications will demand different things from mill processes and necessitate change. The change in emphasis on the nutrient profile and the safety of flour (both microbiologically and biochemically) continues. A further development is the emergence of wheat-based bio-refineries, initially to produce bioethanol for transport fuel. These are already making it harder for millers to source adequate wheat supplies for bread flour. More positively, wheat bio-refining starts with fractionation of the wheat grain; thus improvements in our understanding of flour milling also have relevance to this new industrial activity ( The future of development in the milling industry is likely to take the form of incremental evolution of the technologies mentioned earlier, but new technologies and new ways of understanding how to optimize old and new technologies will entail quantum steps in the progress of the milling and baking industry. Profitability and developments downstream of mills will have a major impact since customer demands will drive decisions about reinvestment and new investments in mills and their technologies. Competition between millers can also be a catalyst for change as new plants can have competitive advantages over older ones. This discussion on milling began with an overview of the history of the process and its recent development. It can be seen from this review that the process has a long historical background and this has had an enormous influence on how mills operate. Even though the means of effecting particle breakage have changed in the last 20