In the present paper, a detailed study of the redox behavior of zirconium in the eutectic LiF-NaF system was carried out on an inert molybdenum electrode at 750 °C. Several transient electrochemical methods were used such as cyclic voltammetry, square wave voltammetry, chronopotentiometry, and open circuit voltammetry. The reduction of Zr (IV) was found to follow a two-step mechanism of Zr (IV)/Zr (II) and Zr (II)/Zr at the potentials of about −1.10 and −1.50 V versus Pt, respectively. The theoretical evaluations of the number of transferred electrons according to both cyclic voltammetry and square wave voltammetry further confirmed the Zr reduction mechanism. The estimations of Zr (IV) diffusion coefficient in the LiF-NaF eutectic melt at 750 °C through cyclic voltammetry and chronopotentiometry are in fair agreement, as to be approximately 1.13E-5 and 2.42E-5 cm2/s, respectively.Zirconium is an important material in nuclear industry for structural purposes and for holding the nuclear fuel because of its extremely low neutron-absorption cross-section and excellent corrosion-resistance properties, so that the thermal or slow neutrons are not absorbed during nuclear reactions by using zirconium as the fuel cladding material The zirconium cladding can be contaminated by the penetration of fission products and transuranic elements after long time use and could not meet the requirements of nuclear reactors In order to enhance the efficiency and improve the reliability of the electrorefining process, the precise knowledge of the redox potentials of zirconium in the molten salt is required. The electrochemical behavior of zirconium in different molten salt systems has been investigated during deposition or electrorefining process. A number of investigations have been devoted to all-chloride salt mixtures such as LiCl-KCl-ZrCl This paper presents a systematic electrochemical study on zirconium redox behavior in the eutectic LiF-NaF system on an inert molybdenum electrode at a constant temperature of 750 °C with different transient electrochemical techniques. K The experimental apparatus used in this work is shown in All the potentials in this study were measured with respect to a platinum wire (0.5 mm diameter, 99.99% purity) immersed in the molten bath, serving as a quasi-reference electrode Pt/PtO All the chemical reagents employed in this study were of analytical grade. The mixture of LiF (99% purity) and NaF (≥99% purity) with eutectic composition (61:39 mol%) was served as supporting electrolyte, previously dehydrated at 300 °C for 48 h and pre-melted at 750 °C to remove residual moisture. The pre-melted salt mixture was melted again at 750 °C and zirconium ions were introduced into the molten melt in the form of K All the electrochemical experiments were conducted with the AUTOLAB/PGSTAT320 potentiostat from M/s. EcoChemie, the Netherlands, and the data acquisition was performed with GPES 4.9 software. The transient electrochemical techniques such as cyclic voltammetry, square wave voltammetry, chronopotentiometry, and open circuit voltammetry were employed to investigate the redox mechanisms of zirconium in the molten salt. CV measurements were carried out on an inert Mo electrode to avoid the formation of any Zr alloys during the electrochemical reduction process of Zr (IV). A typical curve recorded in the blank LiF-NaF eutectic at 750 °C and 100 mVs In the presence of K As summarized in the Introduction, the reduction/oxidation of zirconium has been found to be a one-step process in all-fluoride molten salt systems like LiF-KF-ZrF For the potential range between −0.40 and −1.00 V vs. Pt, no redox peak was observed indicating no electrochemical reaction occurred within this range. When the scan range is over −1.10 V vs. Pt, the cathodic peak R Extending the potential range to −1.45 V vs. Pt, the reduction peak R  The reversibility of the redox reaction at each peak was evaluated according to the relationship between peak potential and scan rate, as plotted in For a diffusion-controlled reversible electrochemical reaction system, the diffusion coefficient of zirconium ion is given by the Randles-Shevchik equation as follows In the present study, the reduction peak R For an electrochemical reaction of reversibility, the number of transferred electrons during the electrode process can be evaluated via the following equation The number of transferred electrons associated with the reduction peak R Square wave voltammetry has been reported to be a more sensitive transient electrochemical method than cyclic voltammetry For a reversible electrochemical system, a mathematical analysis of the peak yields an equation which can associate the half-width of the peak (W As can be seen from Chronopotentiometry was carried out to further comprehend the reduction mechanism of Zr (IV). The calculated diffusion coefficients of zirconium ions are plotted versus the number of exchanged electrons in Based on the empirical formulations by Chen et al.  Open circuit voltammetry was also carried out to investigate the redox mechanism of zirconium by depositing a thin metal layer on the surface of the working electrode. The open-circuit potential of the electrode was recorded as a function of time after switching off the electrochemical control. The electrochemical behavior of zirconium in the molten eutectic LiF-NaF containing 1 wt% K The authors acknowledge the financial support of the