The results of microbial toxicity tests are needed for the risk assessment of polluted sediments. In comparison with animals the anaerobic microorganisms are more tolerant to natural sediment conditions whereas they are more sensitive for a number of specific pollutants.
                  Microbial toxicity tests from a literature search were classified in seven categories. Category A, B and C use polluted sediments and are applied for sediment monitoring. In category D, a pure chemical is added and the organisms and the test conditions were derived from sediment. Therefore this category can be used for setting sediment quality guidelines which protect sediment functions for the toxic effects of chemicals. In category E, organisms from a polluted site are separated from the sediment and are tested with pure chemicals. Organisms from a more polluted site can be more tolerant to a local pollutant. This is called pollution-induced community tolerance and can be used as evidence for the occurrence of toxic effects in a specific sediment. In category F pure chemicals are tested with a pure culture of microorganisms under sediment conditions. The results of category F tests can be combined with single species tests with animals and plants to obtain sediment quality guidelines sufficient for species protection. This can be compared with the sediment quality guidelines which protect sediment functions. When one of these quality guidelines is exceeded for a compound at a specific location a category E test can be used to determine whether the compound shows toxic effects in that sediment.Sediment microorganisms are crucial for the biodegradation of organic matter and the cycling of nutrients while these microorganisms are susceptible to toxic pollutants ( When there are no results of toxicity tests with microorganisms, plants or animals available it is very difficult to derive sediment quality guidelines. In the Netherlands these guidelines are derived from aquatic toxicity data using a sediment/water partitioning coefficient ( Sediment quality guidelines might also be derived from sediment toxicity tests with animals, plants or microorganisms that live in the sediment. The procedure would be similar to the derivation of soil quality guidelines and can be explained as follows: The concentration effect relation is summarized with a no observed effect concentration (NOEC), and an EC10 or EC50. (The NOEC is the highest toxicant concentration that produces no significant difference with the control. The EC10 and EC50 are the toxicant concentrations that give 10% or 50% inhibition.) Many processes or enzymatic reactions can be monitored in sediment samples and can be used to obtain concentration effect relations. When the EC10 values of a specific toxicant for different processes and enzymatic reactions are collected, a microbial sensitivity distribution is obtained. The lowest EC10 value of this distribution may be taken to derive a safe concentration that can be used to set a sediment quality guideline. In practice however it is better to statistically derive ( Sediments contain clay particles, organic matter, iron oxides, sulfides and other compounds that can bind the toxicant and mitigate toxicity. The toxicity depends also on the pH and the presence of dissolved inorganic and organic compounds ( While the presence of sediments can decrease toxic effects of pollutants, some of the naturally occurring compounds in anaerobic sediments can cause inhibitory effects. Animals and plants need oxygen for their metabolism that is obtained from the water or in the case of plants even from the air ( PICT can be caused by the following chain of events: The organisms in polluted sediments are exposed to elevated concentrations of pollutants. When the pollution exceeds a critical level the most sensitive organisms become inhibited by toxic effects. This cause a decreased fitness in these organisms which can then be outcompeted by other more tolerant organisms. Therefore the absence of sensitive species can be used as an indicator for the toxic effects of a certain pollutant ( Microorganisms do not form a separate taxonomic group like vertebrates or angiosperms since they are only defined as creatures which are too small to be seen by the naked eye ( There is however a large number of microbial toxicity tests which focus on the functions and processes that these microorganisms support. These tests are quite different from single species tests and are therefore treated in a separate way. These functional tests are often combined to form a sensitivity distribution which is different from the sensitivity distribution of single species tests. This functional sensitivity distribution is subsequently used in a risk assessment which leads to a separate ecotoxicological risk level for microbial functions. Subsequently the lowest risk level of either the single species tests or the functional tests are used to determine the ecotoxicological quality guidelines ( The answer to this question strongly depends on the type of microbial toxicity tests. Therefore the different types of microbial tests must first be categorized before this question can be answered separately for each category. This is not an easy task since there are very different types of microbial toxicity tests used for the assessment of contaminant effects in sediments ( In the following paragraphs the application of each of these categories of microbial toxicity tests for the risk assessment of polluted sediments will be discussed. The discussion deals with the pro and cons of these categories for either the determination of environmental risk limits of specific pollutants or location specific risk assessment of polluted sediments. A literature search was performed in May 2003 using the current contents database (starting at 1996) with the following search statement: toxic In this category of tests the microorganisms present in polluted sediments are tested under conditions as close as possible to the natural conditions in the sediment (see In summary, this category of microbial toxicity tests often only yields correlations between pollution and microbial activity. These tests can only be used for deriving sediment quality guidelines when proper control sites are available which are identical to the test sites in all aspects but the sediment pollutants. In this category of tests polluted sediments are tested with pure cultures of added bacteria that are introduced into the sediment (see In summary, this category of microbial toxicity tests can be used for rapid screening of polluted sediments. Historically this is the oldest category of sediment toxicity tests. It was developed in the time that only aquatic toxicity tests were available. The maintenance of anaerobic conditions is not necessary in this category of tests. The available aquatic toxicity tests were used to evaluate the toxicity of elutriates extracted from sediments. There are several extraction methods available: The simplest one is mixing sediment with water, centrifuge and use the supernatant for toxicity testing ( The In summary, this category of microbial toxicity tests might be used to unravel which classes of compounds cause the toxicity in polluted sediments. The extraction procedures are very critical because these procedures might not concentrate certain classes of pollutants which do cause effects in the sediments on one hand, while on the other hand these procedures might liberate pollutants from the sediment which are bound and do not cause toxic effects in the sediments. In these tests a mixed community of sediment microorganisms in an unpolluted sediment are exposed to different concentrations of a specific chemical or mixture of chemicals in the laboratory. In this category D the toxicants are not taken from the sediment while the organisms and the test conditions are derived from sediment (see  The mercury methylation, chloroform mineralization and methanogenesis are sometimes listed more than once for the same author. In these instances the same process was studied in several sediments. It is clear that there can be large differences (more than four orders of magnitude) between the EC50 values of the same process in different sediments. Since the sediment microorganisms are tested together with the sediment there is no way to differentiate between the sensitivity of the microflora and the ability of the sediment to bind and mitigate toxicity. This is especially important in long-term experiments (more than one day) which allow slow sorption and biodegradation to decrease toxicity whereas at the same time the exposed microflora might obtain tolerance. In summary, this category of microbial toxicity tests can be used for setting sediment quality guidelines protecting sediment functions. These tests can be extremely sensitive compared to the Dutch quality criterion for unpolluted sediment the “Maximum Permissible Concentration”, but the same test shows large variations in sensitivity between different sediments. The tests can be influenced by the method by which the chemicals are added since, for example, the toxicity of metals and TBT that are already bound to the sediment is much smaller than the toxicity of freshly added metals or TBT.  In the experiments of DeanRoss (see The Cu tolerant bacteria were measured in a medium that contained 0.1 M hydrous ferric oxide which binds the Cu. Therefore the copper concentrations in For some pollutants it is difficult to detect PICT ( Some older publications report the percentage of resistant colonies on agar plates with one specific metal concentration ( In conclusion, PICT can be used as evidence for the occurrence of toxic effects of organic compounds and metals in sediments. It is however possible that cross resistance occurs. In this category F of tests pure chemicals or toxic mixtures are tested with pure cultures of added microorganisms that are introduced into the sediment. This means that only the conditions of taken from sediment (see Category F is often used together with category B as a control with a pure toxic chemical instead of a polluted sediment. This can then be used to study the influence of the speciation of a specific chemical between the sediment, porewater and surface water on the toxicity. For example, a combination of whole sediment, porewater and elutriate testing with artificial sediment amended with The results of category F can be combined with the results of animal toxicity tests in sediment to derive sediment quality guidelines protecting individual species. A pure culture of microorganisms can be regarded as a single species. In aquatic ecotoxicology the tests with pure cultures of microorganisms like In conclusion, category F is used to study the influence of speciation of added chemicals on the toxicity. This category of experiments are needed to derive a sediment type correction between toxicity experiments performed in different sediments. The results of category F tests can be combined with results of animal toxicity tests to derive sediment quality guidelines protecting individual species. Category G experiments were not found in the literature search. It requires sediment organisms to be tested with pollutants from sediment under artificially controlled conditions (see Microbial tests are often used in first-tier testing because they are relatively cheap. A German study for example recommended to use the In principle the categories A, B, C, and G can be used for a site-specific risk assessment because these tests utilize polluted sediment as toxicant. Category A however needs a control site that is identical to the polluted sites in all aspects but the pollution. This is not often available. Category G is not present. This leaves category B and C as practically available options for a site-specific risk assessment. These tests can also detect the toxic effects of compounds that are not measured by chemical analysis. Category C tests use elutriates of sediments together with aquatic toxicity tests. The extraction method of the elutriates can be specific enough to avoid the concentration of natural toxicants like hydrogen sulfide or ammonia ( Category E uses pollution induced community tolerance to detect effects of certain chemicals at a specific site. This method is very useful for site-specific risk assessments at the locations where the risk limits derived from category D tests are exceeded. In that case the pollutants that exceed the risk limits are known. The PICT method can determine which of these pollutants did cause toxic effects at the site. Bacteria at the sediment surface play a vital role in aquatic ecosystems. Microbial toxicity tests are needed for the risk assessment of polluted sediments because sediment quality guidelines derived from animal toxicity data are not always low enough to protect sediment microorganisms. Anaerobic microorganisms are adapted to survive in the presence of naturally occurring toxicants like ammonia or hydrogen sulfide that inhibit the animals used in sediment toxicity testing. Many microbial tests are cheap, rapid and sensitive compared to toxicity tests with animals in sediment. The category B, and C tests can be used for site-specific monitoring of polluted sediments. The category D can be used for setting sediment quality guidelines protecting sediment functions. The category E tests can be used as evidence for the occurrence of toxic effects of a specific compound in a specific sediment. The results of category F tests can be combined with single species tests to obtain sediment quality guidelines sufficient for species protection. The author thanks Theo Traas, Willie Peijnenburg, Martien Janssen, Marie-Elène Boivin and Dick de Zwart for critically reading the manuscript. The results as presented in this report have been discussed by the members of the ‘Setting Integrated Environmental Quality Standards Advisory Group’ (OZBG-eco), who are acknowledged for their contribution. The advisory group provides a non-binding scientific comment on the final draft of a report in order to advice the steering committee of the project Setting Integrated Environmental Quality Standards (INS) on the scientific merits of the report.