Various surface treatment processes are used for increasing the corrosion or wear resistance, as well as for aesthetic reasons. The usage of zinc coatings for the corrosion protection of ferrous substrates is very widespread. In fact, 50% of annual zinc production is used for galvanizing to protect steel from corrosion ( During the batch hot dip galvanizing process, zinc ash is formed on the galvanizing bath surface as a thin layer. This waste is the result of oxidation of molten zinc with the surrounding atmosphere and the result of reaction of flux components with molten zinc. A galvanizing plant produces typically approximately 80 Because of high heterogeneity of zinc ash it is very difficult to define precisely its chemical, phase and granulometric composition. For this reason it is very difficult to determine the optimum conditions for processing the waste. Current zinc ash recycling technologies are aimed at recovering primarily metallic zinc or its compounds, but not all technologies have achieved a satisfactory waste recycling rate of this waste. Possible industrial zinc ash processing technologies could be divided into: physico-metallurgical, pyrometallurgical, hydrometallurgical and combined technologies. Industrial physico-metallurgical processing methods are applied by galvanizing plants in-house. The efficiency of individual physico-metallurgical technologies is various and ranges from 50 to 70% ( Pyrometallurgical processing technologies are the most used. Some pyrometallurgical technologies process zinc ash in-house and some of them outside the place of origin. The final product of the pyrometallurgical processing can be metallic zinc or zinc compounds. Pyrometallurgical processes can also be classified according to the processing temperature as processes operated at temperatures below 600 Hydrometallurgical methods of zinc ash processing analogous to pyrometallurgical methods are used for recovery of metallic zinc (modified Zincex process) ( There are also combined procedures used for processing several zinc waste types, including zinc ash. These are based on pyro-hydrometallurgical procedures. These procedures are the most efficient in terms of completeness of processing of zinc waste and are not applied in galvanizing plants. The aim of the physico-metallurgical processes is to minimize the amount of zinc accumulated in the zinc ash. These methods are the subject of laboratory study ( Research in the area of pyrometallurgical methods of zinc ash processing is oriented on the study of parameters influencing the efficiency of smelted zinc recovery, such as the temperature, the time period and the usage of fluxes. Muffle furnaces were most frequently used by researchers for recovering the metallic zinc from the coarse-grained fraction after sorting at the temperatures of 600–700 At present, research in the area of hydrometallurgical procedures of zinc ash processing follows two routes. One course of research is specialized in recovery of metallic zinc by electrolyses from refined acid solutions ( There are few published papers devoted to research of combined procedures of zinc ash processing under laboratory conditions. Laboratory research of combined procedures was aimed at processing of two main zinc ash fractions, where the coarse-grained fraction was processed by the pyrometallurgical method and the fine fraction by the hydrometallurgical method ( Zinc ash as a very important secondary source of zinc replaces its primary sources by means of recycling technologies. On the one hand, zinc ash is characterized by a higher portion of zinc comparing with primary sources; on the other hand, it is a composite material with high heterogeneity. A zinc ash sample for the experiments was provided by a Slovak galvanizing plant which applies the hot dip galvanizing process. The prepared representative sample was subjected to chemical analysis. Atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS) Varian AA-20 Based on executed sieve analysis and chemical analysis of individual fractions two basic fractions were created from zinc ash: coarse-grained (d It was obvious from the chemical analysis that in the coarse-grained fraction the Zn content was about 80%, the content of chlorides about 14%, the Al content 0.2%, the Pb content 0.35% and the Fe content 0.2%. The fine-grained faction contained: 60–73% Zn, 23% Cl The phase composition of the unsorted fraction, as well as of the coarse-grained and fine-grained fractions, was analysed by means of X-ray diffraction method (XRD). Diffractometer D8 Advance, Bruker with CuKα radiation, generated at 40 Quantitative phase XRD analyses of coarse-grained and fine-grained fractions were made using the XRD diffractomer system from Seifert X-ray diffraction System XRD 3003 PTS with 3D goniometer and PSD detector, Co X-ray tube (wavelength Thermal analysis (DTA) of the coarse-grained sample was made with the aim of investigating the thermal behaviour. The DTA analysis was made using NETZSCH STA 449F3-0861-M in an Al There was no change observed on the DTA/TG pattern of the coarse-grained fraction up to 100 A laboratory thermo-mechanical unit was constructed for pyrometallurgical processing of the coarse-grained ash fraction. An electric resistivity furnace controlled by a thermoregulation unit was used for melting the charge. Centrifugal force was evolved using a laboratory mixer after melting the charge. The process ran in a nitrogen protective atmosphere. The main parts of the equipment are shown in The following procedure was used in experiments: The weighed amount of the sample was placed into a perforated (rotating) cylinder, lined with a glass-ceramic sieve, which was then closed with a lid. The part served as a collecting point for the residue after melting and centrifuging. The perforated (rotating) cylinder was placed into a stainless steel cylinder, which was closed with a lid. The basic unit of the equipment, prepared in this way, was placed into a furnace space, where the perforated cylinder was connected to the electric mixer that served as a source of centrifugal force. The furnace space was closed with a lid. A hose through which nitrogen flowed was connected to the tube leading from the stationary cylinder. Nitrogen flowed into the furnace space throughout the melting period of the sample as well as cooling of already smelted zinc. Relevant melting conditions (temperature, pre-heating time and melting) were set on the thermoregulation unit of the furnace device. The whole melting process of the sample was initiated by a switch on the thermoregulation unit. After the melting process was finished, the electric mixer was turned on for 30 After cooling (approx. 30 The obtained products were weighed for evaluation of the process efficiency under the chosen conditions and subsequently their qualities were investigated. There are numerous technical solutions and devices which use centrifugal force for separation in many fields ( The aim of the experiments was to find out the most suitable conditions of processing based on the quantitative results (material balance), as well as on the qualitative results (chemical analysis, microstructural analysis) of smelted zinc. The conditions of pyrometallurgical processing of the coarse-grained fraction of Zn ash were as shown in The principle of pyrometallurgical processing in the constructed equipment is shown in The centrifugal force acting in the process of centrifuging of the smelted zinc from a perforated cylinder lined with a glass–ceramic sieve was calculated under the chosen melting conditions for the coarse grained fraction (30 The centrifugal force was calculated according to the following equation: where: m is the mass (mass of coarse grained fraction), r is the radius (the radius of perforated cylinder), and ω is the angular velocity. The angular velocity was calculated according to the following equation: The counter type C 571 was used for determination of the frequency. The measuring conditions were: temperature 500 The calculated centrifugal force for m The gravitational force for comparison with the centrifugal force was calculated according to the following equation: where: m is the mass and g is the gravitational constant (9.81 It follows from comparing the centrifugal force with the gravitational force 29.85 Innovation of the designed equipment consists in a combination of all the technical conditions of the experiment — the centrifugal force, the glass–ceramic sieve in a perforated cylinder, the protective atmosphere, and the heating technique. Pyrometallurgical processing of the coarse-grained fraction of zinc ash was made in the constructed laboratory equipment at the temperatures of 480, 500, 550, 600, 650, and 700 The lowest recovery of smelted zinc (68%) was at the temperature of 480 The results show that an important change occurred at the melting time of 60 At the melting time of 60 Recovery of smelted zinc and residual ash and losses after pyrometallurgical processing of the coarse-grained zinc ash fraction at the temperatures of 480, 500 and 550 The increase of the melting time from 60 Samples of smelted zinc obtained by processing at the temperatures of 500, 600, and 700 The highest purity was achieved in the sample of smelted zinc obtained by processing at the temperature of 500 The microstructural component (spectrum 25) corresponded to the intermetallic particle of Fe Residual ash as a by-product after processing of the coarse-grained fraction was concentrated in the perforated part (glass–ceramic sieve lined) of the equipment. The samples of residual ash were subjected to chemical and phase analyses. The results of chemical analysis of residual ash obtained by AAS under individual conditions are shown in In addition, the residual ash samples were subjected to X-ray diffraction analyses using diffractomer Philips PW 1710, X-Pert Pro (Co Kα radiation, generated at 40 The occurrence of new peaks corresponding to the ZnO phase was observed in residual ash samples processed at the melting time of 30 XRD patterns of residual ash samples after processing at the melting times of 60 and 90 Laboratory equipment for pyrometallurgical processing of the coarse-grained zinc ash fraction with the aim of metallic zinc recovery was designed and subsequently constructed. The effect of the temperature (480, 500, 550, 600, 650, 700 The authors wish to express their acknowledgement to the Slovak grant agency