In the first part of this work, a solar photovoltaic system with battery storage (PV-BESS) and grid backup system to supply a SAG mill was modeled. There, the overall framework, the optimization model, and the model for the solar forecast were presented. Here, in the second part, the impact of ore hardness variability and uncertainty is studied. Demand side management strategies are modeled to improve the solar energy integration. This work starts by analyzing the impact of the mineral hardness variability and uncertainty (in the SAG mill’s feed) on the sizing of the PV-BESS system. For this, several feed hardness variabilities are considered in order to understand the effects of the frequency, amplitude, and phase with sun hours. Second, for demand-side management, a feed hardness array is generated by mixing two normal distributions with different standard deviation and mean values, representing a hard and soft ore. And third, realistic SAG mill feeds are generated with geostatistical simulations. Different densities of the sampling grids in the geostatistical simulations generate estimated ore feeds with varying levels of uncertainty. These are used to propose a greenfield sizing methodology. The results show that the PV-BESS system proves to be an attractive solution under all scenarios considered, being able to reduce the total costs by over 30% (when considering a Chilean scenario). It allows decreasing the electricity imports by more than 80% and lowering the power capacity contracts by more than 15%. The frequency and phase of the hardness of the feed show the benefit of mineral management; the more prominent the amplitude and the standard deviation is, the more cost-effective the integration of renewable energy becomes. Managing the rock hardness assists in complying with the capacity contract during more extended periods of low solar irradiation and reduces the need for batteries. Models estimated from limited data are smooth and under estimate the hardness variability leading to smaller BESS results from the simulations showing its importance as an energy buffer. The sizing methodology using predicted feed showed that the model could be applied to a realistic mineral feed.The sizing of a solar photovoltaic plant (PV) with a battery energy storage system (BESS) to feed an energy-hungry process is highly dependent on the solar resource available, which is itself dependent of the geographic location ( Assessing the potentials of DSM is a frequent contender for many industrial applications ( Geometallurgy combines geological, mining and metallurgical information to create spatially based predictive models for mining, mineral processing and metallurgy that can be used to optimize the decisions, given all other essential project constraints such as environmental restrictions, water availability and energy efficiency ( This work aims to study the mineral variability effect on the sizing of a PV-BESS system. The DSM potential is also studied here with a proposed heuristic for its application. To achieve this, several synthetic feeds are generated by using different methodologies to study the feed variability’s shape and magnitude and link it with the solar energy resource. To generate realistic feed that reflects spatial variability and uncertainty, a mining model is proposed which uses geostatistical simulations. Using this feed a greenfield sizing methodology is proposed to validate the sizing results. Several case studies are presented to guide through the different aspects of mineral hardness variability. Finally, the conclusions are presented. This paper aims to analyze how the solar resource variability, the variability of the SAG mill’s feed (product of the inherent mineral deposit) and extraction planning as DSM strategy has a direct impact on the sizing and cost of an energy supply based on solar PV power plant and BESS. In a previous paper ( Here, several case studies are performed, going from simpler to more complex (in terms of mineral modeling). The simpler case studies use by using different synthetic and controlled mineral feeds to understand how the system responds to different power demand cases (with their characteristics and forms). The more complex feed cases rely on a geostatistical model, which will be detailed now. The mining model consists of two parts. The first part uses geostatictical modeling to create different mining sequencing to obtain the mineral that is fed to the SAG mill. The second part proposes a DSM methodology. It uses two stockpiles to classify the extracted mineral according to its hardness, and sends a controllable mix from the two stockpiles to the mill. A simulated model of the spatial distribution of hardness in the rock is created, using statistics of hardness (SAG Power Index, SPI) from a large porphyry copper deposit in Chile as a reference. The construction of this simulated mine model has three steps: Initially, the distribution of geometallurgical units (GMUs) is simulated using sequential indicator simulation ( Then, within each unit, the distribution of SPI is simulated using sequential Gaussian simulation ( Finally, this model is converted into a time series of truckloads fed to the processing plant by applying a simplified mine plan. These models are exhaustive in their spatial resolution. Hence they represent several scenarios where the ground truth, This workflow follows the typical steps to construct realizations in space of variables of interest such as grades or hardness ( For categorical variables such as the geometallurgical unit, the random variable Simulation proceeds as follows ( Code the Compute experimental indicator variograms and model 3D indicator variograms to represent the spatial continuity of each geometallurgical domain Define a random path over the M locations Visit simulation nodes following the random path. At every node: Perform kriging of each indicator using the sampled data and the previously simulated nodes found at locations A simulated domain is obtained by Monte Carlo Simulation (MCS) from the cumulative distribution built with the estimated probabilities in the previous step. MCS works by generating a uniform random variable between 0 and 1 and then reading the corresponding quantile of the conditional cumulative distribution as the simulated value of the variable. Repeat the process to obtain a new realization, by changing the random path to visit the nodes and the random numbers in the MCS step. Once the spatial distribution of the GMUs has been characterized, the SPI can be modeled inside these units. This is achieved considering a multi-Gaussian assumption that eases the inference of the probability distribution characterizing each location. Under this assumption, the variable is characterized by a Gaussian probability distribution, with expected mean and variance identified with the simple kriging estimate and simple kriging variance, respectively. Simulated values are drawn from this distribution ( Transform the sample values to their corresponding normal scores. This requires having a representative reference distribution that may have been obtained after declustering the available data: Compute the experimental variogram and model a 3D variogram of the normal scores to represent the spatial continuity of the transformed SPI within each geometallurgical unit. Define a random path over the M locations Visit the nodes following the random path. At every location: Compute the simple kriging estimate Draw a simulated value from the conditional distribution characterized by a mean equal to the simple kriging estimate, a variance equal to the simple kriging variance, and Gaussian shape. This is done by Monte Carlo Simulation. The simulated value is used as conditioning for all subsequent nodes in the random path. Repeat the process to obtain a new realization, by changing the random path to visit the nodes and the random numbers in the MCS step. Back-transform the Gaussian simulated values to the grade distribution by reversing the transformation from step 1: Simulation trades off the local precision obtained in kriging to reproduce the spatial continuity of the variable. Building several scenarios allows assessing the uncertainty at unsampled locations. The final step consists in converting the spatial models into a sequence of values that represent the feed to the processing plant. This is done quite simply by simulating the sequential extraction of neighbor blocks representing truckloads, which are fed to the process. In practice, planning is done without access to the ground truth. Therefore, this is emulated by selecting values on different grids (20 × 20 m, 40 × 40 m, 60 × 60 m, 80 × 80 m, and 100 × 100 m) over each one of the realizations that represent possible ground truths. With these samples, a commonly used procedure for short-term planning is performed. Namely, the properties using the values on the sampled grid are estimated by ordinary kriging, disregarding any additional constraint. This model represents the short term planning model. For the case study presented, statistics from a large porphyry copper deposit were used as a reference to build realistic spatial models of SPI. The information considers three geometallurgical units, characterized by the statistics presented in Sequential indicator simulation is used to build 100 scenarios of the distribution of geometallurgical domains. The corresponding indicators are characterized by the standardized (i.e. unit sill) variogram models provided in The SPI distribution changes from one geometallurgical unit to the next. Therefore, when simulating the SPI, this is done considering only the data that belong to the same geometallurgical unit. Simulation of SPI is done using the standard sequential Gaussian simulation method. This method ensures the reference histogram and variogram of SPI for the geometallurgical unit is honored on average over a large number of realizations. The spatial distribution of SPI within each GMU is imposed with the variogram models presented in The final distribution of GMUs and inferred GMUs from a 20 × 20 m grid of samples is depicted in The spatial SPI model is built at a truckload resolution. It was converted into a time series of ore feed by truckloads, by assuming blocks are extracted by row. This provides a good approximation of the mining process, where adjacent blocks are mined out in order. Demand-side management (DSM) is proposed to study whether better results can be achieved for integrating the solar resource. A working hypothesis is that applying DSM to the mineral feed of the SAG mill can provide further costs savings because it better uses the solar energy cycles by managing the feed variability. The proposed DSM is to classify the extracted mineral according to its hardness into different stockpiles and feed the SAG mill in an optimum way. For this two stockpiles are proposed, one for “hard” rock and another for “soft” ( To model the DSM, the stockpiles will be treated as a first-in/first-out line accumulation of ore, meaning that no mixing will occur in them. Derived from the results obtained in The mineral deposit provides a natural mineral variability, which is added to the extra variability produced in the extraction and mixing process. This final variability is what the operator sees when the SAG mill operates. The form and variability of the SAG’s power consumption have a direct impact on the sizing and investment of the needed BESS and solar PV plant, thus having an effect on the possible integration of the renewable resource. To study this, the following route is proposed: Understand whether the shape (eg. daily profile) of the power demand matters or not. Incorporate stochasticity of ore feed in the simulations, but without incorporating correlation of the feed due to spatial variability. Simulate a realistic case with spatial variability and uncertainty (geometallurgic case). For this, the following case studies are proposed as shown in For every case (except for case study A), a DSM implementation of the original feed is studied in the same way. These results are also compared with the original cases. To study the mineral variability impact, several synthetic scenarios of mineral extraction for different years are made. First of all, to study the effect of how the mineral is fed into the mill by a possible DSM, synthetic yearly feeds are built as sinusoidal-shaped specific energy consumptions sequences (case A). These sinusoidal-shaped feed sequences have the same average power consumption and amplitude, but different frequency based on a daily basis (number of periods per day). This was done considering that there are different degrees of rock hardness that could be managed over the day, and if they are grouped in various categories, they can be managed efficiently to have better integration with the solar energy. A second step is to choose the feed frequency with the best cost related result (in the sense of a successful DSM) and then perform phase changes to study their effects whether the harder feed is to be fed during the day or the night. The last step is to chose the best cost related result from the previous step and use it to study the effect of the amplitude while maintaining the average power consumption of the feeds. This case study is done to emphasize the day/night heuristic associated to the DSM. A second case study (B) is proposed to take into account the mineral variability. For this, new feed arrays are made based on synthetic two-population mineral distributions representing the hard and soft ore. Two Gaussian probability distributions are generated with specific mean and standard deviation values. Then, these two distributions are mixed for creating one feed that will be used for the simulations. To combine them, a sequence of random binary numbers is drawn to select feed values from either the hard-ore distribution (if the generated number is 1) or the soft-ore distribution (if the generated number is 0). The resulting power consumption values are assigned to each time period, resulting in a full year of combined feed. According to the mean and standard deviation values of the normal distributions, the final feed will have different variances which are considered to study the mineral variability. The third case study (C) combines the effect of ore hardness and spatial distribution by generating several geostatistical simulations to feed the mill. The impact of solar variability, obtained by simulating the irradiation, is also considered. Using the mining model, several feeds are generated by using 20 × 20 m, 40 × 40 m, 60 × 60 m, 80 × 80 m and 100 × 100 m sampling grids which provide different levels of uncertainty and variance. These feeds are also contrasted with the ground truth data. These are the input to the stochastic optimization to size a PV and BESS plant for the specific case. The last study is a greenfield sizing case, which considers the effect of sizing using estimated data. Greenfield is referred as the sizing of the PV-BESS plant using just estimated extraction data from the mineral deposit (before actual extraction occurs). It takes into account uncertainty. The methodology for the greenfield study is to simulate using 20 different 20x20m grid (advanced exploration data) geostatistical simulation feed and solar irradiation data to obtain a PV-BESS system and power contract sizing data. This sizing is later validated with the ground truth data by fixing the sizing values and using the same solar irradiation data in the simulation to see the differences in the total costs and penalties. This section describes the results for the four case studies proposed in this work. This provides fundamental knowledge on how the optimization model reacts to different changes in the SAG mill feed from cases A-D, and from cases B-D with DSM. Different factors such as the feed sequence, variance, hardness variability among others, have a direct impact on how the model reacts. This has an effect on the optimal PV-BESS plant sizing, also changing how the energy imports behave and the needed contracted power to operate. The sinusoidal-shaped feeds were generated to study the impact of the frequency and amplitude of the feed. Every feed series has the same average power consumption and, since they are sinusoidal signals, they are centered on the same value. The first series were generated to study the effects of daily frequency. An example of the generated signals are shown in A total of 8 different frequencies were tested in which the base frequency is the one that has a complete cycle over one day (frequency 1), which corresponds to the “Sinusoidal 2” signal in As expected, the frequency that is aligned with the sun (frequency 1) works the best with the model having an objective function value (total cost) from 8% to 10% lower than the rest of the cases (see This result can be complemented by studying the base frequency 1 with other phases, meaning that the higher consumption, in this case, does not happen exclusively during the day (see The signal that is similar to the sun day-night cycle has the best results. The base case continues to be the one obtaining the best results, where the total cost is over 10% lower for most cases, in spite of having the biggest BESS and PV plants sizing. This means that this case has better integration of the renewable technology and takes better advantage of it. Also, it has the lowest power contract and grid imports suggesting that it is more power-autonomous than the rest. The worst case in this scenario, looking at the total costs, is the signal that has +12 h, corresponding to the base inverted. This signal feeds the hard ore during the night. Its results show a higher dependency on the grid with the highest imports value, but either way, it does not show the lowest PV-BESS sizing, meaning that it still can power the softer ore consumption with renewable energy. The results from phases +8, +16 and +20 show a different behavior from the rest, indicating almost no need of a BESS in the system. Nearly all the PV energy is used during the day showing no need to store energy, while they will have a higher dependency on the energy grid. For these cases, lower BESS means higher grid energy consumption. Combining the results obtained from the frequency and phase sensitivities, they indicate that to have better integration of the PV solar energy into the SAG mill, the mineral feed should follow the sun, that is, the harder ore feed should be fed when there is sunlight available for generating energy. This points towards a DSM strategy as mineral management to control the feed hardness. A final study in the signal-type feeds is for the amplitude (see     For this study, the following amplitude modification factors With increasing amplitude (and thus standard deviation) of the feed, there is a clear trend in which the BESS energy capacity and PV plant increase in size, while decreasing the dependency from the grid, importing less energy. Associated with this, a cost decrease trend happens as the amplitude is increased. The results show a 15% difference in between the lowest amplitude case ( To study the impact of the soft and hard ore spatial allocation, hardness contrast, and mineral variability, new scenarios are generated from the mixture of two random normal distributions, one representing the hard-ore and the other for the softer ore (without spatial restrictions). For each scenario, the hard and soft-ore distributions are assigned the same standard deviation. Different sub-cases were generated which are shown in Also, a DSM approach is applied to the final feed to have an alternate and ordered (according to the daylight) version of it. The DSM is applied as described in Section For each case, a feed with DSM and without DSM is simulated, resulting in a total of 34 cases. In Case B1, different trends appear without and with DSM (see In Case B2, the sensitivity depends on the standard deviation of the distributions (see In Cases B3, B4 and B5, the same effects that happen in Case B2 are seen (see When comparing all the data obtained from Cases B3 to B5 together, relative to the lowest standard deviation value (Case B5.1 without DSM), The exploration of mineral resources can be done using several drillhole sampling grid sizes which will provide a certain level of uncertainty in the final mineral deposit block model. This has effects later on the mine planning. Having a smaller sampling grid size gives more data to model, but this has a significant cost associated with the number of drillholes to provide the information. When realizing the sizing for a PV-BESS system projected for a future mine (greenfield), only estimates will be available, hence it is important to know how different levels of uncertainty affect the final sizing of the PV-BESS system. Several sampling grids are used within the geometallurgical model to make different geostatistical estimations of the ore fed to the SAG mill. In this study, the sampling grids considered are 20 × 20 m, 40 × 40 m, 60 × 60 m, 80 × 80, and 100 × 100 m, having lower to higher uncertainty respectively. The exhaustive simulations represent the ground truth and provide the data without uncertainty. An example of the feeds generated with the mentioned sampling grids is shown in The most crucial result involves the BESS energy capacity (see This shows an expected result: with lower variability (not controlled by DSM), the need of an energy buffer, which is the BESS in this system, diminishes considerably. This means that the variability in the feed is absorbed by the BESS. The grid energy requirements are lower with a larger BESS, meaning that the energy can be managed in an easier and efficient way, leading to a higher PV integration. The lower variability is an effect of the geostatistical estimation based on scarce samples which in reality has a higher uncertainty. This can lead to an error on the optimal sizing for the real operation. For this specific problem, a greenfield sizing methodology is proposed to use the estimated model to size the plant, and later these results will be validated with the ground truth data. A greenfield case study was simulated to see the behavior of the model with more realistic data. This study consists of several simulations which will use 20 years of synthetic data generated using the solar model and from the geometallurgical model. In this case, the geometallurgical model provides simulated extraction data and the ground truth associated with its generation. To these feeds, the DSM algorithm is also applied obtaining data with and without DSM as an input for the simulations. An example of the feed generated and their respective DSM is shown in The simulations are analyzed in the following way. First, using the ground truth data, a base case is run without considering the integration of a PV-BESS system. This results in the actual power contract, grid imports and total costs that the mine has to incur without renewable solar energy and serves as a base for comparisons. A second step is to optimize using the geostatistical estimated hardness, with and without DSM, with the sole purpose of sizing the infrastructure (PV-BESS and power contract). The last step is to determine the resulting cost (the actual one occurring during operation) with the ground truth data with and without DSM, using the previous sizing results. The mineral hardness (or SEC) is estimated and used for the sizing, but the system responds according to the ground truth. This means that the model is run with a fixed PV-BESS and power contract size validating the sizing estimation from the previous step. The feeds used for the simulations from the ground truth data and the 20x20 drillholes sampling grid estimation (Model) have the standard deviations shown in The numeric results obtained for this case study are presented in  A framework was developed for the optimal sizing of a solar photovoltaic and a battery energy storage system to supply a SAG mill (SAG-PV-BESS). This framework consists of a geometallurgical model (spatial distributions of ore hardess and conversion to a time series through a mine plan) and a solar model (generation of time series of solar radiation), which are then used by the optimal planning model. The first part of this study focused on the solar and the optimization model ( First, the impact of the variability of the mineral hardness that feeds the mill on the sizing of the system was studied. For this, different synthetic feeds were generated, including sinusoidal signals and normal distributions. Given their significant impact on the investment decisions, a geometallurgical model based on geostatistical simulations was developed to better understand how the energy system should look like for a realistic rock feed. Furthermore, a demand-side management (DSM) option, based on classifying rocks in terms of their hardness, was developed and assessed. Simulations using sinusoidal shaped feeds showed that the frequency and phase of the feed has a significant impact on the results. When the feed is in phase with the sun, i.e., when the feed hardness follows the PV solar generation curve, the model gave (as could be expected) the best results regarding sizing and total costs. The feed’s amplitude also showed a significant effect on the model results: The larger the amplitude is, the lower the total costs are, also having a higher solar integration. This shows the theoretical utility of a DSM. Managing the rock hardness assists in using cheap solar energy, complying with the capacity contract during more extended periods of low solar irradiation and displaces the need for batteries. Towards a more realistic approach, two synthetic feeds, a hard and a soft one, were simulated (using two normal distributions). A DSM strategy was also applied to these feeds. The higher the difference from the mean values of the original distributions (related to the effective sorting capacity of the operator and the nature of the ore deposits), the higher is the resulting standard deviation. With a high standard deviation, the DSM has a higher integration potential (i.e., lower total costs, lower grid power consumption, and a larger PV-BESS system). But also, with a higher standard deviation, as the needed PV-BESS system grows, so does the total costs if DSM is not implemented. The most realistic approach was based on using different sampling grids from geostatistical simulations to study the effect of the uncertainty of the feed. For a higher level of uncertainty (i.e., higher spaced grid), the required BESS size is highly underestimated, which can generate problems in the operation with the real extraction. When considering the DSM, large differences in power contract and PV plant sizes are observed. The total costs in these case remain almost constant. A greenfield sizing case study was done for a real case scenario analysis. Estimated mineral hardness from different sampling grids were used to size the power plant while using the ground truth data for validation. The DSM was also applied to the feed. The results are compatible with the findings from using synthetic feeds. The integration of a PV-BESS system to a SAG mill operation shows a vast cost reduction potential. For all scenarios considered, it is able to reduce the total costs by over 30% for a Chilean case. It allows decreasing the electricity imports by more than 80% and lowering the power capacity contracts by more than 15%. When the standard deviation of the feed is low, a DSM application does not show a significant cost reduction potential, but it still obtains better integration results. Whether the DSM is worth to be applied or not depends on each mining deposit and their geometallurgical characteristics and spatial distribution, including the mine’s available space and facilities and road distribution. The implementation of DSM needs a paradigm change on how the SAG mill is operated (including the feed management): the new operation should be aligned to the solar energy generation. Under many circumstances, this strategy seems to be a promising source of flexibility. Future studies will focus on estimating the cost of such a strategy. Additionally, future research will be focused on a more complete energy consumption modeling of the mine, exploring other synergy potential with solar energy production. This work was supported by the    The results for Case B1 are shown in The results for Case B2 are shown in The results for Case B3 are shown in The results for Case B4 are shown in The results for Case B5 are shown in The obtained results are shown in