Cake filtration is an important unit operation in the processing of minerals and pigments. The filtration characteristics are strongly dependent on the upstream processing of the ore, such as grinding parameters. This study aims at empirical investigation of the influence of key stirred media milling variables on the pressure filtration characteristics of calcium carbonate. Various regression models are presented and evaluated with respect to their statistical significance. The results show that all the grinding variables have a statistically significant influence on the average specific cake resistance, but the predictability of the models is not very good unless combined and polynomial terms are considered.The need for fine particles for various applications has increased recently in many industries, such as ceramics, minerals, pigments, cosmetics, electronics, and pharmaceutical industries ( In stirred media grinding, several factors have an influence on the obtained fineness of the product. These factors include, but are not limited to (1) the size of the mill, (2) the tip speed of the stirring element, (3) the rheology and solids concentration of the slurry, and (4) the size and density of the grinding beads ( After the wet grinding stage, mechanical dewatering by cake filtration techniques is often performed in order to remove water from the product. A general trend in the mining industry has been that the flotation concentrates have become finer than they were before, which is mainly due to the increasing complexity and decreasing quality of the available ores ( In this study, ground calcium carbonate (GCC) is used as the model substance. The aim is to increase awareness of the effect of grinding parameters on the pressure filtration properties of the ground suspensions. Various regression models are utilized as tools in this empirical evaluation. The used regression models are introduced below. The theory of constant pressure filtration has been presented in earlier literature for instance by The models described in Eqs. The simplest linear model used to describe the filtration properties was All possible combined effects were then added to improve the prediction as follows: When also the quadratic terms were added, the model became Evaluation of the statistical significance revealed that some terms in Eq. A slurry with 20 A stirred media mill with an inner diameter of 152 The use of dimensionless values for the regression modeling enables comparison of the variables with relation to the direction and the strength of how the variables affect the output of the model. Therefore, each variable was converted to values ranging from −1 (minimum) to 1 (maximum). The coded values of the variables for regression models containing combined and quadratic terms are listed in the online The dependency of the average specific cake resistance The average specific cake resistance is an important measure of filterability and is therefore widely used as a main sizing parameter of industrial filters. The pore structure of the filter cake has a great influence on The information shown in The linear regression models for the dependence of the average specific cake resistance The measured and modeled values of Further improvement of the model was performed by the addition of quadratic terms of the variables ( The regression models indicated that there was a clear correlation between the grinding variables and the filtration properties of the slurry. According to the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 