The microgravity and high magnetic field simulated by a superconducting magnet were used to investigate the dynamics of deposition mechanisms of hydroxyapatite (HAp) on the surface of Ti-6Al-4V samples. The HAp coatings were derived by a self-assembly-induced biomineralization method in simulated body fluid. The experimental results showed that the amount and growth rate of HAp deposition in the simulated microgravity condition were far less than those in the gravity field, as were those in the high magnetic field compared with those outside the magnet. This may provide insight into the bone loss of astronauts in spaceflight from the viewpoint of the dynamic balance between HAp nucleation, deposition and decomposition on the surface of substrates.Bone loss is an important medical complication of long-duration spaceflight. It was found that over a period of 8 months in space, an astronaut loses about as much bone mass as the average person loses between ages 50 and 60 In the human body, bone remodeling is a lifelong process by which old bone is removed from the skeleton (a subprocess called bone resorption) and new bone is added (a subprocess called ossification or bone formation). This process, which continues throughout adult life, is in dynamic balance. That is, when the bone is growing in vivo, bone remodeling is in the dynamically balanced state. The At the more detailed molecular level, the processes are composed of the deposition of Ca The superior mechanical performance and acceptable biocompatibility of Ti alloys can be maintained for long periods in inner-body ambient conditions, making them highly desirable biomedical implant materials in artificial hips, orthopedics, or dental implants In the present study, the effects of simulated microgravity and a magnetic field on hydroxyapatite (HAp) deposition on the surface of a modified Ti alloy were examined experimentally by using a superconducting magnet. Ti alloy (Ti-6Al-4V) samples of dimension 1 Self-assembly of a well-organized monolayer was achieved by immersing the Ti-alloy substrates into millimolar solutions of C Simulated body fluid (SBF) with ion concentrations (in mM: Na The static contact angle of SBF on the SAM-Ti-alloy samples was measured using an EasyDrop contact angle meter (KRUSS, Germany) by placing 20 The surfaces were analyzed using a scanning electron microscope (SEM: SUPRA™ 55, Germany). In the current work, a high magnetic field and a simulated microgravity were achieved in a superconducting magnet The hydroxyapatites formed on –PO The contact angle of SBF on Ti-6Al-4V after the formation of a SAM strongly depended on the surface functional groups present ( Quantitative measurements showed that the amount and growth rate of that HAp deposition depended on the intensity of the gravity or magnetic field ( From    The surface functional groups play important roles in the nucleation of HAp. Firstly, for nucleation to occur, an activation energy barrier must be exceeded. –PO The effect of microgravity on the nucleation dynamics of HAp can be understood according to convection Monolithic HAp has diamagnetic susceptibility HAp nucleation and crystal growth dynamics are controlled by the solute transport (such as convection and diffusion) caused by the solute density differences in the solution. Firstly, Ca In the high magnetic field, the force condition for charged particles (Ca That is to say, Ca From the microscopic view, the tiny weight change of Ti-alloy deposition in the SBF may be interpreted by the slower transport of ions at the 0 The mechanisms underlying the current phenomenon may be partly responsible for the bone loss that occurs in space, which is one of the most serious problems for people living in space. Most biologists investigating the reasons behind astronaut bone loss at the cellular level have used molecular cell biology methods We have noticed that in the bone mineralization process, material exchange between osteoblasts and the surrounding medium, such as plasma (which contains Ca In this study, HAp deposits on the surface of Ti-alloy samples were examined under simulated gravity levels and a high-magnetic field obtained through the use of a superconducting magnet. The amount and growth rate of HAp deposition are influenced by the functional groups of SAMs, the magnetic field, and the gravity field. Larger HAp deposition amounts and growth rates could be obtained by –PO We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the