The sliming properties of siderite contained in carbonate-bearing iron ore have an unavoidable, negative impact on the reverse flotation of hematite during the beneficiation process. This leads to the ineffective beneficiation of carbonate-bearing iron ore. The main purpose of this study was to reveal the effect of particle imperfections in siderite and hematite on the inherent sliming mechanism, from the perspectives of local defects in the crystal structures and the pre-existing micropores present in these particles. To this end, an X-ray microscope (XRM) was used to characterize the mesostructure of milled siderite and hematite, revealing their particle size and the pre-existing micropores present in these minerals. Additionally, the microstructures of vacancy defects in the crystals were determined with the aid of density functional theory (DFT). XRM results demonstrated that siderite particles contain a greater density of pre-existing micropores than hematite particles, increasing the sliming properties of siderite when it is milled simultaneously with hematite. DFT calculations suggested that siderite crystals were more susceptible to O-vacancy defects, which contributes to the number of micropores in siderite particles. This study provides an insight into the relationship between the particle structure and sliming properties of siderite and hematite, thereby paving the way for improvements in the beneficiation process of carbonate-bearing iron ore.Native micropores and flaws in mineral structure play an important role in the grinding process of carbonate-bearing iron ores, and partially determine ground particle size and shape. Siderite and hematite are two of the principal iron-bearing minerals found in carbonate-bearing iron ores. During the grinding process, siderite can easily form a slime that unselectively adsorbs onto other minerals. DFT has been recognised as an effective approach to investigate structural, physical, chemical and mechanical properties of crystals ( Building on these precedents, this study evaluated the effects of native defects and pre-existing micropores on particle fracture to provide fundamental insights into the sliming properties of siderite. These insights can contribute to the development of theories that will improve the beneficiation process of carbonate-bearing iron ores by avoiding the overgrinding of siderite. In line with the literature described above, the study used XRM analysis and DFT calculations to investigate the relationship between the physical properties of particles and crystal defects. The former was used to characterise particle size and pre-existing micropores, while the latter was used to calculate the formation energies of vacancy defects. Two pure mineral samples, hematite and siderite, were sourced from the Anshan Iron and Steel Group Corporation in China. The purity of the hematite and siderite samples was 97.60% and 82.85% respectively, and the mineral composition was listed in Micropore analysis of milled samples was performed using a ZEISS Xradia 510 Versa X-ray microscope, providing high-resolution and high-contrast images. The micro-CT images particles according to their different densities. A particle with higher density presents a brighter image in the grayscale, while that with a lower density presents a darker image. Densities of siderite and hematite are 3.7–4.0 g/cm The electronic structure and formation energies of vacancy defects in the hematite and siderite samples were determined using DFT calculations. The calculations were corrected according to the Hubbard U method in order to take strong, on-site Hematite and siderite belong to the space group R-3c. The Fe The milled siderite and hematite-siderite binary mixture were sampled and observed using an XRM. Characterisation of the changes in particle size of siderite and hematite-siderite mixture as a result of grinding method, as well as the distribution of pores of the selected particles, was carried out. Images of the siderite sample, along with enlarged sections displaying greater detail are shown in  The initial geometries of hematite and siderite were optimised to determine the most stable crystal structure. The computed structural parameters of the pristine minerals, along with observed experimental values, are displayed in The electronic structures of pristine and vacancy defect containing siderite and hematite were determined using DFT + U calculations. A simple formulation of the DFT + U method by To understand whether vacancy defects are stable at room temperature, and to evaluate the relative stability of the different charge states of a given defect, the formalism based on formation energies was calculated. The formation energy is given by The charged defect formation energies and charge transition levels for defect containing hematite and siderite were calculated according to Eq. Defects can easily occur in crystals at the micro-level, and this leads to an increase in the number of micropores in particles at the macro level. Micropores have been shown to have an eminent influence on the fracture behavior of crystals ( In the grinding process, properties of microstructure, hardness, impact toughness and wear performance of minerals do affect the fracture of particles. Although it is addressed by Moroz that an increase of hardness generally leads to an increase in wear performance, if different microstructures are compared, hardness cannot be safely used as an indicator of wear performance ( The results of this study provide a fundamental understanding of the relationship between particle imperfections and defects in crystal structure. XRM analysis demonstrated that micropores and flaws in particles of siderite were more general than in the case of hematite. The dimensions of the micropores in siderite of approximately 2–3 μm were shown to have a significant influence on the size distribution of particles during the fracturing process. DFT + U calculations were used to determine, with a high degree of accuracy, a band gap of 2.219 and 3.175 eV for hematite and siderite respectively. The formation energies for charged defects were plotted according to the fermi level, identifying the O-vacancy as the most widespread defect in hematite and siderite. The O-vacancy and the Fe-vacancy were determined to be more likely to occur in siderite than hematite, and this was seen to be consistent with the results of XRM analysis. The defects of crystals at a microscopic level can therefore be correlated with the presence of micropores. This property, which was seen to be a characteristic of siderite, plays an important role in the ease with which carbonate-bearing iron ores generate slime during the milling process. This study provides insights that could help to reduce the overgrinding and selective grinding of siderite in the refining process of carbonate-bearing iron ores. This study was supported by the Thanks to the engineer (Mr. Chunjie Cao, Ms. Wen Shi, Mr. Wenjie Zhang) in Carl Zeiss (Shanghai) Co. Ltd. to provide X-ray microscopy imaging dataset and dataset processing with Dragonfly software. Additionally, we would like to express our gratitude to editors and reviewers for their diligent work.