Conventional treatment methods for arsenic removal from copper smelting wastewaters create sludge that is difficult to handle. Biosorption of arsenic using algae as sorbent is an interesting alternative to the conventional methods.
                  This work shows results from biosorption of arsenic(V) by Lessonia nigrescens at pH=2.5, 4.5 and 6.5. The adsorption of arsenic could be explained satisfactorily both by the Freundlich and the Langmuir isotherms. Maximum adsorption capacities were estimated to 45.2mg/g (pH=2.5), 33.3mg/g (pH=4.5), and 28.2mg/g (pH=6.5) indicating better adsorption at the lower pH. These values are high in comparison with other arsenic adsorbents reported.
                  The sorption kinetics of arsenic by L. nigrescens could be modelled well by Lagergren’s first-order rate equation. The kinetics were observed to be independent of pH during the first 120min of adsorption with the Lagergren first-order rate constant of around 1.07×10−3
                     min−1.Copper smelting generates large amount of wastewater containing considerable amounts of inorganic compounds such as heavy metals and arsenic species. These wastewaters origin from sulphuric acid plants, which treat the SO During the last decades, the use of biosorbents has become interesting due to high adsorption capacities, low costs and regenerability of the sorbent ( One of the interesting algae that could be used to remove heavy metals from these contaminated waters is the The objective with this work is to test the sorption capacities and kinetics of arsenic(V) of air-dried and size reduced algae The knowledge of the kinetics of any adsorption process is crucial in order to be able to design industrial scale separation processes. For biosorption, simplified approach given by Lagergren can often be applied with success especially in the first phase of the biosorption. The Lagergren first-order rate model is given by the following expression: In order to be able to estimate maximum capacities of adsorbents, it is necessary to know the quantity of adsorbed metal as a function of metal concentration in solution. Typically two models can be applied—the Freundlich and Langmuir isotherms.   The Langmuir isotherm has been widely accepted as a practical method for integrating experimental data of adsorption processes. Rearranging Eq. The The experimental wastewater solutions (pH The difference in volume in the adsorption cell due the samples removed was corrected during calculations. The concentration of arsenic in the samples was measured by AAS in flame. Each adsorption kinetics experiment was carried out twice, and the average was used in this work. The experimental wastewater solutions (pH The concentration of arsenic in the samples was measured by AAS in flame. Each adsorption capacity experiment was carried out in triplicate, and the average was used in this work. The      The arsenic speciation in copper smelting wastewaters is a mixture of As(III) and As(V). In this work, only As(V) was studied. Future work should include the biosorption of As(III) as well. The results show that the arsenic biosorption capacity by The adsorption of arsenic could be explained satisfactorily both by the Freundlich and the Langmuir isotherms. The sorption kinetics of arsenic by The authors Henrik K. Hansen, Alexandra Ribeiro and Eduardo Mateus would like to thank for economical support from the “Programa de Cooperación Científica Internacional CONICYT/GRICES”. Carla Oyarzun, Maria Pascual Barber and Ana Gonzalez are acknowledged for help with the experimental work.