The behavior of impurity elements during a copper recovery process from waste printed circuit board (PCB) using ammonia–ammonium sulfate and chloride systems are examined and the performance of these two systems are compared. Leaching of PCB was carried out by solutions containing copper(II) ammine complexes as the oxidizing agent. The copper was selectively dissolved but the leach solution also contained zinc (∼1 g/L), lead and manganese (∼0.1 g/L), in addition to 40–50 g/L copper.
                  The solution was then purified by solvent extraction using LIX 26 (alkyl substituted 8-hydroxy-quinoline) which typically extracted >95% of the impurity elements with a few exceptions. The selectivity in the leaching and purification steps was higher in the sulfate system than that in the chloride system. Finally, copper was recovered from the solution by electro-deposition with a low power consumption of 1300 and 500 kWh/tonne in the sulfate and chloride systems, respectively.
                  The results of glow discharge mass spectrometry of the electro-deposited copper revealed that the electro-deposited copper contained 24 and 1.1 ppm of impurities in the sulfate and chloride systems, respectively, with lead as the main impurity element in both systems. Because the purity of the copper deposit from the chloride system was high, this copper scrap recycling process has the potential to recover high purity copper from wastes with a low power consumption.The development of copper recycling processes from wastes is an important issue to effectively utilize the copper resources. Among the wastes that contain copper, one of the most complex recycling materials is electronic scrap like printed circuit boards (PCB), which generally contain 10–30% copper as well as plastics, fibreglass and other metals. One of the potential processes to recover copper from electronic scrap is copper smelting ( Our research group has therefore focused on studying a hydrometallurgical copper recycling process for electronic scrap like PCBs ( One of the most important advantages of this process is the significant reduction of power consumption during the electrowinning stage due to the small difference between the standard redox potentials of Cu(0)/Cu(I) and Cu(I)/Cu(II) couples (0.2 V) and the increased current efficiency when copper is electrowon from the monovalent state, Cu(I). In our previous studies and publications on this process, except for the copper leaching examination, synthetic solutions were used instead of solutions obtained from actual electronic scrap. The data using actual electronic scrap is important in order to confirm the behavior of each impurity element and identify the problem(s) to be solved for practical process development. Thus, in this study, the purity of copper recovered from actual electronic scrap was examined and the results were compared with those obtained using synthetic solutions. Furthermore, this study compares the impurity behavior in ammonia–ammonium sulfate (sulfate system) and ammonia–ammonium chloride (chloride system) systems which showed good performance in our previous studies. The experimental conditions were determined on the basis of the results obtained previously, so that copper was effectively recovered with low power consumption. Crushed PCB pieces (diameter from 0.5 to 3 mm) were used as the actual electronic scrap and processed according to the experimental scheme shown in Two leaching solutions were prepared from aqueous ammonia solution (25% w/w), AR grade cupric oxide (CuO, 99.99% w/w), and either ammonium sulfate or ammonium chloride (Wako Pure Chemical Industries) in de-ionized water. The concentrations of NH After the leaching, the solution was filtered in a glove box filled with argon gas, and then extracted by LIX 26 (A/O The concentrations of total copper and other metal ions in the aqueous solution before and after solvent extraction were measured by ICP-AES. The Cu(II) concentration was measured by spectrophotometry (Shimadzu UV-2550) using the absorbance peak at 630 nm wavelength and the Cu(I) concentration was determined by difference. The purified solution was transferred to the electrolytic cell without exposure to air, and then subjected to electro-deposition in a cell separated by an anion exchange membrane (ACM, Tokuyama). The leach solution before solvent extraction was also used for electro-deposition for the purpose of comparison. Because the main aim was to study the electro-deposition of impurities in the electro-deposited copper, the leach solution was only added to the cathode compartment, whilst the anode compartment was filled with the background electrolyte (5 M NH The electro-deposition was conducted under a galvanostatic condition for 22 h at a current density of 250 A/m A typical analysis of the PCB metal content and leach solution is shown in  In this solution, Cu(II) leaches metals and accepts one electron according to the following half-reaction: The redox potentials of reaction Eq. However, zinc, lead and manganese can readily leach. The half-reaction for the Zn(II)/Zn couple is as follows ( As for manganese, the logarithms of the stepwise stability constants for the manganese ammine complexes range from − Likewise, the half-wave potential for lead electro-deposition in a solution containing 1 M NH At pH 10, Pb(II) generally exists as HPbO Except for the high lead concentration, the results of leaching PCB were consistent with results of previous studies at simulated conditions ( The results of purification by solvent extraction with LIX 26 are summarized in Concerning copper, an overall 12 and 14% were lost during solvent extraction in the sulfate and chloride systems, respectively. As discussed by Further investigation is required to understand and overcome this problem. Otherwise, the impurity removal was successfully achieved and the aqueous raffinates were subjected to electro-deposition.  The impurities in the electro-deposited copper are shown in Since lead electro-deposition is important for developing the present recycling process, further electrochemical studies were carried out using linear sweep voltammetry on a platinum plate in a solution containing NH Although the copper(I) reduction potential is more positive compared to the lead electro-deposition, the cathode potential during copper electro-deposition at 250 A/m Copper recovery from PCB scrap was carried out by a hydrometallurgical process using ammoniacal ammonium sulfate and chloride systems. Copper was leached by Cu(II) ammine to produce a Cu(I) ammine solution containing Zn, Pb, Mn and some Ni, but leaving Fe, Al and other impurities in the residue. Lead rejection was slightly higher in the sulfate system. In the following purification stage, the selective removal of Zn, Pb, Ni, Mn, and Fe impurities was achieved in both systems by solvent extraction using LIX 26 (alkyl substituted 8-hydroxy-quinoline). The selectivity and % extraction of impurities were slightly higher in the sulfate system. In the final electrowinning stage, a smooth copper deposit was obtained with low power consumption in both systems. The total impurity contents of 24 and 1.1 ppm in the copper deposit were achieved from the sulfate and chloride systems, respectively, with lead as the main impurity. Lead co-deposited with copper at a similar potential in the sulfate system, but copper deposited at a higher potential than lead in the chloride system. The proposed process has the potential to produce high purity copper directly from a waste PCB recovery process with low power consumption.