The separation of tantalum and niobium compounds has been of interest for many years, with few new developments. Classically separation is achieved by liquid–liquid extraction and most research focuses on optimising this process. A separation method that bypasses the need for liquid–liquid extraction is reported here. The process uses dry fluorination to convert tantalum and niobium pentoxides into metal oxyfluorides. The thermal behaviour of these species is sufficiently different for separation to be achieved by preferential volatilisation. Experimental results indicate that at least two temperature ranges are suitable for separation, viz. one below 165°C, and one above 650°C.Niobium and tantalum are present in the crust of the earth at 1 The African continent accounts for about 19% of tantalum ore reserves ( Tantalum and niobium are industrially important materials due to their use in the fields of electronics, optics and nuclear energy ( The uncanny chemical similarity between the two metals can be attributed to their virtually identical ionic sizes, resulting from lanthanide contraction ( Separation using liquid–liquid extraction has significant drawbacks since it involves the use of aqueous hydrofluoric acid as well as several organic solvents. The procedure generates a large amount of hazardous liquid waste that is difficult and expensive to store and process. Naturally occurring tantalum and niobium occur in pentoxide form in mineral ores ( Dilute HF(g) was prepared by loading a cylinder with 0.6 For single component experiments, both Ta Product distributions were determined by selective sublimation and decomposition of the product at selected temperatures using a TA Instruments QDT 600 simultaneous TG/DSC. The metal content of each product was determined by ICP-OES analysis. The oxyfluorides (MO Subsequent preparation of oxy-trifluorides (MOF These reactions were completed in sealed Hastalloy C80 sample vessels by adding a mechanically mixed excess (ca. 20%) of MF In practice, the preparation of a single oxyfluoride is problematic since the higher fluorinated species are prone to hydrolysis ( The reactions between HF(g) and niobium and tantalum pentoxides are characterised by two consecutive exothermic events ( Thermodynamically the metal pentafluorides are the stable products for the reactions between the metal pentoxides and anhydrous HF at relatively low temperatures, i.e. for the substitution reactions: For Ta and Nb the values for the change in standard Gibbs energy at room temperature are − A two step reaction, with oxyfluoride intermediates, is similarly observed when elemental fluorine is used as the fluorinating agent ( Using TG data collected for the prepared model compounds and comparison of XRD data in the PDF-2007 data base, we were able to identify the species noted in  In the above 0 In According to the literature, and our own experiments, the sublimation temperatures of niobium pentafluoride (80 From the data presented in The HF fluorination of mixtures of Nb By treating mixtures of tantalum and niobium pentoxides with HF(g), a mixture of oxyfluoride compounds is created. Though the thermal behaviour of the pentoxides and pentafluorides of tantalum and niobium is similar, the oxyfluorides have substantially different sublimation and decomposition temperatures. This difference allows for a separation process that does not involve the use of aqueous HF or organic solvents. Indeed, we have shown that such a separation is possible at 165 Further work may include optimising experimental parameters to produce the desired oxyfluoride species, which may make an even more efficient process possible. Since both tantalum and niobium occur in nature in pentoxide form, this process could be extended to recover metal values from minerals. A patent application for this process has been filed (