We compared post-operative distal radius fracture (DRF) displacement after volar locking plate fixation using full-length unicortical and shorter-length distal locking screws. In this non-inferiority, retrospective cohort study, DRFs treated with volar locking plate fixation were evaluated on X-rays. In the full-length group, volar locking plate fixation was performed with full-length unicortical distal locking screws. In the shorter-length group, the distal locking screws were planned pre-operatively to be approximately 75% of the distal radius depth based on the lunate depth, and the same depth was drilled. Three radiographic parameters – ulnar variance, volar tilt, and radial inclination – were measured intra-operatively and at the final follow-up. The displacements were compared between the two groups. Each group contained 34 fractures. The mean ulnar variance between the two periods increased 1.1 mm in the full-length group and 1.3 mm in the shorter group (mean difference, 0.2 mm; 90% confidence interval, −0.3 to 0.6). The shorter group was not significantly inferior to the full-length one. Volar tilt increased 0.6° in the full-length group and −0.1° in the shorter group, while the radial inclination increased 0.1° in the full-length group and 0.2° in the shorter one. The differences in the increases were not significant. The post-operative DRF stability of 75%-length distal locking screws was not inferior to that of full-length unicortical screws. To prevent extensor pollicis longus tendon rupture, shorter distal locking screws and the same drilling depth may be preferable for volar locking plate fixation.Volar locking plates have become a popular treatment for distal radius fractures (DRF). Many authors report that volar locking plates can maintain adequate fracture stability However, post-operative extensor pollicis longus tendon rupture has been reported after volar locking plate fixation for DRF The purpose of this study was to compare post-operative fracture displacement between full-length unicortical and shorter-length distal locking screws placed in volar locking plate for DRFs. As the primary outcome, the potential increase in ulnar variance was compared between the two groups. A previous biomechanical study showed that 75%-length unicortical distal locking screw fixation was mechanically similar to bi-cortical fixation The study was a single center, non-inferiority, retrospective cohort study. Ethics approval was obtained from our institutional research ethics committee. Patients who had undergone volar plate fixation for either intra- and extra-articular DRF were included in this study. The patients were operated on and followed at the regional referral hospital in Nagano Prefecture in Japan between April 2014 and January 2017. Since a 2015 article reported that distal radius depth could be calculated from lunate depth Inclusion criteria for this study were: DRF (AO type A and C) treated with a volar locking plate; adult patients (18 years old or older); minimum follow-up period of six months. Exclusion criteria were: open fracture; buttress plating for Smith's or Barton's fracture; dorsal plating or other fixation; concomitant distal ulnar fracture, except for the ulnar styloid. All surgeries were performed or supervised by one of two orthopedic specialists with more than 15 years’ experience, although six residents performed these procedures. Most (60 of 68 surgeries, 88%) were handled by one of the two specialists. Screw and peg lengths were not calculated pre-operatively but measured with a depth gage during surgery. Surgeons drilled while avoiding penetrating the dorsal cortex of the distal radius and measured them with a depth gage. However, since the dorsal cortex was often comminuted, no feeling of cortex penetration was perceived by the surgeon during drilling. In this situation, the tip of the depth gage was placed on the dorsal cortex line visible with fluoroscopy, and then the screw length was selected as being 2 mm shorter than the depth gage measurement. Pre-operatively, the lunate depth was measured on a lateral X-ray of the injured or contralateral wrist ( The locking plate products were independently selected by the surgeons, and two different products were used. Twenty-one plates with distal screws and 13 plates with distal pegs were used in the full-length group while two plates with screws and 32 plates with pegs were used in the shorter group. Twenty-three plate products with distal screws were the ADAPTIVE Distal Radius Plate 2.5 (Medartis, Basel, Switzerland), and the 45 with distal pegs were the 2.4 mm Variable Angle LCP Two-Column Volar Distal Radius Plate (Synthes, West Chester, PA, USA). In all plates, four screws or pegs were inserted in the first distal row and two screws or pegs were inserted in the second distal row. Surgeons also must be aware that “screw length” in many products includes the screw “head” length, approximately 2 mm. Through a transflexor carpi radialis approach, the pronator quadratus muscle was released from the radial side of the radius and elevated subperiosteally from the radius. The exposed fracture site was reduced and fixed temporarily with a K-wire. After the volar locking plate was positioned at the center of the radius, immediately proximal to the watershed line under fluoroscopy, four distal locking screws or pegs were inserted in the first distal row of the plate. Then, three cortical screws were added to the proximal plate holes. Finally, two locking screws or pegs were inserted into the second distal row of the plate ( On the next day, active range of motion exercises were started using the same rehabilitation protocol in both groups without any immobilization, based on a recent prospective randomized study describing the benefits of early active wrist exercises Post-operative radiographs were examined every month until six months after the surgery, with at least two wrist views, including posteroanterior and lateral X-rays in neutral forearm rotation and 90 degrees elbow flexion. Three radiographic parameters of the wrist – the ulnar variance, volar tilt, and radial inclination – were evaluated intra-operatively and at the final follow-up (mean 10.6, range 6.0 to 22.8 months after surgery), using our hospital's picture archiving and communications system (EV Insite version 3.4; PSP corporation). It was reported that measurements of the ulnar variance and palmar tilt had good intra- and inter-observer consistency, although that of the radial inclination showed fair agreement The potential increase in ulnar variance between the two periods was calculated in each group because an increase means radial shortening, which is caused by post-operative fracture displacement. Then, the difference in the ulnar variance increase was analyzed by a non-inferiority trial between the groups. The increases in the volar tilt and radial inclination between the two periods were assessed in each group, and the differences in the increase were compared between the two groups. Clinically tolerated radius shortening (= ulnar variance increase) is 2 mm in DRF The demographic characteristics of the patients were analyzed using Student's Seventy-eight fractures (40 full-length unicortical and 38 shorter ones) in 76 patients fulfilled the inclusion criteria. Of these 78 fractures, ten were followed for less than six months post-operatively or had bilateral fractures, thus were excluded. Finally, 68 fractures (34 in each group) were assessed. The baseline characteristics of the two groups are shown in The mean increase in ulnar variance was 1.1 mm in the full-length group and 1.3 mm in the shorter group. The mean difference between each group was −0.3 to 0.6 mm of the 90% CI ( Volar tilt increased 0.6° in the full-length group and −0.1° in the shorter group ( Three fractures in the full-length group had a subsequent post-operative extensor pollicis longus tendon rupture while none in the shorter group had tendon rupture. One of the three was performed by an orthopedic specialist while the remaining two were performed by a resident under supervision. The post-operative CT scans showed that one case had a peg (not screw) tip protrusion into the third compartment penetrating the dorsal cortex, another had over-drilling through the dorsal cortex without screw tip protrusion, and the other had neither screw tip protrusion nor over-drilling. Since post-operative CT in the second case showed a hole in the dorsal cortex under the third compartment, the cause of the tendon rupture was considered as over-drilling. The last case had dorsal cortex comminution; therefore, the comminution may imply the possibility of over-drilling into the extensor tendon because the surgeon could not feel the dorsal cortex during drilling. One of the three patients underwent a tendon transfer whereas the remaining two refused reoperation. The post-operative fracture stability of shorter distal locking screws was not inferior to that of full-length unicortical screws, which was consistent with our hypothesis. The previous biomechanical study showed that 75%-length unicortical distal locking fixation was mechanically similar to bi-cortical fixation in terms of axial compression, dorsal bending, and volar bending In order to prevent distal screw protrusion of the dorsal cortex, specific intra-operative radiographic views have been suggested To calculate the distal screw length pre-operatively, we used the lunate depth on a lateral X-ray view. Although a recent article reported there was no relevant correlation between distal screw length and lunate depth after volar locking screw fixation, it also raised the possibility that surgeons did not place longer screws in larger radii There are several limitations to our study. This was a retrospective study, thus confounding variables were not investigated. The full-length group was constituted earlier while the shorter group was later, and the baseline characteristics of the two groups were not significantly different ( Our study showed that the post-operative fracture stability of shorter distal locking screws was not inferior to that of full-length unicortical screws for volar locking plate fixation. Therefore, to prevent extensor pollicis longus tendon rupture, shorter (approximately 75% of the distal radius depth) screws and the same depth drilling may be preferable for volar locking plate fixation. The authors declare that they have no competing interest.