The synergistic extraction of nickel and cobalt from acidic aqueous solutions has been observed with a mixture of di(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid and 5-dodecylsalicylaldoxime. The rates of extraction and stripping were found to be rapid, even for nickel, and stripping of nickel-loaded organic phase was readily achieved by contact with 0.50 M mineral acid. The separation of nickel and cobalt is possible based on differences in stripping behaviors of the two metals.Much research effort has been devoted to the separation of cobalt and nickel by solvent extraction. Successful developments of selective extraction of cobalt from nickel using amines at a high chloride ion concentration The commercial extractants employed, bis(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid (D2EHPA) was kindly donated by Daihachi Chemical Industry and 5-dodecylsalicylaldoxime (LIX 860) was purchased from Henkel. These reagents were utilized as received. The diluent was kerosene. The concentration of the extractant in the solvent was expressed as percentage by volume (v/v%). Other reagents were of analytical grade. Extraction and stripping tests were carried out by contacting equal volumes of the organic and aqueous phases in a 50-ml centrifuge tube at room temperature (25±0.2 °C). The pH was adjusted by the addition of concentrated sodium hydroxide and sulfuric acid solutions to the appropriate value. A contact time of 60 min (found to be sufficient for reaching equilibrium in all cases) was employed, except for the tests on rates of extraction and stripping. After the two phases were disengaged, the aqueous phase was taken to determine the pH and the concentrations of the metals. The concentrations of metals in both initial feed and equilibrium aqueous solutions were determined by inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectroscopy using a SEIKO SPS 1200A ICP-AES spectrophotometer. Those in the organic phase were calculated in accordance with mass balance. The pH value of aqueous solution was measured with a TOA pH meter-type HM-30S. The existence of substantial synergistic effect is demonstrated in Sulfuric and hydrochloric acids were used for stripping nickel and cobalt from the loaded organic phase.  Although the difference between the pH A detailed investigation of the stoichiometries of the extraction reactions is beyond the scope of the present work. However, the already available data can be used to confirm the generalized form of synergistic extraction of divalent metal ions with an acidic extractant (H Inspection of A novel synergistic extraction system consisting of D2EHPA and LIX 860 for nickel and cobalt has been found. The mixed extractants can extract nickel and cobalt effectively from an acidic aqueous solution (pH<3). The rates of extraction and stripping of cobalt and nickel with the mixture of D2EHPA and LIX 860 were found to be much faster, compared with the D2EHPA/LIX 63 system. Furthermore, the stripping of nickel is easy, achieving complete stripping by a 0.50 M mineral acid. The separation of nickel from cobalt using this mixed extractants is possible based on differences in their stripping behaviors. A high separation factor of 36.4 ( The Authors thank Dr. K. Torii, Director, Molecular Chemistry Division, and Dr. Y. Niwa, Director General, Tohoku National Industrial Research Institute, for permission to publish this paper. They also gratefully acknowledge Daihachi Chemical Industry, Osaka, Japan, for providing a free sample of D2EHPA.