Aluminosilicate minerals (e.g., spodumene, albite) have complex crystal structures and similar surface chemistries, but they have poor selectivity compared to traditional fatty acid collectors, making flotation separation difficult. Previous research has mainly considered the mineral crystal structure as a whole. In contrast, the surface characteristics at the atomic level and the effects of different crystal interfaces on the flotation behavior have rarely been investigated. This study focuses on investigating the surface anisotropy quantitatively, including the chemical bond characteristics, surface energies, and broken bond densities, using density functional theory and classical theoretical calculations. In addition, the anisotropy of the surface wettability and adsorption characteristics were examined using contact angle, zeta potential, and Fourier-transform infrared measurements. Finally, these surface anisotropies with different flotation behaviors were investigated and interpreted using molecular dynamics simulations, scanning electron microscopy, and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. This systematic research offers new ideas concerning the selective grinding and stage flotation of aluminosilicate minerals based on the crystal characteristics.Aluminosilicate minerals The floatability of aluminosilicate materials (e.g., spodumene, albite) is closely related to the quantity and type of surface-exposed elements after mineral liberation; this, in turn, depends on the crystal structure and fracture characteristics of the mineral. Differences in crystal characteristics during mineral dissociation, such as the degree of breaking of Si Manser The relationship between the crystal structure, surface wettability, and floatability of aluminosilicate minerals in bauxite, including kaolinite, illite, pyrophyllite, and diaspora, was studied by Hu et al. Miller et al. The electrokinetics and flotation behavior of kaolinite were studied by Hu et al. The chemical bonds in aluminosilicate minerals are mainly ionic and covalent bonds, and, in fact, there are no pure ionic bonds or pure covalent bonds in the actual minerals. In the mineral crystal structure, as the ionic bond composition increases, the mineral polarity increases, and the bonds are broken more easily. Consequently, the interactions between the mineral surface and water become stronger; that is, the hydrophilicity increases. Therefore, it is important to study the characteristics of the chemical bonds in the crystal structure to understand the surface properties and floatability of minerals. This investigation aims to quantitatively study the mineral crystal characteristics, including chemical bonds, broken bond density, and wettability, by using various methods, such as contact angle, zeta potential, and Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) measurements and molecular modeling. Using these methods, we have attempted to correlate the surface anisotropic properties to the differences in adsorption and flotation behavior. Spodumene and albite were obtained from the Jiajika Lithium Mine, Ganzi District of Sichuan Province, China. The samples were hand-picked, crushed, and ground in a laboratory porcelain mill. Then, the powder samples were screened into four different size fractions (45–75, 38–45, 19–38, and 0–19 X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements were carried out on a X’Pert PRO with Cu Kα radiation (λ The anionic collector, sodium oleate (NaOL), was of analytical grade and obtained from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd. Ferric trichloride (FeCl Periodic density functional theory (DFT) calculations were carried out using CASTEP as implemented in Materials Studio 6.0 (MS) to calculate the lattice constants and surface energies of the mineral crystal surfaces. Crystal Builder was used to calculate the number of broken bonds. Detailed information concerning these calculations is presented in Sections For the MD simulations, the phyllosilicate force field embedded in the polymer-consistent force field (PCFF-phyllosilicate) was adopted, as implemented in the Forcite module in MS. This force field was developed by Heinz et al. Flotation tests were carried out in a 40-mL hitch-groove flotation cell (XFG-1600). The mineral suspension was prepared by adding 3.0 The pendant drop method was applied to measure the contact angle using a drop shape analyzer (DSA30, Kruss, Germany). The tests were conducted at room temperature 20 The mineral powder was firstly ground and screened to 2 The pure minerals were ground to less than 5 The morphologies of mineral samples with different size fractions were characterized using a scanning electron microscope (SEM, TM-1000, Hitachi, Japan) with an accelerating voltage of 20 Mineral samples (2 Spodumene, chemical formula LiAl[Si The Li Albite has a frame-like structure in the triclinic system. The unit cell parameters are In aqueous media, there are few exposed four-coordinated Al The exposed groups are Spodumene and albite are aluminosilicate minerals containing three types of chemical bond, i.e., Si Calculation of electrostatic attraction between anions and cations in the mineral crystal structure. Coulomb's law was applied to calculate electrostatic attraction, as shown in Eq. Calculation of the average bond valence for M Bond valence is a measure of the strength of a bond. Generally, shorter bonds have stronger interactions, corresponding to higher bond valence values. The exponential relationship in Eq. The calculated average bond length M The electrostatic bond valence strength, M The surface energy of mineral crystal is the energy required to divide the crystal into two independent surfaces along the direction of the crystal surface. For a surface system in the absence of external forces, the total surface energy of the system tends to be minimized spontaneously, i.e., the lower the surface energy, the higher the surface stability. Based on the DFT pseudopotential plane wave method To calculate the surface energy, we must optimize the geometry of the two mineral crystals. Both local density approximation (LDA) When the thickness of the vacuum layer is smaller than the equilibrium distance of the crystal, there is a strong interaction between the ionic layers on the surface of the In the DFT calculations, the number of layers in the surface cell is also an important factor determining the effectiveness of the surface energy calculations. For the spodumene (001) crystal plane, the effect of the number of layers on the surface energy was investigated, and the results are shown in When the number of layers is greater than three, the calculated value of surface energy converges to 0.001 As shown in   The surface energy difference between two minerals for one certain crystal plane can be from the mineral type, and is governed by the atomic interaction within the crystal structure. And surface energy difference among different crystal faces for one mineral type could be attributed to that of layer–layer atomic interaction at different directions. The floatability of minerals such as albite and spodumene is closely related to the number and type of exposed surface atoms, and this, in turn, depends on the crystal structure of the mineral and the characteristics of the chemical bonds. The surface bond properties of minerals can be used to predict and verify the cleavage properties of minerals and to predict the chemical reactivity of the surface atoms. Using Crystal Builder in MS to cut different crystal planes, we calculated the number of broken bonds ( From To further investigate the influence of the surface bond density on the surface properties of the minerals, we calculated the total bond densities and the corrected values. The results are listed in The surface broken bond density and surface energy can be used to determine both the stability and the cleavage properties of mineral surfaces. However, compared with the complex and time-consuming surface energy calculations, the calculation of bond density is simpler and quicker. The calculation of each broken bond for the different spodumene surfaces can be found in the Supplementary Material. To verify the anisotropy of mineral surface wettability, we tested the contact angles of different crystal planes. In this section, the results for spodumene are presented. The (110) and (001) planes of spodumene were cut and prepared, as shown in The corresponding XRD patterns are shown in The change in the contact angle with pH for the spodumene (110) and (001) surfaces are shown in Young's equation, Eq. From Section The physical and chemical properties, such as wettability, adsorption, active site density, and spatial orientation distribution of different exposed surfaces The effect of the amount of sodium oleate and the pH value on the flotation and recovery of particles measuring 0–0.074 In the flotation of real ores, ions such as Ca At a fixed Fe As the particle size decreases gradually during the grinding process, the influence of particle shape and size As shown in The trend in flotation behavior is opposite to that of spodumene ( According to the double layer theory within the context of flotation, the separation of some minerals is based on the difference in their surface potentials. In general, the surface of a negatively charged mineral can be absorbed electrostatically by cationic collectors, while a positively charged mineral surface can be adsorbed by anionic collectors. Electrostatic interactions are also important for collectors that are chemically adsorbed because the strong electrostatic repulsive force may affect or even hinder chemical adsorption. Thus, mineral flotation recovery can be adversely affected by the electrostatic interactions. The results of surface zeta potential measurements as a function of pH in water with a sodium oleate concentration of 6 For albite ( The PZC difference as a function of pH for spodumene and albite is shown in To further study the adsorption of sodium oleate on the surfaces of spodumene and albite, the products after reaction with the flotation reagents were characterized by FTIR. The results are shown in In the IR spectrum of albite, peaks at 2925 and 2850 Combining the results of the zeta potential tests and the IR spectra, we concluded that chemical adsorption occurred between the Al active sites (on the surface of spodumene) and sodium oleate. By comparing the spectra with that of sodium oleate, the peak strength in the spodumene sample is larger than that of albite, which shows that the chemical action of sodium oleate with spodumene is greater than that with albite. In Section The CASTEP DFT module implemented in MS was applied to model spodumene and albite. The atomic charges were assigned as listed in The calculation of the mineral-NaOL interactions was based on the PCFF-phyllosilicate force field, and the Forcite module in MS was used. To ensure that there were no interactions between the atoms on the surface in the Z direction, the use of a vacuum layer with a thickness of 8 To ensure that the mineral–flotation-agent model has the lowest energy configuration overall (not a local minimum configuration), we optimized ten initial configurations, and the final configuration was used for the interaction energy calculation. The interaction energy was obtained using Eq. The calculated interaction energies between the mineral and NaOL for different crystal planes are shown in For the albite-NaOL interactions ( The (001) plane of spodumene has one broken Al-O bond per Al tetrahedron; however, its interaction energy is stronger than that of the albite (001) plane. This difference may be related to Al site characteristics, i.e., the Al To confirm the reliability of the MD simulations, we measured the wettability of the (110) and (001) planes of spodumene in the presence of sodium oleate. The change in the contact angles with pH in an aqueous sodium oleate solution is shown in The contact angles of two crystal planes after reaction with NaOL both increased. However, with increasing pH, the contact angle first increased and then decreased, having a maximum at pH 8.5. This is consistent with the flotation results. The (110) plane has a larger contact angle than that of the (001) surface, which suggests that the (110) plane adsorbs sodium oleate more easily than the (001) plane. This result agrees well with those from MD simulation. To interpret the differences in flotation behavior of differently sized grains, we measured the adsorption of sodium oleate on different particle sizes. The initial sodium oleate concentration was 6 The effect of pH on the adsorption of sodium oleate on albite particles of different sizes is shown in The influence of particle size on the adsorption of sodium oleate on the surface of albite is clear. That is, as particles decrease to 38–45 For albite, the order of recovery with different sizes particle sizes is 0–19 SEM images of albite particles are shown in A detailed illustration is shown in According to the analysis of the broken bond anisotropy for albite, the (010) plane has no broken Al-O bonds; thus, there are no active sites for the chemical adsorption of NaOL. However, on the (001) plane, every Al site generates one broken Al As the particle sizes further decrease, the mineral particles break along the bottom face (001), i.e., the proportion of (001) planes gradually increases. As shown in  For spodumene, similar discussions and explanations are also effective. To quantitatively analyze the effect of particle size on the flotation behavior, we made XPS measurements on particles of different sizes, and the relative contents of surface atoms are compared. The XPS patterns of spodumene with different size distributions are shown in For each element appearing in the full spectrum of spodumene, the fine scanning energy spectra were measured, and the binding energies and relative concentrations of surface elements were obtained. The binding energies of the surface elements for spodumene particles of different sizes nearly are very similar, indicating that there is little difference in the chemical properties of these surface elements.  The floatability of minerals, such as albite and spodumene, is closely related to the number and type of exposed surface atoms, which, in turn, are affected by the crystal structure of the mineral and characteristics of the chemical bonds. The surface anisotropy of different crystal planes was investigated quantitatively in this study, and the chemical bond characteristics, surface energies, and broken bond densities were determined using DFT and classical MD calculations. The surface energies and broken bond densities were calculated to predict the surface wettability, and the predictive values of these indices were verified using XRD and contact angle tests. The electrostatic bond valence strength, M The authors thank the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following is Supplementary data to this article: