For solving multivariate aggregation population balance equation, two new discretizations based on number and mass distributions are presented. These proposed schemes are relatively simple to implement and computationally very efficient. Moreover, the mathematical structure of the schemes remains unchanged with the change in dimension. Hence, these methods are ideally suited for solving multidimensional aggregation problems on non-uniform grids. The accuracy of the new schemes is shown by comparing number density as well as different order moments with exact results as well as with the numerical results of Forestier and Mancini (2012). Besides preservation of the zeroth and first order moments, the new schemes also predict higher order moments and number density very accurately. In conclusion, the proposed schemes are more accurate and efficient than the scheme of Forestier and Mancini (2012).particle property (size) distribution exact value of number of particles in the cell approximate value of the total number of cells degree of aggregation index of the cell where weight function particle property vector (size) aggregation kernel measure of error moments of particle property distribution sum function arithmetic mean function numerical scheme of ordinary differential equation population balance equation weighted finite volume scheme Population balance equation (PBE) has been discussed by several researchers in many branches of engineering for both the numerical and theoretical point of view. It is mainly used to model the population dynamics of particulate processes, like growth, aggregation, breakage etc. appear in the area of process engineering, mining engineering, aerosol engineering, pharmaceutical industries, food industries etc. ( One of the important applications of aggregation process is the granulation of particles. It is well known in the literature that the one-dimensional population balance equation is not adequate to describe the granulation process ( Define It is very challenging to find the analytical solutions of multidimensional pure aggregation population balance equation as it is non-linear in nature. Analytical solutions of PBE are provided in the literature by Finding number density function is of great interest but we are also keen to find other integral properties like moments. The moment of order In this work, we generalize the work of In this section, we provide a brief description of the existing finite volume scheme by We first give a concise summary of existing finite volume scheme developed by It must be emphasized that the formulation given in Eq. In this section, the formulation of the weighted finite volume scheme (WFVS) for solving a multidimensional aggregation population balance equation is provided. This section presents the discrete formulation based on number distribution, whereas a similar formulation based on mass distribution is presented in the next section. Let the multidimensional computational domain be divided into small sub-domains called  The numerical scheme is said to be zeroth order preserving or number preserving if it satisfies We now introduce the weighted finite volume scheme (WFVS) as Note that the formulation  For special uniform grids of the type where every combination Now we state and prove some important properties of the solutions.   The above result can be proved as follows. On taking summation over all    Similar to the preceding proof, we multiply to the discrete formulation It should be noted that the above formulation and also the formulation of It is interesting to note that, unlike number form of WFVS, only one weight function is required. On the other hand, this weight function is no more time independent and cannot be stored in advance before execution of the scheme. Furthermore, for each cell there are Now, the question arises about the relation between  It can easily be shown that both number and mass forms of WFVS turn out to be the same for one-dimensional case ( We now prove our claims that the proposed formulation is number preserving and mass conserving for each component.    Taking summation over    Dividing by In this section, we present the numerical results of the proposed scheme (number form) and the existing scheme by comparing these results with the known analytical solutions. For simplicity (and without loss of generality), we demonstrate numerical results only for two and three dimensional problems, however, as stated before, the framework remains the same for higher dimensions. Moreover, for the numerical comparison, all the variables and parameters are chosen to be dimensionless. For simulations, the property domain is discretized into rectangular and cuboid cells for two and three dimensional problems, respectively. To generate these cells, each property domain is simply discretized with exponentially increasing intervals. For comparisons, we have chosen the number form of WFVS as its feature of total mass conservation matches with the FM2012. However, at last we shall also show effectiveness of the mass form of WFVS. The extent of aggregation is measured with the degree of aggregation, which is defined as In FM2012, it is required to compute proportionality constant Numerical outcome of different order moments including zeroth sectional moment ( To compare zeroth sectional moment of multidimensional distribution, we use the flat representation as followed in the literature by The numerical results of different order moments and sectional zeroth moment for the size-independent kernel, i.e., Finally, Additionally, we have compared some numerical results using WFVS for 3D problem for constant kernel. Each property domain is discretized into 20 geometrically spaced cells. The degree of aggregation is taken same as before. In The comparison of the results produced by both the numerical schemes are shown in We now compare the result of sectional zeroth order moment computed by the proposed scheme and the existing scheme shown in Similar to the constant kernel, we have also compared numerical results of moments using WFVS for 3D problem with sum kernel As stated earlier, we now show effectiveness of the mass form of WFVS over number form of WFVS. The three dimensional problem from Section In this paper, two new finite volume schemes are applied to solve multidimensional pure aggregation population balance equation. Moreover, implementation of these schemes for any number of properties is trivial. Consequently, both the schemes turn to be computationally very efficient for higher dimensional problems. Mathematical derivations of mass conservation and number preservation are provided for both the schemes. The accuracy of both the proposed schemes is verified by comparing the numerical results with the exact solution for two different kernels. The results show that both the proposed schemes preserve total number of the particles as well as conserve total mass of the system whereas FM2012 conserves only total mass of the system. Additionally, mass form of WFVS conserves mass of each property. Moreover, the results obtained for higher order moments as well as number density function are also well predicted by both the schemes. The computational time (CPU) taken by WFVS for number and mass form is much lower than the FM2012. It can be concluded that the new finite volume schemes are the smartest schemes for solving multivariate aggregation population balance equation. The financial support by the