To explore the potential of acid leaching in purifying metallurgical grade silicon (MG-Si) for solar cell applications, the effect of silicon microstructure on its leaching behavior was systematically investigated in the present work by a combination of alloying refining with acid etching. The microstructure evolution of silicon was revealed before and after acid etching with different lixiviants. Calcium-containing precipitates were found in MG-Si after alloying with calcium. The etching results showed that the leaching behavior of impurity inclusions strongly depended on the composition of the major impurities. HCl+HF mixture was an effective lixiviant for dissolving impurity inclusions in both MG-Si and its alloy with calcium. The impurity removal efficiency of acid leaching of MG-Si was efficiently improved after alloying. Moreover, the kinetics of acid leaching of MG-Si after alloying with calcium was further discussed based on cracking shrinking model.As mass utilization of traditional fossil fuel increased, which has led to energy crisis and environmental pollution, it is necessary for humans to find alternative energy sources. Solar energy is the most abundant among the currently known clean and renewable energy sources, hence it is regarded as having the most potential to meet energy demands. At present, silicon remains as the principal material for solar cell applications. According to the global market outlook for photovoltaics from the European Photovoltaic Industry Association, crystalline silicon is expected to maintain approximately 80% market share in production capacity of modules in the next few years ( As inexpensive and promising methods, metallurgical purification technologies, such as acid leaching ( Acid leaching is regarded as a simple and effective method to remove metallic impurity inclusions from the grain boundaries when MG-Si lumps are crushed and ground into adequate sizes, exposing the impurities to the action of acids. In 1927, However, acid leaching cannot extract non-metallic impurities, such as boron (B) and phosphorus (P) which yield relatively high segregation coefficients (k Alloying refining, as a promising method for upgrading MG-Si at relatively low refining temperatures, has recently received considerable attention. The addition of calcium to silicon as a phosphorus getter has been thermodynamically verified as an effective approach by Hence, on the basis of the above discussion, we investigated the influence of microstructure of MG-Si on its leaching behavior by combining calcium alloying with acid etching. Moreover, the effect of calcium alloying on leaching yield of impurities and the kinetics of acid leaching of Si–Ca alloys were also further studied. Raw MG-Si and analytical grade calcium (99.99%) were supplied by Run Xiang Co., Ltd., China and Aladdin Co., Ltd., China, respectively. The concentrations of impurities in the as-received MG-Si are listed in Analytical grade reagents, such as hydrochloric acid (HCl), nitric acid (HNO MG-Si powder was mixed with 5 The study on the influence of calcium addition on purifying MG-Si with acid leaching was performed by comparing the leaching yield of MG-Si and A-MG-Si after acid leaching experiments. Prior to the acid leaching treatment, for testing the acid sensitivity of precipitation phases through revealing the evolution of the silicon microstructure before and after acid leaching using different lixiviants, the etching experiments were carried out. The obtained ingot was longitudinally cut into two pieces. One piece was crushed into blocks to obtain analytical samples before being embedded into epoxy resin, and then polished with a 2000 After the etching experiments, treated samples were observed by electron probe microanalyzer to assess the acid sensitivity of the precipitation phases. By comparing the acid sensitivity results, the optimal lixiviant of these samples would be determined. And then, acid leaching was carried out with optimal acids in a polytetrafluoroethylene beaker at 333 The concentrations of impurities in MG-Si and A-MG-Si after acid leaching were determined by Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry (ICP-MS, DRC II, Perkin Elmer, US). Approximately 0.5 Before acid etching experiments, the concentrations of impurities in source silicon were analyzed. As shown in The microstructure of source silicon and the composition of the precipitation phases were detected by EPMA with EDX. The corresponding results are presented in The sensitivity of precipitates in MG-Si to the acids was studied by observing the micro-structural evolution of the samples before and after exposure to HCl, aqua regia and HCl The effect of calcium addition on the microstructure of MG-Si was investigated by alloying with 5 The effect of calcium addition on the sensitivity of precipitates in MG-Si to the acids was investigated by observing the micro-structural development of A-MG-Si before and after the action of HCl, aqua regia and HCl This result indicates that the dissolution rate of Si–Ca-based alloy is much higher than FeSi As shown in This result suggests that the aluminum-containing phases exhibit relatively high sensitivity to aqua regia.  The effects of leaching duration on the leaching yield of iron and aluminum were investigated at five different periods, with 2 The cracking shrinking model was first proposed by Margarido et al. and applied to assess kinetics of acid leaching of an industrial Fe–Si alloy successfully. They found that leaching of the impurity was under chemical reaction control ( According to the cracking shrinking model, the process of acid leaching can be divided into two steps. First, the HCl For grain reaction control: For grain film diffusion control: Assuming that In fact, to improve leaching efficiency, MG-Si must be crushed into adequate particle sizes for the sake of exposing the phases carrying the impurities to the action of acids. According to the discussion in The variations in the impurity concentration of MG-Si treated by acid leaching directly and MG-Si treated by alloying refining followed by acid leaching are displayed in A relationship between the microstructure of MG-Si and its leaching behavior was established to determine an effective and low-cost method for purifying MG-Si. It was found that the leaching behavior of impurity inclusions strongly depends on the composition of major impurities. Phases such as Si–Fe, Si–Ti–Fe and Si–V–Ti were insoluble in HCl or HCl This research was performed with the financial support of the