The hydrothermal formation and conversion of titanate species in the system Na2O–Al2O3–CaO–TiO2–H2O was investigated based on the thermodynamic calculation and systematic experiments. Experimental results show that the reaction product of anatase with aluminate solution is sodium tri-titanate (Na2O·3TiO2), and that kassite (CaO·2TiO2·H2O) is formed by the reaction of sodium tri-titanate with calcium hydroxide (Ca(OH)2) and sodium aluminate solution with high free caustic concentration at elevated temperatures. The results also show that there are two reaction paths for the formation of perovskite (CaTiO3), one is the direct reaction of sodium tri-titanate with calcium hydroxide, and the other is the conversion of kassite with calcium hydroxide and sodium aluminate solution at elevated temperatures. In addition, the aluminum species in the sodium aluminate solution play a very important role in the process of kassite formation and its conversion to perovskite. The findings provide a potential method for the efficient preparation of titanate species and enhance the understanding of the scaling of heat exchanger surfaces in the Bayer process alumina refinery which is a result of titanate formation.Calcium titanates, kassite (CaO·2TiO In addition, calcium titanates are important compounds formed in the Bayer process for alumina production from diasporic bauxite by the reaction of TiO So far, considerable research on the syntheses of titanates has been reported using various sources of calcium and titanium. Commonly, hydrothermal methods have been used. Layered titanate nano-tubes with a general formula Na With respect to the background of the alumina refinery, numerous studies were also carried out on the formation of titanates. All of these authors have drawn the same conclusion that kassite is a metastable phase in the system Na Unfortunately, little fundamental knowledge is available in the literature with respect to the formation paths of the two main titanate compounds and the detailed conversion mechanism in the system Na There are several reaction products of anatase, the typical titanium-containing mineral present in the bauxite, with caustic soda such as Na Kassite may be formed by the following chemical reactions: Perovskite may be formed by the following chemical reactions: The reaction Gibbs free energy change, Δ Thermodynamic calculations ( Anatase used in the experiments is a chemical agent in the form of powder with analytical purity. The synthetic sodium aluminate solution was prepared by the chemical reaction of aluminum hydroxide (A. P. grade) with sodium hydroxide (A. P. grade) dissolved in de-ionized water and subsequent filtration of the resultant sodium aluminate solution with a vacuum pump. Calcium oxide was obtained by the calcination of calcium hydroxide (A. P. grade) at 800 TCA was synthesized by adding calcium oxide to the sodium aluminate solution at 70 NTT was prepared by the reaction of anatase with sodium aluminate solution at 200 The hydrothermal reaction of calcium oxide and sodium aluminate solution was carried out in the stirred laboratory autoclave (miniclave drive, Switzerland) with a high-temperature sampling system. The other hydrothermal experiments were carried out in the self-designed high-pressure autoclave heated by the mixed molten salts of sodium nitrate, potassium nitrate and sodium nitrite. The hydrothermal products were cooled abruptly by immersing the 100 XRPD was used to assess the mineralogical composition of the synthesized starting materials and the products resulted from the hydrothermal experiments. The diffractometry was conducted on a Siemens D8 Advance diffractometer at 40 Kassite mass contents in the synthesized mixture of kassite, perovskite and TCA, and in the acid-treated mixture, were determined by the visible absorption spectroscopy method using the characteristic reaction of titanium(IV) ion with hydrogen peroxide. Kassite can be dissolved in the diluted hydrochloric acid whilst perovskite cannot be dissolved ( Thermodynamic calculations have demonstrated that the formation of kassite may have four different reaction paths (from reaction The XRPD patterns show that the anatase does not react with TCA in aqueous solution at 200  There are five possible formation paths from the thermodynamic calculations (from reaction As pure kassite is difficult to synthesize in the laboratory, the mixture of kassite, TCA and perovskite ( In order to determine the formation mechanism of perovskite, the synthesized mixture was treated in 0.1 Comparing with In the system of Na In Bayer liquors, organic compounds present in the reaction system can affect the particle size and morphology of the TCA formed, whilst the presence of silica species ( Experimental results have shown that kassite formation is through the reaction of NTT with calcium hydroxide and sodium aluminate solution (reaction As for the perovskite formation, there are two different reaction paths when calcium oxide is added to the sodium aluminate solution. One is from the direct reaction of NTT with calcium hydroxide (reaction As far as the Na The hydrothermal formation and conversion of calcium titanate species in the system Na Kassite is formed by the reaction of NTT with calcium hydroxide and sodium aluminate solution with high free caustic concentration. Perovskite may be formed either by the direct reaction of NTT with calcium hydroxide, or by the conversion of kassite by reaction with calcium hydroxide and sodium aluminate solution. The sodium aluminate solution plays a very important role in the process of kassite formation and its conversion to perovskite. This work was financially supported by the