Our purpose was to examine survivorship of the native hip joint in patients ages 60 and over who underwent percutaneous reduction and fixation of acetabular fractures. A retrospective review at a University Level I Trauma Center was performed. Our institutional trauma database was reviewed. Patients aged 60 or older treated with percutaneous reduction and fixation of acetabular fractures between 1994 and 2007 were selected. 79 consecutive patients with 80 fractures were identified. Rate of conversion to total hip arthroplasty were used to construct a Kaplan–Meier curve showing survivorship of the native hip joint after treatment. 75 fractures had adequate clinical follow-up with a mean of 3.9 years (range 0.5–11.9 years). Average blood loss was 69cc and there were no postoperative infections. 19/75 (25%) were converted to total hip arthroplasty at a mean time of 1.4 years after the index procedure. Survivorship analysis demonstrated a cumulative survival of 65% at 11.9 years of follow-up. There were no conversions to arthroplasty beyond 4.7 years postoperatively. There were no statistically significant associations between conversion to arthroplasty and age, sex, closed vs. limited open reduction, and simple vs. complex fracture pattern. Percutaneous fixation is a viable treatment option for patients age 60 or greater with acetabular fractures. Rates of conversion to total hip arthroplasty are comparable to open treatment methods and if conversion is required, soft tissues are preserved for future surgery.Treatment of acetabular fractures in elderly patients is controversial. Although open reduction and internal fixation of displaced fractures of the acetabulum has gained wide acceptance in the treatment of young patients, indications and results of this treatment in the elderly population are not as clear. Older patients often have health conditions that make them poor candidates for lengthy surgery, and many elderly patients have osteopenic bone that makes fracture stabilisation and maintenance of reduction difficult. The purpose of this study is to report the results of limited open reduction and percutaneous screw fixation of displaced fractures of the acetabulum in a consecutive series of elderly patients, with survival of the hip joint to total hip replacement as the primary outcome measure. After approval from our institutional review board, our institutional trauma database was searched from 1994 to 2007. Inclusion criteria were patients aged 60 or greater and who had undergone percutaneous screw fixation of an acetabular fracture. All patients meeting these criteria were included in the study, with no exclusions. Seventy-nine consecutive patients were identified, one with bilateral acetabular fractures, giving a total of 80 fractures. Basic demographic data was collected for each patient: gender, age (categorised into 5 year categories: <65, 65–70, 70–75, 75–80, 80–85, and >85). Acetabular fractures were classified according to the system of Judet and Letounel based on plain radiographs, and then separated into simple and complex fracture categories for the purposes of our analysis. Postoperative therapy was standardised. Patients who were able to comply with weight-bearing restrictions were allowed foot-flat weight bearing with a walker. If a patient was not able to comply with restricted weight bearing (for example, due to deconditioning or obesity) they were mobilised with wheelchair transfers only for a period of 2–4 weeks. Following this, they were allowed to advance to foot-flat weight bearing using a walker. Thromboprophylaxis was instituted with bilateral foot pumps or sequential compression devices and either subcutaneous heparin or enoxaparin (Lovenox, Aventis, Bridgewater, NJ). The occurrence of medical complications in hospital was recorded. Patients were discharged home when they cleared physical therapy or were discharged to a rehabilitation facility if the physicians and therapist believed the patient would benefit from extended rehabilitation. Foot-flat weight bearing was continued for 12 weeks after surgery. Patients were followed at regular intervals both clinically and radiographically. Radiographic examination included anterioposterior and oblique views of the acetabulum. A combination of medical records and telephone survey were used to obtain information about the date of last follow-up for each patient, and whether or not they had undergone conversion to total hip arthroplasty. Patients were tracked for death using the Social Security Death Index. If patients were deceased without recent follow-up, the next-of-kin was contacted to determine the date of death and if hip replacement was done prior to death. If a patient underwent a total hip arthroplasty, the date of arthroplasty was recorded as their event date (event patients). Patients were censored upon their death, or at the time of their last available follow-up (censored patients). All statistical analyses were performed using SAS (Statistical Analysis Software) v 9.1. As stated, the primary objective of this study was to determine the survival time of percutaneously treated acetabular fractures, with time to total hip replacement as the event time. Patients who died or were lost to follow-up were censored, as previously described. First, a basic survival analysis was constructed to create a survival table at each event and censoring time point, as well as a Kaplan–Meier survival curve. Next, each of the categorical variables was used to test for statistical differences in survival between groups. A likelihood ratio chi-square test for equality over strata was also performed. This crude relationship was depicted in a stratified Kaplan–Meier curve for each variable (age category, gender, complex vs. simple fractures, limited open reduction vs. closed reductions, medical complications). Finally, using the crude relationships, as well as There were 80 fractures in 79 patients. Average age was 73 During the same time period, 49 elderly patients with acetabular fractures were treated with traditional open reduction and internal fixation, and 14 were treated non-operatively. Four patients were lost to follow-up within 6 months of their discharge from the hospital, including the patient with bilateral fractures, leaving 75 patients in our study group. Of the 75 patients, a total of 19 (25%) had total hip replacements following their percutaneoulsy treated acetabulum fractures. There are 13 patients will follow-up less than 1 year. Ten of these patients died in the year following their injury and fixation without conversion to total hip arthroplasty. Their death marked the timing of their censorship in the Kaplan–Meier curve. One patient was converted to total hip arthroplasty 9 months after his index surgery and died of unrelated causes at 1.5 years after his index surgery. One patient was converted to total hip arthroplasty 8 months after index surgery and is still living. One patient with less than 1 year follow-up was doing well and not planning on conversion to arthroplasty by phone interview at 10 months after his index surgery. We have attempted to contact him since, but he has been lost to follow-up. This was the only patient censored for follow-up less than 1 year ( The Kaplan–Meier survival curve is seen in The stratified Kaplan–Meier curves for four different patient factors are shown in Finally, a Cox Proportional Hazards ratio was performed to assess the influence of four  Five patients sustained pulmonary embolism. Five patients (6%) had a loss of reduction, three in the immediate postoperative period. Two of these patients walked without any assistive device in the immediate postoperative period. One patient fell out of bed on the fifth postoperative day. The other two were ambulatory using a walker when their fractures displaced. In each case, the loss of reduction involved varying amounts of medialisation of the femoral head through the soft bone of the quadrilateral plate, mimicking the displacement seen on injury radiographs. The mean age in the loss of fixation group was 79 There were no postoperative wound infections. A 60-year-old male sustained a displaced anterior column with posterior hemitransverse fracture in a motor vehicle collision. He was taken to the operating room on the day of injury. Six years after injury the patient's hip is asymptomatic. Please see A 62-year-old male sustained a displaced anterior column with posterior hemitransverse fracture. He was taken to the operating room on postinjury day 3. He was converted to arthroplasty at 2.1 years after his index surgery. Please see Management of acetabular fractures in the elderly is controversial. Three broad categories of management have been put forth – non-operative management, traditional open reduction and internal fixation, and immediate total hip replacement. Current reports recommend non-operative management for fractures which are stable to stress or which are non-displaced, or which have secondary congruency. Open reduction and internal fixation is an accepted treatment for displaced acetabular fractures. However, not all patients are good candidates for this procedure. Tile notes, “if the patient is elderly, has poor bone that is unlikely to hold a screw, has comminution, and is in a questionable medical state, open reduction would be folly”. Elderly patients often meet both these exclusion criteria. Osteopenic bone may jeopardise the reduction, even when a skilled surgeon performs the surgery. Three large series of elderly patients treated with open reduction and internal fixation reported rates of non-antomic to poor reduction in 39–57% of patients treated. Immediate total hip arthroplasty, coupled with internal fixation to create a stable platform for the acetabular cup, is another option for treatment of acetabular fractures in the elderly. Femoral head injury, severe acetabular comminution, pre-existing arthritis, and osteopenia are cited as indications for this technique. Immediate hip arthroplasty and/or open reduction and internal fixation can be a lengthy procedure and blood loss can be substantial, with average estimates of blood loss of 1065 and 1163 Although older patients seem better able to tolerate imperfect reductions than young patients, In conclusion, we believe that examination of the data presented in Percutaneous screw fixation of acetabular fractures is a new procedure. The potential risks are not yet clearly defined, and the indications for the use of this technique are not yet fully formed. Based on the authors’ experience, most fracture patterns are amenable to percutaneous treatment; however, due to high failure rates, percutaneous fixation of unstable posterior wall fractures has been abandoned by the authors. The use of the technique is limited at this time, because it requires specialised instruments, and skillful fluoroscopy personnel. In addition, our series shows that loss of reduction due to osteopenia (6%) is a problem with the percutaneous technique, just as it is with the more traditional open procedure. None of the authors have any conflicts of interest, personal or financial, with regards to this manuscript. This research was supported by the Suzanne and Aaron A. Hoffman, MD Orthopaedic Research Fund. The authors received nothing of value in exchange for their work on this project. The medical devices mentioned in this manuscript are approved by the Food and Drug Administration.