The redox potential dependence of chalcopyrite leaching was investigated in acidic ferric chloride solutions using a specially designed batch leaching experimental setup that accurately determined and monitored changes of solution redox potential with time. The concentration ratio of ferric (Fe3+) to ferrous (Fe2+) ions and leaching rate-redox potential relationship were then determined from measured redox potential data assuming chalcopyrite oxidation with Fe3+ occurred stoichiometrically. A distinct peak was observed in the leaching rate vs. redox potential plot; that is, the leaching rate increased with increasing redox potential, reaching a (local) maximum (i.e., the peak rate) at a certain redox potential (i.e., the peak redox potential) followed by the gradual decrease in leaching rate at higher redox potentials. For example, in the experiment performed at [Cu2+] = [Fe2+] = 0.01 kmol m−3 in HCl (0.1 kmol m−3) at 343 K, the rate continuously increased with increasing redox potential, reaching the fastest rate of 9.7 × 10−8 mol s−1 g−1 (peak rate) at 0.442 V (peak redox potential). After passing this redox potential peak, the rate started to decrease, slowing down to 2.9 × 10−8 mol s−1 g−1 at 0.487 V. Using this setup, the effects of temperature and solution composition (Cu2+, Fe3+ and HCl concentrations) on the peak rate and peak redox potential were investigated. The results showed that the peak rate increased with increasing temperature, decreased with increasing HCl and Fe3+ concentrations but was not strongly affected by Cu2+ concentration. In comparison, the peak redox potential was less dependent on the temperature and concentrations of HCl and Fe3+. Although the role of Cu2+ was apparently not crucial in the occurrence of the peak rate, it exerted a relatively strong influence on the peak redox potential; that is, the peak redox potential increased with increasing Cu2+ concentration. Based on these results, an empirical equation for the relationship between peak redox potential and Cu2+ concentration was derived.Pyrometallurgy is the major route for extracting copper from its primary sulfide minerals ( One of the biggest challenges in copper hydrometallurgy is how to establish the leaching method suitable for chalcopyrite (CuFeS Previous studies have shown that the leaching rate of chalcopyrite in acid solutions strongly depended on the redox potential of the system ( To explain why faster chalcopyrite leaching rates are achieved at low redox potentials, The oxidation rate of this Cu More recently, This study investigated the effects of temperature and solution composition on the redox potential-dependent leaching of chalcopyrite in acidic ferric chloride solutions using a specially designed leaching experimental setup. Based on the results, the effects of temperature and solution composition on the peak redox potential ( A chalcopyrite specimen obtained from Copper Queen Mine, Arizona, USA was used in this study. The specimen was dry-ground in a vibratory disc mill (RS 100, Retsch Inc., Germany) and dry-sieved to obtain a 38–53 μm fraction. To remove the oxidized layer and fine particles on the surface of chalcopyrite, the ground sample was washed using a modified "washing method" based on the technique developed by The leaching experimental setup is shown in The overall reaction of chalcopyrite leaching in acidic ferric chloride solution is described in Eq. In the acidic chloride solutions of our experiments, both Fe During the leaching experiments, Fe Calculations used the values of formal electrode potential (  Equation (9) can be rearranged to Using this equation, copper extraction, The rate of copper extracted from chalcopyrite ( By combining the measured redox potential, To examine the effects of temperature on the redox potential dependence of chalcopyrite leaching, experiments were carried out at various temperatures (298, 313 and 343 K). The concentration of HCl was 0.1 kmol m   To examine the effects of HCl concentration on the redox potential dependence of chalcopyrite leaching, experiments were carried out with various HCl concentrations at 343 K. The initial concentrations of Fe  The effects of Fe   To examine the effects of Cu  As described above, the peak redox potential is independent of temperature as well as the concentrations of HCl, Fe The redox potential dependence of chalcopyrite leaching in acidic ferric chloride solutions was investigated using a specially designed batch leaching setup under different temperatures with varying concentrations of Fe In the copper extraction rate vs. redox potential curve, a peak behavior was observed; that is, the copper extraction rate increased with increasing redox potential, reaching a maximum value (peak rate) at a certain redox potential (peak redox potential). After this peak, the rate decreased with increasing redox potential. The peak rate ( None. All persons who have made substantial contributions to the work reported in the manuscript (e.g., technical help, writing and editing assistance, general support), but who do not meet the criteria for authorship, are named in the Acknowledgements and have given us their written permission to be named. If we have not included an Acknowledgements, then that indicates that we have not received substantial contributions from non-authors.