In the present study, to investigate the effects of acidic leaching on the iron removal from kaolin clay supplied by Cam-Ser Madencilik A.S., the 24 full factorial design of experiments and analysis of variance (ANOVA) were performed. The aim of the initial phase of research was to determine the effects of the main and interaction factors which can potentially influence the iron removal process. The factors were; pulp density, sulfuric acid concentration, temperature, leaching duration and reducing agent (oxalic acid, citric acid and hydrogen peroxide) concentration. The highest iron extraction yield (IEY) (26.3%) was obtained after 120min of treatment at 90°C, 20% pulp density, 3M H2SO4 and with 0.50M H2O2 as a reducing agent. For the purpose of increasing the IEY, in the second phase of research, initially the particle size of the kaolin sample was decreased to −106μm providing the liberation of iron oxides. Then, two-step leaching experiments were carried out with the optimum leaching conditions of full factorial design tests. The maximum IEY was 37.0% after two-step leaching with the optimum conditions of H2SO4 and H2SO4 with oxalic acid leaching. Iron oxide content of kaolin clay was decreased from 2.40% to 1.51%.Millions of tons of kaolin are used each year worldwide for a large variety of applications, such as paper filling and coating (45%) refractories and ceramics (31%), fiberglass (6%), cement (6%), rubber and plastic (5%), paint (3%) and others 4% ( Kaolin is a clay consisting mainly of kaolinite a hydrated aluminum silicate, with structural formula [Al Minor quantities of transition elements such as iron, titanium and manganese are generally present as ancillary minerals which adversely affect the optical properties of kaolins. Fe-oxides namely reddish hematite and yellow goethite are the main contaminants in kaolins ( Iron contents as low as 0.4–0.5% may be sufficient to use in paper and ceramic industries for which > Magnetic separation, froth flotation, selective flocculation, and chemical and biological leaching are some of the commonly practiced techniques for the removal of ferric iron oxides or hydroxides in the clay, and increase of the kaolin whiteness by the iron reduction and mobilization methods ( The physical, chemical, structural, and surface properties of kaolinite determine its applicability. These properties can be significantly modified by mechanochemical activation through dry grinding ( However, physical separation techniques such as flotation are generally less effective for iron removal than chemical bleaching aiming at dissolving iron compounds bonded at the surface or existing as distinct mineral grains. High-gradient magnetic separation (HGMS) or blending processes are also employed in the beneficiation of industrial minerals ( Although chemical leaching has high efficiency, it is costly to implement, complicated and environmentally hazardous. Recently, scientific studies have shown that biological methods using Fe(III)-reducing microorganisms have been suggested as an innovative alternative method to improve the quality of kaolins in many industrial applications and this method is low in cost, easy to operate and more environmental friendly than conventional methods. During Fe reduction, Fe oxides can be dissolved and Fe in the structure of clay minerals can also be reduced ( The use of organic acids has been very efficient for the whitening of kaolin ( The present work aims to study the characterization of kaolin clay and the removal of iron in acidic leaching conditions using organic acids. In the leaching studies the effect of parameters was investigated using factorial design ANOVA–Yates test technique. Also, two-step leaching experiments were carried out at optimum conditions to increase the iron removal yield. The kaolin clay used in this experiment was supplied by Cam-Ser Madencilik A.S., Balikesir, Turkey. The clay was crushed with a jaw crusher (Fritsch) and ground with an alumina ball mill until the particle size was − All leaching tests were conducted in a 600 While pulp density, acid concentration, leaching temperature, leaching duration and reducing agent concentration were variable parameters, stirring rate was the constant parameter. This is because stirring rate was also impeller size and solution volume dependent and higher stirrer rates cause vortex formation, optimum stirring rate (200 The leaching tests were performed to investigate mainly the effect of the investigated factors on the iron removal process. The levels (values) of the factors were based on the cited literature. The experimental conditions of each treatment investigated in 2 A 98% sulfuric acid solution (Merck) was used as the stock solutions for the experiments. Oxalic acid (OA) (H Two-step leaching tests were carried out using the results of factorial experiments for increasing iron extraction yield (IEY). For this purpose, firstly, the particle size of the kaolin sample was reduced to − The chemical composition of the kaolin clay is shown in In the thin sections obtained from the zone of 2 The experimental plan, based on full factorial design, involved sixteen tests and three replications of the center points in random order to determine iron removal from kaolin sample. Iron was removed successfully in treatment combination “abcd” (25.0%) in H Based on the experimental results of processing by Analysis of Variance (ANOVA), which was evaluated utilizing Minitab 15 Statistical Software, the main significant positive factor for IEY is the effect of pulp density (A) for four leaching sets. The H The aforementioned results show that H Comparisons between the experimental extraction yields of iron oxide and those obtained by using equations above are shown in scatter diagrams ( In first leaching step, H The IEY percentages obtained after two-step leaching are shown in In this paper, H For sulfuric acid leaching, 25.0% IEY was achieved at 90 Alternatively, by using biotechnological methods, clays with low-iron content are able to produce at lower cost, under environmentally safe and relatively less complex conditions. But these methods have lower applicability in plants and higher leaching duration. The particle size of the kaolin clay is an important parameter for the removal of iron oxide. However, decreasing further particle size of kaolin clay will increase the cost significantly. Because of the high cost of grinding steps, energy consumption is between 30 and 50% of operating cost. Nevertheless lower particle size of kaolin samples will yield higher IEYs in industrial applications as paper, ceramics, paint, etc. This work was supported by research grants from the Research Projects Coordination Unit of the