Strategies for efficient start-up of a continuous process for biooxidation of refractory gold ore and concentrate obtained from Hutti Gold Mines Limited (HGML), India are discussed in this work. The biooxidation of the concentrate at high pulp density (10%) with wild strain of Thiobacillus ferrooxidans isolated from HGML mines is characterized by significant lag phase (20 days) and incomplete oxidation (35%) even after prolonged operation (60 days). Two strategies, biooxidation with concentrate adapted cells and a step leaching strategy, in which the pulp density is progressively increased from 2% to 10% were considered and the latter resulted in efficient biooxidation of concentrate. Conversion of such a process from batch to continuous operation is shown to result in complete biooxidation of the concentrate and gold extraction efficiency in excess of 90%.The Hutti Gold Mines Company Limited (HGML), India, has recently opened various new gold mining zones and preliminary reports indicate that gold is present in refractory ores in some of these zones. As against the conventional cyanidation process, the biotechnological route would prove to be more efficient, economically viable and environmentally acceptable technology for such refractory ores ( Biooxidation was conducted in both batch and continuous mode and its effect on gold and silver recovery was studied. Biooxidation rate depends to a large extent on the efficiency of the bacterial strain used. This paper discusses the effect of pulp density on the biooxidation efficiency and brings about the start-up strategies required for optimum activity of the bacterial strain. An indigenous strain of Biooxidation experiments were done either in batch mode or in continuous mode in well agitated and aerated stirred tank bioreactors. The agitators were of pitched blade turbine design with four blades. Compressed air sparged at the rate of 0.5 V/V/min was supplemented with 1% (V/V) CO The experimental result of the batch biooxidation at various starting pulp densities is portrayed in The factors that affect biooxidation at high solids concentration include oxygen and carbon dioxide availability, low cell-to-solid ratio, mechanical damage of bacteria, and buildup of toxic leach metabolites. There are several ways of overcoming this problem. Since ferric sulphate is a good lixiviant, metabolite of a fully grown culture can be used as the leaching medium. Our experiments with 5% pd showed 88% oxidation at the end of 48 days (data not shown). Another alternative considered was to use concentrate (substrate) adapted strain. A strain of Apart from the above, step leaching technique can be a better option for such situation since it combines the advantages of both ferric iron built up and adaptation in single stage. In this technique, the leaching is started with a low pulp density and when almost all the iron has been leached out, the pulp density is increased by the addition of fresh concentrate to the running bioreactor. By doing so, the sudden exposure of unadapted bacteria to high solids concentration is avoided and thereby the inhibition of its growth minimized. The result of such an experiment with a starting pulp density of 1% is plotted in Step leaching technique with a low starting pulp density was found to be most efficient to obtain good leaching rates at high pulp densities. The cyanidation results of the biotreated samples at 10% pulp density continuous run showed about 85% gold recovery and 98% silver recovery, as against 38% and 63% obtained prior to treatment. The above results clearly demonstrate advantage of biooxidation as a pretreatment process prior to cyanidation for refractory gold containing sulphidic concentrates. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial assistance provided by Department of Biotechnology, Government of India and Hutti Gold Mines Company Limited.