Laminar movement of concentrated kaolin pulps is difficult without the use of dispersing agents. The aim of this work was to contribute to a better understanding of the fundamental aspects of kaolin pulp rheology using colloidal chemistry theory. Zeta potential and rheology were evaluated with and without a dispersant as a function of pH and dispersant concentration. Total interparticle interaction energy was calculated by means of DLVO theory. Finally, rheological data was coordinated with the calculated data from DLVO theory. It was concluded that DLVO theory was qualitatively related to the rheological behaviour of kaolin pulps.Concentrated kaolin pulps are utilized in the paper industry as coatings. Elevated shear rates during pulp application produce high viscosities, which inhibit laminar movement producing bubbles or even tearing of the paper. In order to minimize this effect, pH adjustment and dispersant additions are made to pulps ( Suspension rheology can be affected by: volumetric solids fraction particle size distribution, particle shape, floc and electroviscous effects ( It should be noted that apart from the nature of the particles and their concentration, interparticle interactions have an important role in the rheology of the suspension, especially at colloidal sizes ( The aim of the present work was to evaluate the pulp rheological data of kaolin from electrokinetic properties by the DLVO theory. The raw material was a beneficiated kaolin sample from Mineração Monte Pascoal LTDA (named Coat 90). This sample essentially contains kaolinite of pseudo-hexagonal crystals and with bimodal distribution (80% less than 2 Electrokinetic studies were carried out in a Malvern Zeta Master. The zeta potential data obtained was used to estimate the total interparticle interaction energy (TIIE) by means of DLVO theory. Israelachvili approach (1992) was used, which accounts for spherical particles with the same size, where Boltzmann’s constant temperature (298 mean radius (kaolin particle) bulk electrolyte concentration tanh( Debye length interparticle distance of closest approach Hamaker effective constant For 1:1 electrolytes: Viscosity values were obtained from a Haake Rheo Stress Rheometer using concentrated kaolin aqueous suspensions (50  The modifications of the kaolin surfaces due to dispersant addition are shown in Analyzing   The results achieved allow us to conclude that the anions generated are chemically adsorbed by kaolin, preferentially to the edges faces; pH increase and dispersant addition generate increasingly negative zeta potential values (up to pH 8 and dispersant concentration 3 Finally DLVO theory proved to be qualitatively related to the rheological behaviour of the kaolin pulps in the absence and presence of the dispersant used.