We describe a comminuted intercondylar fracture of the distal femur that was associated with a coronal split of both condyles, essentially double Hoffa fractures. Initially poorly treated, revisional reconstruction with small fragment screw fixation and the LISS-DF device was performed. The patient regained active knee ROM from 10 to 100° and the fracture had healed after 8 weeks. A 20-year-old woman was involved in a 50 Revision fixation via the normal lateral approach proved difficult due to early healing in the fracture gaps and a tibial tubercle osteotomy was required to expose the intra-articular fragments. This revealed displaced Hoffa fractures of both femoral condyles in addition to the intercondylar split, together forming a cruciate fracture pattern. After removal of the previous implants, the condylar fragments were reconstructed using two antero-posterior screws 3.5 Post-operatively, unrestricted active and passive knee movements but touch weight bearing were encouraged and a hinged knee brace applied. At 3 weeks she had regained 30–80° of knee motion and 8 weeks 10–100°. Radiographs ( The “Hoffa” fracture is a rare injury where there is a coronal plane fracture in the femoral condyle. This was first described by Friedrich Busch in 1869 and later by Albert Hoffa in 1904. Our patient had both the condyles split in the coronal plane and intercondylar fracture with metaphyseal comminution (AO/OTA 33C2.3). After each condyle was reconstructed they were fixed together to restore the anatomy of articular mass. The use of 3.5 cortical screws instead of larger screws for articular reconstruction has been described recently particularly with regard to the tibial plateau The LISS-DF device allows fixed angle stabilisation without the loss of bone stock associated with the DCS and gives varus–valgus control which is not possible with a condylar buttress plate. In this scenario, the multiple potential screw positions provided fracture fixation while accommodating the distal femoral defect caused by the previous DCS and the space limitations produced by the distal femoral screw fixation. We do not believe any other device would have worked satisfactorily in this situation. The early healing seen in the case has been typical of our experience with LISS.