Bioleaching, also referred to as minerals biooxidation, and bioremediation have been widely employed commercially for heap and dump bioleaching of secondary copper sulfide ores, sulfidic-refractory gold concentrates and treatment of acid rock drainage. Technical and commercial challenges, identified in this paper, remain for bioleaching of primary sulfides and complex ores. New frontiers for the technology exist in processing massive sulfides, silicate-locked minerals and in the more distant future in-situ leaching. Decommissioning of cyanide heap leach operations and stabilizing mine wastes using biotechnology are opportunities requiring intensive and focused research, development and engineering efforts.The past decade has been particularly dramatic in view of increasing metal prices to unprecedented high levels followed by an unparalleled event of precipitously declining base metal prices with rapid increase in production costs, and finally a sustained period of uncertainty in metal prices. These events have dramatically impacted the global mining community. The mining industry, however, has always been a “boom-and-bust” business, exhibiting cycles of high and low metal prices. These cycles have a substantial effect on the growth and contraction of the industry. When metal prices decline, costs increase, or both, high-cost mines are usually moth-balled, production is often curtailed, mine plans may be changed to target higher metal grades, expenditures including research and development are often severely cut-back, and lay-offs that include research and engineering personnel are implemented. But do boom-and-bust cycles have an effect on metal recovery innovations and the practice of these innovations? Those who research, develop, engineer and apply biohydrometallurgical processes for mine production and metals remediation tend to believe that biotechnical processes have lower capital and operating costs than competitive technologies and therefore should perhaps be more economical to implement during mining down-cycles than other processes. Is this really the case? To test this theory, the prices of two metals – gold and copper – were plotted against time and superimposed on these graphs are biohydrometallurgical processes for mine production and remediation that have been demonstrated or put into practice. This paper discusses these findings, other motivating factors for biohydrometallurgical innovation, technical and commercial challenges of implementing biohydrometallurgy in an industry prone to the ups and downs of market economics, and concludes with a discussion of the future of biohydrometallurgy which includes both production and metals remediation technologies.   Metal prices, of course, are not the only motivating factor for employing biohydrometallurgical processes ( Cost of production — as energy costs escalate, mining, processing, and environmental costs substantially increase. Some biohydrometallurgical methods for processing and remediation are less energy intensive than alternative technologies and can potentially reduce costs for the industry. Also, biohydrometallurgical processing methods eliminate Net Smelter Royalties associated with smelting and refining and potential penalty charges associated with smelting feeds with impurities ( Exploitation of ore deposits not amenable to conventional processes or otherwise difficult to exploit — one such example is the development of secondary copper sulfide ore deposits, which may be too small or too remote to be economically amenable to making a flotation concentrate either for shipping or onsite smelting. Another example is processing of sulfidic-refractory gold ore properties located in regions where biooxidation technologies may be more suitable for cost and workforce reasons. A third example is ores deposits with complex mineralogy; such deposits are difficult to treat and biohydrometallurgy may be a viable alternative. Maximizing use of existing capital investment — many copper operations already have installed solvent extraction-electrowinning plants that represent a significant investment. Applying bioleaching for processing copper sulfides allows for use and expansion of these facilities ( Environmental permitting for mining operations can be long and difficult — the use of biohydrometallurgical processes for both mineral processing and treatment of effluents may offer some environmental advantages over more conventional technologies. In some cases bioprocessing is seen as a “green” technology. Biohydrometallurgical technologies for mineral processing and metals remediation are developed by mining companies, biotechnology companies, government laboratories, university research scientists and engineers, and mining consultants. The path from laboratory research to commercial application of biohydrometallurgical technologies developed by these various entities has many obstacles and challenges: Time Site specificity — bioprocessing and metals bioremediation technologies are usually site specific. Therefore, nearly every process that is developed requires on-site piloting and perhaps even large-scale demonstration. On-site pilot trials and demonstration-scale testing can be very costly and time-consuming. Long-term commitments of time, money, facilities, personnel and management are required not only by the mining company whose property and resources will be used, but also for the company or institution whose technology is being evaluated. Competitiveness — biohydrometallurgical processes must compete technically and cost-wise with alternative technologies. In the case of bioleaching, the technology must compete with making and selling a concentrate, pressure oxidation, roasting/smelting, and emerging chemical leaching processes. Metals bioremediation must compete with alkaline precipitation – a process that has long been used by the industry – and other technologies, such as ion exchange and reverse osmosis, which are used by the industry under certain circumstances. There are a number of factors that the mining industry must consider when selecting a processing or remediation technology. Bioprocesses may not always meet all of the criteria. Risk — new technologies whether they are bioprocesses or physical/chemical processes have a modest chance of success. The risks involved in commercially exploiting new technologies have been detailed by others ( Capital investment — new technologies often require a substantial capital investment, since new unit processes may be required on the front-end and the back-end of the actual biohydrometallurgical process. For example, the 20,000 tonne per annum BioCOP Intellectual property Process guarantees Availability of skilled engineers and scientists — dramatic declines in metal prices nearly always result in the mining industry cutting-back on research and development, which means lay-offs of experienced scientists and engineers who may have worked decades on biohydrometallurgical processes. Industry is not the only sector subject to the loss of talent. Declining metal prices and a sluggish economy usually result in less money for R&D at universities and government laboratories. Mining schools may even cut-back curriculum and professors, who have long been involved in biohydrometallurgical research. Such cut-backs in talent and R&D can have a serious impact when the economy recovers and decisions are made to consider biohydrometallurgy as a processing option. Talent is no longer available and corporate memory is lost. It may take years before less experienced scientists and engineers can become acquainted with techniques and historical developments and constructively contribute to the state-of-the-art of the technology. The commercial challenges of implementing biohydrometallurgy should not discourage research and development. Despite the boom-and-bust cycles of mining and metal industries, companies do rely on innovation to remain competitive, decrease production and environmental costs, confidently process complex ores, surmount environmental permitting issues and maximize investment. Some of the technical challenges and opportunities to be addressed by research and development are discussed: Heap leaching of primary sulfide minerals — progress has been made recently in the heap bioleaching of chalcopyrite ( Heap bioleach model development, integration, and validation — there have been mathematical models developed for various heap leaching aspects such as hydrology and heat balance, however, more robust modeling is needed for the microbial aspects of heap leaching. To fully exploit the value of heap modeling, the models must be integrated and validated using data from existing commercial-scale operations. This effort not only requires a team effort by researchers and engineers, but also the commitment by industry to support the effort by providing information on heaps. Some of the information necessary to validate models will require heap leach data that are currently not collected. Better understanding of secondary copper sulfide heap leaching — although crushed ore heap leaching of secondary copper sulfides has been widely used for over a decade, there are still some production issues. Some specific technical questions follow: How long does it take for the microbial population to develop in the heap when the source of the organisms is the raffinate and natural development in the stacked ore? Would inoculation of the ore be of any benefit? Is aeration necessary during the entire leach period and what aeration rate is really needed? Why does the temperature in most secondary copper heap leach operations remain quite cool? Is this a result of slow oxidation of sulfides, the absence of pyrite oxidation, or are there other reasons? What is occurring at the microbe/mineral interface in terms of ORP, pH, and dissolved metals and how does this relate to what is observed in the bulk solution? Designing heap leaching for complex polymetallic ores, massive sulfide-type ores, and silicate-bound minerals — heap bioleaching of complex ores can result in conditions considerably different from those observed in secondary copper heap leaching ( In-situ leaching — as the world becomes more urbanized, it is inevitable that more people will live closer to mining operations. Therefore, it is increasingly important that we lessen the footprint of mining. In-situ mining is an approach that could substantially diminish the surface impacts of mining. How to effectively accomplish in-situ mining for many minerals is a huge challenge. Can biological methods somehow be exploited? Can we use microbial technology to contain leach solutions in subsurface deposits? Can we use microbes to increase the permeability of subsurface deposits? Can we use bioleaching? Are there alternative electron acceptors that can be used in the bioleach process? Are there new microbe-based mineral dissolution processes that we should be considering? While in-situ technology for some minerals is far in the future, it is not too soon to begin to develop the fundamentals around such a processing option. Technology for decommissioning cyanide Technology for stabilizing sulfide Biohydrometallurgy for both mine production and remediation will continue to play an important role in mining and metal industries. Bioleaching lends itself economically and technically to the processing of small deposits that can't support high capital costs, remote deposits where making and shipping concentrates may not be a viable option, low-grade ores that can't be cost-effectively treated by existing technologies, and complex ores. Bioleaching also offers opportunities as an auxiliary process for on-site generation of acid for adjunct operations, such as base metal oxide heap leaching. Bioleaching, in some cases, may be more environmentally acceptable than other technologies resulting in faster permitting of operations. Despite its commercial successes there are technical challenges that need to be addressed even for existing applications. While emphasis has been placed largely on the bioleaching of sulfidic-refractory gold concentrates in stirred-tank reactors and on the dump and heap bioleaching of secondary copper sulfide ores, development is underway on heap leaching of low-grade chalcopyrite ores ( Metals bioremediation has been extensively exploited for acid rock drainage treatment using passive methods such as constructive anaerobic wetlands and employing more engineered processes (