A low cost and eco-friendly technology to bioremediate toxic metals associated with fly ash dumps that contaminate ground and surface water in and around fly ash settling ponds, was investigated. The impact of augmentation of fly ash tolerant bacterial strains, isolated from Typha latifolia growing naturally on fly ash dumps, was studied for metal extractability. It was observed that most of the bacterial strains either induced the bioavailability of Fe, Zn and Ni or immobilized Pb, Cr, Cu, Cd in the fly ash. However, there were few exceptions also. In case of Ni, eight strains enhanced metal mobility, while others caused metal immobilization. The findings also suggest that metal solublization and immobilization are specific to bacterial strains. While induced bioavailability of metals by bacteria may be used to accelerate the phytoextraction of metals from fly ash by hyper accumulator plants, immobilization of metals can check their migration to water reservoirs and reduce the human suffering in affected areas. Thus, bacteria serve the dual purpose and may result in the microbe- assisted phytoremediation of contaminated sites.In India, fly ash disposal around coal-fired thermal power plants is a potential source of air and water pollution. In the year 2003–2004, the fly ash generation has already touched the mark of 125 million tones and encroached more than 30,000 hectares of agricultural and forest land ( As an alternative, synergistic use of plants and microbe is suggested by Bioleaching of metals (Al, Fe, and Zn) from incinerator fly ash was found accelerated by On the other hand, metals may be also immobilized as insoluble sulfides indirectly by the metabolic activity of sulfate reducing bacteria ( In view of above observations, in this investigation, we studied the role of fly ash tolerant bacteria in metal solublization and immobilization with two objectives: (i) the bacterial strains responsible for metal mobility may be used in rhizospheric manipulation to enhance the phytoextraction of metals by plants through bioaugmentation; (ii) while metal immobilizing bacterial strains may be used to check migration of metals to water reservoirs from fly ash dumps. Fly ash samples were collected from the rhizosphere of Electrical conductivity and pH of fly ash were determined by Orion electrical conductivity meter and Orion pH meter. For metal analysis in fly ash, 1 Bacterial isolation was carried out from the fly ash of rhizospheric zone of NBRFT1, NBRFT2, NBRFT3, NBRFT4, NBRFT5, NBRFT6, NBRFT7, NBRFT8, NBRFT9, NBRFT10, NBRFT11. All the bacterial strains were inoculated separately in nutrient broth (NB composition 1 Having potential to strongly chelate Fe, Cu, Mn, and Zn etc. from the exchangeable fractions, EDTA was selected as a metal extractant in the fly ash ( Therefore, in the beginning of experiment i.e. 0 days and after 7 days, 15 days, and 30 days of incubation with different bacterial strains, a synthetic chelate EDTA was used for the extraction of metals from the fly ash incubated with different bacterial strains separately. EDTA extractable fractions were obtained separately from all the replicates of different strains by mechanically shaking of 10 Data on metal mobilization and immobilization were subjected to two-way ANOVA to know the relationship of metal extractability with bacterial strain and incubation period. Then after, these data were statistically analyzed for DMRT ( Biochemical characterization of the bacterial strains isolated from the fly ash was carried out following the standard methods outlined by Fly ash is primarily made up of oxides of Al and Si, but also enriched with several other essential (Zn, Fe, Mn, B, and Mo) and non- essential metals (Ni, Cr, Pb, Co Al, Si). Its particle size ranges between 10 and 150 CFU values contained in The biochemical characteristics of the bacterial strains isolated from the fly ash dumps indicated that out of 11 strains, five were found gram negative (NBRFT1, NBRFT7, NBRFT8, NBRFT10, NBRFT11) and remaining strains were gram positive (NBRFT2, NBRFT3, NBRFT4, NBRFT5, NBRFT6, NBRFT9).All of them were aerobic bacteria, as none of the bacterial strain could grow in Pseudomonas agar. This shows that this organism was absent in the fly ash ( All the bacterial strains, isolated from the rhizosphere of Zn availability induced by bacteria from fly ash has been depicted in Unlike Zn, copper was immobilized by most of the bacterial strains as indicated in Similar to Zn, iron availability was also significantly induced by the bacterial action in the fly ash, which was highly enriched with Fe. On the basis of Fe availability, the bacterial strains may be arranged in the order as; NBRFT9 Like Copper, Cadmium was also immobilized by the bacterial activities in the fly ash, reducing is leachability to ground or surface water. Among the bacterial strains, their immobilization potential varied significantly. It was observed that strains NBRFT2, NBRFT4 and NBRFT7 showed an increasing trend of Cd immobilization with incubation period, while strains NBRFT 3, NBRFT6 and NBRFT 11 exhibited reverse trend ( As indicated in Unlike Ni, Pb immobility was induced in the fly ash by the action of all bacteria used in the experimental set up ( Similar to Pb, Chromium, the most toxic metal present in fly ash, was also immobilized by most of the bacteria except NBRFT1, which induced metal bioavailability. In this case, six strains showed decreasing trend of immobilization, while three strains exhibited an increasing trend with incubation period. However, remaining two strains showed no correlation with incubation period. At 7 days incubation, Cr immobilization was enhanced between a minimum of 23% and a maximum of 85%, while at 15 days incubation, it varied between 16% and 100% and at 30 days incubation, between 7% and 99% ( Statistical analysis (ANOVA) indicated that solublization and immobilization of metals in fly ash are significantly governed by the bacterial strains ( When bacterial strains, isolated from the rhizosphere of Soil bacteria have been known to exude biosurfactants, organic acids and to produce siderophores which stimulate metal bioavailability in soil and thereby facilitate their uptake through root absorption of various metal ions, including Fe Some bacteria are also capable to reduce Cr (VI) to Cr (III) in both aerobic and anaerobic conditions. Anaerobic bacteria may use chromate as a terminal electron acceptor or reduce chromate in periplasmatic space by hydrogenase or cytochrome C Zn and Cd, occur in soil primarily as insoluble precipitates ( Thus, bacteria involve various metabolic processes to enhance the solublization and immobilization of heavy metals in the soils or industrial wastes as per their requirements. Among eleven bacterial strains, NBRFT2 (MTCC 9018), NBRFT4 (MTCC 9021), NBRFT5 (MTCC 8912), and NBRFT9 (MTCC 8913) were found very effective in enhancing mobility or immobilization of toxic metals from fly ash. Besides, metal mobility and immobility are also governed by the physico–chemical properties of the contaminated soils. pH, in particular, has got an inverse relationship with metal leachability. Use of microorganisms for the decontamination of metal-contaminated sites has attracted attention in recent years, because of their low cost, self driven and eco-friendliness. Mechanisms of microbial solublization and immobilization of metal (loids) and radionuclides are of high potential for bioremediation and hence may be integral to the operation of several successful The findings conclusively suggest that bacteria play an important role in inducing metal mobilization and immobilization in fly ash, which may be used for bioremediation of metal contaminated sites. The authors are thankful to Director, NBRI for laboratory facilities and to CSIR for additional support through network project (COR008).