For the production of high-strength lump coke from non-baking coals the processing, agglomeration and gentle coking of the agglomerates are essential steps. In previous studies the influence of the processing regime and the briquetting and coking parameters were systematically analysed.
                  The current investigations combined the intensive processing of German and Indonesian brown coals in a twin-screw extruder and a swing mill with the addition of 5 wt% draff as a coking additive. Briquetting the mixture of coal and draff leads to an increasing briquette compressive strength. This binding capability of the draff is probably caused by the denaturation of protein during the processing in the twin-screw extruder and the swing mill. The produced coke as well offers a high mechanical strength. During the coking process the protein and cellulose material could be partially converted to solid bridges between the particles causing a higher coke compressive strength.Brown coal high temperature coke dry dry and ash free German brown coal High Conversion Soaker Cracking – Residue Oil Supercritical Extraction Indonesian brown coal (formerly) Department of Briquetting swing mill twin-screw extruder ash content wt% grain size, diameter mm grain size fraction mm gross heating value kJ kg height of the briquette mm lower heating value kJ kg total mass of briquettes in the IfB drum g mass of briquettes on the 30 mm sieve g briquetting pressure MPa abrasion resistance, residue on the 30 mm sieve wt% gross density g cm briquette/coke compressive strength MPa dwell time h briquetting temperature °C pyrolysis temperature °C rotor velocity m s heating rate K min velocity of the piston for the determination of the compression resistance mm min moisture content wt% In order to enlarge the raw material base for lump coke the usage of modified non-baking coal could be a promising perspective, especially for those countries which do not have direct access to the valuable coking coals. A possibility of modification could be the blending of non-baking coals with baking coals. But this option is only feasible up to a certain fraction of the non-baking component. If the coke should be mainly made out of the non-baking coal, the intensive processing of the non-baking coal, the agglomeration to high-quality briquettes and the gentle pyrolysis of those briquettes are the essential steps The lump coke production using non-baking coals was developed by Erich Rammler and Georg Bilkenroth in 1952 for a Lusatian brown coal In order to reach these quality standards Fehse et al. As shown in literature there is a large number of potential coking additives which is very important with regard on the regional availability and the price of the coking additives. Therefore it is very reasonable to enlarge this basis of potential coking additives. Particularly the usage of biomass waste might be promising. Zhu et al. In this work the application of draff of Freiberg brewery (Freiberger Brauhaus GmbH) as coking additive was experimentally investigated. Draff offers a high amount of protein For the present investigations a German brown coal (GBC) with an ash content of A = 5.33 wt% (d) and a moisture content of w = 51.2 wt% and an Indonesian brown coal (IBC) with an ash content of A = 2.96 wt% (d) and a moisture content of w = 54.3 wt% were used. The ultimate analyses of both coals as well as the lower (LHV) and gross calorific value (GHV) are given in Investigating the influence of the processing parameters and the influence of the coking additive two different approaches were used ( In the Using the After investigating the coal processing it was tested if the heating regime could be slightly increased according to previous investigations In order to characterise the briquette and coke quality the following parameters were determined: In the first experimental series the briquettes and cokes were produced according to the conventional BHT approach and according to the new approach with the addition of draff and processing in the twin screw extruder (TSE) or in the swing mill (SM). The results of the briquette and coke quality are shown in The variation of the processing regime and the addition of draff shows an influence on the briquette and coke quality with respect to density, compressive strength and abrasion resistance. The briquettes produced according to the conventional BHT approach offer a raw density of 1.225 g cm Regarding the briquette and coke compressive strength similar correlations can be detected. Using the conventional BHT approach briquettes with a compressive strength of 21.4 MPa and coke with a compressive strength of 16.0 MPa were produced. If the coal is mixed with 5 wt% draff and comminuted in the twin-screw extruder the briquette compressive strength increases to 33.8 MPa and the coke compressive strength reaches 72.6 MPa and even exceeds the briquette compressive strength. If the mixture of coal and draff is comminuted in the swing mill the briquettes and cokes even reach a compressive strength of 47.5 MPa (briquette) and 68.2 MPa (coke). The proteins in the draff are probably denaturated during comminution in the twin-screw extruder and in the swing mill and homogeneously spread in the mixture. They lead to solid bridges between the coal particles and result in a stronger briquette formation. The intense comminution of the coal itself leads to a higher binding potential of the mixture as well. Due to the intensive comminution the shrinkage behaviour of the coke improves and analogue to the raw density the coke compressive strength increases. The draff in the briquette formation may lead to melted bridges in the coke due to the conversion process during pyrolysis ( Those effects are also visible for the abrasion resistance of the briquettes and coke. Although the abrasion resistance is on a high level even for the conventional approach an increase in the strength could be determined by adding draff to the mixture and improvement of the processing regime. This means during handling, transportation and charging of the briquettes and coke only a slight abrasion might be expected in comparison to the briquettes and cokes from the conventional approach. For the German brown coal the influence of draff addition and intensive processing in the twin-screw extruder was investigated. The quality parameters of briquettes and coke are shown in The results of the investigations with the German brown coal confirm the results and effects especially for the presented processing approach with draff addition for the Indonesian coal. If the coal is processed using the conventional BHT approach the raw density reaches 1.212 g cm The compressive strength of the German brown coal is on a lower level for both approaches than for the Indonesian coal but even here the presented processing approach and the addition of draff leads to an increase in strength by a factor of 2.68 (briquettes) and 1.82 (coke) in comparison to the conventional BHT approach, presuming the denaturation of proteins of the draff and the intensive comminution. Hence the benchmark of the coke compressive strength of 50 MPa could not be reached. The briquettes and coke also offer a high abrasion resistance for both approaches. But the addition of draff and the intensive processing lead to an increase of the abrasion resistance as well (98.2 wt% for the briquettes and 97.4 wt% for the coke). Whereas in the first investigations the briquettes were coked using the Vollmaier regime, previous investigations showed that the heating rate in the second stage might be increased to 3.5 K min As shown in The coke compressive strength decreases from 76.6 MPa to 66.4 MPa, which means a decline of the compressive strength in comparison to the Vollmaier Regime of 13.3 wt%. This decrease in compressive strength may have its origin in the higher heating rate which leads to a faster degassing during pyrolysis and a weakening of the lump coke structure. This effect could not be detected for the abrasion resistance. The addition of 5 wt% draff and the intensive processing of the brown coal is a promising possibility to increase the mechanical quality of briquettes and coke of Indonesian and German brown coal. With the new processing approach the briquette compressive strength for Indonesian Coal is 1.6 times higher and the coke compressive strength is 4.5 times higher than for the conventional approach. The abrasion resistance of the briquettes and coke is on a high level even using the conventional approach but could be also increased using the new processing regime and draff addition. The raw density of the briquettes is on a high level for both approaches. But due to the intensive processing and the draff addition the coke raw density could be clearly improved. For the German brown coal the new processing approach leads to a higher briquette and coke quality as well: The raw density of the briquettes and coke increases with the new processing approach. The compressive strength of the briquettes could be nearly doubled and the coke compressive strength could be more than doubled in comparison to the conventional BHT approach. Although, the benchmark of 50 MPa coke compressive strength could not be reached yet. The abrasion resistance could be increased from 90 wt% to 98 wt% for the briquettes and from 88 wt% to 97 wt% for the coke. An increase of the heating rate for the Indonesian coal in the second heating stage from 2.85 K min