Trace additions of elemental Boron to Ti-6A-4V melt has a marked influence on the as-cast microstructure and mechanical properties. In this study, dry sliding wear behavior of as-cast Ti-6Al-4V alloys containing 0%, 0.3% and 0.55% B was investigated in the temperature range of 300–573 K against the hardened steel as the counterface material. The results indicate that wear rate decreases initially with small additions of B and then increases again with subsequent additions. It is found that decrease in grain and lath sizes decreases the wear rate while the increase in volume fraction of TiB increases it. At low temperatures and low volume fractions of TiB, the wear mechanism is primary adhesive or abrasive in nature while at high temperature the mechanism changes to abrasive or delamination wear. A close examination of sub-surface microstructures of the worn surfaces reveals an intensive shearing of the laths at room temperature, while a noticeable shearing is not observed at high temperatures. The topographical analysis of the worn surfaces using SEM and AFM reveal severe plowing of the material, particularly at high TiB content. Debonding of the TiB particles and their participation in the wear appears to be the possible reasons for the high wear rate observed in a Ti-6Al-4V alloy containing 0.55% B.Titanium alloys Zhu et al. Sen and co-workers Ti64 alloys are often used in disc brakes of aircrafts where they experience severe contact loading conditions. During several instances, the composite lining of the brake pads wears off and thus exposing the underlying steel parts directly to come in contact with the Ti64 disc. Therefore, along with other mechanical properties, these alloys must exhibit good resistance to contact loading conditions Wear experiments are carried out on three different as-cast Ti alloys (Ti64-xB, x = 0, 0.3 and 0.55 wt% B) and the complete processing details of these alloys is discussed in Ref The microstructures of the as-cast Ti64-0B, 0.3B and 0.55B alloys are presented in The wear rate,  The representative surface morphologies of the worn-out surfaces obtained using SEM and contact profilometer are presented in The representative optical micrographs of the regions just beneath the wear surface are presented in The reasons for lath kinking at room temperature is due to high shear stresses acting at the contact surfaces. At high temperatures, where diffusion related phenomena are very active, lath kinking appears to be insignificant. Another important observation from the The microstructural parameters such as grain size, lath size, and second phase particles have a considerable influence on the wear rate and corresponding wear mechanisms. Both fine grain and lath sizes generally tend to increase the wear resistance It is well-established fact that stable surface tribo-oxides increased the wear resistance of materials  It has been observed in the literature that the coefficient of friction, μ, increases with increase in The following conclusions can be drawn from the experimental results and subsequent analysis, of the wear behavior of Boron modified as-cast Ti64 alloys. Boron addition causes a substantial reduction in grain size of the Ti64 alloys and also imparts the TiB particles into the microstructure. The presence of TiB particles have a malign effect on the wear behavior. The high contact forces at the pin-disc interface causes debonding of the TiB particles. This hard TiB particles also participate in the wear process causing a severe delamination of pin surface. At low temperatures, lath kinking appears to be the dominant phenomenon by which as-cast microstructure offers resistance to the contact loads while at high temperatures severe kinking is not observed due to the diffusion related softening mechanisms. Further, surface oxides do not play any role on the observed wear behavior for the test conditions used in the current work. The coefficient of friction increases with increase in temperature and does not the follow the same trend as wear rate. We would like to acknowledge the help of Prof. U. Ramamurty of NTU, Singapore for providing the materials used in the experiments and Dr. Gaurav Singh for helpful discussions.