A new method for the experimental estimation of radiant heat emittance at high temperatures has been developed which involves aero-acoustic levitation of samples, laser heating and contactless temperature measurement. Radiant heat emittance values are determined from the time dependent development of the sample temperature which requires analysis of both the radiant and convective heat transfer towards the surroundings by means of fluid dynamics calculations. First results for the emittance of a corundum sample obtained with this method are presented in this article and found in good agreement with literature values.Each body takes part in a continuous exchange of radiant heat with its surroundings. The heat flow between the bodies taking part in that exchange is determined by their temperatures and their absorptivities and emittivities, respectively. The latter describes a body’s ability to emit heat in comparison with an ideal Black Body radiator for which the value becomes unity. Its knowledge is crucial for heat balance calculations or measuring techniques based on heat flow, e.g. temperature measurement by optical pyrometry. For optically smooth surfaces the emissivity is given by the complex refractive index Measurement techniques are, however, rather limited with regard to high temperatures and especially when molten sample material is to be investigated. Firstly, the melting points of most mineral materials may easily exceed the operating temperature ranges of any crucible, reference radiator or thermocouple material in use. Furthermore, dissolution or chemical reactions with the crucible or thermocouple materials may lead to undesired contamination of the samples. Additionally, for the radiation comparison methods the exact knowledge of both the sample and reference radiator temperatures is required, since according to Stefan–Boltzmann’s law the radiant heat emitted by a surface correlates with its temperature to the power of four. For the reasons given above, contacting temperature measurement with thermocouples is considered unsuitable for the determination of emittances of mineral samples at their melting points. In order to overcome these limitations, an emittance measurement method has been developed which does not require a reference radiator and which does not rely on absolute temperature measurements. Samples are levitated in an aero-acoustic levitator and their temperatures elevated beyond their melting point by means of laser heating. The sample temperatures are measured contact-free by an optical pyrometer. In this specific setup, knowledge of the absolute sample temperature is not required to obtain emittance values. Instead, time resolved temperature development during the cooling down phase of the sample is measured. The experiments described in this article have been carried out with the aero-acoustic levitator of the Institute of Mineral Engineering at the RWTH Aachen University, which is depicted in In this setup a spherical sample of about 3 Amplitude, frequency and phase of the sound emitted by the acoustic transducers as well as the laser power are set and controlled from a computer workstation. Furthermore, the sample temperatures measured by the pyrometer and the images recorded by the high-speed camera are evaluated at that workstation. Sample placement and the gas flow meter are controlled manually by a second operator. Apart from its utility as a calibration substance for the pyrometer, Al The spherical sample is levitated by means of a gas jet and heated by absorption of laser radiation. Once a certain temperature is reached, the sum of heat flows through the sample surface vanishes and the sample temperature remains constant. However, as soon as the lasers are switched off, net heat is released by the sample due to convective heat transfer towards the gas jet and emittance of thermal radiation into the surroundings. Heat transfer by means of conduction towards the surrounding fluid is considered negligible: This heat release is accompanied by a decrease in sample temperature which is proportional to its mass and specific heat: While the former is well known, the latter can be derived from the Shomate equation as a function of temperature using a polynomial approach. Suitable coefficients for corundum are published over the whole temperature range examined in this experiment When inserting In the above two Eqs. In fluid mechanics the heat transfer coefficient α is usually expressed via For spherical samples with either small diameters or low temperature gradients against the fluid Furthermore, the term for forced convection Similarly, the turbulent term can be derived from the general relation given by In the admittedly keen calculation outlined above in Eqs. The gas stream temperature and velocity have been measured with a thermocouple and a rotameter, respectively, as With an assumed jet angle of For the Reynolds number Experimental results for the measurement of the temperature development of an Al Initially, the curve shows a nearly constant temperature of around 2200 It is noticeable that the cooling curve of the solidified sample divides into two distinct intervals featuring different slopes and an inflection point between them. In the early range from the recalescence up to the 44,000 The diagram in According to Substitution of From From the development of the radiant heat flow shown above, the sample emittance The latter diagram shows that the measured sample emittance starts at the lowest measuring temperature of 720 The temperature dependent emittance values of the corundum sample measured in this work and depicted in Typically, methods measuring the optical properties of materials are constrained by uncertainties in the sample temperature measurement. For example, thermocouples are usually not applied directly to the heat emitting surface of a sample but instead attached into its volume, where they act as heat sinks and thermal gradients add to their inaccuracy. Furthermore, thermocouples are rather limited with regard to measuring frequency and are generally not applicable in the temperature range up to the melting point of the corundum samples investigated here. Pyrometry, on the other hand, allows for rapid measurements of surface temperatures. However, in order to obtain absolute temperature values additional information about the sample emittance is required. This is, in turn, often unknown or as in the present case even one of the desired experimental results. In the experimental setup presented here, however, the sample emittance is derived solely from the time derivative of the sample temperature instead of its absolute value. Consider the temperature By finding the time derivative Without doubt, however, the main source of uncertainty in the method presented here is the analytic estimation of the convective heat flow. While the empirical equations outlined in In the work presented here, the radiant heat emittance of an Al Further experiments are planned to enhance the temperature range and to extend the sample material to other minerals with well-known melting points, e.g. ZrO There is no conflict of interest.