In this study, an integrated process was developed to separate and simultaneously recover both magnesium and lithium from brines. This technology includes production of magnesium-aluminum-carbonate-layered double hydroxide materials (MgAlCO3-LDHs), removal of boron, CO3
                     2–, and SO4
                     2−, and precipitation of lithium carbonate. Factors such as water addition ratio, Mg2+/Al3+ mole ratio, and lithium loss rate were investigated during MgAlCO3-LDHs production. The effects of lithium concentration and CO3
                     2−/2Li+ mole ratio on lithium carbonate precipitation were also studied. It was found magnesium and lithium had been effectively separated after MgAlCO3-LDHs production. The magnesium content in brine displayed a notable decrease from 117g/L to less than 0.02g/L with a lithium yield more than 95.0%. To concentrate lithium and precipitate lithium carbonate, 96.46% of boron, 99.2% of the CO3
                     2−, and 99.56% of the SO4
                     2− impurities were removed from the brine by adsorption, acidification, and precipitation, respectively. The lithium yield was more than 91% when lithium concentration in brine approximated 27g/L and the CO3
                     2−/2Li+ mole ratio was 1.2. The purity of this product was 99.70%. Overall, this study provides an interesting vision for future integrated utilization of magnesium and lithium resources from salt lake brines with high Mg/Li ratio.Lithium, known as “the new energy metal promoting the world forward”, is widely used in lithium-ion batteries, aircraft alloys, aviation, atomic energy, medicine and other industries due to its unique electrochemical reactivity as well other properties ( Layered double hydroxides (LDHs), also called hydrotalcites or hydrotalcite-like materials, are a class of synthetic anionic clays with a general formula is [M MgAlCO The brine (brine A) was collected from the Taijinaier salt lake on the Qinghai-Tibet plateau in China and then saturated with bischofite (MgCl A water-bath (SHJ-E, Jintan MEITE instrument manufacturing co., Ltd., china) was used to control reaction temperature. Flame atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS, Analyst 800, PE of USA) and inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES, ICAP 6500 DUO, Thermo Electron Corporation) were used to determine the concentration of elements. X-ray diffraction (XRD, PRO PANalytical X'Pert, Cu Kα1) was applied to identify the solid phase. MS-2000 and Malvern Nano ZS laser particle analyzer (Malvern Instruments Ltd.) were employed to determine the particle size of lithium carbonate and MgAlCO The compositions of the brine samples were determined using the methods previously described in the reference “ The schematic diagram of the integrated process is depicted in MgAlCO After the recovery of Mg, an adsorption method with LSC-800 resin (  where In order to remove residual CO After boron and CO After the removal of Mg The dependence of mass ratio of water/brine A on the precipitation behavior of MgAlCO    A SEM image of the Mg   According to the above results, it can be concluded that magnesium and lithium in brine were completely separated after MgAlCO The composition of the brine after removal of boron and CO The crystallization path of this brine can be predicted using the metastable phase diagram of Na As can be seen from  The effects of lithium concentration and mole ratio of CO The XRD pattern of the precipitated solid is shown in Based on this study data, it is possible that about 0.07 ton lithium carbonate products can be prepared when producing per ton MgAlCO The total cost of main raw materials was about $987. During the removal of boron, CO An integrated process was proposed to separate and simultaneously recover both magnesium and lithium from brines. This process involved the production of MgAlCO This work was supported by the