The applicability of near-infrared (NIR) spectroscopy as tool for continuous and direct quality control of bauxite material on conveyor belts at mining sites was assessed. Modal quantifications of the bauxite mineralogy were performed by X-ray powder diffractions (XRPD)/Rietveld-analysis on 200 aliquots derived from 4 charges from the same sample locality and compared to Near Infrared (NIR) spectra measured in reflectance mode. Based on the two methods multivariate calibration models from partial least squares (PLS) regressions were evolved. Laboratory scaled results show a predictability of the major mineralogical phases (gibbsite and kaolinite) within 2.5wt% (1σ).
                  In order to test the quality of the laboratory scaled calibrations and their applicability to mining procedures, additional measurements were performed using an industrial NIR-analyzer from ABB that was specifically developed for conveyor belts. Results show that for an industrial usage two crucial points have to be considered: (1) The modal mineralogy of individual chunks of material depends on the grain size. Specifically, larger chunks contain a higher modal content of gibbsite and often are coated by a kaolinite-rich shell. Therefore, modal mineralogy determined by NIR spectroscopy in reflectance mode is biased by the grain size. In order to yield unbiased measurements, the material must be crushed at least to cm-size. (2) Humidity has strong influence on the NIR-spectra by changing band intensities. Therefore, in order to get accurate predictions, absorption bands of water have to be taken into account as additional constituent in the calibration models.Bauxite is the most important raw material for the production of aluminium and is a natural weathering product of alumina-rich rocks, consisting mainly of one or more aluminium hydroxide minerals and – depending on the precursor rock – a mixture of quartz, iron oxides, TiO NIR-Spectroscopy has several advantages compared to other common analytical techniques such as XRD and XRF. The measurements are very fast and a sophisticated sample preparation is not necessary ( In this study a calibration model to predict phase concentrations of gibbsite and kaolinite based on NIR-spectra is presented. It is to our knowledge the first approach to use quantitative results from XRPD/Rietveld analysis as input for the calibration of NIR-spectra from bauxites. As reference method Rietveld-analysis has the advantage of direct phase analysis. In contrast, other common quantitative methods such as X-ray fluorescence measure the chemical composition, and therefore cannot distinguish the reactive silica (hosted in the kaolinite) from the non-reactive silica concentration (present as quartz), which is one of the most important quality criteria of bauxite for the Bayer-process and need therefore to determine additionally the total available alumina and reactive silica concentration via hydroxide digestion. The bauxite material used in this study originates from a mine 70 Additional 180 XRPD-measurements were performed on a D8 Advance from Bruker with parallel beam optics, Cu-target and energy-dispersive detector (measurement parameters: 40 For Rietveld-analysis the Software “Topas 4.2” from Bruker was used in combination with the crystal structure database from ICSD (Inorganic Crystal Structure Database). Results presented here were achieved with a fundamental parameter approach, refining the scale factors, lattice parameters, crystallite sizes and preferred orientation for kaolinite and gibbsite with March-Dollase. Site occupation factors were not refined during Rietveld analysis, since all goethite peaks are overlapped by peaks of other minerals. To estimate roughly the error of Rietveld-analysis, X-ray fluorescence analytics together with normative phase calculations and loss on ignition (LOI) data were used. The error of the Rietveld quantifications can be estimated to be approximately 2 NIR-spectra were measured in reflection mode in the 3900–12000 Calibration models were developed together with ABB Schweiz AG (Baden/Switzerland) with Matlab Software based on the NIR-spectra and quantitative phase analysis of the samples. Partial-least-squares (PLS)-regression ( Rietveld-refinements of all 200 samples reveal that larger bauxite chunks are heterogeneous with respect to the modal mineral content (  NIR-measurements with different amount of moisture show that with the appearance of the OH combination band around 5200 The laboratory scaled calibration models for kaolinite and gibbsite show that the prediction of the modal mineral content of the major constituents of lateritic bauxites based on NIR-spectra is a suitable method. The quantification errors are somewhat larger than in The major findings towards an industrial usage of NIR-spectroscopy for bauxite quantifications are: Generally, the quantification of lateritic bauxites based on NIR-spectra is a suitable method and an efficient alternative to common X-ray methods at mining sites, providing advantages with respect to sample preparation and real-time sample characterisation. The heterogeneous distribution of bauxite minerals in different grain size fractions leads to an overestimation of the kaolinite/gibbsite ratio for coarser grained material. In view of an industrial implementation at conveyor belts, the bauxite material needs to be crushed at least to cm-size prior to analysis by NIR. An important consideration is the moisture of the material, because most bauxite mining sites are located in the tropics and subtropics and exhibit considerable variations in humidity, and moisture has a strong influence on different parts of the NIR-spectrum, causing a decrease of all absorption bands of bauxite minerals. Therefore moisture has to be considered as additional component in calibration models to correct the influence on the mineral bands. The authors acknowledge