The preparation of oxide dispersion strengthened (ODS) Al67Cr8Ti25-type intermetallic compounds with L12-structure was carried out by mechanical alloying and ball milling. Subsequent powder consolidation by hot uniaxial pressing yielded fully dense samples with nano-scaled dispersions of 1–3 vol.% Y2O3, Al2O3 and CeO2 embedded in the single-phase matrix revealing a sub-μm grain size. As a single-phase reference, samples without oxide dispersions were also prepared. While retaining the mean dispersoid size, additional thermal and thermo-mechanical treatment yielded normal and abnormal grain growth of the matrix, respectively, to produce grain sizes ranging from several microns to close to 1 mm. Constant compression tests were carried out at ambient temperature to reveal the contribution to the yield strength stemming from the dispersoid/dislocation interaction as well as from dislocation pile-up at grain boundaries. The results are discussed in terms of actual microstructurally based concepts for room temperature yielding.In the past decade intermetallic compounds in the system Ti–Al have attracted attention from the scientific community, as well as the industry. This interest originates mainly from the potential for elevated temperature applications, notably in gas- and aircraft turbine components, where outstanding high temperature creep and fatigue resistance combined with good oxidation resistance and low density are required. While advanced multiphase TiAl-based alloys are nowadays on the edge of commercial application, the breakthrough of Aluminium-rich ternary trialuminides of type Al In preceding work Details on the powder metallurgical manufacturing of ODS Al The bright field TEM micrograph, The TEM bright field micrograph, It is well known from the research on dispersion strengthened nickel- and iron-base superalloys that the optimum creep resistance is obtained for a combination of coarse grains (preferentially elongated with the main loading axis  For a separation of the contributions stemming from dispersion strengthening and fine-grain strengthening according to Hall–Petch we follow an approach by Morris and Morris As a second step we correlate the remaining 0.2% yield strength difference with the contribution from Hall–Petch type strengthening due to dislocation pile-ups at the grain boundaries For obstacles of similar strength which may differ in their number Koppenaal and Kuhlmann–Wilsdorf In this study room temperature yielding in an oxide dispersion strengthened intermetallic compound was studied applying compression testing at constant strain rates. The experimentally observed yield strength showed a superimposed dependence on grain size This research was sponsored by the DFG (German Science Foundation) under contract He1872/5-2. One of the authors (K.J. Mirpuri) acknowledges support from the DAAD through the Indian-German Sandwich program.