Surface modification for low-rank coal with poor hydrophobicity is critical to its efficient flotation. In the present study, induction time and flotation results were employed to evaluate the coal sample's flotability in the pickling process, while the changes in coal surface properties were comprehensively investigated by various surface analysis technologies. The results suggested that the induction time between coal particles and bubbles decreased from 115 ms to 13 ms with increases in the concentration of hydrochloric acid, and the combustible matter recovery correspondingly exhibited an evident increase from 31.98 to 59.22%. Additionally, after pickling, a significant increase in the liberation of gangue minerals from coal particles was observed by XRD and SEM measurements. Furthermore, the XPS results indicated that the hydrophilic oxygen-containing functional groups of coal sample decreased after the pickling process. Consequently, the enhanced flotation performance could be attributed to the changes in surface chemical functional groups and increased liberation of gangue minerals from coal particles in the pickling process.Currently, fossil fuels are still considered as the major consumer energy sources for global economic development, particularly in China, despite the continuous exploration and utilization of new energy sources. According to statistics, coal accounted for almost 64% of China's primary energy consumption in 2016 [ It is well known that froth flotation, which is based on the differences in physical and chemical properties of mineral surface, is widely used for separation of minerals with particle diameters less than 0.5 mm. With respect to the flotation of mineral powders, hydrophobic particles attach themselves to air bubbles, and thus are transferred to froth layers to form a concentrate. Conversely, hydrophilic gangue minerals fail to complete the attachment with bubbles, and thus are discharged as tailings [ Furthermore, it should be noted that various organic acids, such as tannic acid and naphthalene hydroxamic acid, were used in mineral flotation to promote selective separation and enrichment for useful minerals under different temperatures or pH values [ In the present work, Daliuta long-flame coal samples with particle sizes less than 0.5 mm were used as the materials, and different concentrations of hydrochloric acid solution were used to pretreat the coal samples. The investigation focused on the effect of pickling on the flotation performance of low rank coal and its mechanism. Thus, the changes in hydrophobicity and flotability of coals before and after pickling were estimated by the induction time and flotation tests while the changes in physicochemical properties of coal surface were investigated via XPS, SEM-EDX, FTIR, and XRD analyses. A Low-rank coal sample less than 0.5 mm used in this study was provided by Daliuta Coal Preparation Plant, Shenfu Mine Area in Shaanxi Province of China. The induction analyzer is an extremely sensitive instrument, and the requirement for grain size of coal particles is extremely high to obtain more convincing results. Therefore, particles with a size range of 0.125–0.074 mm obtained by the wetting screening experiment were used in the induction time measurement. As shown in The flotation tests of coal samples before and after pickling were performed in a 0.5 L flotation cell. Diesel and methyl isobutyl carbinol (MIBC) were taken as a collector and foaming agent, respectively. First, the coal samples were washed by the deionized water and filtered after pretreatment with hydrochloric acid. Subsequently, coal samples with deionized water were transferred to the flotation cell, and the pulp was maintained constant at a concentration of 60 g/L. The prewetting for coal samples was conducted for 120 s at a rotation speed of 2000 rpm. Subsequently, 1453 μL (40 kg/t) diesel was added into pulp and conditioned for an additional 120 s. Subsequently, 30 μL (800 g/t) MIBC was added and agitated for 60 s. Finally, froth concentrates were collected for 300 s at an air flow rate of 200 L/h. The flotation products (concentrates and tailings) were filtered, dried, and weighed to determine the ash content. The XRD measurement for the coal samples was operated on an XRD analyzer (D8 ADVANCE, Bruker), which was used to analyze the changes in the mineral matters of Daliuta long-flame coal after treatment by hydrochloric acid. In order to investigate the mineral of coal samples with XRD analysis in a more precise manner, the coal samples were first ground to −0.074 mm and subsequently treated with hydrochloric acid. The test parameters were set as follows: voltage and current of the X-ray tube corresponded to 40 kV and 30 mA, respectively, the radius of the goniometer corresponded to 250 mm, the scanning speed of the sample corresponded to 0.2 s/step, and the sampling interval corresponded to 0.01945°. The XPS measurement was used to analyze the changes in surface elements and functional groups of coal samples before and after pickling. In a manner similar to the sample preparation for the XRD measurement, the coal samples were first ground to −0.074 mm and subsequently subject to pickling. The XPS measurements of coal samples were operated on an X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (ESCALAB 250Xi) that was equipped with an Al Kα (1486.6 eV) source. A wide scanning test for carbon, oxygen, nitrogen, silicon, and aluminum elements was performed with a step energy of 1 eV while a narrow scanning test for carbon was conducted with a step energy of 0.05 eV. The obtained data was processed with the software XPS peak 4.1. Infrared spectroscopy is a method for structural analysis, and qualitative and quantitative analysis are attained by the specific absorption of material to the electromagnetic radiation in infrared light area [ The surface morphology of the coal samples before and after pickling was analyzed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS). For a typical test, a layer of coal particles was adhered to the conductive tape on a sample holder. The particles that cannot stick to the conductive tape were blow off through a shrinking syringe, which can avoid damaging the vacuum system. Then, the coal samples were sputtered with a gold powder layer for the subsequent scanning test. The operating parameters of SEM measurement were as follows: HV was 25.00 kV, spot was 4.0 nm, the magnification was fixed at 1500, and working distance was kept about 15.4 mm. Induction time is an important parameter for the mineralization process in the flotation of coal, which reflects the flotability and hydrophobicity of coal particles and predicts attachment efficiency between coal particles and bubbles.  The enhancement in flotation performance of coal samples was potentially caused by changes in surface properties owing to the treatment with hydrochloric acid. Therefore, the changes in surface properties of coal samples after acid treatment were fully investigated in the next section. The changes in ash content of flotation feed coal samples before and after treatment with hydrochloric acid are shown in However, when compared to the ash content of clean coal, the variation amplitude in ash content for feed coal was significantly lower. This appears as an extremely limited contribution in terms of improving the flotation performance. Furthermore, enough attentions should be paid to an extremely interesting phenomenon, and the representative photographs for coal sample after the pickling process are shown in In the present study, XPS wide-range scanning was performed to analyze surface elements, such as carbon, oxygen, silicon, aluminum, and nitrogen, in long-flame coals after treatment with hydrochloric acid, and the results are given in Narrow scanning for carbon and the peak-differentiation-imitating analysis for C1s were conducted to analyze the chemical functional groups contents. The corresponding results are shown in In order to obtain further information on the changes in various functional groups of long-flame coals, the FTIR analysis for coal samples was performed. The specific changes in functional groups are shown in In the present study, the results of induction time measurements and flotation tests indicated that the floatability of low rank coal were improved by the treatment with hydrochloric acid. The induction time between coal particles and bubbles decreased from 115 to 13 ms while the combustible matter recovery exhibited an evident increase from 31.98 to 59.22%. According to the XRD and ash content analyses, it can be found that the ash content of feed coals was reduced by the pickling process, which reached the minimum value of 30.30% at the hydrochloric acid concentration of 5 mol/L. An improved liberation of gangue minerals from coal particles was also observed after pickling, and this significantly enhanced the surface hydrophobicity of coal particles. Furthermore, the results obtained from XPS and SEM-EDX demonstrated that the gangue minerals were removed from coal particles in the acid treatment. Besides, FTIR analysis indicated that the hydrophilic functional groups declined while the hydrophobic functional groups exhibited a slight increase in the pickling process. Therefore, it can be concluded that the improvements in the flotation performance of Daliuta long-flame coal was ascribed to the changes in surface chemical functional groups and increased liberation of gangue minerals from coal particles in the pickling process. This work was supported by the