Chalcopyrite can be electro-reduced in acid media to less refractory mineral phases such as chalcocite and metallic copper. This paper presents the effect of current density, pulp density, acidity, flow of oxygen and agitation on the chalcopyrite reduction kinetics. The study was complemented with SEM and X-ray characterization techniques in order to understand the phenomena taking place in an electrolytic reactor with anionic separator. The results revealed that when the pulp density is increased (>10g/L), the main problem of the electro-assisted reduction of chalcopyrite is observed, i.e. chalcopyrite reduction kinetics is considerably hindered. This phenomenon was found to be related to the chemical interaction of the hydrogen sulfide (released during the chalcopyrite reduction) with the oxygen present in the electroleaching system. Elemental sulfur is the product of such chemical interaction, which in the same case as in the conventional oxidative processes, promotes the passivation of chalcopyrite due to the fact that it is a highly non-conductive and hydrophobic species. On the other hand, the electrochemical experiments revealed that chalcopyrite reduction kinetics is dependent on the acidity and agitation rate, showing that chalcopyrite reduction is controlled by the diffusion of protons in the solid-liquid interface. The solid residue characterization revealed that the metallic copper species (product of the chalcopyrite reduction), is very reactive with air (after filtering), producing copper oxide or copper sulfate with and without rinsing, respectively. These results were corroborated by electrochemical techniques, EDS and X-Ray diffraction.Seventy percent of the world copper resources are present as chalcopyrite (CuFeS Chalcopyrite presents a tetragonal crystalline structure, almost similar to a cubic structure ( An oxidizing agent is employed in this type of processes, in order to promote the oxidative decomposition of chalcopyrite to cupric and ferric ions (Cu On the other hand,  When a reducing agent is used, chalcopyrite is mainly decomposed to chalcocite (Cu From a mechanistic viewpoint, chalcopyrite can be electrolytically reduced in acid solutions to bornite or chalcocite, according to However, Chalcocite can be further electro-reduced to metallic copper, according to The global reduction of chalcopyrite to copper can be represented by the following equation: As can be seen from a mechanistic viewpoint, there exists discrepancy in the chalcopyrite reduction mechanism. Earlier it was proposed that the chalcopyrite can be reduced by a direct electronic transfer mechanism ( In this research, the electro-assisted reductive leaching of chalcopyrite was studied with different techniques and varying pulp densities, in order to understand the phenomena responsible to decrease the chalcopyrite reduction kinetics in a conventional electrolytic reactor with anionic separator. The experiments were carried out at room temperature (25 For the preparation of the working electrode, chalcopyrite crystal was mounted in a teflon rod in order to obtain a rotating disk electrode with exposed active area of 19.6 The electrochemical tests were carried out employing aqueous solutions of 0.5, 1 and 2 Electro-assisted reductive leaching of chalcopyrite was studied employing a chalcopyrite concentrate obtained from Peñoles, Minera el Roble, Cuencamé, Durango. The concentrate was chemically analyzed by X-Ray fluorescence spectrometry (Brunker, S4 Pionner). The mineral phases contained in the concentrate were identified by X-Ray diffraction studies (Bruker, D8 Advanced). The chemical analysis showed that the concentrate contains: 68.3% chalcopyrite, 15.4% pyrite, 9.1% sphalerite and 1.5% galena. The mineral particles in the concentrate present a size distribution from 11 The electro-assisted reductive leaching experiments were carried out employing the experimental scheme shown in The procedure employed to carry out the electro-assisted reductive leaching experiments was as follows: 250 In order to study the chemical interaction between the chalcopyrite concentrate and the hydrogen sulfide (a product of the chalcopyrite reduction), the concentrate was pre-treated in 250  These results are in good agreement with  It is worth mentioning, that calculation of the current efficiency was done considering that chalcopyrite is reduced to metallic copper (Eq. As can be seen the current efficiency is considerably decreased during the leaching tests shown in In order to complement the study, chalcopyrite reduction was also examined using a pure chalcopyrite electrode in a three-electrodes electrochemical cell at different acid concentrations. The results are illustrated in On the other hand,  From this figure, it is also observed that the magnitude of reduction current increased from − The OCP was measured for each surface at the end of the chronoamperometric experiments carried out at 100, −  The EDS of the electrode surface subjected to a potential sweep from the OCP to − The electro-assisted reductive leaching experiment was further conducted at 0.7 The last results confirm that chalcopyrite can be electrolytically reduced to metallic copper using an electrolytic reactor separated by an anionic membrane, which is in good agreement with earlier reports ( Pulp density is an important variable to be considered in the development of an attractive process for the industry. Therefore, the effect of the pulp density on the kinetics of the electro-assisted reductive leaching of chalcopyrite is presented.  The solid residue obtained at a pulp density of 100 In this case it is necessary that an oxidant species is also present. It is possible that the oxygen present in the leaching solution could promote the oxidation of hydrogen sulfide to elemental sulfur according to Eq. The production of sulfur from hydrogen sulfide during the leaching is a very interesting result which plays an important role in decreasing the chalcopyrite reduction kinetics found at pulp densities higher than 10  In order to understand the mechanism involved in the generation of elemental sulfur, a sample of the fresh chalcopyrite concentrate was pre-treated with 2 In order to verify the mechanism of formation of elemental sulfur from the interaction of hydrogen sulfide with oxygen, 250 The electro-assisted reductive leaching of the chalcopyrite pre-treated in On the other hand, Finally, the passivation phenomenon was also electrochemically investigated. Based on the last results,  Chalcopyrite can be electrolytically reduced to 96, 84 and 60% at the applied current of 0.7, 0.5 and 0.3 Reduction of chalcopyrite is controlled by the diffusion of protons in the solid-liquid interface, e.g., when the chalcopyrite electrode is polarized in the presence of agitation, the recorded current is increased. Furthermore, an increase in the acid concentration favors the chalcopyrite reduction kinetics. Chalcopyrite can be reduced to metallic copper, which is highly reactive with the oxygen of the atmosphere, i.e., metallic copper can easily be oxidized to cupric sulfate or copper oxide, confirmed by the XRD and EDS analysis. Chalcopyrite reduction kinetics is significantly hindered when the pulp density is increased above 10 The authors are grateful to Conacyt for the postgraduate scholarship awarded to Víctor Martínez-Gómez.