Objective
                  Pauwels III femoral neck fractures are highly unstable. These fractures are commonly treated with three cannulated screws or sliding hip screw (SHS) implants, however high rates of non-union persist. A hybrid SHS construct has recently been proposed. The objective of the study was to compare this construct to the familiar inverted triad of cannulated screws and to a single SHS.
               
                  Methods
                  Fourth generation biomechanical femur analogs were used to create a highly repeatable injury model. The hybrid SHS construct contained a SHS with two superior cannulated screws in an inverted triangle configuration. Eight samples for each construct were biomechanically evaluated and the results compared using ANOVA (p<0.05).
               
                  Results
                  The cannulated triad and hybrid SHS provided similar stiffness and fracture gap motion. The single SHS exhibited significantly lower stiffness and larger fracture plane diastasis than either the inverted triangle of cannulated screws or hybrid SHS (p<0.05). None of the constructs exhibited catastrophic failure during cyclic loading nor under loading up to 2.5 times body weight.
               
                  Conclusions
                  The single SHS provided the least stable fracture fixation, while the inverted triad and hybrid SHS constructs were mechanically similar. The fracture repair simulated here illustrates how these repairs have the potential to return near pre-fracture strength in ideal conditions with young, healthy bone. However; in clinical situations where comminution impairs load transfer through the cortices the hybrid SHS may be the most favorable option.More than 250,000 hip fractures occur in the United States each year, with approximately 3% of these fractures existing in the intracapsular femoral neck Femoral neck fractures in the young adult are problematic because of the high rate of nonunion, hardware irritation, and continued pain Common treatment options for femoral neck fracture in the young adult include an inverted triangle of cannulated screws (inverted triad), Sliding Hip Screws (SHS), Dynamic Condylar Screws (DCS), cephalomedullary nails (CMN), and the proximal femoral locking plate (PFLP) Currently, there are no concrete recommendations for treatment of femoral neck fractures in the young adult. So much so that a recent survey of orthopedic surgeons demonstrated a near even split between DHS or Cannulated Screws when treating displaced femoral neck fractures The current study compared the biomechanical performance of a hybrid inverted triangle construct comprised of an inferior calcar SHS with paired anterior-superior and posterior-superior cannulated screws to the conventional single SHS repair and an inverted triad of cannulated screws Large, fourth generation composite femora (model 3406, Sawbones, Vashon, WA) with 20 The analogs were prepared for instrumentation by first drilling the screw holes required for one of three different constructs: 1) triad of cannulated 7.3 Following repair, all femora were osteotomized through the mid-shaft in preparation for placement in a test fixture. The fixture oriented the femur to simulate single leg stance, with the anatomic axis at 25° to the vertical plane Each construct was loaded using a protocol adapted from previous literature For the pre-cycle 1400 Following confirmation of data normality, the data from the three construct groups were analyzed with an ANOVA (p The initial stiffness of the cannulated triad and hybrid SHS constructs were similar, with both significantly stiffer than the SHS ( There was no significant difference between the groups in average failure load. There was, however, a trend for the hybrid construct to exhibit the highest failure load, but the comparison was under-powered (β Femoral neck fractures of the young adult are problematic in both fixation and clinical success. Osteonecrosis, nonunion, malunion, and revision rates are high The biomechanical test results from the current study suggest that the inverted triad of cannulated screws and the hybrid SHS construct yielded similar stiffness magnitudes and fracture plane motion. The results also suggest that a SHS alone provides a less stable fixation of a Pauwels III femoral neck fracture when compared to either of the triangle constructs. The SHS exhibited significantly lower construct stiffness and higher fracture plane motion. Additionally, the rotation and shear that the single SHS experienced highlights the need for anti-rotation screws in femoral neck fractures. The construct stiffness measured in the current study exceeded the stiffness of 166 Comparing this finding to data from earlier biomechanical studies of the SHS and cannulated triad, where constructs placed in cadaveric femora failed during the cyclic loading regime While the hybrid SHS construct did not exceed the biomechanical performance of the inverted triad of cannulated screws, it may provide benefit in clinical application. Previous literature illustrated that both the SHS and a SHS with a single de-rotational screw were superior to the inverted triad of cannulated screws One limitation of the current study’s evaluation of the hybrid SHS was that the biomechanical analysis alone cannot fully address the clinical performance of the constructs. The composite sawbone stiffness was higher than cadaveric bone The inverted triad of cannulated screws and the hybrid SHS with two cannulated screws provided superior fracture plane stabilization as compared to the single SHS alone. The single SHS allowed both significantly larger fracture plane motion than either the cannulated screws or the hybrid SHS. In conclusion, an inverted triangle construct (either of cannulated screws or the hybrid SHS) is superior to a single SHS. The hybrid SHS is likely more adequate for comminuted femoral neck fractures as compared to the cannulated screw triad and more studies should be made to investigate its performance under those conditions. None. This study was funded by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following is Supplementary data to this article: