Glass-ceramics were successfully prepared from high-carbon ferrochromium slag (HCFS), and the optimum heat-treatment conditions were determined by analysis of the crystallization kinetics. The parent glass is first prepared in five different ratios of HCFS to waste glass (R(H/W)), then heat-treated separately at five heating rates (α) and monitored by DSC. As the value of R(H/W) increases from 0.60 to 1.67, the crystallization activation energy (Ec) decreases from 253.41 to 183.52kJ/mol. The nucleation and crystallization temperatures decrease from 641.7 to 612.2°C, and 822.8–814.7°C, respectively, and both are lower than that of ordinary metallurgy slag. These results indicate that using HCFS to produce glass-ceramics both facilitates its production and saves energy. The crystallization index (n) increases with increasing R(H/W), and when n exceeds 2.32, all of the parent glass samples with different R(H/W) crystallize as bulk crystallization. The crystallization index (n) increases as the heating rate α decreases from 25 to 5°C/min, with a maximum value of n (5.94) observed when α is 5°C/min. These conditions produce the largest aspect ratio and highest density of the crystal grain in the glass-ceramics. Our results show the optimal HCFS-based glass-ceramics were obtained with a R(H/W) of 1.29 and a 5°C/min heating rate; under those conditions, the parent glass nucleates and crystalizes at 627.1 and 820.9°C, respectively.High-carbon ferrochromium slag (HCFS) is an industrial by-product from the formation of high-carbon ferrochromium (HCFC); the production of one ton of HCFC generates 1.3 Little work has been reported on the immobilization of HCFS in glass and ceramic matrices The preparation of HCFS-based glass-ceramics has been reported previously HCFS used in this study was received from a ferrochromium plant, and the HCFS mainly consisted of ringwoodite ((Mg, Fe) The HCFS-based parent glass was prepared as described previously Based on the analysis of the DSC data, the parent glass underwent a two-step process for the transformation to the glass-ceramics. The first stage is a low temperature heat-treatment to obtain a high density of nuclei seeds throughout the interior of the parent glass, and a higher temperature second step for the crystallization of nuclei seeds, which finally prepares the glass-ceramics. The chemical compositions of the raw materials were determined by wavelength dispersive X-ray fluorescence (XRF, Shimadzu-XRF-1800). Microstructural characterizations of the glass-ceramic samples were performed by a MLA250 scanning electron microscope (SEM) with an energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS) attachment. Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC, Model STA 4090, NETZSCH-Gerätebau GmbH, Selb, Germany) was used to determine the non-isothermal crystallization kinetics of the parent glass. The leaching performance of each sample was tested by the toxicity characteristic leaching procedure (TCLP) developed by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) The transformation of parent glass to glass-ceramics involves two steps, nucleation and crystallization; therefore, two step heat-treatment was adopted on the parent glass. This transformation is monitored by DSC detection of the powdered parent glass samples from room temperature to 1000 To study the crystallization kinetics of the parent glass, DSC curve analysis are performed. Several characteristic temperatures used during the kinetics analysis are defined and obtained from the DSC curves shown as To a certain extent, the thermal stability of the HCFS-based parent glass reveals the trend of crystallization of the parent glass. Usually, the thermal stability is enhanced along with the increase of ΔT and ΔT′, which are derived from T According to the T  The thermal stability only reveals the trend of crystallization of the parent glass; therefore, to investigate the crystallization mechanism of the parent glass, an analysis of crystallization kinetics was carried out, and the crystallization activation energy and crystallization index of the parent glass were subsequently calculated. Thermal analysis has been used to study the crystallization kinetics of various glass systems Prior to calculating the crystallization index n, the crystallization activation energy needed to be obtained first. Under the non-isothermal condition, the crystallization activation energy of the parent glass can be calculated by the Kissinger equation When the value of R(H/W) increases from 0.60 to 1.67, the crystallization activation energy decreases from 253.41 to 183.52 To date, two crystallization mechanisms have been developed for parent glass: surface crystallization and bulk crystallization. Bulk crystallization occurs when the parent glass is easy to crystallize and crystallization takes place both within the parent glass and at its surface. When crystallization occurs only at the surface of the parent glass, it is called surface crystallization The crystallization index n can be calculated by Augis-Bennett equation  When the R(H/W) is constant, the crystallization index increases with the decrease of the heating rate. Especially when α=5  Comparing the two groups of microstructures in  Compared to ordinary metallurgy slag-based parent glass, HCFS-based parent glass has a smaller E The ICP results of the glass-ceramics leaching performance are shown in The crystallization kinetics of HCFS-based glass-ceramics have been investigated in this work to determine the best heat-treatment conditions. The parent glass samples were prepared with five different ratios of HCFS to WG (R(H/W)=0.60, 0.78, 1.00, 1.29, 1.67), and each of the samples was heat-treated by five heating rates (α=5, 10, 15, 20, 25 The thermal stability of the HCFS-based parent glass was investigated first, and the results show enhanced thermal stability of parent glass along with the increasing ΔT (ΔT′). The crystallization activation energy (E The