The settling behavior of quartz using chitosan as flocculant has been studied and the mechanism has been discussed. The sedimentation results show that pH has an influence on the settling behavior of quartz particles and the sedimentation velocity is more quickly at acidic pH range. Chitosan is a useful flocculant for the settling of quartz but its flocculation effect is influenced greatly by pH. The sedimentation velocity of quartz is quickly and the volume of sediment is large when chitosan was added at pH 9. The reason is that chitosan is only sparingly soluble in water at pH 9, thus the adsorption amount is large and produce strongly flocculation effect. However, when the pH was changed from 9 to 3, the adsorbed chitosan desorption from quartz surface and the flocculation effect disappeared. The flocs were disorganized to the particles and the sediment can be consolidated to significantly higher densities.Because of the very slow settling of fine solids in the tailing ponds, it is necessary to flocculate fine particles to produce more rapid settling and easy removal of the solids by gravity in the tailings treatment process In recent years, much interest has been focused on polymer systems that show a phase transition in response to external stimuli such as temperature, pH, ionic strength, and electric potential because of their scientific or technological importance The settling behavior of quartz using chitosan as flocculant has been studied and the mechanism has been discussed in this paper. The aim of this paper is to provide a novel solid/liquid separation reagent, which is sensitive to the change of pH. Pure quartz was sourced from Jiangxi, China. X-ray powder diffraction data confirmed that the quartz was 99% pure ( The sample of chitosan (molecular weight is 250,000 For the sedimentation tests, 1 For the adsorption tests, 1 For these measurements, a mineral suspension was prepared by adding 1 The effect of pH on the settling behavior of quartz was studied and the results are shown in    After 1 Chitosan is positively charged at low pH, but loses its charge as pH is increased above neutral. When it loses its charge it becomes hydrophobic and is only sparingly soluble in water  The effect of chitosan amount on the zeta potential of quartz at different pH was studied and the results are given in The effect of pH on the particle size distribution of quartz in the absence and presence of chitosan were studied and the results are shown in Chitosan is a useful flocculant for the settling of quartz but its flocculation effect is influenced greatly by pH. At pH 3, the addition of chitosan increased the sedimentation velocity of quartz, but the sedimentation velocity is still slow. The sedimentation velocity of quartz is quickly and the volume of sediment is large when chitosan was added at pH 9. The reason is that the chitosan is positively charged at pH 3 and adsorbs on quartz surface by electrostatic interaction between the reagent and surface, thus the adsorption amount is small. When the pH is increased to 9, chitosan is only slightly soluble in water and the adsorption amount is large, thus produced strongly flocculation effect. When the pH of sediment was changed from 9 to 3, the adsorbed chitosan desorption from quartz surface and the flocculation effect disappeared. The flocks were disorganized to the particles and the sediment can be consolidated to significantly higher densities. The authors declare no conflicts of interest. The authors acknowledge the support from