In this work, the flotation of ultrafine pentlandite and its separation from lizardite in de-ionized water, and bore water of high ionic strength were studied. In de-ionized water, the flotation separation was poor due to low pentlandite recovery and high lizardite entrainment. However, bore water increased pentlandite flotation recovery while reducing lizardite entrainment. The possible mechanisms responsible for the improved flotation separation in bore water were investigated by electrokinetic studies, Scanning Electronic Microscopy (SEM) analysis and settling tests. It was found that the reduction of electrical double layer forces between particles in bore water might mitigate the coating of lizardite particles on pentlandite surfaces resulting in the improved pentlandite flotation. The reduction of electrical double layer forces might also induce the aggregation of lizardite particles and therefore enhance lizardite rejection. This study provides a new direction to address slime coating and high gangue entrainment in ultrafine mineral flotation by electrolytes.The flotation of pentlandite minerals in Western Australia has historically been difficult due to low nickel grade and a large amount of serpentine minerals in deposits. At the largest nickel deposit, Mt. Keith Mine, nickel grade of the feed is about 0.6%, while MgO grade is about 38% equivalent to about 90% serpentine minerals. While lizardite is the major serpentine mineral, antigorite and chrysotile, the fibrous serpentine minerals, also occur in some minor ore bodies. To increase pentlandite flotation and its separation from serpentine, split flotation has been implemented at major pentlandite flotation plants. The grinding discharge is pumped to cyclone classification from which underflows and overflows pass to flotation streams dealing with different sizes. Nickel recovery in the ultrafine flotation stream (−8 The separation of pentlandite from serpentine by froth flotation has been studied in fresh water by a great number of researchers.  The mechanism proposed in the literature to be responsible for the negative effect of serpentine minerals on pentlandite or copper mineral flotation may explain the poor flotation behavior of pentlandite in de-ionized water in previous studies ( In fact, the beneficial effect of saline water on coal flotation has also been observed and a number of studies have been conducted to investigate the mechanisms. In general, the improved coal flotation in saline water compared to fresh water has been attributed to the increased bubble–particle attachment. Studies in coal flotation in saline water have not taken into account the behavior of gangue minerals. It is unlikely that the increased bubble–particle attachment is a major contributor to the improved flotation of pentlandite against lizardite in saline water in previous studies since it cannot explain the decreased serpentine entrainment. The increased bubble–particle attachment in saline water should increase the collection of serpentine minerals as well. Furthermore, in pentlandite flotation, serpentine minerals play an important role due to the surface coating ( The entrainment of fine gangue minerals through water films between air bubbles is a well-known problem in flotation ( Pentlandite (NiFeS Mineral grinding and flotation were conducted at room temperature, 25 Samples before the flotation of pentlandite–lizardite mixtures were taken, washed with de-ionized or saline water and then analyzed by a CAMSCAN CS44FE scanning electron microscope (SEM) fitted with a Camscan Energy Dispersive X-ray spectrometer (EDXS). During analysis, a focused electron beam was rastered across the sample surface. The secondary or backscattered electrons produced were used to map the surface topography and compositional contrast. EDXS was used to provide a means of elemental identification on the surface of interest. Particle electrophoretic mobility was measured with a Rank Brothers Microelectrophoresis Mark II apparatus. Single pentlandite or lizardite mineral particles were ground in a ceramic mill to about 8 The particle slurry was conditioned in the flotation cell and then transferred to a 1.5 A mixture consisting of 10% pentlandite and 90% lizardite with the Ni grade being about 3.2% was tested first. The effect of lizardite proportions on pentlandite flotation and lizardite entrainment in de-ionized water and bore water was studied. The results are shown in  Flotation tests above strongly suggest that the negative effect of lizardite on pentlandite flotation can be mitigated in bore water and high salinity of the water is the contributor. Studies published in the literature indicate that the negative effect of serpentine minerals on pentlandite flotation may be associated with the increased pulp viscosity and slime coating in fresh water. It is unlikely that pulp viscosity plays a role in this study due to the low percentage solids (6.5%) used in flotation. Rheology measurements indicated that the viscosity of the flotation pulp was similar to water regardless of the proportion of lizardite. It is therefore hypothesized that bore water may mitigate lizardite coating on pentlandite surfaces resulting in the improved flotation. This mechanism is investigated in the following sections by SEM analysis and zeta potential measurement to probe the interaction between lizardite and pentlandite particles. While SEM analysis directly examines the coating of lizardite on pentlandite surfaces, zeta potential measurement provides information on the electrostatic interaction between pentlandite and lizardite particles which is attributed to the coating. In addition, a number of researchers correlated the reduced fine gangue entrainment with the faster settling of gangue particles as a result of the enlarged size with the addition of inorganic coagulants or organic flocculants (  The EDX analysis from pentlandite particles located are also shown in the figures. In addition to the S, Fe and Ni signals attributed to pentlandite, distinct signals were also detected from O, Si and Mg showing attached particles or layers attributed to lizardite particles. A comparison of the EDX results in SEM analysis clearly shows that lizardite coating on pentlandite surfaces was mitigated and lizardite particles were aggregated in bore water. These are further examined in the following sections. Zeta potentials on pentlandite and lizardite in de-ionized water with a background electrolyte solution of 10 The zeta potential measurement in  Zeta potential measurement, settling tests and lizardite entrainment in flotation are well correlated. The electrolytes in bore water which compress the electrical double layers on lizardite particles, as shown by the reduced magnitude of zeta potentials, promote lizardite aggregation. In fact, mineral aggregation in saline water due to the reduction of electrical double layers has been widely observed ( The flotation of ultrafine pentlandite and its separation from lizardite are contrasting in de-ionized water and bore water. In de-ionized water, low Ni recovery was obtained with high MgO recovery, resulting in the poor separation. Bore water not only increased Ni recovery but also decreased MgO recovery subsequently improving pentlandite flotation against lizardite. The improved pentlandite flotation and the reduced lizardite entrainment in bore water should be associated with the changed inter-particle interaction caused by electrolytes, which is discussed below. Based on the DLVO theory, when two particles are brought into contact they are subjected to van der Waals and electrical double layer forces ( In de-ionized water, the electrostatic attraction between serpentine and lizardite is strong. It is therefore anticipated that lizardite particles can coat pentlandite surfaces and then depress pentlandite flotation. It is unlikely that rheology play a dominant role in pentlandite flotation in this study. In this study, the effect of pulp viscosity caused by ultrafine lizardite on the flotation was minimized by using low percentage solids in flotation, which is consistent with the practice in the nickel flotation plants in Western Australia and other flotation plants where ultrafine particles are treated. In de-ionized water lizardite particles are well dispersed as well due to electrical double layer repulsive forces and therefore, the high entrainment of ultrafine lizardite particles in de-ionized water is expected. In contrast, in bore water, both the electrostatic interaction between pentlandite and lizardite, and electrical double layer repulsive forces among lizardite particles are minimized due to the compression of electrical double layer by electrolytes. As a result, the coating of lizardite particles on pentlandite surfaces is mitigated while lizardite particles aggregate together. This may result in the improved pentlandite flotation and reduced lizardite gangue entrainment in bore water. In coal flotation using saline water, the reduced bubble sizes ( This study also indicates that 5% bore water is sufficient to improve the flotation. A further increase in the proportion of bore water only slightly improves the flotation. Zeta potential measurement and settling tests suggest that 5% bore water completely compresses the electrical double layers and reduce the electrical double layer forces. The reduction of electrostatic interaction in saline water is a well-known phenomenon. This study explores this phenomenon in ultrafine particle flotation and its effect on slime coating and high gangue entrainment, two of the major barriers preventing efficient mineral separation ( The current study indicates the importance of mineral interactions in the flotation of ultrafine pentlandite and its separation from lizardite. In de-ionized water, the coating of serpentine particles on pentlandite surfaces by an electrostatic attraction depresses pentlandite flotation. The dispersed fine lizardite particles also cause high gangue entrainment in flotation. Electrolytes in bore water may mitigate the coating of serpentine particles on pentlandite surfaces and induce lizardite particles to aggregate together by reducing electrical double layer forces, resulting in the improved pentlandite flotation and the decreased lizardite entrainment. The authors gratefully acknowledge the New Start Grant awarded to the first author by the University of Queensland.