Within the scope of the evaluation and optimization of a grinding circuit, the breakage and mineral liberation characteristics of three low grade sulphide gold ore blends have been investigated by Bond tests, batch grinding tests, and mineral liberation characterization. The tests were conducted in a size range from 0.063 to 2mm. It was found that the breakage of all blends follows a first-order behaviour for all feed sizes. The work index was correlated with the quartz content and the breakage rate deceleration parameter, which both showed a linear relationship. The correlation between breakage function fineness parameter and first-order rate constant also satisfied a linear relationship .The breakage parameters established from batch grinding and grindability studies indicate differences in the breakage behaviour of the three ore blends. However, the mineral liberation properties of the valuable phase in three blends show minor differences.In the minerals industry, it is important to understand how mills will respond to variations in the grindability of ores coming from different parts of a deposit. It is based on the fact that comminution accounts for approximately 65–85% of all energy used for processing ore (Deep level mining consumes the major part in some mines) and that only 1–2% of the supplied energy is translated to the creation of new surface area ( One of the main challenges in mineral liberation is the changing grinding and liberation behaviour of the material as the mineralogical composition of the feed varies with time. Therefore, the ability to predict how minerals act during grinding will be important for two reasons: (1) the output of processing plant can be projected based on present condition, and (2) further actions can be taken in order to meet the target product size. The grinding result is determined by two components, the circuit or equipment on one side and the material itself on the other. Studies on the correlation between mineralogical composition of the material and the grinding properties of blends, ores or pure minerals provide information about the integral or individual liberation characteristics. Thus, it becomes possible to estimate and predict the liberation based on mineralogical data of a deposit, even before a mine is in operation. Another approach in studying the grinding behaviour is by determination of Bond’s work index ( The present paper analyses, compares and correlates the grinding and liberation characteristics of three low grade sulphide gold ores. Three properties were investigated from grinding tests: Bond’s work index, breakage function, and selection function. The modal mineralogy and liberation characteristics of the ores were also determined in order to provide the correlation between the mineralogical composition and their grinding behaviour. The practical background of this work is to predict key grinding circuit parameters in order to be prepared for future challenges. It is generally accepted that the rate of disappearance of particles being ground in a mill is proportional to the amount of particles present. This assumption known as the first-order breakage law, results in a similarity between milling and chemical reactions ( That is, The following model was used by The weight fraction of the material broken initially from size interval The values of Samples of the feed to SAG mill at Acacia’s Buzwagi Gold Mine, in Tanzania, were taken. The ore had a maximum size of 200 A ball mill equipped with a screen (1 The standard Bond’s test is a batch type dry test where the mill is operated in a locked cycle. The charge is ground for a number of mill revolutions, sieved on the desired screen size to remove undersize and then replacing the undersize with new feed. The procedure is repeated until a constant mass ratio of 2.5 for oversize and undersize is achieved for three consecutive cycles (equilibrium condition). In the current work, standard Bond’s test protocols were adopted and the complete description of the test may be found elsewhere ( Samples were prepared also to study the grinding kinetics following the protocol as proposed by previous investigators (  The primary grinding circuit at Buzwagi Gold Mine incorporates a gravity unit which concentrates portion of gold contained in sulphides. The final gold recovery from the gravity concentrate is accomplished by intensive cyanidation. Therefore, liberation of sulphides has significant implications on the overall performance of the plant. After fine grinding, gold is recovered through flotation and cyanidation processes.  The liberation of pyrite-pyrrhotite based on size fractions is shown in The errors included in    The work indices of ore samples were also determined and compared with values established during plant design as presented in The breakage rates ( The variation of measured and estimated specific rates of breakage ( The model parameters for the selection function, The parameter The values of cumulative breakage distribution function This allows fitting of The Further, it is postulated that the first term in the breakage distribution function Eq. The variation of breakage function fineness parameter The relationship can be further interpreted that more fines are expected for a slow breaking material. This is in agreement with what is displayed in In order to evaluate the relationship between work index, The relationship could be explained by the fact that quartz is the hardest mineral compared to others in the material (hardness value of 7 based on Mohs hardness scale). Therefore, the work index for the Buzwagi Gold ore may be predicted based on known quartz content of the material. In another step, experimental work indices are compared with predicted values from Eq. The dependence of the breakage deceleration rate parameter Since work index is the measure of material hardness, this correlation implies that milling of harder ores will experience higher deceleration rates. Eq. The breakage and mineral liberation properties of three low grade sulphide gold ore blends from Buzwagi Gold Mine have been investigated and the followings conclusions are drawn:  Pyrite-pyrrhotite is the valuable mineral phase in the material with an abundance of 6.54, 5.58 and 3.2% for S-1, S-2 and S-3, respectively. Additionally, quartz, feldspar, muscovite and biotite-chlorite are the main gangue phases in the material. The mineral grain size distribution of quartz and feldspars closely follows the particle size distribution of the host particles. Therefore, those minerals phases show a good liberation from the others. Pyrite-pyrrhotite mineral grain size distribution is coarser compared to most gangue minerals present. This indicates that the milling energy is more applied in grinding of the gangue mineral phases (e.g. quartz and feldspars). Pyrite-pyrrhotite liberation based on fractions is higher than 75% for all samples in fractions <500 Pyrite-pyrrhotite is liberated at relatively coarse size (i.e. approx. 200–400 Higher pyrite-pyrrhotite enrichment is displayed in the size range 250–500 Pyrite-pyrrhotite mineral grain size in S-3 is coarser than those in other samples. Based on reduction ratios, S-3 fractions used for MLA were finer than those for S-1 and S-2. The lower pyrite-pyrrhotite liberation levels achieved in S-2 could be contributed to material hardness.  The work index of the three ore blends are 17.2 The grinding process follows first-order for all feed size fractions in all three samples. Sample S-2 has higher value of breakage rate deceleration parameter, Sample S-1 has the highest breakage rate constant than S-2 and S-3. The primary breakage distribution function, Ore sample S-3 has the highest value of fineness parameter, The material has the same breakage behaviour of the top size as indicated by same values of the breakage parameter  The variation of breakage fineness parameter The Authors would like to thank Buzwagi Gold Mine for provision and transportation of ore material that was used in this investigation. The Department of Mineralogy, TU Bergakademie Freiberg is also acknowledged for preparation and measurement of mineral liberation for the material.