Several health-promoting effects of mature silkworms, Bombyx mori, have recently been reported. Interestingly, those reports suggested that powders of steamed and lyophilized mature silkworms (SMSPs) generated from different varieties with unique cocoon colors may have additional and distinctive pharmacological activities. In our recent studies, “fine” SMSPs (fSMSPs) with an average particle size of 10 μm had higher contents of nutrients and enhanced their pharmacological activities, compared with “coarse” SMSPs (cSMSPs) with an average particle size of 120 μm. Recently, a new pulverizing method for SMSPs reducing their particle size to around 1.1 μm has been developed to generate “ultra-fine” SMSPs (ufSMSPs). In the present study, we analyzed and compared the contents of nutrients in the ufSMSPs generated by four different varieties with unique cocoon colors; white jade, yellow, pistachio, and red. The contents of almost all nutrients detected in the four ufSMSPs showed significant differences (p < .05) in at least one or more of the four varieties. The results of nutrient composition analyses in this study will be helpful for future studies to determine various unidentified functionalities of ufSMSPs in different varieties. We also examined the hair growth promoting activities of fSMSP and ufSMSP obtained from a pistachio cocoon strain to determine whether there is a correlation between contents of nutrients and pharmacological activity. Our data in the present study suggested that ufSMSPs might have enhanced and/or unique pharmacological effects due to their smaller particle size, although their contents of nutrients were comparable to or slightly lower than those in fSMSPs.Mulberry silkworms of The National Institute of Agricultural Sciences (NIAS) in Korea has developed several F1 silkworm varieties from 340 silkworm pure breeds, including white jade (WJ; named “Baekokjam” in Korea), yellow (GS; named “Golden Silk” in Korea), pistachio (PS; named “Yeonnokjam” in Korea), and red (RS; named “Joohwangjam” in Korea) cocoon strains ( Recently, we have developed a new pulverization method for SMSPs using an air-jet mill that can reduce the particle size to around 1.1 μm ( All varieties (i.e., WJ, GS, PS, and RS) of The proximate analyses for determining crude nutrients in the four ufSMSPs were performed as previously described ( The protocols in the Korean Food Standards Codex were employed to quantify the contents of amino acids, as previously described ( Fatty acids were extracted from the four ufSMSPs by the Folch method ( The protocol from the Association of Official Analytical Chemist ( Vitamins in the four ufSMSPs were extracted and quantified as previously described ( For quantifying β-carotene, 5 g of samples was mixed with 20 ml of 0.2% ascorbic acid and then sonicated for 15 min at 80 °C. After cooling down for 3 min on ice, 5 ml of 80% KOH was added and then incubated for 30 min. After cooling down for 5 min on ice, 5 ml of dH Equal amounts of samples were mixed with 25 ml of 10% trichloroacetic acid (vitamin B1) or 0.1 N HCl (vitamin B2), and hydrolysis was performed for 60 min before adding 2 N sodium acetate buffer (pH 4.5). After being treated with 300 mg of Takadiastase at 37 °C for 18 h, samples were centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 5 min and filtered with 0.2-μm syringe filters before injecting into a Shiseido Nanospace SI-2 equipped with an API 3200 MS (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) and a Unison UKC18 column (2 mm × 100 mm, 3 μm). Mobile phases A and B were 0.1% formic acid with 10 mM ammonium formate dissolved in dH Equal amounts of samples were mixed with 5 mM Na 1-hexanesulfonate in 0.1% acetic acid and boiled for 60 min. After shaking for 5 min, samples were centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 5 min. The supernatants were then filtered with 0.2-μm syringe filters. The analytical conditions of the HPLC-MS were the same as for vitamins B1 and B2. Equal amounts of samples were mixed with 40 ml of 0.1 N HCl, and hydrolysis was performed for 60 min. After adding 2 N sodium acetate buffer (pH 4.5), 500 mg of protease and α-amylase was added and incubated at 40 °C for 3 h. Samples were centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 5 min, and then the supernatants were filtered with 0.2-μm syringe filters. The analytical conditions of the HPLC-MS were the same as for vitamins B1 and B2. Equal amounts of samples were mixed with 30 ml of dH 2 g of sample was homogenized with 20 ml of 5% metaphosphoric acid, to which an additional 5% metaphosphoric acid was added for a total of 50 ml. Equal amounts of samples were centrifuged at 15000 rpm for 5 min, and the supernatants were collected for injection into HPLC. The analytical conditions of the HPLC-MS were identical to those for vitamins B1 and B2. Total phenolic compounds and flavonoids in the four ufSMSPs were determined by the Folin-Ciocalteu (FC) method and the aluminum chloride calorimetric assay, respectively, with minor modifications ( For measuring the amount of γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) in the four ufSMSPs, standard solutions were created with serially diluted GABA in 0.1 N HCl. The ufSMSP samples were homogenized in 2% formic acid in 70% EtOH, sonicated for 30 min, and spun down. The supernatants were then filtered using syringe filters with 0.2-μm pore size. Filtered samples and standard solutions were analyzed using a Shiseido Nanospace SI-2 equipped with API 3200 MS. 4-week-old male C3H mice were obtained from Samtako Bio Korea Co., Ltd. (Osan, Korea). Animals were maintained under conditions of controlled temperature (22 ± 2 °C), humidity (55 ± 5%), and illumination (light on 7 a.m. to 7 p.m.). Animal experiments conducted in this study were performed in accordance with guidelines established by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Dong-eui University and approved by the committee (approval number: R2018–009). Animals were placed individually in separate cages and acclimated to the housing conditions with ad libitum access to a commercial diet and tap water for 3 weeks, and then randomly divided into 3 groups ( All experimental data were expressed as the mean ± the standard error of the mean (SEM). Data were evaluated by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by two sample The compositions and contents of crude nutrients, amino acids, fatty acids, minerals, vitamins, phytochemicals and GABA, and dietary fibers in the four ufSMSPs were examined and compared, and the results were summarized in In our previous studies, comparisons of nutrient compositions between cSMSPs and fSMSPs suggested that reduced particle size (i.e., to averagely 10 μm) in fSMSPs increased compositions of major nutrients, such as crude protein and fatty acids, in the final products ( Total hair growth in each mouse was determined by measuring its hair weight from a certain area of dorsal skin on the last day (i.e., day 18) of the experiment ( Taken together, our data in the present study suggested that ufSMSPs might have enhanced and/or unique pharmacological activities due to their smaller particle size although their contents of nutrients were comparable to or slightly lower than those in fSMSPs. Further studies on the fSMSPs and ufSMSPs are needed to elucidate relationships among their particle sizes, nutrient compositions, varieties, and pharmacological activities. This work was supported by the next-generation