Stope layout designing and production scheduling are main phases to determine the profitability of an underground mining project. These are mainly related to the output of one phase, which has a significant impact on generating of the next phase. Individual optimization of these two phases results only in a local optimal solution. To date, the integrated optimization of these phases has been carried out to maximize net present value (NPV). In this paper, a multi-objective integer programming model (MOIP) was developed to optimize this integrated problem in a sublevel stoping operation. The non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm (NSGA-II) was incorporated to solve the objective functions. The Pareto front generated by NSGA-II showed good convergence and diversity with the solution time decreasing significantly (from 7-8 days to 6–7 h). The most preferred solution point on the Pareto front increased recovery by 18.55% in exchange for a 0.41% reduction in NPV with respect to the single objective optimization to maximize NPV.In underground mining, the standard practise for producing a mine plan is to complete each phase sequentially. In this way, each phase is planned separately and the solution of one phase forms the input and starting point for the next phase. This will continue until the mining plan is completed ( Mining limit (or mining envelope) optimization and production scheduling are the most important parts in open-pit and underground mining. The main objective in optimal layout in underground mining (stope layout) is to maximize undiscounted value with the satisfaction of all physical and geotechnical constraints ( In studies carried out on independent optimization of stope layout (e.g. by In some recent studies, it was shown that taking into account the interaction between the phases of underground mine planning in an integrated optimization generates a more viable result. As stated by MOP problems can be solved using two types of solution methods, including exact/traditional methods and evolutionary methods. In traditional methods, the different objective functions are aggregated into a single objective function. In these methods, several runs of different parameter setting must be completed in order to approximate the whole Pareto front. Also, they are not scalable for NP-hard problems where further objectives are added. Hence, there is a growing trend in the use of algorithms (i.e. evolutionary ones) that can find a good approximation of Pareto front at a reasonable time ( The counter-intuitive outcomes of the single objective integrated optimizations in underground mine planning include: a diminution in stope layout, - an increase in operating costs, and – reduction in ore recovery. The present study aims to develop a multi-objective integer programming (MOIP) model that simultaneously optimizes stope layout design and production schedule for SLS iron ore operation. Then, an EA is used to solve the model at a reasonable time. As external development and stope access play important role in designing a stope layout and scheduling of stopes, these features are also considered in optimizing the overall profitability of the mining project. In multi-objective optimization, there are multiple conflicting objectives that lead to a trade-off between solutions that help the Decision Maker (DM) to choose a preferred solution among all trade-offs ( In classic methods, different objective functions are aggregated into a single objective function. In these methods, several runs of different parameters settings must be completed in order to approximate the whole Pareto front ( Since Evolutionary Algorithms work with a population of solutions, they are suited to solving multi-objective optimization problems (known as EMO's) because of use a population in an iteration to help EMO find several members of the Pareto solutions in a single run ( EA starts its search by randomly creating a set of solutions. After creating the initial population, the EA updates the current population during an iterative operation using four main probability techniques and reproduction operators, including: selection, crossover, mutation and preservation of elites. The selection operator chooses better solutions, and then the selected solutions are modified using two main operators called crossover and mutation. The elitism operator combines the new population with the old population and selects better solutions from the combined population, which results in non-degrading performance. Finally, the operation stops when one or more pre-specified termination criteria are met (  Among the artificial intelligence-based optimization methods, Genetic Algorithm (GA) is a popular method used to solve simple to complex MOP problems, that solves several MOP problems with/without considering Pareto-dominance as a selection criteria (    First, the population  Both solutions are feasible; in this case, solution A is better than solution B, if solution A dominates solution B. One solution is feasible and the other one is infeasible; Solution A is deemed better than solution B if solution A is feasible. Both solutions are infeasible; in this case, solution A is better than solution B if the total value of violation from constraints for solution A is less than solution B. Sublevel stoping (SLS) is an underground mining method in which large blocks of ore are excavated in an unsupported ground condition. The ore body is primarily divided into a series of sublevels by drifts which are connected through ore passes. The rock contained inside each stope is blasted by charging the holes that are produced through drill rigs. The blasted ore is channelled through ore passes to a central crushing facility before transferring to a surface processing plant. This process is repeated until the stope is completely evacuated. After that, the empty void is backfilled to support the stope walls and roof. Typically, the new fillmass will require some period of time to fully dry out and consolidate ( There are several main constraints inherent to SLS including the stope layout, scheduling and external development activities for stope access that must be appropriately reflected in modelling. In regards to stope layout design, the maximum and minimum permitted size of stopes is firstly specified. This is a function of the ore body geotechnical characteristics and requirements of the equipment. Secondly, locating a stope directly above another stope with equal size is not permitted due to the creation of vertical weak planes between backfilled stopes which can result in a geotechnical failure. There are also several scheduling restrictions required to guarantee the geotechnical stability of the operation. Firstly, it is crucial that once production from the stope starts, it must progress through to backfilling without interruption. This is to prevent excessive exposure of the void which can lead to failure as a result of intense geotechnical stresses. Second, two adjacent stopes cannot be in production simultaneously so as to limit the size of unsupported open areas. Finally, only one of the adjacent stopes can produce around a backfilled stope because the fill mass is much weaker than host rock and cannot effectively transfer stresses ( The MOIP model is developed to reflect all inherent constraints, while simultaneously optimizing the stope layout and production scheduling. In the field of underground mining, stope layout designing, production scheduling and access network, there are three main areas of planning that have important effects on each other and the overall profitability of projects. In this regard, a MOIP model was developed to optimize the stope layout designing and the production scheduling simultaneously for the SLS operation taking into account external, and stope access development activities. This model is based on the model developed by In the present study, a multi-objective form of this model is used as an original model in the next section for the initial evaluation of the multi-objective model of an integrated optimization problem. As discussed earlier, each planning area has its own objective; therefore, the sub-objectives for integrated planning of different areas can lead to misguided results. In this regard, a MOIP model was developed to maximize the NPV (as an objective of production scheduling) and maximize metal recovery (as the stope layout designing objective) under operational constraints as well as those related to external development and stope access. It is worth noting that recovery and NPV are directly related to each other, as all feasible stopes with a positive undiscounted value are selected to ultimately provide maximum NPV. The reverse occurs when adding stopes with marginal grade and negative undiscounted values. NPV and recovery are therefore conflictive items when modelled as a MOIP optimization problem. Formulating concise constraints is an important strategy to reduce the solving times in an integrated optimization problem. Pre-generating the geotechnical data using MATLAB Code, it eliminates the need for additional variables and constraints in the MOIP model to compute information when optimized. This work is done to help reduce the complexity of constraints without compromising the integrity of the model or the optimal violation. Binary matrices are calculated according to a set of rules that determines which stopes are adjacent (share an adjacent boundary or are on the same level) and the violation (offset extraction layers or share common blocks). From the point of view of computing, binary inputs allow for calculation faster than reading and referring to larger data labels ( Subject to In equation The new developed MOIP was used to maximize NPV and recovery while ensuring that all constraints are satisfied during mine life. The original model was used for initial assessment which considers the constraints 2 to 11 and 23 of the new model while excluding the rest. Both the new and original MOIP models were solved using CPLEX 12.6 (ILOGTM) with a classic solution method (weighted sum (WS) method). Since at least 100 different weights of the objective function have been used for the WS method to approximate the whole Pareto front, the solution time increased dramatically due to the increasing number of variables and constraints of the new model. As such, the popular evolutionary method (NSGAII) was used for solving the MOIP model and obtained results were compared and validated against WS results (since the WS method generates a proper Pareto front for linear and convex problems). The model was implemented on an iron deposit containing 1453 blocks of 10m*10m*10m, including 772 ore blocks.  The original model was initially solved by the WS method for 100 wt in the range of [0, 1]. The results are shown in After this, the new model was solved using the WS method for 100 wt in the same way that the original model was solved. The first model consisted of 4120 binary variables and 3,406,324 constraints, while the new model had 6240 binary variables and 4,672,908 constraints. When gaining the Pareto front, taking into account 100 wt, increasing number of variables and constraints made the solution time increases significantly from 2 to 3 days for the original model to 8–9 days. As discussed earlier, the solution time increases by decreasing the maximum NPV objective's weight. In this case, it went from 2-3 h to 70–80 h for weights of 0 for maximum NPV. The solutions obtained are shown in Therefore, an evolutionary method was used to solve the MOIP at a reasonable time. NSGAII was firstly employed to solve the original model using MATLAB software. Then, the results were compared with the results of the classic method. Acceptable results with good convergence and diversity then allowed the algorithm to be used for the new model. Selection, crossover, and mutation operators have been modified according to the model. Crossover operator is based on the 2PX cutting operators. All experiments considered the parameters: population size = 30; crossover rate = 0.6; and mutation rate = 0.5. The mutation operator was modified to produce good feasible solutions. Therefore, higher mutation rate was considered for faster convergence. The selection operator employed was a Binary Tournament and the initial population was randomly generated. If information is available on some of the good solutions to this problem, the use of such information in creating the initial population will be useful and can help achieve a faster convergence. So, in order to improve the convergence rate, we derived three solutions from classical methods randomly (i.e. weights of 0.1, 0.5 and 0.9 for NPV) and copied into the initial population. The Pareto fronts generated from different generations by NSGA-II are illustrated in The number of solutions in the Pareto front is less than the size of initial population, because the difference between existing feasible stopes in the single objective optimization of the model and multi-objective optimization with two different objectives is low (from 1 to 8 stopes for different objective weights or Pareto solutions). On the other hand, some solutions are removed from Pareto front due to the close distance to each other as a result of the implementation of the crowded-comparison operator. The solutions of the average Pareto-front obtained from different runs of NSGA-II are in accordance with the classic method for some of weights of objective functions shown in In solution 3, the NPV decreases by 0.41%, while recovery increases 18.55% with respect to the single objective case of maximizing NPV. NPV and recovery increases 0.05 and 0.03%, respectively, as compared to the closest solution obtained from WS. Because all weights aren't taken in WS, all solutions can't be produced, and there aren't some points in the Pareto fronts of the WS. This would be suitable from the viewpoint of sustainable development through the optimal use of the resource and consequently human resource employment. Another case of interest is solution 4. This case can be chosen by decision maker if there is a desire to improve recovery as the NPV decreases a small amount (0.94%) while the recovery increases significantly (27.68%). For NPV weights less than 0.9, the project's NPV reduction is high and, therefore not economically reasonable, as mining companies may not be willing to reduce the project's profitability. Stopes selected for production in these solutions together with their respective scheduling are illustrated in There is a recent interest in the integrated optimization of various phases across the mining chain, which can take into account and manage the effects of each phase on each other and ultimately generate the optimal plan. Using sub-objectives for integrated optimization of the various phases of the mining value chain can generate misleading results. Therefore, the use of multi-objective optimization with considering the related objective for each phase is considered. The mining layout and production scheduling are two main phases in mining planning process of underground operations. The highly constrained nature of underground mines often involves additional complexity when planning these two phases. In this paper, a MOIP model was developed for integrated optimization of the mine layout and scheduling process for sublevel stoping operations method with respect to external development and stope access development activities. The main conclusions that can be drawn are that: In the classic solution methods of MOP, several runs of different parameter setting must be completed in order to approximate the whole Pareto front. These methods do not scale for NP-hard problems. Evolutionary Algorithms can find an approximation of the Pareto front which requires a reasonably small set of good representative solutions and are relatively easy to use and flexible. The Non-Dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm is one of the most popular and widespread elitist MOEAs, which implements a faster sorting and elitism preserving method. The use of available good solutions in creating the initial population in EAs can help to achieve faster convergence. In this regard, three solutions obtained from weighted sum approach were used in the initial population, which leads to faster convergence and at the same time maintains a good diversity. The solution time for NSGA-II is significantly reduced from 7-8 days to 6–7 h with respect to WS. The solution time increases with decreasing the maximum NPV objective's weight. In most preferred solution, NPV decreases 0.41%, while recovery increases 18.55% with respect to the single objective case of maximizing NPV. As such, NPV and recovery increase 0.05 and 0.03%, respectively, as compared to the closest solution obtained from the WS. The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at  Here,