The high-pressure grinding roll (HPGR) is a type of roller mill that continuously produces particle-bed comminution. Since the capacity of the HPGR is determined by not only operating conditions but also the roll geometry, knowledge of the effectiveness of the roll geometry is still limited. This study investigated the effect of the stud diameter on the capacity of a stud-type HPGR using the discrete element method with a breakage model. To evaluate the effect of a stud diameter, which is placed on a roll surface, simulations were performed for three types of HPGR having 13-, 6-, and 3.75-mm studs. Simulation results show that the working roll gap increased when a smaller stud was used. This suggests that a roll surface with a smaller stud was likely to provide a stronger force. As a consequence, roll back likely occurred when a smaller stud was used because stronger friction acted on the roll surface. Meanwhile, the stud diameter had less effect on throughput and power during grinding. These trends obtained in simulation qualitatively correspond to those obtained in experiments. Consequently, the study demonstrated that simulation adopting the discrete element method with a breakage model can contribute to the investigation of the effect of roll design in an efficient HPGR grinding.maximum selection function coefficient (kg/J) 80% cumulative weight passing size (m) cumulative energy (J/kg) contact force (N) gravity (m/s added gravity (m/s contact stiffness during loading (N/m contact stiffness during unloading (N/m power during grinding (W) normal pressure at overlap volume (m cross-sectional area of the hopper (m total magnitude of the torque (J) cumulative weight passing percent of one-tenth size of the initial particle size (%) circumference of the hopper (m) depth of the hopper (m) density of ore (kg/m coefficient of lateral stress coefficient of wall friction dynamic coefficient static coefficient diameter of a stud (mm) rotational speed of the rolls (rad/s) normal component tangential component The high-pressure grinding roll (HPGR) is a type of roller mill that continuously produces particle-bed comminution. The HPGR was introduced by Schönert and first installed in the cement industry in the 1980s ( To meet the increasing demand for HPGR applications in mineral processing, many researchers have investigated the effects of the HPGR on energy savings and mineral liberation ( Numerical simulation based on the discrete element method (DEM) ( To simulate the comminution process, especially for HPGR grinding, it is necessary to model the size reduction of the feed rock and raw ore ( Recent advances of breakage models including the As mentioned above, most previous numerical studies focused on the investigation and optimization of operating parameters of the HPGR, while few numerical studies investigated the effect of the HPGR geometry, especially the geometry of roll studs. Experimental studies investigated the effect of various types of roll stud shape, such as welded, chevron, studded, and hexagonal shapes, and revealed that the studded shapes provided better wear resistance ( The present study investigates the effect of stud diameter on the capacity of the HPGR through DEM simulation with the breakage model. Three different studs were compared to evaluate the effect of stud diameter. First, experiments and simulations for the pilot-scale HPGR were conducted to validate the applicability of the simulation model. Three types of roll having studs of different diameters were then modeled for numerical analysis. Using these simulation models, the effect of stud diameter in the laboratory-scale HPGR was evaluated. Grinding experiments on the laboratory-scale HPGR were conducted to verify the effect of stud diameter obtained from simulation. The HPGR (GEOPUS GR DHP-2009, Furukawa Industrial Machinery Systems Co., Ltd.) which has two rolls of 520 mm diameter was used as a pilot-scale HPGR. The geometry of the rolls and studs installed in the rolls is described in The HPGR (GEOPUS GR DHP-0603, Furukawa Industrial Machinery Systems Co., Ltd.) which has two rolls of 150 mm diameter was used as a laboratory-scale HPGR. This small HPGR was developed for laboratory-scale experiments using small amounts of raw ore. The size of rolls in the laboratory-scale HPGR is listed in In pilot-scale HPGR experiments, copper ore was used as raw ore. The copper ore was pre-crushed to less than 20 mm and used for the feed in the pilot-scale HPGR experiments. In laboratory-scale HPGR experiments, limestone was used as raw ore. The limestone was pre-crushed to less than 6 mm and used for the feed in the laboratory-scale HPGR experiments. The pre-crushed size was determined according to the scale of the HPGR. The size distributions of the feeds are given in First, the initial roll gap was set to a target value and the hopper was filled with raw ore to enough to achieve continuous grinding. The rotational speed and pressing force of the rolls were also set to target values, and the grinding tests then commenced. During operations, the raw ore passing through the grinding rolls was sampled for a certain time. After operations, the weight of ore was measured and the throughput was calculated from the weight and the sampling time. In this study, the throughput was defined as the amount of raw ore passing through the grinding rolls per unit of time. During grinding operation, the working roll gap and power consumption were monitored by a data logger. In the HPGR experiments, the pressing force was changed because the pressing force is one of the most variable parameters among the various operating parameters ( The three-dimensional behavior of raw ores was simulated using the DEM. ROCKY software (version 4.2) was used for the DEM simulation. In the DEM simulation, the behavior of raw ore was calculated according to Newton’s second law. To calculate a contact force, the hysteretic linear spring model ( Simulation models of the pilot-scale HPGR and laboratory-scale HPGR are shown in Physical properties in the DEM simulations are listed in To increase the time step, Young’s modulus was set smaller than that calculated from the physical properties. Accordingly, the pressing force was reduced to match the decrease in the repulsive force of the particle. The setting of the pressing force is summarized in To reduce the number of calculated particles, three larger size fractions of the particle only were considered in the initial feed conditions. As described in To reduce the number of particles in the calculation, the feed loaded in the hopper was not fully calculated. Instead of loaded particles in the hopper, the inlet of the feed was introduced to the upper part of the grinding rolls. To model the feed fully loaded in the hopper, stronger gravity was set at the inlet. The gravity was calculated from the load of the feed in the hopper using Janssen’s law ( The working roll gap, throughput, and power consumption were calculated to compare the simulation results with experimental results. The working roll gap was calculated according to the position of the floating roll. The throughput was calculated using the quantity of particle passing the centers of the rolls during a certain time. The power consumption was calculated from the torque and angular velocity: To verify the DEM simulation including the Simulations of the laboratory-scale HPGR having studs of different diameters were conducted to evaluate the effect of the roll stud diameter on the capacity of the HPGR. In the literature, the relationship between the working roll gap and throughput has been investigated to estimate throughput from the working roll gap ( To investigate the effect of the stud diameter, normal and shear stresses on the surface of the laboratory-scale HPGR were calculated as shown in Among the three different stud diameters of the laboratory-scale HPGR, the stud diameter of 3.75 mm provides working roll gap, throughput, and power similar to those for the pilot-scale HPGR. This suggests that the simulation model is effective in estimating the capacity of the pilot-scale HPGR. However, it might be difficult to produce such small pins, like those having a diameter of 3.75 mm, because such small pins generally have low mechanical strength. To evaluate the effect of stud diameter, grinding tests were conducted on laboratory-scale HPGRs with We conducted a DEM simulation with a breakage model to investigate the effect of the stud diameter on the capacity of the HPGR. For this purpose, experiments and DEM simulations were conducted. Assumptions were made to reduce the number of particles in simulation. The results of the DEM simulation with these assumptions qualitatively corresponded to the experimental results of the pilot-scale HPGR in terms of the working roll gap, throughput and power. For the evaluation of the effect of the stud diameter, three different studs of the HPGR were modeled. The simulation results suggest that the working roll gap increased as the stud diameter decreased. In terms of throughput and power consumption, no large difference among different diameters was observed. To verify the stud diameter effects obtained in the simulations, two types of a roll having  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This study was financially supported by the Japan Oil, Gas and Metals National Corporation (JOGMEC). Part of this work was performed as a component of the activities of the Research Institute of the Sustainable Future Society, Waseda Research Institute for Science and Engineering, Waseda University. We thank Glenn Pennycook, MSc, from Edanz Group (www.edanzediting.com/ac) for editing a draft of this manuscript.