The aim of this work was to study the feasibility of textile sludge as a precursor to prepare catalysts for catalytic wet peroxide oxidation (CWPO) by chemical and thermal treatments. Textile sludge was characterized by physical-chemical and metal composition analyses. The chemical activation was evaluated using iron sulfate and the thermal treatment was carried out at 720 °C in a vacuum pyrolysis reactor. Two catalysts with iron contents of 1.5% and 5.6% were selected. Process parameters influence on CWPO of phenol were evaluated and a maximum removal of phenol and TOC was observed at pH 3 and 60 °C, using 3 g L−1 of the catalyst containing 5.6% of iron and 11.8 mmol L−1 of H2O2. Metal analysis indicated that the textile sludge is suitable to be employed as both iron catalyst and adsorbent. The catalysts characterization indicated a reasonable surface area with a well-developed microporosity and the presence of Hematite structures in the carbonaceous matrix. The degradation process achieved 98.2% of phenol conversion, 68.2% of mineralization and 2.11 mg L−1 of iron leaching in 150 min of reaction. The catalyst presented activity for up to 5 cycles of use, but with loss of efficiency.Petroleum refinery effluents (PRE) originate from crude oil refining processes and the manufacture of fuels, lubricants and petrochemical intermediaries [ Several methods have been investigated for the treatment of different pollutants in wastewater using physical separation [ Many studies have focused on finding catalysts with activity and stability, taking into account the temperature and pH conditions at which the reaction takes place. So far, mesostructured materials [ In order to develop strategies of valuing wastes, Mohedano et al. [ Textile sludge is generated by the biological and physicochemical wastewater treatment. The physicochemical sludge contains a high amount of inorganic matter, such as iron, aluminum, calcium, magnesium, and sodium. Its presence is due to the diversity of chemical products that are used in the wastewater treatment. In addition, biological sludge is mainly composed of organic matter [ Therefore, the aim of this work was to obtain active and stable iron catalysts by chemical and thermal treatment of the residual sludge from physical-chemical treatment process in a textile industry using phenol as an emerging pollutant. These catalysts were prepared based on the studies of Mohedano et al. [ Sludge from a Brazilian textile company (Blumenau, SC) was used as the precursor to obtain the catalysts. The material is composed by residual sludge from physical-chemical effluent treatment process. For the oxidation tests, phenol (analytical grade, Sigma-Aldrich) was selected as a pollutant model. Catechol, hydroquinone and p-benzoquinone were purchased from Neon (Brazil). All other reagents used were of analytical grade and purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Firstly, textile sludge was oven-dried at 80 °C for 12 h and the solids were sieved to a particle size in the range of 0.11–0.25 mm. Moisture and ash content analysis of the textile sludge were carried out according to standard methods described by APHA [ For the preparation of the catalysts, 50 g of dried sludge was added to 100 mL of Fe Adsorbent surface area, volume, and average pore diameter were determined by the N Batch experiments were performed in 125 mL stoppered Erlenmeyer flasks under 200 rpm of agitation speed in a thermostatic shaker. A given amount of the catalyst was added to 50 mL of 1.06 mmol L Reaction samples were periodically taken and immediately analyzed after filtration through fiberglass filters (Albet FV-C). Phenol and aromatic intermediates (catechol, hydroquinone and p-benzoquinone) were followed and quantified by means of HPLC (Shimadzu SPD-10 A), with a diode array detector (330 PDA). A Shimadzu C18 column (VP-ODS, 25 cm long, 4,6 mm diameter) was employed as stationary phase and 0.7 mL L In order to evaluate the efficiency of the proposed heterogeneous Fenton process, biodegradation measurements of treated water at the optimum condition were evaluated by the BOD In order to analyze the influence of factors for phenol oxidation by CWPO, a screening test was carried out using a 2 In order to define the reaction optimum conditions and to analyze the factors influences, a 2 Catalyst stability test was carried out at optimal conditions by sequenced batch reactions following the same experimental methods described in CWPO experiments section. The catalyst was subjected to the CWPO reactions until the equilibrium was reached (150 min), then separated by vacuum filtration and oven-dried at 105 °C for 12 h. The following reactions were performed using the same amount of catalyst. Phenol, total organic carbon (TOC) and leached iron concentration were determined for each run. Phenol degradation by CWPO is a complex mechanism due to the difficulty to elucidate the reaction pathway. The literature describes simplified mechanisms for phenol oxidation, where the reaction rate is based on lumped reactions using TOC values for monitoring the total variation of phenol and its intermediates. The simplified model proposed by Zhang and Chuang [ Assuming a first-order kinetic behavior for both complete oxidation and partial oxidation reactions, the phenol oxidation in liquid phase can be expressed by Eq. Hence, the kinetic data were fitted to the proposed model using the non-linear method. Statistical analysis of the data and evaluation of the model were carried out using Origin 8.5 software (OriginLab Corp.).    XRD patterns of the TSC-1 and TSC-2 catalysts are presented in A 2 The main effects of each selected factor were analyzed at 95% confidence level and the analysis of variance (ANOVA) for phenol and TOC removal are shown in Supplementary Material 3 and 4, respectively. The Pareto chart displays the statistically relevant effects over the phenol and TOC removal ( Hence, based on the effects values, it was decided to adjust the factor ranges in order to achieve an optimum operating condition, as it follows: (A) pH from 3 to 5; (B) temperature from 40 °C to 60 °C; (C) catalyst concentration from 1 g L Based on the results obtained by the evaluation of the main factors effects on CWPO of phenol, a 2  In addition, Rey et al. [ Advanced oxidation processes focus on conversion of recalcitrant compounds into less harmful products, besides the complete mineralization. Based on that, it was evaluated the biodegradability of the untreated and treated phenol solutions. The results showed that the oxidation treatment increased the DBO Stability and the possibility of catalysts reuse are important factors for CWPO process. Thus, several works have related the loss of catalytic activity due to catalyst poisoning, reduction of specific surface area, among others [ The proposed model was evaluated in order to describe the reaction pathway and to obtain the reaction rate. The results showed that the lumped kinetic model had an adequate fitting to the experimental data ( Thermal and chemical activation of textile sludge with iron sulfate allowed obtaining carbonaceous iron catalysts with a suitable specific surface area and well-developed microporosity. These characteristics allowed the iron distribution over the catalyst surface, which supports its application on CWPO process. Two catalysts were evaluated and both showed activity towards the phenol and TOC removal. However, TSC-2 catalyst presented better results on operating conditions. The optimum operating conditions led to 98.2% and 68.2% of phenol and TOC removal in 150 min of reaction using a sub-stoichiometric dose of H None. The authors are grateful to Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following is Supplementary data to this article: