A pyrite mineral surface was exposed to a mixed culture of the lithotrophic bacteria Thiobacillus ferrooxidans (Tf). The surface structure of this sample was compared to surfaces exposed to uninoculated solutions of either sulphuric acid or ferric and ferrous sulfate dissolved in sulfuric acid solution at equivalent concentrations as the inoculated solution. All surfaces were examined using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). A chemical profile of the surfaces, as a function of depth, was obtained by surface ablation. The colonised surface produced an oxidised phase extending to a depth of more than 4 μm. A carbonaceous phase was not observed within the oxide layer. No oxide layers of significant depth were observed for samples exposed to uninoculated solutions. The importance of the sessile cells in bio-oxidation of pyrite is demonstrated and a qualitative model is proposed.The oxidation of pyrite and other mineral sulphides is often necessary as a pre-treatment for refractory ores before metals of value can be released from the mineral matrix. Despite the bio-oxidation technology being successfully applied at a number of operations Fowler and Crundwell In order to determine the role of the sessile cell population and further elucidate the bio-leach mechanisms, a series of experiments were performed to examine the surface and sub-surface products and structures produced by the action of lithotrophic bacteria colonising a pyrite surface. Based on the data generated we have proposed a qualitative model for pyrite bio-oxidation. A gem quality sample of pyrite obtained from the Soklich Trading Company (Wattle Grove Perth WA. 6995) was used for this study. The crystalline mineral contained massive agglomerations that were cut to produce flat sections. These pieces were cut and lightly polished to produce small flat coupons (8×5×2 mm Coupons of crystalline pyrite were exposed to three different leaching solutions. Solution 1 contained 0.4 g l After exposure to the leaching solution, the coupons were removed and gently rinsed with de-ionised water. The coupons were then dried under vacuum (15 mm Hg) at 40°C and introduced into the vacuum chamber of the XPS system. The pH and E of solutions 1 and 2 did not vary significantly over the 8-day period (data not shown). The XPS spectra were obtained from a Kratos model Axis Ultra spectrometer fitted with a hemispherical analyser and a monochromated Al K XPS data were obtained and used to determine the percentage abundance of the elements of interest, namely sulfur, iron, oxygen, and carbon from the surface of each coupon. After the initial spectra were obtained, the surface was then ablated for a specific period and another set of spectra acquired. The process was repeated until the bulk phase was revealed. Quantification of the total elemental abundance was performed using the operating software after each ablation period. The SEM images were obtained from a Philips XL 20 Series scanning electron microscope, from the same mineral coupons used for the XPS analysis. Images were obtained before exposure to the leach media and after exposure, for an identical period and conditions as the samples used for XPS analysis. By a comparison of the SEM images of the mineral surfaces before exposure to leach solutions shown in The XPS data obtained from these samples showed profound differences in the surface composition between the pyrite exposed to uninoculated leach media of the H It can be seen from the SEM image of the inoculated sample shown in The sub-surface structure of this sample as determined by XPS is shown in A feature of all three samples is the lack of significant quantities of carbon within the depth profile. Carbon is observed at the surface in both the uninoculated samples but none is found in the bulk phase. The carbon present on the outer surface layers can be attributed to adsorption of atmospheric CO From the analysis of peak area, shown in The speciation of the sulfur atoms was also examined by line shape analysis; the plots of the spectra are shown in The implication of the XPS data is that the sub-structure, develops below the cell attachment level with a major component of ferric oxy-hydroxides, with a minor contribution from an iron sulfate and potassium species, most likely a jarosite. This layer is not formed by the action of H To explain these observations we propose the following dynamic aspects for a model of pyrite bio-oxidation: (1) Planktonic cells become sessile on a mineral sulfide surface and an oxide film develops, incorporating cells, extra cellular polysaccharides, iron oxy-hydroxides and jarosite. (2) Below the surface film, iron species act as a mediator being oxidised at the level of cell attachment and reduced at the oxide/sulfide interface. (3) A sulphur species produced by the action of the mediator at the oxide/sulfide interface diffuses through the surface layers and is either metabolised or passes into the bulk solution. (4) The iron released from the pyrite, and reduced mediator, diffuse to the bio-film and are oxidised to ferric form. The ferric ion hydrolyses water that diffuses past the bio-film producing solid Fe(OH) A schematic view of the proposed model is shown in At the oxide/sulfide interface: At the bio-film: Sum of oxidative reactions: Reductive reaction at the bio-film: Overall stoichiometry: The mediator reaction: The absence of significant amounts of carbon in the depth profile suggests that the charge transport through the oxide layer is mediated by iron species and not by a cellular exudate, this is in agreement with the model proposed by Fowler et al. On the basis of the XPS results, it is reasonable to assume that the Fe By inferring a series of chemical events that appear cogent with the observations, we have developed a qualitative model of pyrite bio-oxidation for discussion. The ability of cells in a surface film to provide the reactants and mass transport to the pyrite surface has been clearly demonstrated. The implications are that improvements in process concentration and rate may be found by maximising sessile populations and improving the selective formation of bio-films on desired surfaces. The authors wish to acknowledge the financial assistance of the AJ Parker CRC for Hydrometallurgy in providing support for K. Blight and Murdoch University for technical and infrastructure support. We also wish to acknowledge the assistance of both Mr. Peter Wilkie and Dr. Zhong-Tao Jiang for the collection and interpretation of XPS spectra.