Attenuation of ground roll is an essential step in seismic data processing. Spatial aliasing of the ground roll may cause the overlap of the ground roll with reflections in the f–k domain. The shearlet transform is a directional and multidimensional transform that separates the events with different dips and generates subimages in different scales and directions. In this study, the shearlet transform was used adaptively to attenuate aliased and non-aliased ground roll. After defining a filtering zone, an input shot record is divided into segments. Each segment overlaps adjacent segments. To apply the shearlet transform on each segment, the subimages containing aliased and non-aliased ground roll, the locations of these events on each subimage are selected adaptively. Based on these locations, mute is applied on the selected subimages. The filtered segments are merged together, using the Hanning function, after applying the inverse shearlet transform. This adaptive process of ground roll attenuation was tested on synthetic data, and field shot records from west of Iran. Analysis of the results using the f–k spectra revealed that the non-aliased and most of the aliased ground roll were attenuated using the proposed adaptive attenuation procedure. Also, we applied this method on shot records of a 2D land survey, and the data sets before and after ground roll attenuation were stacked and compared. The stacked section after ground roll attenuation contained less linear ground roll noise and more continuous reflections in comparison with the stacked section before the ground roll attenuation. The proposed method has some drawbacks such as more run time in comparison with traditional methods such as f–k filtering and reduced performance when the dip and frequency content of aliased ground roll are the same as those of the reflections.Ground roll is one of the main types of coherent noise in land seismic data. Since it has stronger amplitudes and higher level of energy compared to reflections, it may mask them. Different methods have been introduced to attenuate this type of noise. Frequency–wavenumber (f–k) filtering is one of the methods of ground roll attenuation. In the f–k domain, ground roll and reflections are separated regarding their dips. Spatial aliasing of the signal and/or noise usually creates problems in seismic data processing. The simplest solutions to overcome this problem are high-cut filtering, spatial anti-alias filtering, and trace interpolation. Applying high-cut filter or spatial anti-alias filter results in losing some data. Different authors discuss trace interpolation. Based on the fact that missing traces spaced equally can be interpolated by a set of linear equations, In addition to the above procedures, some methods have been introduced for aliased ground roll attenuation. In this study, we use the shearlet transform to adaptively attenuate the aliased ground roll on synthetic and field shot records. The shearlet transform is a directional and multidimensional transform that can separate events with different directions on seismic data. Given the presence of events with different dips (directions) on the seismic shot record, and considering the directional property of the shearlet transform, it is possible to separate events with different dips such as aliased and non-aliased ground roll and reflections, using the shearlet transform. Each shearlet system forms an affine system, i.e., consists of dilations and translations of one single generating function For The matrix Then, the discrete shearlet system associated with a shearlet Eqs. The Laplacian pyramid algorithm ( The wavelet transform efficiently represents a one-dimensional signal with pointwise discontinuities while it does not perform as well in dimensions larger than one with curved singularities ( We used an earth model containing seven layers over a half space ( In addition to the f–k domain and energy distribution plots, it is noteworthy to see the position of different events such as reflections, aliased and non-aliased ground roll in the shearlet subimages. Attenuating the ground roll manually in the shearlet domain, the ground roll (filtering) zone needs to be defined by the user. To apply the shearlet transform, the input shot record requires an equal number of rows and columns. If the input data does not meet this condition, two situations might happen. The first situation can occur when the number of rows (time samples) is greater than the number of the columns (traces). In this case, the input data is divided into several segments, satisfying the aforementioned condition. To prevent the adverse effect of segmenting, segments are overlapped. The percentage of overlap is defined before segmentation. Based on several tests, the value of 50% was considered as an appropriate overlap value for the examples in this paper. To have an adequate number of rows to generate segments of the input shot record, it was necessary to add some zero rows to the input data. These zero rows were added symmetrically to the top and bottom of the input shot record. Then, the shearlet transform was applied on each segment. In each segment, the subimages of each scale were plotted and the subimages containing aliased, and non-aliased ground roll were selected by visual checking of all subimages in each scale. In some of these subimages, we must mute only the left side (as The procedure for adaptive attenuation of ground roll differs only in the stage of selection of the subimages for filtering. As explained in To test the ability of the adaptive ground roll attenuation, this method was applied on a synthetic shot record, To evaluate the ability of the proposed method in ground roll attenuation in the presence of random noise, we tested this method on shot records with different values of signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). To generate shot records with different SNR values, first a synthetic shot record containing only reflections was considered as the original shot record. Then, by adding random noise, the noisy shot record was generated with the desired SNR. After adding the designated level of random noise to the original shot record, the ground roll was added to the noisy shot records. In that way, a shot record is generated containing reflections, random noise and ground roll. To calculate the SNR, the following formula was used (  We selected a shot record from a field data set from the west of Iran, with trace spacing of 60 To evaluate the ability of the proposed method in attenuating ground roll, data from a 2D land seismic line from an Iranian oilfield was stacked in two different cases (1) without attenuating the ground roll, and (2) using the proposed adaptive method in attenuating the aliased and non-aliased ground roll. The 2D data contained 42 shot records. The trace spacing and sampling interval of each shot record were 25 For the shearlet transform used in this paper, the number of scales, and directions (subimages) in each scale are the main parameters for application of the shearlet transform. The number of scales is defined by the user. More scales need more run time. However, this study showed that it is not needed to have many scales for the aim of the ground roll attenuation. Assuming that the size of each segment for shearlet transform is N First, the user defined the direction of ground roll manually (by the mouse). Then, the subimages for muting were selected adaptively based on the relationship between these directions on the input shot record and the directions on the energy distribution plot. Therefore, increasing the random noise has negligible effect on the ability of this method in attenuating the aliased and non-aliased ground roll. In comparison with traditional methods such as f–k filtering, the adaptive ground roll attenuation using the shearlet transform requires more computer run time. In using the shearlet transform, the input shot record should be divided into several segments if the number of its samples in the spatial direction is smaller than that of the temporal direction. Applying forward shearlet transform, selecting and muting the ground roll related to subimages, and inverse shearlet transform must be repeated for each segment separately. The other limitation arises when the dip and frequency content of the aliased ground roll are the same as those of reflections. In this case, the aliased ground roll and reflections overlap in the same subimages and muting that subimages results in the loss of reflections. Therefore, the mentioned subimages are not muted, and some aliased ground roll remains in the filtered data. The directional property of the shearlet transform allows the separation of different events on a seismic shot record, such as aliased and non-aliased ground roll and reflections. This property is used to design an adaptive procedure for attenuating the aliased and non-aliased ground roll in the presence of random noise. This procedure is applied on a synthetic shot record and field data from west of Iran. Analysis on the synthetic data showed that most aliased ground roll was successfully attenuated. But some aliased ground roll that had the same dip and frequency content as non-aliased reflections overlapped on the same subimages in the shearlet domain. Zeroing these subimages resulted in attenuation of reflections that was not desired. Therefore, these subimages were not filtered, and some aliased ground roll remained. Using the f–k spectra of the input and filtered shot records as an assessment criteria revealed that the aliased and non-aliased ground roll were successfully attenuated on the field shot record. Evaluating the effect of the ground roll attenuation by the proposed method on the results of stacking, this method was applied on 42 shot records of a 2D line data and stacked sections of data before and after the ground roll attenuation were generated and compared. Analysis showed that the stacked section after the ground roll attenuation was less affected by steep linear ground roll and also had reflections with more continuity and clarity in comparison to the stacked section of data before the ground roll attenuation. The proposed method has some limitations. One of them is more run time in comparison with the conventional ground roll attenuation methods such as f–k filtering. The other happens when the dip and frequency content of the aliased ground roll are the same as those of reflections. In this case, the aliased ground roll and reflections overlap in some subimages. Muting the ground roll zone of these subimages attenuates the reflections. Consequently, some of the aliased ground roll remains in the filtered data. The authors wish to thank the authors of Shearlab (Shearlab-1.1, A continuous affine system in Observe that  The continuous shearlet transform of function The continuous shearlet transform projects the function  For each The Eq.