The kinetics of the leaching reaction of synthetic scheelite with hydrochloric acid was studied to determine the effect of pH and temperature in the formation of tungstic acid. Conversion data obtained from leaching in a temperature range of 28–100 °C and pH between 1.5 and 3.0 are interpreted in terms of the predominating tungsten species present in the leaching liquors. The results show that it is possible to digest the synthetic scheelite in the acidic hydrochloric medium without the formation of tungstic acid by monitoring and controlling the pH, and controlling the temperature in the domain of metatungstates. In this case, the experimental results match with the shrinking core model, and show that the solids leaching is kinetically under both chemical and mass transfer control.Synthetic scheelite is an artificial product resulting from the interactions of sodium tungstates with calcium salts or calcium solutions. Historically, the production of this compound is related with the tungsten recovery from alkaline leaches produced by the digestion of wolframite concentrates or low-grade scheelite concentrates, respectively, by sodium hydroxide or sodium carbonate. In order to minimize tungsten losses in the physical beneficiation process, the mining industry is forced to produce less pure concentrates. It becomes apparent that intermediate purification has to be introduced in the global process flow sheet for the production of tungsten. As can be seen in Pure tungstic acid can be then obtained from the leaching of synthetic scheelite by hydrochloric acid according to the following reaction: Some strategies are usually adopted to increase the reaction rate and consequently the corresponding yield: (a) working with fine particles (<44 μm) The oldest industrial process to produce ammonium paratungstate (APT) uses acid leaching as a method to digest the natural or synthetic scheelite. The process is described as follows: The raw material with particle size equal to or lower than 74 μm is charged to a digester vessel consisting of a steel shell lined with rubber. Commercial HCl is added at about twice or threefold the amount required by the stoichiometry of the leaching reaction. An amount of sodium nitrate at a rate of 0.05% of calcium tungstate is also added as an oxidizing agent, and the total mixture is agitated and maintained at 70 °C for 12 h or at 90–100 °C for 5 h by steam jacket. The slurry is then diluted and allowed to settle. Nine washes are performed by settling and decantation in steel shell tanks with rubber lining, the first seven at 70 °C (from the third washes 1% HCl is used) and the last two at ambient temperature. The slurry of tungstic acid is then digested with approximately 100% excess of 28% ammonia at 60 °C for 2 h. The system generates a pressure (6 psi), so that the vessel must be closed to avoid loss of ammonia. Filtration of the final liquor separates the undissolved ore or gangue from the ammonium paratungstate solution. This solution is tested for calcium, the specific gravity fixed at about 1.26 or 1.12, respectively, according to The aim of this work is to show that by monitoring the pH of the reaction and controlling the temperature it is possible to leach the synthetic scheelite by hydrochloric acid without the formation of tungstic acid precipitate. Many of the chemical difficulties associated with understanding of the process in which tungsten in solution is extracted from its ores are related to the fact that the solution chemistry of tungsten is extremely complex. Upon acidification of a solution containing the ion WO One way of rationalising the formation of isopolytungstates is to regard them as being produced by the addition of acid to the orthotungstate ion. The general equation can be written as follow: It deserves to be mentioned that some protons act as central atoms and cannot be exchangeable. Besides the common tungstates, the paratungstates ( Since the tungstic acid is obtained only for more acidic solutions ( In the desired solid–liquid reaction, both products are soluble (calcium chloride and isopolytungstates) and so the solid particles become smaller during the leaching. Therefore, the reaction surface moves from outside towards the centre and is progressively reduced. The shrinking core model Considering the approximation to the pseudo-stationary state under laminar regime, the evolution of the particle size with time for first- and zero-order reactions, respectively, to the leaching agent and to the solid particles, is given by the following relation: If the fluid film resistance controls the reaction rate, If the chemical relation controls the reaction, The synthetic scheelite was supplied by Instituto Geológico Mineiro. The reagents used in the leaching experiments were commercial grade. The reference solutions of isopolytungstates for UV/VIS analysis were prepared with reagent-grade ammonium metatungstate hydrate and ammonium paratungstate, obtained from Fluka. Chemical analysis by atomic absorption spectroscopy of raw material shows a content of 78% WO The equipment used consisted mainly of a four-neck Pyrex Quickfit vessel The glass electrode was connected to a pH meter (Crison 2002) controlled by computer, which ordered a microburette (Crison BU 2031) to add the amount of acid required to keep the pH at a preset value. The acid consumption during the reaction tends to increase the pH of the solution. UV spectroscopy (JASCO V-560 UV/VIS Spectrophotometer) was used as support to obtain information about the isopolytungstates present in leaching solutions. Leaching tests were performed using 180 mL of the hydrochloric acid solution at a preset pH value in a 300-mL vessel with magnetic stirring and heating to the required temperature. When the conditions were attained, the reaction was initiated with the addition of 30 g of synthetic scheelite. Samples (15 mL) were quickly collected and filtered with Whatman paper no. 42 at selected intervals and then 10 mL of the solution was taken for WO The plotting of the conversions of WO  At the considered instants, the plotting of logarithm of the rate of the reaction as a function of logarithm of concentration allows the determination of the reaction order, while the Arrhenius plots give the activation energy. The apparent reaction order for the hydrochloric acid and the process activation energy calculated for the experiments results performed at temperatures of 70 and 80 °C are shown, respectively, in At the initial moments of the leaching, it is possible to accept that the system is only under chemical reaction control. Then, the rate constant of the reaction can be calculated by the expression resulting from the differentiation of Using the experimental results of The HCl begins to attack the solid particles of synthetic scheelite by the adsorption of the hydrogen ion on its surface: The next step will be the calcium ion desorption. A new hydrogen ion bonding of anionic ions adsorbed on the solid surface: The reaction for concentrated acid solutions (pH≤1.2), according to Our results show that this same reaction also happens when temperatures are equal to or higher than 85 °C, in the range of pH between 1.5 and 3. Outside the reported domain for the formation of solid H Intermediates species before the formation of paratungstate A, [W The proposed mechanism for the digestion of synthetic scheelite by hydrochloric acid shows a sequence of multiple reactions where the hydrogen ion is involved in homogeneous and heterogeneous reactions. Indeed, these reactions occur on and near the boundary of the solid particles. Thus, it is reasonable to consider the film surrounding the solid particles as a “packed bed” with a small permeability, which is responsible for the lower effective diffusion of hydrogen ion. At present we are developing research on natural scheelite, considering the advantages using this new technique of acid leaching in the industry. The leaching of synthetic scheelite by hydrochloric acid is strongly dependent on pH and temperature. The main conclusions for monitoring the pH (1.5–2.2) in the domain of metatungstates formation and temperature control (70–80 °C) of the synthetic scheelite leaching by hydrochloric acid are the following: Decrease of leaching agent consumption to about 20%, since the production of metatungstates ions ( Decrease of the reaction temperature from the usual value in the traditional acid leaching of 100 to 80 °C. Decrease of the reaction time to 45 min (at pH=1.5 and Use of test equipment material without rubber lining that reduces the heating transfer global coefficient, because the level of the chloride ions (1.15 g/L) enables the use of a titanium alloy ATi 24 Elimination of the solid–liquid separation costs, since the yellow H Reduced costs of waste treatment. Reduced costs of APT production, since a smaller amount of ammonium hydroxide is used to set the solution in the suitable pH range to initiate the crystallization. Leaching operation amenable for continuous operation. stoichiometric factor of solid particle in the reaction fluid concentration (kmol/m effective diffusivity of fluid (m energy activation (kJ/mol) specific reaction rate for surface reaction (m/s) initial radius of spherical particle (m) reaction time (s) time for the total conversion (s) temperature (K) fractional degree of conversion molar density of solid reactant (kmol/m coefficient of mass transfer coefficient of chemical reaction aqueous solution initial liquid reactant solid particle; interface between liquid and solid Funding from Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia, POCTI/36287/ECM/1999, is gratefully acknowledged.