Drying pans are used during wastewater treatment (WWT) to store, stabilise and dry residual solids. The pans are filled with sludge that dries via exposure to sunshine and wind. We propose that drying pans be operated based on dry stacking principles, a technique with proven success in the mineral processing industry. The implementation of the dry stacking technique requires very little in the way of additional engineering beyond a conventional drying pan. By applying the sludge in thin layers, the sludge naturally forms its own stack with an angle that is dependent on the consistency of the material. The benefits of dry stacking are that the slope allows instantaneous run-off of rainfall and supernatant, allowing operation throughout the year rather than seasonally. The layering approach also maximises the evaporation achieved in the available deposition area compared to filling the pans sequentially.
                  A series of laboratory tests were carried out on samples from Melbourne Water's Western Treatment Plant in Werribee, Australia, to provide validation of the dry stacking concept for WWT sludges. Rheological tests showed that samples had appropriate flow properties to form stacks. Drying and re-wetting tests on the samples indicated that a sloped, partially dry sludge sheds rainfall, depending on the slope, cake dryness and amount of rainfall. Local rainfall data was used to estimate a potential increase in pan throughput of 65%–140% due to dry stacking. The greatest improvements were predicted to occur during wetter years. In combination, the results indicated that dry stacking has the potential to dramatically improve the performance of WWT sludge drying pans.Melbourne Water operates the Western Treatment Plant (WTP), which treats approximately 450 ML/day on dry days. The lagoon-based process at the WTP has been operating since the 19th century. The current process is outlined in The WTP has 24 drying pans covering approximately 2.5 ha (see In general, drying pans represent a good dewatering option due to minimal operating costs, especially where land is readily available and good evaporation conditions exist. The dried sludges can be used as fertiliser, incinerated for energy production, or transported for storage in landfills or stockpiles ( The existing 48 ha at the WTP are operating at capacity at approximately 24,000 dry tonnes per year. In spite of this, sludge is accumulating in the treatment lagoons and sludge production is forecast to increase. A new drying facility is being constructed to alleviate these sludge handling bottlenecks. The opportunity exists to implement novel drying practices that will improve drying pan efficiency and throughput. Melbourne Water estimates that a 50% throughput improvement would eliminate the need for at least USD $30 million in capital expenditure on additional sludge drying infrastructure. A well established solar drying practice that has revolutionised the mining industry's approach to managing tailings (mining residues) is the process of ‘dry stacking’ ( A series of laboratory drying tests and rheological measurements were conducted to investigate several key issues related to the dry stacking of wastewater treatment sludge. The aims of this work were to use rheological measurements to confirm that wastewater treatment sludge can ‘dry stack’, to investigate the ability of rain to run off a sloped sludge bed and to characterise the effect of sludge layer thickness on drying rate. Finally, the test results were used with local rainfall data to estimate the effect of dry stacking on the solids throughput of the WTP drying pans. Sludge samples were collected from the drying pans at the Western Treatment Plant, Werribee, Australia. The details are shown in The solids content was determined gravimetrically using oven drying at 105 °C until constant mass was achieved (typically greater than 24 h for the 50–100 g wet samples). The balance had accuracy to 2 decimal places. All solids content information is expressed as weight percent dry solids (%DS). Yield stress and steady-state viscosity measurements were performed using a controlled strain-rate rheometer (Haake VT550) with either cup-and-bob or cup-and-vane geometries ( The torque measured by the rheometer was converted to stress ( The yield stress was taken from the peak torque at a fixed rotational rate of 0.2 rpm. The steady-state torque values at a range of rotational rates (0.2–500 rpm) were converted to viscosity as a function of shear-rate. The shear rate d Two types of laboratory-scale containers were used to simulate drying pans – plastic storage tubs (330 × 220 mm, shown in A range of sludge drying and re-wetting experiments were undertaken. To estimate the degree of absorption of rainfall into a sludge bed, water (143 mL or to a depth of 5.1 mm) was applied using a watering can over ∼30 s to the surface of a drying bed in a plastic tub. After 2 min, unabsorbed water was collected using a syringe and the volume recorded. The water was subsequently returned to the tub to assess water absorption over time. A separate experiment involved ∼25 g samples sludge dried to ∼80% DS in the oven. The dried sludge was submerged in water and the amount of water absorbed was measured after 2 h and 24 h following the same collection method described above. To estimate the degree of adsorption of fresh sludge into a drying bed, partially dried sludge crust (∼32% DS, collected from the WTP sludge drying pan) was placed in crucibles and a small amount of wet sludge (∼6.5 %DS) applied on top of the crust. The samples were covered and observations of the crust were made after 24 h and 1 week. To compare the evaporation rates of sludge and water, two identical 2 L beakers were filled with the same mass of water and sludge respectively and the mass loss monitored over time. To characterise the effect of layer thickness on drying time, different thicknesses (5, 20 and 100 mm) of sludge at 6.2% DS were applied in 2 L beakers. Seven layers of 5 mm, two layers of 20 mm and one layer of 100 mm were made. Successive applications were made when the previous layer reached ∼30% DS. The drying rate in the tubs and beakers was quite high due to the constant air flow created by the fume cupboard. The drying rate in each container was expected to be comparable, but may have varied due to different positions within the fume cupboard. Likewise, the evaporation rate would have varied with sludge height, due to different diffusion lengths from the surface of the sludge to the lip of the container. Containers were covered with lids during nights and weekends in order to facilitate regular measurements. The shear yield stress was measured from the peak torque value at 0.2 rpm for concentrations ranging from 4.82 to 12.35% DS. The yield stress increased with concentration from 3.9 to 898 Pa over this range. The results are shown in Using Eq. The steady-state stress values were fitted with a Herschel–Bulkley model, which has been used previously for many particulate suspensions, including WWT sludges ( The fact that the sludge exhibited yielding and shear thinning behaviour indicates that wastewater treatment sludges will stack. For example, Several experiments were performed to investigate the amount of rainfall or water from fresh sludge that is absorbed by an existing sludge bed. In the first test, 5.1 mm of water was added over 30 s to a sludge bed inclined at 5°. The laboratory-prepared bed was at an average concentration of 25% DS. After adding the water, the surface was wetted but the majority of the water ran down the surface of the angled bed. This result alone shows unequivocally that a sloped sludge bed will shed rainfall. In practice, the water may not be removed immediately due to heavy inundation or low slope. The tub in the first test was returned to horizontal and the water allowed to absorb. By decanting periodically, it was observed that 35% of the applied water had absorbed after 2 min, 89% after 19 h, and all free water within 45 h. The total volume of water was not great compared to the volume of the sludge bed – absorption of all the water led to a reduction in dry solids content from 25 to 24% DS. The second absorption test investigated water application to a much drier cake that had dried to approximately 85% DS in the fume cupboard. The same volume of water as the first test was applied; after 19 h, 35% of applied water had been absorbed and 43% after 45 h. The fact that the sludge cake did not rehydrate indicates that the desaturated crust has reduced the capacity of the sludge for water uptake. A third investigation involved taking cake at 28% DS from an operating drying pan at the WTP and drying it in the oven to varying degrees of up to ∼80% DS. The dried samples were submerged in water for 2 h before free water was decanted and the amount of water absorbed measured. The free water was then returned to the sample and the amount absorbed measured again after 24 h In the final absorption test, fresh sludge was applied to crust samples from the plant sludge drying pans. The crust samples were examined for moisture ingress after 24 h. There was no visible sign of moisture transfer to the sludge crust and the solids content in the wet sludge did not increase. After one week, there was still no sign of moisture ingress, although the relative humidity was 100% since there was visible condensation on the plastic wrap covering the container. The observations of the pan crust samples suggest that some parts of the crust exhibit a hydrophobic nature that prevents water seeping into the crust. The visual appearance of pan crust was quite different to the crust formed in the laboratory-scale studies, with a distinct white surface rather than brown in parts of the pan crust. A water droplet beaded on the white section of the crust (see Overall, these results showed that dried sludge did not fully re-wet and that drier sludge had greater water repelling ability. Dry stacking takes advantage of both of these characteristics – the slope allows water to run-off and the dryness of the thin layers means very little water is re-absorbed. These tests were exploratory in nature and the results are indicative only due to the presence of many uncontrolled variables. Cake cracking, for example, was observed throughout the experiments (see Sludge and water drying tests were performed in order to assess if and when the sludge evaporation rates differ dramatically (i.e. onset of diffusion inhibition due to crust formation), and to justify the use of meteorological data as a tool for estimating the impact of dry stacking. Two 2 L beakers were set up adjacent to each other as evaporation vessels. 0.3 L of water was added to the first beaker and the same volume of sludge at 7.0 %DS was added to the second beaker. The evaporation (in mm) and average solids concentration of the sludge, both calculated from the cumulative mass loss, are shown in This consistent difference between the water and sludge evaporation rates was quite significant. Unlike the conditions of the layering experiments undertaken, these two samples had the same initial height in the beaker and were placed in similar positions in the fume cupboard, so there were unlikely to be differences due to test conditions. Thus, the differences seen are likely to be due to reduced evaporation from the surface of the sludge. If the sludge surface was still saturated, the reduced rate could be due to curvature at the liquid–air interface and is described by the Kelvin equation ( The effect of drying via application of a single layer or multiple thin layers of wet sludge was investigated. All three scenarios (1 × 100, 2 × 20 and 7 × 5 mm layer thicknesses) showed continual mass loss, as shown by the cumulative evaporation results in In general, the three experiments showed similar evaporation rates, which indicates that the application of sludge in thin layers was not significantly detrimental to the drying rate. The slope of The 100 mm experiment showed slightly greater mass loss than the 20 and 5 mm experiments, most likely due to a shorter diffusion distance from the liquid surface to the top of the beaker rather than variations due to layer thickness. The 100, 20 and 5 mm experiments initially had evaporation rates of 3.3, 2.9 and 2.4 mm/day based on the first 1.5 days data (the solid lines in The results of this investigation indicate that dry stacking will have a higher throughput than existing drying pan operation based on the following observations: If the sludge settles, any supernatant will quickly run off the stack rather than remaining Rain runs off the stack rather than pooling on the surface; and All pans can be in operation throughout the year (that is, non-annual harvest), rather than being filled sequentially over the winter months for drying during the summer months. Indications of the impact of the latter two effects can be calculated from weather data, assuming that the rate of sludge drying is 80% of water evaporation. An analysis of meteorology data for Werribee from 1988 to 2010 (see If the drying pans are used throughout the year, as proposed with the dry stacking technique, the throughput of the pans will improve by an average of 42% (ranging from 34% to 49%) based on the additional net evaporation achieved by operating from April to October. Combining this additional evaporation with the assumption that all incident rainfall runs down the stacked slope gives a total improvement varying from 65% to 140%, with an average improvement of 93%. If a proportion of the rain, say 30%, soaks into the sludge bed, the improvement is still 78% on average. This analysis shows that, even without considering supernatant run-off as a result of settling, the implementation of dry stacking practices will provide dramatically increased throughput improvements. The use of meteorological data is justified as a surrogate for actual drying pan drying rates since the average net summer evaporation figure of 967 mm/yr is comparable with the current design throughput of the pans of 762 mm/yr (500 dry t/ha dried from 6 wt% to 70 wt%). There are obviously many inherent assumptions in using the meteorological data to estimate the impact of dry stacking, such as the real rate of drying from sludge beds compared to that of water alone, and variations between the weather at the treatment plant and the weather station site; nonetheless the analysis clearly shows a major improvement is possible. As would be expected, the meteorological data shows (see Some relevant sludge management factors that are not addressed here are the effect of dry stacking on volatile solids destruction, pathogen decay and odour compared to normal drying pan practice. In normal practice, sludge may settle prior to decanting, which can help stabilise the sludge and reduce odours. The level of bacteria and coliphages show an exponential decrease during drying in a pan ( An investigation was carried out to ascertain the viability of introducing dry stacking methods for wastewater treatment sludge drying at a large wastewater treatment plant. A series of tests were undertaken to investigate the evaporation rates of sludge compared with water, the drying rates of sludges applied in different layer thicknesses, and the absorption of rain and fresh sludge in to a drying sludge bed. The yield stress and rate-dependent viscosity of sludge at various concentrations were measured. In addition, meteorology data was analysed to estimate the impact of dry stacking by predicting drying performance. The key findings and impacts on future drying pan design are: WWT sludges have the appropriate flow properties to dry stack. The mineral industry controls the stacking based on the sludge rheology, implying that consistent and maximised sludge concentrations will be crucial for successful dry stacking of WWT sludges; Water beads on part of the sludge crust and rainfall runs off sloped sludge beds. Horizontal beds absorb 35% of rainfall in 2 min, 89% in 19 h, 100% in <45 h. This means that a sloped bed will assist with drying by ensuring that water has minimal contact with sludge surface; Moisture from newly applied wet sludge does not significantly penetrate dried sludge crust. Therefore, complete rewetting is not likely to be a major issue; Sludge evaporation is ∼20% slower than water evaporation. This was applied to the meteorological data to estimate the impact of dry stacking; Thin layers of sludge have comparable evaporation rates to thicker layers, meaning that applying thin layers as per the dry stacking technique is not detrimental to drying pan throughput; Based on rainfall and evaporation data for the study area, dry stacking will improve pan throughput by 65%–140%. Overall, this work shows that wastewater treatment sludges will stack and that the slope achieved by the stacked sludge will shed rainfall. This is potentially of great benefit to sludge drying practice. We acknowledge funding for this work from