Chemical modeling is a very powerful tool to predict and understand the behavior of complex aqueous processing systems. Equally powerful is the educational aspect associated with building such models. In recent years, chemical modeling has undergone tremendous development. The new capabilities of various software have changed the way engineers simulate aqueous solutions in hydrometallurgical processes. This paper presents new developments and strategies to model the chemistry of high temperature aqueous processing systems. The acid pressure leach of nickeliferous laterites is used as an example. In this work, calculation of standard thermodynamic properties of aqueous species was performed with the revised Helgeson-Kirkham-Flowers (HKF) model as well as with the Density model. Nonidealities, including weak ion-pair formations, were treated through the Bromley-Zemaitis ion interaction method. The above models were implemented through the OLI-Systems® commercial software. Monometallic sulphate solutions like Al2(SO4)3–H2SO4, MgSO4–H2SO4, NiSO4–H2SO4, Fe2O3–H2SO4 were used to fit new thermodynamic parameters which were verified on progressively more complex solution mixtures. Finally, simulation results of laterite leach solutions were compared with available experimental data and very good agreement was found.Chemical modeling of aqueous electrolyte solutions is becoming increasingly important in the development, analysis, design, and control of hydrometallurgical processes. Chemical models are extremely useful when they can accurately describe the behavior of electrolyte solutions over wide ranges of temperature, pressure and concentration, and predict solution properties up to saturation levels. Obviously, such models need to be validated against experimental measurements before they can be considered trustworthy and reliable. Nevertheless, once a reasonable degree of confidence is built, they can prove themselves extremely powerful. Then, they can describe and validate available laboratory or pilot scale data and predict with confidence beyond the range of available data even more complex systems. Hydrometallurgical processes at elevated temperatures are receiving more attention recently due to new materials of construction, faster kinetics, selectivity against iron and stability of produced residues. This is particularly true in the nickel industry where sulphuric acid pressure leaching of laterites has become the process of choice because of its fast kinetics, selective extraction of Ni and Co and simultaneous rejection of Al and Fe ( Chemical modeling of sulphuric acid pressure leaching of laterites has been studied by Papangelakis et al. over many years ( In the early work of Later, without considering any temperature extrapolation technique, However, due to the need for fitting many thermodynamic parameters with the above methodology, The above work solidified our understanding of why laterites with high Mg content require elevated free acid levels in the autoclave for efficient leaching. It essentially allowed the accurate calculation of acid consumptions as a function of feed composition and solution chemistry. It also revealed that there is a severe lack of fundamental data for concentrated electrolytes at high temperature and as a result new thermodynamic data are needed. The latter would be better generated at temperature, rather than extrapolating properties from room temperature. To do so, a “standard” chemical modeling approach is necessary, that is implemented in the form of a commercial software dedicated to chemical modeling of electrolyte systems with a built-in ability for data regression and parameter estimation. Such a software is available through OLI-Systems ( Hence, the purpose of this work is to demonstrate the practice of chemical modeling of high temperature aqueous processes as has evolved through the University of Toronto experience and is an integral part for both research and teaching activities. The objectives of this article are to: (1) demonstrate a methodology for establishing a chemical model for a high temperature hydrometallurgical process that involves sulphate solutions and solid-aqueous equilibria, (2) model the Al–Mg–Fe–Ni–SO Existing chemical models for electrolytes can be grouped into three classes ( To describe aqueous and solid-aqueous equilibria of electrolyte systems, the following conceptual mathematical framework is employed. The equilibrium constant of any general reaction However, for aqueous species, infinite dilution is used as the reference state, i.e., The equilibrium constant The latter is given by the stoichiometric summation of the standard partial molal Gibbs free energy of formation of all species in the reaction, Let's consider an aqueous sulphate system as an example. The solubility of metal Me is given by the total concentration of all aqueous Me-bearing species, The SO The electroneutrality equation, From Eqs. To obtain the equilibrium constant of a reaction, one needs to know the standard molal Gibbs free energy of formation of the reaction products and reactants as shown in Eqs. This deficiency was overcome when Helgeson et al. proposed the Helgeson-Kirkham-Flowers (HKF) model ( The above equation requires one to know the values of all the seven HKF parameters ( In fact, the HKF model is gaining more and more attention in simulating electrolyte systems at high temperatures and pressures ( However, for many aqueous reactions there is a lack of experimental data in the first place to allow HKF parameters to be included in the original databases. In this case, it is necessary to estimate equilibrium constants at high temperatures by extrapolating low temperature data using one of the conventional methods of extrapolation. Such methods include the correspondence principle ( The Density Model is based on the observation that the ionization constants of water and many aqueous solutes at high temperatures and high pressures show a linear behaviour when plotted as ln The complete expression for ln Bromley defined the mean molal activity coefficient for a single electrolyte ( Eq. So, for one pair of cation–anion, one needs nine parameters. For limited temperature ranges, the higher terms A large number of Bromley parameters is being provided in OLI's database. New ion interaction coefficients can also be estimated based on the “Model Substance” concept. According to the model substance concept, all interactions involving cations and anions of same charge (+ Data regression is a powerful tool for ensuring and benchmarking thermodynamic consistency among experimental data. Data regression is essential to simulate high temperature concentrated electrolyte systems due to the lack of high temperature thermodynamic data and parameters.  As a powerful aqueous process simulator, the data regression facility is an important part of OLI software. Thermophysical data such as water activity or osmotic coefficient, salt solubility, vapor pressure, heat of solution, pH, density and electrical conductivity can be used to regress parameters such as the equilibrium constant, Bromley-Zemaitis ion interaction parameters for activity coefficient calculation of ionic species, Pitzer-type parameters for activity coefficient of neutral species, HKF parameters, Soave-Redlich-Kwong (SRK) parameters for gas phases, Pitzer density model parameters and electrical conductivity model parameters. In the work reported here, we regressed solubility data to obtain thermodynamic parameters such as equilibrium constants of solubility, or complexation reactions (for established or new species). Their validity must be assessed against measurements from independent sources, or measurements of different thermodynamic variables in the same system (i.e., pH, vapor pressure, etc.), or measurements in progressively more complex solutions (i.e., from monometallic to polymetallic). For species, including solid compounds, with no thermodynamic data at the reference temperature, regression of the equilibrium constant can be performed using the following function of temperature, It usually is not necessary to determine all four The goodness of the fit is estimated by calculating the coefficient of determination An important validation element of the estimated or regressed parameters is to check the chemical model on a temperature range, or on a solution composition (synthetic or actual), that is beyond the parameterization range. In this paper, application of this strategy to Al, Mg, Ni and Fe sulphate solutions of relevance to pressure acid leaching of laterites is made. More specifically, parameters obtained from monometallic systems are tested against more complicated polymetallic sulphate systems. Details are described in the following sections. Thermodynamic data at the reference state (25 °C) and equilibrium constants at 230, 250, 270 °C for the Al–Mg–Fe–Ni–Co–Mn–H Δ For species Al No reliable thermodynamic data (i.e., experimentally verified) have ever been reported in the literature for hydronium alunite (H Equilibrium constants for MgSO   Solubility of Hematite in H  The above calculations show that by fitting one or two parameters in each monometallic-sulphate system, good account for the solubility of these metals in concentrated and high temperature solutions can be achieved. In order to test whether the model parameters obtained from simple systems perform equally well in multi-component solutions, the model was benchmarked against a ternary Al–Mg–H The solubilities of Al As one can see, the OLI model gives very a good prediction for the solubility of Al Finally, it is evident that the model is capable of performing very well in two-metal-sulphate solutions, once it is “calibrated” by regressing some key equilibrium constants using simpler one-metal-sulphate solution data. Does it perform equally well in progressively more complicated solutions though? The model was further applied to simulate bench-scale batch laterite leaching solutions. All the equilibrium constants for Al–Mg–Fe–Ni species were obtained from monometallic systems and were presented in Calculated solubility of Al and respective experimental data are shown in  Precipitation of Mg and Ni was observed for experiments 1 and 2 in Based on the advanced framework of OLI-Systems® software, chemical models were developed and fine-tuned to simulate high temperature aqueous solutions. Modeling the solubility of salts requires the equilibrium constants for all aqueous and aqueous-solid reactions involved in the system of interest and activity coefficients of all aqueous species. To obtain the equilibrium constants at high temperature, three methods were discussed: the revised Helgeson-Kirkham-Flowers (HKF) model that needs certain HKF parameters specific to the species; the Density Model that needs room temperature Gibbs free energy, enthalpy and heat capacity data; as well as regression of equilibrium constants for new species, or established species without existing reliable thermodynamic data by using the software built-in regression facility. Nonidealities were treated through the Bromley-Zemaitis ion interaction method. The HKF model and the Bromley-Zemaitis model are embedded within OLI. A high temperature metal sulphate system of relevance to the pressure acid leach process for nickeliferous laterites was used as a case study. The following monometallic sulphate solutions Al Because of its convenient interface and the rigorous handling of electrolyte solutions, the OLI software is also used as a teaching tool for Chemical Engineering students at the University of Toronto. The experience of students is enhanced because OLI provides a convenient tool for modeling process electrolyte solutions and making sense of complex chemistries. Multicomponent aqueous electrolyte equilibria, for both dilute (environmental chemistry) and concentrated (process chemistry) solutions, as well as solid-aqueous and vapour-aqueous equilibria can be simulated simultaneously and help students successfully meet their project requirements. The financial support of the Centre for Chemical Process Metallurgy of the University of Toronto, as well as the National Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada are gratefully acknowledged. The authors are also thankful to one reviewer who brought forward interesting insights of the approach they followed.