Small, meter-to decimeter-displacement oblique-slip faults cut latest Precambrian lithic arkose to feldspathic litharenite and Cambrian quartz arenite sandstones in NW Scotland. Despite common slip and thermal histories during faulting, the two sandstone units have different fault-core and damage-zone attributes, including fracture length and aperture distributions, and location of quartz deposits. Fault cores are narrow (less than 1 m), low-porosity cataclasite in lithic arkose/feldspathic litharenites. Damage zone-parallel opening-mode fractures are long (meters or more) with narrow ranges of lengths and apertures, are mostly isolated, have sparse quartz cement, and are open. In contrast, quartz arenites, despite abundant quartz cement, have fault cores that contain porous breccia and dense, striated slip zones. Damage-zone fractures have lengths ranging from meters to centimeters or less, but with distributions skewed to short fractures, and have power-law aperture distributions. Owing to extensive quartz cement, they tend to be sealed. These attributes reflect inhibited authigenic quartz accumulation on feldspar and lithic grains, which are unfavorable precipitation substrates, and favored accumulation on detrital quartz. In quartz breccia, macropores >0.04 mm wide persist where surrounded by slow-growing euhedral quartz. Differences in quartz occurrence and size distributions are compatible with the hypothesis that cement deposits modify the probability of fracture reactivation. Existing fractures readily reactivate in focused growth where quartz accumulation is low and porosity high. Only some existing, partly cemented fractures reactivate and some deformation is manifest in new fracture formation in partitioned growth where quartz accumulation is high. Consequences include along-strike differences in permeability and locus of fluid flow between cores and damage zones and fault strength.Faults are narrow zones of localized shear deformation typically composed of intensely deformed fault cores surrounded by a fault damage zone ( Nevertheless, the extent to which cement precipitation and fracture growth interact to cause important differences in fault-zone properties over short distances is not fully appreciated. Fault studies have focused on faults in poorly to moderately cemented sandstones or sandstone-shale sequences, reflecting their relevance in conventional oil and gas reservoirs. Faults in well-cemented sandstones, on the other hand—including those representative of unconventional oil and gas reservoirs—have received less attention. While many aspects translate from one reservoir type to the other, greater cumulative burial and thermal exposure for unconventional gas and oil sandstone reservoirs (in the range of 80–200 °C) favor cement precipitation, which may occur at rates comparable to fracture opening rates ( Here, for fracture arrays associated with small-displacement, oblique-slip faults formed under sedimentary basin conditions (moderate temperatures to ca. 100 °C) ( In NW Scotland west of the ESE-dipping Paleozoic (Caledonian) Moine Thrust Zone (MTZ), red sandstones of the Proterozoic Torridonian succession are unconformable on the Archean Lewisian Gneiss Complex and are unconformably overlain by sandstones and carbonate rocks of the Cambro–Ordovician Ardvreck and Durness Groups ( Despite histories that probably involved deep (>10 km) and possibly protracted burial before and during emplacement of the Moine Thrust ( Faults that cut both Applecross and Eriboll Formations and that postdate the Moine Thrust were recognized and mapped by Several regional fracture sets are documented in both the Applecross Formation ( We remapped selected contacts and parts of faults (at a scale of 1:10,000) in our study near An Teallach ( Applecross Formation sandstones in our study area are medium to coarse, immature lithic arkose to feldspathic litharenite having an average framework grain quartz:feldspar:lithic composition of Q Late, small-displacement faults (offset < 10 m) cut across the Applecross–Eriboll Formation contact ( Faults are surrounded by discrete damage zones of mostly opening-mode fractures (joints and veins) that are more closely spaced than disseminated fractures of the same set in the same beds. The largest faults (F Applecross and Eriboll Formation core and damage-zone attributes resemble those of other small-displacement faults in indurated sandstone. But in addition to the attributes common to both units, notable differences exist in fault cores and damage zones In the two sandstone units, fault cores differ in structural fabric, the volume of quartz cement, and porosity. In Applecross lithic arkose/feldspathic litharenites, fault cores consist of two parts: tabular zones, usually less than 1 m wide, of opening-mode fractures that are markedly more closely spaced than those in surrounding damage zones, and narrow zones of indurated matrix- and clay-rich cataclasite or gouge in the center of the damage zone ( Cataclasite is present in narrow tabular domains, from 10 to 50 cm wide, traceable for at least a few to tens of meters ( Quartz cement is present in microfractures within quartz grain fragments or radiating from grain contacts. This pattern shows that quartz precipitated during fault-rock formation, but these traces of cement show that quartz is only marginally more abundant in core rocks than in adjacent sandstones. On the micro-scale, open fractures are mostly sample-preparation artifacts. Evidence of dilatancy is rare and no quartz-filled macrofractures are evident. Grain-size reduction accompanied by ductile deformation of lithic clasts resulted in fine-grained, low-porosity fault rock ( In quartz arenites, fault cores include areas of closely spaced opening-mode fractures and zones of dense, quartz-cemented striated-fault rock and tabular to lenticular quartz-cemented breccia with local large, quartz-crystal-lined cavities (vug porosity) ( Breccia within the quartz arenite contains a wide size range of quartz-filled and quartz-lined microfractures in all fabric zones. Crosscutting quartz-filled microfractures show that some cement was subsequently broken and partly resealed later by quartz cementation during progressive fault movement ( Quartz cement is pervasive within breccia but the amount of porosity is variable. Cemented dilatant-fault breccia contains zones lacking or having only trace porosity and breccia bodies containing large (mm to >cm) vug porosity. Low-porosity breccia typically has small between-clast areas (less than 0.04 mm) ( Brecciated cores are narrow (centimeters to ca. 1 m) and have broadly tabular, tapering, and irregular shapes. Tapering to irregular breccia bodies and en echelon offsets of a few well-exposed cm- and meter-scale examples ( In the two sandstone units, damage zones are marked by greater fracture abundance as compared to the abundance of background fractures ( Damage zones include subsidiary fractures diverging from near fault-parallel fracture tips at angles of 30–40°, in wing-crack configurations ( Qualitatively, fractures in Applecross sandstone damage zones are mostly isolated, in part because fractures are widely spaced and subparallel, and wing cracks are less common than in Eriboll Formation damage zones ( Faults have straight traces that are up to several kilometers long. For Applecross sandstones, damage-zone lengths are exposed all along the faults, but recessed weathering means that along-strike variability in width and internal structure is uncertain. Damage zones are meters to tens of meters wide. Four of the largest Applecross Formation damage zones have an average width of 24 m (range 11–37 m). Although for the largest faults, Eriboll Formation fault cores are not well exposed, well-exposed cm- and m-scale damage zones in Eriboll sandstones suggest that damage-zone patterns in this unit are in left- and right-stepping relay patterns over a range of scales. Nevertheless, for larger faults, we infer, partly on the basis of topography, that damage zones are fairly uniform in width along fault traces and have similar widths in the two adjacent sandstones ( Microfractures are common as a component of disseminated fracture sets in Eriboll sandstones ( Fracture-height patterns are similar between the two sandstone units. A range of opening-mode fracture heights is evident in both Applecross and Eriboll sandstones. Although other parts of the Applecross Formation contain sandstones having variable mechanical layering bounded by distinct, closely spaced bedding interfaces, in this area both Applecross and Eriboll sandstones have meters-thick fractured beds with few well-defined mechanical interfaces spaced centimeters to meters apart (in both cases mostly interfaces or zones of finer grain size). Height patterns for the tallest macroscopic fractures are comparable, on the order of meters, and these fractures are unbounded. Shorter fractures are confined within beds (top bounded/hierarchical) (height classification: Trace-length patterns on bed surfaces differ between the two units ( The exponential distribution of mostly long fractures of the Applecross Formation contrasts with the wider range of lengths, skewed toward short traces, of the Eriboll Formation, but incomplete exposures of the longest fractures and ambiguity in defining lengths impede rigorous length comparison. Measuring lengths can be subjective because isolated fractures cannot always be rigorously distinguished from en echelon arrays ( One-dimensional measurements of kinematic apertures or total opening displacement along scanlines are a less ambiguous measure of size than are length measurements. We quantify kinematic aperture size distributions by plotting cumulative frequency of the fracture-size rank divided by scanline length ( The porosity, volume and textures of quartz cement in fractures vary between the two units. Applecross Formation fractures have sparse quartz cement ( Quartz cement is widespread in Eriboll Formation fractures, lining or filling fractures ( Fault style can vary with sandstone rock type ( Sandstones that were exposed to temperatures in excess of 90 °C for millions of years generally contain significant volumes of quartz cement ( These insights explain why temperature history is an important control on quartz cementation in fault zones ( Quartz-lined macropores (vugs) in quartz arenite breccia are examples of An analysis of how these cement bridges and associated porosity form despite protracted accumulation of quartz cement ( Damage-zone fractures that are narrow readily sealed, but wider fractures that lack bridges have low quartz-cement volumes. In fault cores, progressive grain breakage renews fracture surface area, and overall quartz volume is greater than in damage zones. Fracture porosity persists because vugs become surrounded by slow-growing crystal surfaces. Many fault zones are channels for hydrothermal fluids ( Owing to differences in the sandstone composition, our results show that open and sealed fractures that are potential conduits and flow barriers can exist simultaneously in fault zones in different rock types as the result of the same simple structural history. In the modern groundwater regime, qualitative observations of fluid flow and staining show that these structures are either conduits or flow barriers depending on rock type, suggesting they could play the same role in the subsurface. Our results add complexity to accounts of fault-zone attribute patterns. According to some models, if fault cores consist of fine-grained fault products with mineral deposits or alteration (as in our example), and damage zones are dominated by opening-mode fractures (as in our example), fluid flow should be localized in the damage zone rather than in the less permeable fault core ( Determinants of fracture-enhanced fluid flow are fracture length, length distribution, connectivity, and aperture. These size attributes vary along the fault zone. If fractures are open, more interconnected ( Fracture size and fracture diagenesis may not be independent variables. Size-distribution patterns in damage zones are notably different between the two sandstones. These differences might arise from the markedly different mechanical properties of these two units. But the interaction of cement precipitation and fracture growth may also explain the pattern. The cement adhesion mechanism proposed by Fractures tend to have a wide size range where quartz accumulation is high (crack-seal texture and sealed microfractures), and only some existing partly cemented fractures reactivate and some new fracture formation occurs in Fault behavior can be influenced by the mechanical properties of fault rock and surrounding rock, for example, the markedly different stiffness possessed by Applecross and Eriboll sandstones. But the contrasts in Applecross and Eriboll Formation fault-core rock types suggest that the strength of the fault core and damage zone varies along strike and dip. Moreover, the differing susceptibilities of fault-core rocks to quartz precipitation imply that each part of the fault core may differ in how strength changes with time as damage accumulates. Development of locally clay-rich foliated cataclasite in Applecross Formation fault cores suggests a weakening fault. Impeded quartz accumulation means no counteracting cementation process exists to heal damage accumulation, or strengthen the fault as damage accumulates. Copious quartz deposition in Eriboll Formation fault cores and damage zones likely has a countervailing, strengthening effect. Here, brittle deformation and fault weakening by grain-size reduction is paired with strength recovery by quartz cementation. The recovery process and cement bonding are most complete in narrow fractures. But cementation is incomplete in localized zones of macropores owing to slow quartz accumulation in large cavities. Strength recovery may be impeded. This cement-accumulation pattern results in local zones of highly porous and, therefore, potentially weak fault rock. Although quartz accumulation will gradually strengthen these zones by filling the vugs, empirical evidence ( The persistence of open-fracture pore space for millions of years at temperatures well above those experienced by the late faults in NW Scotland suggests that, although parts of quartz-rich fault cores may strengthen rapidly, other parts may remain persistently porous and probably weak. Because cementation effects are sensitive to temperature history, differences in inferred fault properties can evolve with time. What constitutes large pores and how long they will take to fill depends on temperature and rock composition in predictable ways ( Our example shows that different cementation and structural mechanisms can operate under the same conditions in different rock types. Heterogeneous cementation and porosity preservation could be mechanisms that create time-dependent heterogeneous physical properties that could, for example, account for aftershocks along the sides of rupture zones ( This study provides a testable model that can be used to predict key fluid flow characteristics and strength of fault zones. The examples presented are useful because the configuration of faults cutting sandstones of different composition provides controls on variables that affect the evolution of fractures, notably cementation owing to rock-type differences. Under moderate temperatures (up ca. 100 °C) for the same oblique-slip faults in NW Scotland, interaction of fracture growth and quartz precipitation causes along-strike differences in potential locus of fluid flow, from fault core to damage zone, and the distribution of strong fault rock. In Applecross Formation fault cores, grain fracture and attenuation of lithic and feldspar grains lead to low-porosity clay- and matrix-rich cataclasite (indurated gouge), but, on opening-mode fracture walls in damage zones, the small number of quartz substrates inhibits quartz accumulation and preserves fracture porosity. In Eriboll Formation fault cores, ample quartz accumulation surfaces localize cement, forming dense quartz-cemented breccia, but cavities larger than about 0.04 mm preserve porosity because quartz accumulates at slower rates after crystals become faceted. Open fractures may grow or reactivate preferentially, accounting for narrow distributions of trace lengths and aperture size in Applecross Formation damage zones. Progressive deformation is focused into existing fractures. In contrast, the presence of ubiquitous favorable quartz accumulation sites on fracture walls causes pervasive fill in narrow Eriboll Formation fractures. The tendency for narrow fractures to seal may explain large trace length distributions and power-law aperture size distributions for Eriboll Formation damage-zone fractures. With progressive deformation, some fractures reactivate but others do not. Progressive deformation is partitioned between existing and new fractures. Fault cores switch from probable barriers to conduits, and damage zones from conduits to barriers, along same fault zones. Differences in rock type, here a shift of a few percent of whole-rock volume of lithic and feldspar grains versus quartz, lead to a marked difference in the size, shape, and porosity of fractures. These attributes and evidence for groundwater flow in the open fractures (Eriboll fault cores; Applecross damage zones) suggest that these differences also correspond to marked contrasts in permeability. In fault cores, abrupt along-strike differences from clay- and matrix-rich cataclasite to porous quartz breccia correspond to probable differences of fault strength that diagenetic models may be able to predict. This study was funded by grant