A mixture of anhydrite and gypsum was obtained by reacting a yttrium-bearing fluorite (CaF2) with sulfuric acid liberating hydrogen fluoride. Thorium and uranium were extracted from the leach liquor using DEHPA/TBP. The raffinate was then adjusted to pH 1.0 and the rare earths precipitated with oxalic acid leaving commercially viable concentrations of niobium, tantalum and titanium in solution. The overall recovery of rare earths was 89.9% at a product purity of 96% RE2O3. Pure calcium fluoride was recovered from the released hydrogen fluoride by reaction with limestone.Natural gypsum is the most common form of gypsum used around the world and but consumption of synthetic material has started to rise sharply, especially in Europe and North America. The most source of synthetic gypsum is produced by flue gas desulphurisation (FGD) equipment at coal-fired power stations. Global consumption of gypsum in all its forms was estimated at 149 Mt in 2003 ( The rare earths (RE), as a group, constitute 8 Several works discussed the formation of gypsum CaSO The El Missikat granite pluton in the central eastern desert of Egypt is characterized by the presence of secondary fluorite which was formed by acidic alteration of both anorthite [CaAl A representative sample from El Missikat area was ground to − Leaching experiments with sulfuric acid (3–18 M) were performed under agitation for different periods of time (0.5–3.0 h) at different temperatures (27–300 °C) and ratios of 100–590 g ore/L acid. Leaching was carried out in Teflon vessels attached to plastic bottles to collect the evolved gases. The slurry was filtered and the insoluble residue was washed thoroughly with water until free of acid. Extraction was done before applying the precipitation with oxalic acid to separate the radioactive impurities from the rare earths. The hydrogen fluoride gas was absorbed by water then reacted with sodium hydroxide, lime or limestone for the recovery of fluoride compound. All reagents were of analytical grade and were used without further purification. Ammonium hydroxide (SG 0.88) was used for pH adjustment while oxalic acid was used as precipitating agents. The extraction process was performed using diethyl hexyl phosphoric acid D X-ray diffraction (XRD) was used to identify the phases present during processing. The products were analysed for their chemical composition using a scanning electron microscope. The analytical conditions were 15–52 kV accelerating voltages and 60–120 s counting time. The total rare earth content was analysed by spectrophotometric method using Arsenazo III ( The yttrium–fluorite which contains mainly CaF The reactions produce either gypsum or anhydrite and a gas containing hydrogen fluoride (    Two sets of experiments were performed by varying the ore to acid ratio from 100 g/L to 590 g/L. In the first set, 18 M sulfuric acid at 190 °C was used for leaching the ore with continuous stirring for 2 h. Under these conditions, the dissolution of rare earths did not exceed 60% and it decreased at lower solids concentration. The residue contained either anhydrite or a mixture of gypsum and anhydrite. The second set of experiments used 9 M sulfuric acid at 100 °C, the leaching increased with the solids concentration, From the previous results, it is clear that hot sulfuric acid attacked the ore solubilising the rare earths and leaving a residue consisting mainly of gypsum and/or anhydrite. These residues are shown in The experiments show that the formation of the two calcium sulfate compounds in the residue depends mainly on the reaction temperature. Below 80 °C, the ore sample seems to be partly decomposed, since both yttrium fluorite and calcium sulfate (especially anhydrite) were detected by XRD analysis. Regarding the leaching process, it was found that reacting the ore sample containing yttrium fluorite with five times its quantity of 18 M sulfuric acid yielded about 24% calcium contents in the sulfate leach liquor. This may be attributed to the considerable solubility of CaSO The dissolution of the rare earths depends on both sulfuric acid concentration and the reaction temperature. After digesting 100 g of ore in 1.0 L of 18 M acid at 190 °C less than 40% of total rare earth into the sulfate leach liquor, while using 9 M acid at 100 °C resulted in 97.8% dissolution after 2 h. It was mentioned that in strongly acidic solution some rare earth elements (e.g. Ce, Eu) tend to form stable sulfate salts which are insoluble due to hydrolysis ( The dissolved rare earths should be removed from the leach liquor before they become incorporated again in gypsum ( It was noticed that some of the leached rare earths were incorporated into gypsum during crystallization from the sulfate leach liquor. Which elements are incorporated depends on the ionic radius of the rare earth ion being comparable to that of the calcium ion. The Prior to precipitation of rare earths from the sulfate leach liquor separation of uranium and thorium by solvent extraction was necessary. The sulfate leach liquor of pH 1.1 and SO The loaded solvent could undergo two stripping steps using 6% NH The oxalate precipitate was ignited at 950 °C and the analysis of the final product revealed that the recovery of rare earths as oxide was 89.9% with 96% RE As the reaction between the ore sample and sulfuric acid proceeded, hydrofluoric acid was evolved and collected in plastic bottle containing distilled water. Equal volumes of this acidic solution were treated with alkaline substances to raise pH from 1.0 to 10.0. Sodium hydroxide, calcium oxide and calcium carbonate were used for this purpose and the obtained products were analysed by XRD. It was observed that both sodium hydroxide and calcium oxide were consumed first to raise the pH value before precipitate formation. At pH 8.5, both fluorite and calcite were formed as a result of calcium oxide addition, while treating the hydrogen fluoride solution with sodium hydroxide at pH 9.5, produced a mixture of sodium fluoride and sodium fluosilicate with relative weight 92% and 8%, respectively, the silicon being due to slight dissolution of the quartz.  The laboratory scale leaching experiments were performed to produce some valuable products from the El Missikat yttrium-bearing fluorite This study examined the leaching of a yttrium-bearing fluorite with sulfuric acid aiming to obtain three products: a solid residue containing gypsum or anhydrite, a rare earth compound from the sulfate leach liquor and calcium fluoride. It is possible to conclude the following: The dissolution of rare earths as well as the formation of gypsum or anhydrite depends on both sulfuric acid concentration and leaching temperature. About 95.7% total rare earth were leached by reacting 9 M sulfuric acid with yttrium fluorite at 100 °C for 2 h and a solids concentration of 200 g/L. Solvent extraction was performed with 0.2 M DEHPA/TBP to remove thorium and uranium from the sulfate leach liquor of 3.0 M sulfate ion concentration and pH 1.1. The rare earths were precipitated from the raffinate by oxalic acid after extracting the radioactive impurities from the sulfate leach liquor. The recovery of the rare earths as oxide was 89.9% with 96% purity. Calcium fluoride was recovered from the evolved hydrogen fluoride in water by reacting with calcium carbonate in the pH range 1.0–4.0. It is possible to obtain about 580 g CaF The authors would like to express their deep thanks to the members of scanning electron microscope (SEM) as well as XRD departments for their help in analysing some samples. Our thanks are extended to Mrs. Sahar Eissa for her help in the experimental work.