In laboratory measurements, methane ad-/de-sorption behavior on coal is known to be directly related to the particle size. As expected, coal exhibits a relatively high initial desorption rate for smaller coal particles which results in a different gas desorption volume and pressure curves from platter ones for larger coal particles. Both fracture-dominated and matrix-dominated flow theories had been proposed to explain the difference in shapes of desorption curves. These two theories, however, are contradictory to each other and neither of them is completely convincing. Based on the newly developed relationship of apparent diffusion coefficient and apparent permeability, this work uses a dual-permeability concept to explain the different shapes of desorption curves. Numerical simulation solutions indicate that the switching dominance of the fracture and matrix permeability systems produces variable desorption curve shapes. With continuing decrease of coal particle size, the flow will gradually change from fracture-dominated to matrix-dominated mode. The critical apparent permeability ratio dividing the domination of these two systems is in the order of ~10−2, in contrast to the initial hypothesis that if one system dominates the overall gas flow, its permeability must be smaller than that of the other. As particle radius decreases, this parameter first increases and then remain at a certain value. At last, the simulated desorption curves were validated with laboratory desorption experimental data.particle radius Langmuir constant effective matrix flow area effective fracture flow area Langmuir constant gas concentration in the matrix gas concentration in the fracture average gas concentration in the matrix average gas concentration in the fracture gas concentration gas concentration at particle surface gas concentration at gas concentration at apparent diffusion coefficient fracture aperture initial gas concentration distribution in the sphere total apparent permeability of gas in coal apparent permeability of gas in fractures apparent permeability of gas in the matrix fracture width thickness of the plane sheet the length of the path of the gas from the center of the particle to the surface of the sample the straight line distance between the center of particle to the particle surface gas mass molar mass of gas accumulated desorption volume at time final desorption volume as gas pressure at the center of the matrix gas pressure at the center line of the fracture gas pressure at position atmospheric pressure pressure difference between the matrix center and the matrix surface the pressure difference between the center line and the particle surface mass flow per unit matrix volume mass flowing from the matrix into the fracture mass flowing from the fracture into the surface Maximum allowable value of mass flow in the fracture gas constant the distance from one point to the center time temperature matrix block size variable substitution function gas molar volume the distance from one certain point to the particle surface the distance from one place to the fixed end of the plane coefficient permeability model factor shape factor kinematic viscosity the dynamic viscosity of gas apparent permeability ratio of the matrix permeability and fracture permeability coefficient tortuosity gas density gas flow rate porosity of matrix porosity of fracture Coalbed methane (CBM) and shale gas, are abundant and clean energy resources and have become an important source of energy in the United States, China, Australia, and other countries. The knowledge of the gas transport properties of coal improves gas drainage efficiency, decreases the greenhouse gas emissions and improve the safety level during underground mining ( Coal is an inhomogeneous medium with a dual-porosity system composed of matrix pores and cleats/fractures. Because of the dual-porosity feature of coal, two qualitative theoretical explanations for the various desorption curves were previously proposed, namely, matrix-dominated and fracture-dominated theories. In qualitative perspective, both theories seem reasonable, but they are contradictory with each other. The matrix-dominated explanation was first proposed by Airey E.M.in 1968 ( Both the matrix-dominated and fracture-dominated theories have their own reasonable rationales. In the matrix-dominated theory, fractures are treated as pipes with outperformed gas deliverability (under-voltage effect) and the flow bottle-neck is the matrix diffusive flow capability. While in the fracture-dominated theory, fractures are the limiting flow bottle-neck and thus they can be treated as a flow valve that controls the flow rate (throttle effect), as shown in This paper tries to the investigate the internal controlling mechanism of different shapes of desorption curves quantitatively and describe the role of fractures and matrices in gas desorption mathematically. A critical apparent permeability ratio dividing the domination of these two systems is proposed and verified by numerical simulations and experiments. The results will advance the knowledge of the desorption kinetics and lay the foundation for the application of CBM recovery, coal mine gas drainage and carbon sequestration. It is generally believed that diffusive flow occurs across the matrix and Darcian flow occurs through the fractures. In order to distinguish and compare the influences of these two flow influxes on the overall gas flow rate, it is essential to integrate them into a universal governing equation framework. Although it is widely accepted that the flows within matrix and fractures are controlled by the concentration and pressure gradients respectively. These two driving forces are inter-related with each other. The diffusion equation can be transformed into an apparent permeability form ( The mass flow per unit time can be written as: According to the diffusion equation, we have ( According to the ideal gas law, the relationship between the gas concentration and gas pressure can be obtained: Combining Eq. Eq. Many scholars have applied the dual-diffusion framework ( Eq. In order to describe this sequential gas transport process, a homogeneously conceptual plane sheet model is proposed to illustrate the matrix and fracture flows. The conceptual model is graphically shown in According to spherical diffusion model, the diffusion equation can be written as ( Taking the transformation of Variables The above equation is a linear flow equation which is the same as the plane sheet. Thus, diffusion in a sphere can be transformed into a sheet diffusion equation only if the boundary conditions are appropriate, which are: The above derivation indicates that if the concentrations in the two ends of the plane sheet stay at 0 ( As shown in the conceptual model ( Assuming matrix flow direction is perpendicular to fracture surface, the effective matrix flow area For desorption-transport flow in coal particles, the external pressure is usually set to be zero ( The cross-sectional area of the fracture For a certain location Integrating the above equations, the mass flowing from the matrix into the fracture For one fracture, the mass flow According to the basic law for mass conservation, the essential factor determining whether the fracture or the matrix controls the gas flow is the mass quantity of flow, not the geometric features of the two systems. Otherwise, when the matrix controls the gas flow, it implies: When the matrix and fracture system equally control the flow, it will have: The overall gas flow rate from the coal will be controlled either by the matrix influx or fracture deliverability. In order to set up a criterion for which flow will be the dominant, we can mathematically establish an apparent permeability ratio If we consider the influence of tortuosity, then we have Defining Normally, breaking first changes the particle radius or fracture length Based on the literature Thus, the matrix permeability does not need to be greater than the fracture permeability for the matrix to dominate the overall flow if a series of relationships and a perpendicular flow direction are assumed. Note that Eq. In the matrix, there are two gas states: the adsorbed state and the free state. The average concentration of gas within the matrix can be estimated as ( In fractures, only free gas exists, so we have Thus, the governing equation for gas flow in matrix and fracture can be obtained, respectively. The desorption numerical simulations were conducted with the PDE module of COMSOL Multiphysics software. According to Eq. The pressure profiles along the centerline (line The pressure profiles along the lines of The simulated desorption curves with the various permeability ratios were plotted in The above results point out that, if enough gas source can be supplied, the gas desorption curve changes from the fracture-dominated flow to matrix-dominated flow with the particle size decreasing, as shown in The relationship between the desorption curve shape and the changing values of The desorption experiments for five coal particle size diameters (e.g. ~0.074 mm, 0.074–0.2 mm, 0.25–0.5 mm, 0.5–1 mm and 1–3 mm) were conducted with a coking coal sample from the No.3 coal seam in Shuangliu coal mine of Shanxi Province in China. The coal parameters obtained from proximate analysis and isothermal adsorption experiments are listed in It is clear that with a larger particle size, under the same desorption pressure, the desorption curve exhibits a flat and almost linear trend with time, while for smaller particles, the desorption rate increases early in the experiment. By inputting different parameters in COMSOL software, we tried to get close to the experimental desorption curves with the appropriate simulated curves. For every try in fitting, we measured the correlation coefficients to make sure the simulated curves have a good fitting effect. For the range of Based on the developed relationship of apparent diffusion coefficient and apparent permeability, this paper gives an explanation to the different shapes of desorption curves with a dual-permeability model. The conclusions are listed as follows: The shape of gas desorption curve of coal is particle size dependent in a fixed time period. For a given coal sample, the size of coal particle will significantly influence the net outward gas flow rate. As the particle size decrease, the role of matrix and fracture on the overall gas flowrate varies. During continuous crushing, the fracture-dominated flow gradually becomes matrix-dominated flow, resulting in an increasingly steeper desorption curve. The simple parallel flow relationship between matrix permeability and fracture permeability cannot effectively describe the desorption process. Instead, the sequential matrix-fracture flow framework gives a reasonably physical representation of desorption behavior in coal particles. The permeability ratio at the point of transition from matrix-dominated to fracture-dominated flow is on the order of ~10  The authors declare no competing financial interest. This work is supported by the The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at