The feasibility of silica removal in RO treatment of groundwater from a Western Australian mining and processing operation to prevent scaling and enhance water recovery was investigated. This study has shown that it is possible to decrease the silica concentration in RO concentrate to levels that would allow an overall water recovery of 90% to 95% using 10g/L of regenerable activated alumina adsorbent. Regeneration of the adsorbent using 2% NaOH was found to be effective for at least three regeneration cycles. A preliminary costing of the high water recovery RO process using silica removal by adsorption indicated product water (permeate) costs of $5.6/kL and savings due to a reduction in brine volume from the current 40% of feed volume to 5–10% of feed volume. It also allows better utilisation of a scarce groundwater resource, allowing the production of up to 1.6 times more low salt water from a given volume of groundwater. These results warrant larger scale investigation of silica removal and adsorbent regeneration for high recovery RO processing for mining operations, and application of silica removal to RO treatment of other silica laden waters such as coal seam gas produced water.The quality and quantity of process water used in mining and mineral processing operations often have a major impact on the efficiency of the process. In many remote mining operations in arid regions, the only source of water is groundwater, and there is often a need to demineralize this by reverse osmosis (RO) for process stages such as steam generation. The presence of ionic components such as calcium, magnesium, carbonate, sulphate, phosphate and silicate, and components such as soluble silica (silicic acid), in the feed water of an RO process can limit the achievable water recovery by forming insoluble scale that hinders membrane filtration. While it is possible to mitigate scale formation in RO processes by ionic components by removing them using ion exchange resins Silica scale mitigation in RO processes is a challenge because it is difficult to accurately predict scale formation as the threshold limits of silica scale formation are influenced by a large number of parameters Silica scale mitigation is also a challenge because silica removal can lead to waste products that pose engineering challenges for their management. It is possible, for example, to precipitate silica in the presence of metal ions such as Fe(III) and Al(III) Activated alumina was chosen due to its effectiveness as an adsorbent for silica The test water used in these experiments was the RO concentrate that had been derived from the 60% RO water recovery of a Western Australian groundwater. Only one batch of test water was used in all experiments, and the water was collected and transported without acidification or preservation. The test water was sampled for complete analysis on receipt and stored at ambient indoor conditions (~ Initial chemical characterization of the RO concentrate (ROC) test brine was performed by a commercial analytical laboratory. Subsequent silica, calcium and magnesium analyses were performed by Inductively Coupled Plasma spectroscopy. The pH measurements were performed using a Hach pH meter with gel filled double junction reference electrode and built-in temperature sensor. The RO scaling potential was estimated for 90% water recovery of the ROC using ROSA8 Dow Filmtec Software. The maximum silica concentration above which the silica precipitates in the ROC was determined experimentally using a flat sheet Sterlitech Sepa CF RO module, operated with full recycle of the concentrate such that the water recovery increased with time during the experiment, similar to the procedure of Jawor 2009 All experiments were performed using 100 The activated alumina was recycled through several adsorption steps before regeneration to better utilise the capacity of the activated alumina. Such processing would also be used industrially to minimise the activated alumina and adsorbent regeneration requirements for the process. Unused alumina was loaded with silica from the ROC by recycling each batch of alumina through a series of adsorption steps, so that the adsorption capacity of the alumina could be approached. Loading was performed in a series of batch 100 Loading of regenerated alumina was performed under the same conditions as the loading of unused alumina, using 5 silica loading steps. The cumulative quantity of silica loaded onto the adsorbent (L The loaded adsorbent was filtered through 0.45 The cumulative quantity of silica desorbed during regeneration (D The cumulative quantity of adsorbent lost by dissolution during regeneration (AL The composition of the RO concentrate (ROC) generated at the mining site for an RO water recovery of 60% is shown in It can be seen from The scaling potential of the test brine (Feed) and a 90% water recovery RO concentrate with respect to calcium carbonate, calcium sulphate and silica, as predicted by the Dow Filmtec Rosa 8.0 modelling software, is summarised in It can be seen in The silica, calcium and magnesium concentrations in the samples taken during the flat sheet RO scaling tests are shown in The approximately 170 Although these scaling studies illustrate the difficulty involved in prediction of scaling conditions, it is noteworthy that the conditions of the batch mode flat sheet experiments with concentrate recirculation used in the current study are different to those prevailing in conventional industrial scale spiral wound continuous RO process where the concentrate enters and leaves the membrane system in a much shorter time. Slow precipitation of brine constituents may not lead to scaling in the continuous process because the brine may have left the membrane system by the time the precipitation takes place. In the recirculation mode experiments, however, where typically 10 to 12 In order to achieve a system water recovery of 90% or above, a minimum of 75% water recovery must be achievable on the remaining concentrate from the primary RO process. As can be seen in The precipitation behaviour of silica is not as well understood as that of other scale forming chemicals such as calcium carbonate or calcium sulphate The effect of pH on the concentration of soluble silica, calcium and magnesium, after contact with activated alumina for 15 Comparison of the data in the presence and in the absence of activated alumina reveals that the maximum decreases in silica concentration over what is achieved in the absence of adsorbent occurred at the native solution pH of 8.6. The calcium concentration decrease of 34 The effect of activated alumina adsorbent dose at various temperatures is shown in The effect of extension of the contact time to one hour at various temperatures and adsorbent doses is shown in The kinetics of silica adsorption on activated alumina is such that high concentrations of activated alumina (approx. 10 The silica loaded during five consecutive additions and removal by filtration of 100 These results are consistent with dissolution of small alumina particles in the first regeneration and the formation of an adsorption layer during the second and third adsorption stages that is less soluble than the silica loaded, non-regenerated, alumina in the 2%NaOH regenerant. Such an adsorption layer may, for example, be the result of reaction of silicate ions with aluminium ions liberated from the alumina at alkaline conditions ( An interesting feature of the analysis of the 2% NaOH solution during the various regeneration steps and regeneration stages ( The quantity of magnesium released during regeneration ( The three RO concentrate treatment options considered for preliminary costing were those that resulted in silica concentration below the target concentration for 90% system water recovery (45 Option 1: The silica is removed by high pH precipitation in the absence of adsorbent, with precipitate removal using a clarifier, the overflow being neutralised with acid before processing through a continuous SWRO plant. Option 2: The silica is adsorbed onto the alumina at native pH of the ROC, at ambient temperature, with no pH adjustment before processing through a continuous SWRO plant. The adsorbent is regenerated using 2% NaOH. Option 3: As for Option 2, but at an elevated temperature (45 A diagrammatic representation of the process flows is shown in This option has a significantly higher cost ($4 This option has a significantly lower capital cost ($2.7 This option is very similar to Option 3, but the adsorption takes place at 45 It was shown that it is possible to decrease the silica concentration in RO concentrate to levels that would allow an overall water recovery of 90% or above using high concentrations (10 Preliminary costing of the high recovery RO process with an added silica removal stage indicates that this added stage leads to high product water costs ($5.6/kL), and is likely to significantly decreases the brine management costs due to the reduction of the brine volume from the current 40% to 5% of the feed volume. It also allows greater mineral production in situations where groundwater availability is a limiting factor. These results warrant larger scale investigation of silica removal using adsorption column, and adsorbent regeneration. The authors acknowledge the financial support of the National Centre of Excellence in Desalination Australia which is funded by the