Surgical approach selection and fixation of Hoffa fractures is difficult and remains controversial. Evolving trends emphasize the importance of fracture morphology, fracture location, and comminution, all of which guide decisions regarding surgical approach and implant selection. This focused review highlights factors affecting Hoffa fracture available surgical approaches, treatment outcomes, and recommendations for selecting an optimal approach.Surgeon familiarity Suitable for large fragments Can access both condyles Poor visualization and difficult reduction of small Hoffa P-A screw may be impossible with small fragments Preserves quadriceps muscle Preserves vascular supply of patella Difficult to evert patella Proximity to vascular structures Access to both anterior and posterior aspect of condyle with one incision. Possible comminution fracture Large skin incision Risk to extraosseous fragment blood supply Risk to infrapatellar branch of saphenous and saphenous nerves Suitable for small Hoffa fragments Biomechanical advantage of P-A screw Plating possible Occasionally requires medial gastrocnemius incision Risk to extraosseous fragment blood supply Risk to infrapatellar branch of saphenous and saphenous nerves Minimally invasive Direct fracture visualization Quick recovery Decreased blood loss Technically demanding Limited P-A screw trajectory through arthroscopic portal/ surgical window Surgeon familiarity Suitable for large fragment Can access both condyles Can combine with distal femoral locking plate Poor visualization and reduction of small Hoffa P-A screw maybe impossible in small fragment Biomechanical advantage of P- A screw Plating possible Occasionally lateral gastrocnemius incision required Neurovascular risks (if access medial to lateral gastrocnemius needed) Access lateral to posterolateral aspect of condyle Plating possible Requires IT band insertion incision Risk to extraosseous fragment blood supply Risk of common peroneal nerve injury Minimally invasive Direct fracture visualization Quick recovery Decreased blood loss Technically demanding Limited P-A screw trajectory through arthroscopic portal/ surgical window Fracture with metaphyseal extension needed to buttress Large fragment (Letenneur type I, III or Hoffa fracture size > 19.9%) Concurrent distal femoral fracture Moderate to small size fracture (Letenneur type II or Hoffa fracture size <19.9%) Fracture with articular comminution at middle third of the condyle Fracture with metaphyseal extension Large fragment (Letenneur I, III or Hoffa fracture size >28.7%) requiring A-P screw fixation Knee flexion contracture Large fragment (Letenneur type I, III or Hoffa fracture size >19.9%) Knee flexion contracture The Hoffa fracture was first described by Albert Hoffa in 1904 who defined it as a unicondylar intra-articular fracture in the coronal plane [ Presently, the minimally invasive surgical approach with combined incisions for articular fracture treatment, e.g., tibial plateau and pilon fracture, is gaining popularity. This emerging trend is also applicable to Hoffa fractures. In some difficult cases, a Hoffa fracture could be reduced using one approach, but would require a different approach for fixation due to the limited surgical approach area. More complete understanding of available surgical approaches in the armamentarium related to the distal femur would assist surgeons in determining the proper surgical treatment of this difficult fracture. To understand the configuration, size, and location of the fracture, in 1978 Letenneur proposed a classification system for Hoffa fractures which defined different types of coronal fractures of the femoral condyle and introduced the concept of avascular necrosis prediction [ Letenneur et al. and Bel et al. reported an incidence of avascular necrosis in small Hoffa fractures of approximately 2% which was significantly associated with the posterior approach [ It is usually difficult to determine the actual fracture configuration from plain radiographs in AP and lateral view. At present, CT scans with 2D and 3D reconstruction are the gold standard for investigation of Hoffa fractures. Scans can be used to identify the size of the fracture, the fracture plane, and comminution, three characteristics which are crucial for surgical treatment planning. Fracture size is a keystone of surgical treatment strategy. Large Hoffa fractures (Letenneur I and III) can be fixed by various patterns of A–P A screw trajectory which is perpendicular to fracture plane provides the best mechanical advantage [ Hoffa fractures with comminution are more common in the lateral condyle. Dealing with this type of complex fracture requires greater awareness of surgical approach limitations to help prevent poor treatment outcomes such as malunion and knee stiffness [ The optimal surgical approach and proper implant selection is determined and can be controlled by the surgeons. Surgical approaches for Hoffa fracture treatment include those for anterior groups, e.g., PPA, medial subvastus approach, and those for posterior groups, e.g., DMA, DLA and PLA. PPA, previously named the anteromedial or anterolateral approach, is the most commonly used approach, while the medial subvastus approach (MSVA) is used in isolated medial condyle fractures. As noted above, some small Hoffa fragments cannot be visualized by PPA or MSVA. In those cases, the posterior approach plays an important role in fracture reduction and fixation. Details of surgical approaches for Hoffa fracture treatment are described in the following section. Screw diameter and the number of screws used for fixation is directly related to fixation stability. Hak et al. demonstrated that fixation with two screws is better than with one screw. Fixation with two 6.5 mm partially threaded cancellous screws provides better mechanical advantage than two 3.5 mm fully threaded cortical screws [ Plate fixation intended to produce a buttress or anti gliding function (posterior placement) or to neutralize a deforming force (medial or lateral placement) are not commonly used with Hoffa fractures. That type of plate fixation is indicated in fractures where there is proximal extension of the metaphysis. Sun et al. recently demonstrated that the combination of plate fixation and screws in Letenneur type I fractures provides greater mechanical stability than the screw fixation system alone and that P-A screw fixation is more stable than A–P screw fixation [ Thus, fracture characteristics can guide selection of surgical approach and fixation technique. Surgical procedures must be performed gently to reduce the risk of disruption of the blood supply to the Hoffa fragment. The relationship of three major factors is illustrated in PPA is a useful approach for the treatment of intraarticular distal femoral fractures that most surgeons are familiar with. PPA can be done on the lateral or medial side of the patella and is indicated for large Hoffa fragments (Letenneur type I and III). The approach is done in the supine position with slight knee flexion using a bolster. An incision is started from the tibial tubercle, curved medially or laterally, and extended proximally to 2.5 cm above the superior pole of the patella. A medial or lateral arthrotomy is made from the proximal part through the vastus muscle, extended distally to the retinaculum, ending at the tibial tubercle. The patella is pushed either laterally or medially and 120 degrees of knee flexion is used to expose the femoral condyle ( MSVA is indicated in medial Hoffa fractures with metaphyseal extension requiring a buttress plate at the apex of the posteromedial spike. A skin incision is started at the adductor tubercle and extended proximally just posterior to the vastus medialis. The interval between the vastus medialis and the sartorius is identified and an anterior elevation of the vastus medialis is then performed to expose the medial femoral condyle. A medial arthrotomy is used to directly visualize the articular surface. To expose the posteromedial spike, the adductor magnus intermuscular septum has to be detached from the bone. Dissection must be performed with meticulous care to avoid iatrogenic injury of the popliteal vessels which lie behind this septum ( DMA is suitable for addressing the posterior and partially posteromedial aspect of the medial condyle. There are a few variations of using the intermuscular plane to access the medial condyle. Gao et al. accessed the medial condyle through the intermuscular plane between the gracilis and semimembranosus [ DLA is indicated in lateral Hoffa fractures with comminution in the middle part or in the metaphyseal extension. It can be used for reduction and fixation with A–P screws or a buttress plate [ PLA is indicated for small lateral Hoffa fractures which are less than 19.9% of the AP diameter of the lateral condyle [ Arthroscopy is a minimally invasive procedure for fixation of Hoffa fractures. It is indicated in Letenneur type I or III fractures with minimal displacement and no comminution [ A model of the surgical visibility of each approach mapping the visible areas of the distal femoral condyle is shown in Fracture size is a key determinant of the appropriate surgical approach. The first question to be answered is, “Can we adequately appraise the fracture line using a single surgical approach, either anterior or posterior, or do we need to use a combination of approaches?” Most large simple Hoffa fractures can be treated by anatomical reduction using PPA. Using the percentage of Hoffa fragment size to the AP condylar width as a guideline, we recommend PPA if the Hoffa fracture size is more than 28.7% of the medial condyle AP diameter or 19.9% of the lateral condyle AP diameter. If the fragment size is less than 28.7% of the medial condyle or 19.9% of the lateral condyle, we recommend DMA or PLA as the initial approach [ To achieve an anatomical fracture reduction, at least two sides of the bony surfaces which compose the articular surface and non-articular surface, either the outer side (LCL or MCL side) or the inner side (cruciate ligament side), have to be identified. Xie et al. demonstrated CT mapping of Hoffa fractures and reported that the frequency of comminution which is more common in lateral than in medial Hoffa fractures [ Many fixation options can provide adequate stability in large Hoffa fractures using 6.5 mm A–P cancellous screws with the thread crossing the fracture to allow interfragment compression; however, the Hoffa fragment should be larger than 16 or 32 mm to permit adequate thread length. In small Hoffa fragments, we recommend P-A headless screw fixation via the posterior approach, e.g., DMA or PLA ( Fracture size is the most important factor guiding the selection of surgical approach and fixation technique. We have summarized the available surgical approaches and illustrated the fragment visibility in each approach. Better understanding of the relationship between fragment size and treatment approach as summarized in The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest related to this manuscript. This reseach work was partially supported by Chiang Mai University. We wish to thank Prof. Pasuk Mahakkanukrauh, for providing the cadaver as well as Dr. G. Lamar Robert, Ph.D. for reviewing our paper.