Amino trimethylene phosphonic acid (ATMP), an eco-friendly reagent widely applied in industrial production, was employed as a depressant for flotation separation of smithsonite from calcite for the first time. Micro-flotation test results show that ATMP exhibits selective inhibition effect on calcite flotation. Calcite and smithsonite can be well separated in flotation process by applying ATMP as the depressant and sodium oleate (NaOL) as the collector. Based on a series of measurements including zeta potential, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and Fourier transform infrared (FTIR), it is found that large amounts of ATMP can be chemically absorbed on the surface of calcite by chelating with surface Ca2+ sites and thus inhibiting the adsorption of NaOL. While, in comparison, much less adsorption of ATMP is taken place on the surface of smithsonite and hardly affects further adsorption of NaOL. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) images of calcite after treated with ATMP indicate that almost the whole surface of calcite is covered with the dense agglomerate adsorption layer. All in all, these results present excellently selective depression ability of ATMP on smithsonite-calcite flotation separation process.Zinc (Zn) is one of the most versatile transition metal elements that plays a crucial role in many modern industries, such as battery, alloy, mechanical engineering, electric appliance and food Smithsonite (ZnCO Water glass is a commonly used depressant for flotation separation of smithsonite from calcite in industry Amino trimethylene phosphonic acid (ATMP), an eco-friendly reagent with formula of N(CH Motivated by the above summary, for the first time, an attempt was made to realize the efficient flotation separation of smithsonite from calcite by utilization of ATMP as depressant in current research. Sodium oleate (NaOL), a typical fatty acid that has been widely applied in industrial flotation process, was employ as the collector for smithsonite. Laboratory-scale micro-flotation tests were carried out to evaluate the effect of ATMP on the flotation performance of smithsonite and calcite. After that, various surface measurement methods, including zeta potential, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and atomic force microscopy imaging (AFM) were carried out to obtain an in-depth understanding of the interaction between reagents and minerals. Smithsonite and calcite mineral samples were obtained from Changsha (Hunan province, China) and Chenzhou (Hunan province, China), respectively. The block mineral samples were successively hand sorted, hammer-crushed and ground by a agate mortar into powders. For both mineral samples, particle size fraction of −74 + 38 μm was collected by dry screening to be used for flotation tests. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectra of as-prepared minerals are shown in In the current research, micro-flotation tests were carried out to investigate the influence of ATMP on flotation behavior of smithsonite and calcite. All the flotation tests were carted out in an XFG type flotation machine produced by Jilin exploration machinery plant. The flotation machine is equipped with a hanging 40 mL cell. 50 wt% ATMP solution and analytically pure NaOL purchased from Shanghai Macklin Biochemical Co., Ltd. were used as depressant and collector, respectively. Milli-Q water (18.2 mΩ·cm) was used throughout the flotation tests and surface analyses. For each flotation test, 2 g of mineral samples and 35 mL water were mixed in the cell fixed on flotation machine under agitation to form a uniform pulp. Throughout the flotation process, the pulp was continuously agitated by a build-in impeller at the speed of 1700 rpm. Subsequently, 0.1 mol/L sodium hydroxide (NaOH) solution or 0.1 mol/L dilute hydrochloric acid (HCl) solution was added to adjust the pH value of the pulp. When needed, desired amount of ATMP was added in the pulp. Simultaneously, additional NaOH solution were slowly added in the pulp to maintain the pre-determined pH value. After 5 min stirring, designed amount of NaOL was added in the cell, followed by 3 min conditioning. Successively, flotation was performed and forth product was collected for 4 min via manual scraping. Both concentrate (forth product) and tailing (un-floated product) were separately collected, and then in sequence filtered, dried and weighted. The recovery of smithsonite can be calculated through the weight distributions between the two products. For that of artificially mixed minerals, it can be calculated according to Zn grade of concentrate and feed. All flotation tests were repeated for 3 times. The average of the tests was reported as the final value, and error bars represent one standard deviation around the average value. All zeta potential measurements were carried out on a Zeta Potential Analyzer (Coulter Delsa 440sx, Malvern, Instruments Ltd, UK). To prepare samples for zeta potential measurements, mineral samples were firstly ground to finer than 5 μm in an agate mortar. 0.05 g of the above samples were dispersed in 50 mL electrolyte solution (1 × 10 To prepare the samples for FTIR analysis, firstly, the as-prepared mineral powders were further being grinded until the particle size reaches −5 μm. 1 g of the as-prepared samples were completely dispersed in 20 mL water under agitation to form a uniform suspension. Then, designed amounts of ATMP and NaOL were successively added in the suspension at an interval of 5 min. The pH value of the suspension was adjusted to 9.5 by addition of moderate NaOH or HCl solution. After 30 min agitation, the suspension was filtrated, rinsed and dried in a vacuum oven to obtain the final samples for FTIR measurement. The FTIR spectra of the as-prepared samples were recorded on an UV-2350 type infrared spectrometer (Shimadzu Co., Ltd, Japan) from 4000 cm XPS analysis was carried out to detect the chemical state transformations of mineral samples before and after treated with ATMP. All XPS analyses were performed on a K-Alpha 1063 type ultrahigh vacuum electron spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Co., Ltd, UK). Spectra were collected using a monochromatic Al Kα source (1486.7 eV) and a 300 × 500 μm spot size. High-resolution scans were performed at a pass energy of 30 eV and a step size of 0.05 eV. All binding energies were calibrated using contaminant carbon (C1s = 284.6 eV). To prepare samples for analysis, 1 g of as-prepared smithsonite samples consistent with that used in flotation tests were dispersed in 100 mL ATMP solution with certain concentration by continuous agitation to form a uniform suspension. After being agitated for 10 min, the suspension was filtrated, rinsed and dried in a vacuum oven to obtain the final samples for XPS analysis. In the current research, AFM measurement was carried out on a MultiMode SPM AFM (Veeco Instruments, Inc., USA) to investigate the surface morphology variations of calcite samples before and after being treated with ATMP. To prepare the samples for AFM measurement, the calcite samples were polished by a semi-automatic polishing machine (Tegramin-25, Struers). The polished calcite was rinsed with ultrapure water for several times. When needed, the freshly cleaved calcite was immersed in the ATMP solution with a concentration of 50 mg/L for 5 min. After that, the surface of the sample was blow-dried by high-purity argon. The whole process was carried out in a glove box to avoid the contamination of the sample. AFM measurement on the as-prepared samples was carried out in a tapping mode. The measurement details were according to the reported literatures Micro-flotation tests were carried out to investigate the effect of collector dosage on the flotation behavior of smithsonite and calcite. The flotation test results are presented in As seen in Additional micro-flotation tests were carried to research the effect of ATMP on flotation performance of smithsonite from calcite.  Based on the single mineral flotation results, flotation tests on artificially mixed minerals (Smithsonite: Calcite = 1:1) were performed to verify the effect of ATMP on the separation performance of smithsonite from calcite. The flotation conditions and results are listed in Surface charge is an important parameter in flotation process due to its great influence on adsorption behavior of flotation reagents on minerals surface. Thus, in current research, zeta potential measurements were carried out to investigate the influence of ATMP on the surface charge of smithsonite and calcite. The results are illustrated in  FTIR measurements were carried out to further research the influence of ATMP on collector adsorption on minerals. XPS analysis was carried out to examine the chemical state of calcite before and after interaction with ATMP, and the results are presented in    Combined with the flotation results and characterization results, a schematic model is proposed in In the current research, ATMP was employed as a selective depressant to realize flotation separation of smithsonite from calcite. Micro-flotation test results show the flotation of calcite can be significantly depressed with the addition of ATMP. While, smithsonite flotation is slightly affected by ATMP. Artificially mixed minerals flotation tests present that efficient separation of smithsonite from calcite is realized using ATMP as the depressant and NaOL as the collector at pH 9.5. Zeta potential, XPS and FTIR measurements indicate that ATMP can be adsorbed on both minerals. However, the adsorption degree of ATMP on calcite is much higher than that of smithsonite. The slight adsorption of ATMP on smithsonite surface barely inhibits further adsorption of NaOL. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) images indicate that almost the whole surface of calcite is covered with the dense agglomerate adsorption layer, thus inhibiting the adsorption of NaOL. In the whole, the presence of ATMP induces great disparities in surface properties of smithsonite and calcite to interact with NaOL, thus resulting in flotation separation of the two minerals.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.