The success of short-rotation coppice (SRC) will rise with increasing biomass prices. One of the main constraints for establishing SRC today is the unpredictable cost of (whip) harvesting. Therefore, the harvest of a 9 ha SRC in Belgium was monitored, in order to develop a whip harvesting cost model to estimate harvesting productivity and costs as a function of various input data. The harvest was executed in February 2017 with a Stemster MkIII, after a three-year rotation of SRC with poplar. A biomass inventory was combined with a time-motion study and an economic analysis. The field stocking (fresh weight basis) ranged from 40 to 100 Mg ha−1. The average load of 2.4 Mg was obtained from a 220 m long double row and took 6.4 min, resulting in an average productivity of 26 Mg h−1 (excluding delays). Genotype, field stocking and their interaction significantly affected the harvester's productivity. Border limited headlands (<8 m width) had a significant impact on turning time and, thus, increased the total harvesting cost by 6%. The offload time was stable at 23 s Mg−1, while the harvesting cost varied from 7 to 22 € Mg−1, depending on work conditions and costing assumptions. Even though the Stemster MkIII produces whips instead of wood chips, its productivity is still lower than the modified foragers' productivity, but the Stemster MkIII is lighter and may offer better mobility. Optimal performance can be obtained with a high field stocking, appropriate spacing and adequate headlands.European agriculture has a large potential for biomass production, which is indispensable for supporting the new bio-economy. Agriculture can provide sugar- and oil-based feedstocks, and can also supply large amounts of ligno-cellulosic raw material derived from three main sources: fibre residues from conventional food crops, specialized herbaceous fibre crops, and dedicated tree plantations. Among these options, tree plantations have been the least successful so far, mostly due to technical hurdles that have limited their profitability compared with the alternatives Among the various cellulosic cropping systems, short-rotation coppice (SRC) seems well aligned with the expectations of farmers, who are used to short investment return times and not in favour of traditional wood plantations, harvested at 10–30 years intervals Profit margins on bio-energy from SRC are limited and the success of supply chains based on SRC requires efficient management. In particular, care should be devoted to optimizing rotational harvesting operations, which account for almost half of the total SRC production costs The main problem with single pass cut-and-chip harvesters is the production of wet chips, with a high moisture content depending on the tree species, the season of harvest and other local parameters and could vary between 50% and 60% on a fresh weight basis While much financial and research resources have been devoted to the development of efficient cut-and-chip machinery, this development is still ongoing for the cut-and-collect equipment. A few reliable machines have been developed over time, some of which are now commercially available and could be actually deployed Therefore, the goal of this study was to develop a productivity model for a cut-and-collect harvester, capable of estimating productivity output and cost as a function of various field variables as: row length, headland space, field stocking and genotype selection. Such a model may assist farmers, contractors and supply managers when planning production, negotiating rates or scheduling transport. Furthermore, the model was developed using the same structure of similar models already available for the cut-and-chip harvester, as to allow simple comparisons between these two types of machines. This research was carried out on the POPFULL SRC plantation, located in Lochristi, Belgium (51°06′44″ N, 3°51′02″ E; Yield was estimated in terms of above-ground woody biomass (AGWB) for each block, using the same procedure as with previous harvests The AGWB per stool was obtained by summing the AGWB of all shoots on each of the sampled stools. The inventory data were considered spatially representative per block and therefore the average AGWB per stool was calculated. This value was multiplied with the actual (surviving) density per block, in order to obtain the field stocking. AGWB values represent fresh biomass under field conditions, including a water mass fraction estimated at 50%. The cut-and-collect harvester used for the study was the Nordic Biomass Stemster MkIII, which is the most established harvester of this type in Europe ( Before harvesting begun, all obstacles were removed; the edge stools that were too close to the ditches or too big (diameter > 15 cm or height > 8 m) for the harvester were cut with a chainsaw or mechanically with a small feller-buncher. Operating costs were calculated using the procedures described by Miyata Machine performance was determined with the time-study technique, applied at the cycle level in the snap-back mode For each cycle the researcher also recorded the row ID (associated with the individual mono-genotypic blocks) and the weight reported on the electronic on-board scale installed on the Stemster deck. It was, thus, possible to associate each time record with a specific block, surface area, genotype and AGWB weight. In particular, the on-board scale weights were corrected against the results of the pre-harvest inventory conducted for the same genotype and block, although the error was small (1.1%). Furthermore, the distance covered during turns was recorded with the GPS unit, because this distance was variable and depended on how many rows the harvester would skip between exiting the field and re-entering it. The researcher also indicated if the turn occurred at a border limited (<8 m) or at a regular (≥8 m) headland. The database of the time study was then joined with a second database containing information about the row lengths of the original plantation, from which the shortened rows were updated with field measurements. The study allowed building a solid database that contained information of 110 full cycles (deck loads). Descriptive statistics were used for reporting the main results of the study, separately for each time element. In the end the goal of the study was to build the following model: Therefore, the analyses aimed to determine factor effects on each time element. To do this, data was first checked for linearity and normality by observing residual plots and distribution histograms, respectively. Equality of variance was checked with Levene's test. Stocking and cycle time data complied with all statistical assumptions, whereas harvest time per unit product (s Mg Significant regression equations were used to assemble a simple deterministic model, capable of returning SRC collection costs as a function of user-entered independent variables. This model did not require complicated programming and could be effectively assembled in Excel. The simplicity of the model reflected a comparatively simple process that involved a single unit and did not need to account for interface (interaction) delays. Furthermore, more realistic, complex simulation models were not considered to increase much prediction accuracy when used on such simple process chains The average field stocking was 70.8 Mg ha Concerning harvesting performance, the mean row load amounted to 2.4 Mg and was obtained from an on average 202 m long row, with a stocking of 70.8 Mg ha Harvesting time per Mg was significantly affected by field stocking, genotype and their interaction ( Mean turning time was 156 s if the headland was adequate (≥8 m) and 195 s if it was area limited (<8 m), and this difference was statistically significant. In fact, turning time was directly proportional to the distance between the exit row and the re-enter row, which varied with work pattern and operator preference. Both turning distance and headland standards were entered as independent variables into a multiple regression and returned a reasonably good estimate ( Depending on field stocking, headland characteristics and genotype, harvesting cost varied between less than 7 € Mg Genotypic comparison was not among the goals of the study, but collateral information was eventually gathered about genotypic performance, which could be of some practical interest. However, the yield data reported in this study are only valid for one specific site and one rotation. Yield variability depends on resiliency of genotypes to soil and climatic conditions, pests and diseases. Low variability might indicate good resilience to environmental factors and a stable resprouting vigour in the third rotation. The yield data represent fresh biomass, including the water mass fraction. Water content may vary with genotype, and therefore the differences reported here may change once they are referred to dry biomass The model was based on one field trial only and some assumptions were made. The operator of the Stemster was very experienced and also conducted previous harvests at the studied SRC. Another variable not included in the model is the shape of the field, which was not regular (cfr. Machine cost is relatively high, but the SRC harvester is only produced in small quantities and manufacturing is not industrialized. A large expansion of the SRC planted surface area would generate a larger demand for dedicated equipment, leading to industrial production and a possible reduction of investment cost. For example, a 20% reduction in investment cost for the Stemster would reduce the harvesting cost with 0.5 € Mg The model is logical and its operation is relatively easy to explain. The direct relationship between field stocking and SRC harvester productivity is well known and can be generalized across the whole range of machine types and models Apparently, these characteristics of genotype Grimminge facilitated the cut and collection by this machine type and resulted in fewer temporary blockages that were included with harvesting time. Other harvesting machines may not be sensitive to the characteristics of Grimminge, but they might be sensitive to the specific characteristics of other genotypes. The influence of specific genotype traits has been demonstrated here for the first time, which will encourage other researchers to include genotype as a factor in future SRC harvester studies. This study also quantified for the first time the impact of headland standards on harvesting cost. Inadequate headland space limits efficient operation Concerning operation layout this study only covered cutting and collection, not forwarding and comminution. In fact, the same Stemster MkIII could also be used for forwarding to the field edge, which was not the case in this study, where the loads were dumped in the field as soon as the deck was full. However, dumping in the field was considered most efficient: forwarding was performed later on with a dedicated forwarder priced at 85 € h The productivity estimates confirm those of a previous study of the same machine, which reported a mean productivity around 20 Mg per productive machine hour (excluding delays) for a stocking in the range of 40 Mg of fresh matter ha In conclusion, with a harvesting productivity of ca. 26 Mg h This research has received funding from the The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at