The flotation response of malachite, calcite and quartz to bis (2-ethylhexyl) phosphate (DEHPA), dibutyl phosphate (DBP) and tributyl phosphate (TBP) was evaluated by micro-flotation experiments. The results showed that DEHPA exhibited an impressive flotation selectivity for malachite against calcite/quartz in the pH range of 6.0–9.0 and achieved superior malachite flotation recovery over DBP and TBP. The flotation mechanism of DEHPA to malachite was farther investigated through adsorption, contact angle, zeta potential, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). The findings inferred that DEHPA reacted with the surface copper atom of malachite via its O atoms of POH and PO to form the hydrophobic surface complexes of Cu(II)-DEHPA. The double active center of the P(O)OH group might be contributed to the stronger affinity of DEHPA and DBP to malachite than that of TBP with the single active center of the PO group. TBP returned the lowest malachite recovery among the three phosphate surfactants, even it has more hydrophobic-carbon atoms than those of DBP.Copper is extensively used in daily necessities, industries and national defenses. Copper oxide minerals are of a significant resource for copper production Malachite [Cu For flotation recovery of malachite, there are two general technologies, pre-sulfidization flotation with sulfydryl collectors such as xanthates In this paper, bis (2-ethylhexyl) phosphate (DEHPA) was introduced as a flotation collector to enrich malachite, calcite or quartz. Its flotation performances were compared with those of dibutyl phosphate (DBP) and tributyl phosphate (TBP) by micro-flotation tests. Subsequently, the adsorption mechanism of DEHPA toward malachite surfaces was investigated through adsorption, contact angle, zeta potential, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) DEPHA and TBP were purchased from Aladdin and DBP was obtained from Xiya Reagents. Their molecule structures were shown in Malachite, calcite and quartz with high purity were obtained from Guilin, Guangxi Province, China A 240 mL Hallimond tube was used to perform the micro-flotation tests. The flotation procedure was according to our previous experiment Zeta potential of malachite, calcite or quartz particles with or without DEHPA in 1 × 10 To a 150 mL conical flask, 0.1 g malachite, 20 mL distilled water, desired pH regulators (dilute KOH or HCl solutions), DEPHA solutions, and extra distilled water were sequentially added to reach 100 mL. After shaking the suspension for 4 h at 298 ± 1.5 K, the malachite pulp was filtered, and the residual concentration of DEPHA in the filtrate was measured according to the concentration of total organic carbon recorded by the Total Organic Carbon analyzer (TOC-VCPH, Shimadzu, Japan). The adsorption amount of DEPHA on malachite surfaces was calculated via Eq. The contact angles of malachite surfaces with/without DEPHA modification were measured via water drop method on the Zhongchen JC2000C device (China) 2 × 10 The Nicolet FTIR-740 spectrometer (USA) was adopted for FTIR record by KBr disk method. And the wavenumber was ranged from 500 to 4000 cm The ESCALAB 250 Xi instrument and Avantage soft of Thermo Scientific (USA) were used to record and analyze the XPS spectra   In The flotation response of malachite, calcite or quartz as a function of the initial concentration of DEHPA, DBP or TBP at pH ∼7 was listed in Therefore, For DEHPA and DBP, they possess the active center of  The pKa (the negative logarithm of acid dissociation constant) value of DEHPA was about 1.72 The adsorption quantities of DEHPA on malachite as a function of pH or DEHPA dose are shown in Contact angle is an important index for characterizing the hydrophobicity of a mineral surface. The hydrophobization ability of a collector toward a given mineral surface is closely related to its flotation performance The newly-polished malachite exhibited the contact angle of 42 ± 1°. After 1 × 10 The FTIR spectra for DEHPA, Cu-DEHPA sediments, and malachite without/with DEHPA treatment are respectively shown in  After modification with DEHPA, the C The XPS for the Cu-DEHPA precipitation and malachite modified by DEHPA are shown in As shown in The P atom of DEHPA has a valence of 5 The flotation performances of DEHPA to malachite, calcite and quartz were compared with those of DBP and TBP by micro-flotation tests, and DEHPA’s adsorption mechanism towards malachite was further explored via adsorption, contact angle, zeta potential, FTIR and XPS. Based on the experimental findings, the following conclusions were recommended: The micro-flotation results demonstrated the collecting affinity of the three phosphate collectors toward malachite could be determined as: DEHPA > DBP > TBP. And, DEHPA exhibited excellent flotation selectivity for malachite versus calcite and quartz over the pH range of 6–9. Contact angle results illustrated that the hydrophobicity of malachite surface was significantly improved after DEHPA treatment. Adsorption experiments indicated that the preferable pH for malachite adsorption of DEHPA emerged at pH around 7.0, corresponding to that of contact angle findings. Zeta potential inferred that DEHPA might adsorb onto malachite surfaces via electrostatic interaction under pH 6–8.4. At pH > 8.4, the coordination bonding effect might be the dominated driving force for malachite adsorption of DEHPA. FTIR and XPS inferred that DEHPA reacted with the surface copper atom of malachite via its O atoms of P The authors would like to thank the