Use of twin-electrode DC arc furnaces for the purposes of smelting is a growing trend in the research being performed at Mintek. Even though twin-electrode furnaces add complexity to aspects of the mechanical design of the furnace roof and electrode mechanisms (as well as power supply configurations and control systems), the design and operational advantages gained in moving to dual electrodes are significant.
                  Some small-scale testwork on a twin-electrode furnace was performed at Mintek in late 2003, with the aim of enabling direct observation of the plasma arcs and their interactions both with each other and the molten slag bath beneath them. Still and video photography of the twin arcs was performed. The results are presented here, along with some theoretical exploration.
                  The arc trajectory is shown to follow a circular path, with the radius of curvature being directly proportional to the electrode separation, and approximately independent of electrical variables such as current.
                  The influence of the arc deflection on the true arc length, and the dependence of arc voltage on electrode height have been calculated.Direct current plasma arc furnaces have been used in the steel industry for more than a century, and are becoming popular for more advanced metallurgical processes such as the smelting of chromite ( The trend toward ever larger furnaces presents some challenges to the designer. One of the most important is the relationship between the size of the electrode and its current-carrying capacity. The pre-baked graphite electrodes used almost exclusively by DC arc furnace plants have a specified “safe” limit of approximately 15–30 Solutions to the size limitation problem include operating multiple furnaces on a site, or using multiple electrodes in a single cylindrical furnace shell (see Application of twin-electrode furnaces to processes for the smelting of metallurgically useful ores is of great interest to Mintek and its clients, as such furnaces would appear to offer many ancillary benefits in addition to the ability to scale to far higher power. As electrode tip wear, for example, scales with the square of the current carried ( More than 400 electric arc furnaces have been installed for steelmaking around the world. Approximately a quarter of them are DC furnaces, often with tapping masses greater than 100 A very good example of a high-power DC twin-electrode furnace is the Danieli furnace (with ABB power supply) that has been in operation at Hylsa SA de CV in Monterrey, Mexico ( A different design is employed at Tokyo Steel ( With the aim of extending the existing base of knowledge about the behaviour of single arc furnaces ( The furnace (see The electrodes used were 100 The furnace and support equipment were monitored and controlled by a Delta-V distributed control system. The Delta-V system also provided data logging and reporting functionality for all electrical and thermal instruments during the test. Photography of the twin arcs was accomplished using a Sony Mavica digital camera fitted with a Cokin filter holder and custom-made welding glass filters of varying strengths. All photographs taken during the project were first converted to raw bitmap images, then to grayscale, and finally inverted to produce black and white negatives. The negatives show bright (or hot) regions of the furnace as closer to black, and dark (or cold) regions as closer to white. The time stamps on each photograph were correlated against data logged by the furnace control system after suitable corrections for offsets had been made. The arc lengths were calculated from visual touchdowns in certain photographs and the absolute hoist height data. Electrode separation in all photographs presented here was 400  In    In The arc lengths reported in Twin DC arcs, like parallel current-carrying conductors, experience attractive forces toward each other. For the twin-electrode DC furnace designer, something of great interest is the extent of the attraction toward each other that the two arc columns experience as a result of the magnetic fields generated within the furnace vessel. The photographic work shows that deflection of the arcs can be considerable, and a mathematical model of arc deflection and its resultant effect on the other electrical variables is desirable. Several approximations are made to acquire an analytical expression for the magnetic field in the space around a single deflected arc. Firstly, it is assumed that the arcs are deflecting toward each other only, that is, the major arc deflection effect occurs in a plane defined by the two electrodes. Secondly, it is assumed that the electrode column is infinite in length, i.e. end effects are ignored. This is a reasonable assumption, since in typical furnace designs the length of the electrode is very much greater than the length of the arcs it is influencing. Thirdly, it is assumed that the arc follows a straight line when it is deflecting. This is not strictly accurate, as can be seen from the photographs and further analysis of the arc trajectory, however, it serves the purpose of illustrating the gross effect of deflected arcs on the magnetic field. Finally, for present purposes, it is assumed that the magnetic field generated by current passing through the bulk of the molten bath and the anode connection below does not greatly affect the arcs above. With these approximations in mind, the problem of calculating the magnetic field reduces to the 2D problem shown in  From fundamental electromagnetics, the law of Biot and Savart is used For the situation described in Now it is possible to calculate what the magnetic field would be along the path of a second arc present in the system (see The distance In order to calculate the magnetic field felt along the length of this second arc as a result of the first, the path of the second arc is expressed as a parametric curve in This function is shown in What is interesting about these graphs is that they show that the magnetic field felt by the second arc is, to a fairly good approximation, a constant over its length. This approximation is less accurate for smaller arc deflections, but that would indicate a condition in which the calculation of the arc interactions is perhaps not quite as important anyway. In order to calculate the shape of the arc column, a differential equation of motion for a free particle of current-carrying arc plasma gas must be solved. The particle is part of a high-velocity gas jet emanating from the vicinity of the arc attachment zone on the surface of the electrode, and is acted on by the magnetic field as it moves between electrode and molten bath. This is somewhat analogous to the way a jet of water from a garden hose, if held horizontally, will form a parabolic curve as it is acted on by gravity. From fundamental electromagnetics From the definitions of d The result is Integrating the expressions in Some example trajectories for an arc starting at ( It is of some value to the furnace designer to consider the effect of various design variables on the arc curvature, defined by the radius There will also be secondary effects since the function Apart from knowing how the arc curvature Again using the approximate arc trajectory model in Interestingly, for most of the distance over which the electrode moves, the arc voltage curve stays close to that for the undeflected arc, even for quite small values of the arc curvature radius With the aid of a small twin-electrode DC arc furnace, a preliminary photographic study has been made of the behaviour of the two plasma arcs present in such furnaces. In many cases, significant deflection of the arc columns was observed, along with associated driven flow of hot molten process material in the bath below. A theoretical analysis of the twin-electrode furnace in terms of electromagnetics has provided a simple model for the shape and motion of the arc column. This model also presents several interesting features, which may potentially aid the furnace designer in dimensional scale-up as well as electrical design calculations. The arc trajectory follows a circular path, with the radius of curvature being approximately directly proportional to the electrode separation, and largely independent of electrical variables such as current. The influence of the arc deflection on the true arc length, and the dependence of arc voltage on electrode height, have been calculated. Clearly much further experimental work is required in order to verify or disprove the theory developed here. Possible future work at Mintek might include operation of more small scale tests designed exclusively for photographic and electrical investigations, as well as tests integrated into ongoing projects on the larger twin-electrode pilot plant facilities up to a scale of 5 This paper is published with the permission of Mintek.