Cu2ZnSnS4 (CZTS) is most attractive absorber material for inorganic solar cell applications because of its cost effective and ecofriendly nature. To obtain phase pure CZTS film, effects of annealing parameters on synthesis of CZTS thin film are investigated. CZTS films are deposited through dip coating method followed by heat treatment to form crystalline CZTS thin films. Factors influencing the crystallinity, morphology and composition of the films such as annealing temperature, time, rate and atmosphere are studied through X-Ray Diffraction, Raman Spectroscopy, Scanning Electron Microscopy and Energy Dispersive X-Ray Spectroscopy. After numerous experiments of synthesis of CZTS in different annealing conditions and its characterization, it is observed that 1.4eV band gap CZTS thin film of kesterite structure is obtained by annealing the film in nitrogen atmosphere for 60min at 300°C with 10°C/min ramping rate.Cu Among all the methods available, dip coating method is simple and cost effective and having the potential to produce low cost thin film solar cell. In the case of CZTS kesterite structure, Wei Wang et al. Till now there is no study available in the literature on the effects of annealing parameters (atmosphere, temperature, ramping rates and holding time) on dip coated CZTS thin films. The main objective of this work is to investigate the optimum annealing parameters for formation of dip coated CZTS thin film with hydrazine free precursor solution of metal chlorides and thiourea mixed in methanol solvent. Synthesis of CZTS thin films are carried out through dip coating method followed by heat treatment to form crystalline thin films. The reaction matrix employed in our study consists of AR grade CuCl First, CZTS precursor solution is prepared by CuCl X-Ray diffraction (XRD) (Bruker Discover D8) with CuKα radiation (λ As dipped films are annealed at different temperatures (250 The major trouble in phase identification of CZTS through XRD is that all probable secondary phases like ZnS and CTS have quite similar unit cells. For further confirmation of phase pure CZTS formation, Raman spectra of all the films have been captured. As shown in But to achieve the best efficiency phase pure film is not sufficient, film should also be smooth, densely packed and have specific composition of each element in the film. SEM micrograph of the dip coated films annealed at different temperatures are shown in The atomic percentage of Cu, Sn, Zn and S in annealed film at 300 For further optimization, effect of annealing time is studied by annealing the as dipped films for different holding time (5 From SEM micrograph ( Further to improve morphology and stoichiometry, effect of ramping rate on the formation of crystalline CZTS is investigated. In XRD and Raman results deduce that 10  From XRD, Raman, SEM and EDS results, it is found that 300 Optical reflection and transmission spectra of 5 times dipped CZTS film are recorded in wavelength range from 500  In this study, the effect of different annealing parameters for the formation of dip coated CZTS thin film has been investigated. It is found that annealing at 300