In this paper, the free convective flow of magnetohydrodynamic fluid through a channel with time periodic boundary condition is investigated by taking the effects of Joule dissipation into consideration. Based on simplifying assumptions, the coupled governing equations are reduced to a set of nonlinear boundary valued problem. Approximate solutions are obtained by using semi-analytical Adomian decomposition method. The effect of pertinent parameters on the fluid velocity, temperature distribution, Nusselt number and skin friction are presented graphically and discussed. The result of the computation shows that an increase in the magnetic field intensity has significant influence on the fluid flow.In recent times, appreciable progress has been made on studies related to convective flows in the steady-periodic regimes due to its several applications in many electrical and electronic devices. For example, Wang Moreover, recent findings on magnetohydrodynamics have shown that the magnetic field produced by a simple magnet placed in a transverse direction to the channel do interact with the fluid flow and plays important role in the control of hot moving fluid in many metallurgical engineering applications, crystal growth, electrochemistry and other thermal processes occurring at high temperature. Details can be found in a review by Gerbeth et al. Motivated by the above studies in Consider a fully developed laminar flow of viscous incompressible fluid through a vertical channel due to a steady-periodic temperature regime on the bounding plates. The fluid is assumed to be under the influence of an externally applied homogeneous magnetic ﬁeld. The channel plates are taken vertically parallel to the The equations governing the free convective flow of the hydromagnetic fluid can then be written as together with appropriate initial-boundary conditions In view of together with the following dimensionless quantities and variables Using Eqs. and equating orders of Observe that by setting Consider the inhomogeneous nonlinear differential equation in Adomian's operator-theoretic form In Eq. where The standard ADM defines the solution and the nonlinear term comprises the series of the Adomian polynomials where the such that the Adomian polynomials are evaluated as The solution components To obtain the approximate solution of the system of Observed that one boundary condition has been used to arrive in Eq. such that by substituting Eq. and where the nonlinear terms in Eq. and decomposed into Adomian polynomials as follows: It is well known that higher order approximation of a convergent series is not useful. Hence the gives the approximate solution of the coupled problem provided convergence is reached. Eqs. In the present section, the real part of the symbolic solutions are presented.  Moreover,  In this paper, the effect of a transverse magnetic field on the flow of viscous incompressible fluid flowing through a channel subjected to periodic heating is investigated by using Adomian decomposition method. In the limiting case as