In the present study, biosorption of Ni2+ by Na-loaded (raw algae treated with NaCl), algae Pelvetia canaliculata Ochrophyta, was studied in a batch system. Kinetics and equilibrium experiments were conducted at different pH values (2.0, 3.0 and 4.0). The metal uptake capacity decreased by decreasing the solution pH, suggesting that competition exists between hydrogen ions, present in high concentrations at low pH values, and metal ions. An ion-exchange model, considering two different binding sites, sulfonic and carboxylic groups, was developed to describe equilibrium data. A mass transfer model, considering intraparticle resistance was also developed to describe kinetics in a batch system. The release of sodium ions during the uptake of nickel ions revealed that the biosorption mechanism involved ion-exchange between sodium and nickel ions with a stoichiometrical ratio of 2:1. Nickel showed higher affinity to the sulfonic groups than for carboxylic ones of algae biomass. Kinetic results show that hydrogen ions diffuse faster as compared to nickel and sodium ions. The maximum uptake capacity of Na-loaded algae, P. canaliculata, for Ni2+ was found to be ca. 100mg/g at pH 4.0.Heavy metals pose a serious threat to biota, due to their acute toxicity, non-biodegradable nature and biomagnification in the food chain. The presence of heavy metals in aqueous streams causes harmful effects on human health and also on the flora and fauna of receiving water bodies Ni Compared to other conventional physicochemical technologies used for metal ions removal from water and wastewater, the biosorption process has emerged as one of the economical and efficient methods for the remediation of metal bearing wastewaters because of eco-friendly characteristics, low cost, high uptake capacity, lack of toxicity constraints, less sludge production, possible regeneration of biosorbents and availability worldwide Ion-exchange models have been proposed by few researchers for the correct description of the biosorption studies (batch and continuous systems). A mass action law was used by Diniz and Volesky In our previous study, various forms of algae were prepared namely, protonated (H The brown seaweed Ni Biosorption experiments were carried out in duplicate in 100 In equilibrium isotherm studies, Ni The rate of sorption of Ni The concentrations of Ni Considering both the monovalent carboxylic groups ( The total normality remains constant during the reaction and is expressed by: The concentration of exchangeable binding sites is the sum of the concentrations of involved elements in the solid phase and is given by: The corresponding equilibrium constants can be defined as: Considering Eqs. Several steps of metal transfer from bulk solution to the binding sites have been reported in the literature All the cell wall binding sites are readily available for metal uptake, when biomass is used as a free cell suspension in a perfectly stirred batch reactor, therefore, the effect of external film diffusion on biosorption rate is assumed to be negligible and ignored in any engineering analysis. The sorption rate is controlled by homogeneous diffusion inside the particle. The biosorption process is isothermal and the amount of bound metal is in equilibrium with the metal concentration in the aqueous phase as formulated in sorption isotherms. Algae biomass particles are considered to be uniform dimensional thin plates. Therefore, the overall sorption rate is controlled by intraparticle diffusion in the direction normal to the surface of the particles. During the biosorption process, the diffusion and binding of metal ions into the biomass must be accompanied by the release of protons (or other ions) that diffuses into the bulk solution. The ionic diffusion coefficient for H The partial mass balance of the reactor is given by the following equation: The mass balance for an ionic species over particle is represented by: If we consider the average metal concentration inside the particle instead of a concentration profile as in the model above described, we will get the following equation Initial conditions: The system of ordinary differential equations (ODE’s initial value problem) was integrated in time using the solver LSODA Before discussing the equilibrium results for the algae Nickel is classified as predominantly “borderline: intermediate metal” ion, while Na, K, Ca and Mg are classified as predominantly “hard” ions The release of sodium ions during the uptake of Ni In order to confirm this kind of mechanism in the present biosorption analysis, the mass action law represented by Eq. It is well documented that solution pH is an important parameter that affects the biosorption of heavy metal ions The affinity of nickel ions to sulfonic groups was found to be higher than hydrogen ions, whereas the affinity of hydrogen ions was higher than nickel ions for carboxylic groups. The higher affinity of Ni Furthermore, the total number of exchangeable binding sites, The preferential type of adsorption belongs to different ions may be ascribed to the difference in their ionic radii. The ionic radius of H  The uptake of Ni  In a previous study, Ca-loaded The biosorption of Ni This work was supported by project PEst-C/EQB/LA0020/2011, financed by FEDER through COMPETE – Programa Operacional Factores de Competitividade and by FCT – Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia. Amit Bhatnagar acknowledges his post-doctoral scholarship (DFRH-SFRH/BPD/62889/2009) supported by the Portuguese Foundation for Science and Technology (FCT). V.J.P. Vilar acknowledges financial support from Programme Ciência 2008 (FCT).