The extraction of Zn (II) by 5-azidomethyl-8-hydroxyquinoline (HZQ) has been studied. A modified Debye–Hückel equation was used for modeling of system Zn(II)/HZQ/HCl/Chloroform in various conditions of use. The distribution ratio of HZQ and of Zn (II) in organic and aqueous phases has been treated. log10 (P
                     HZQ)=2.91 is obtained for HZQ coefficient of partition and log10(k
                     HZQ)=4.23 for constant of chemical equilibrium HZQ+H3O+
                     ⇌H2(ZQ)+
                     +H2O. From quantitative evaluation of the extraction equilibrium data of Zn (II), it has been deduced that the predominant complex extracted is Zn(ZQ). The extraction constant of Zn (ZQ)2 has a value of log10 (k
                     1200)=0.077. The calculated results are compared to the experimental data.8-hydroxyquinoline (HQ) is a long-known molecule which due to its metal-complexation ability is frequently used for analysis or metal-precipitation. It is also called oxine, and it is an analytical reagent whose chemical properties towards metal ions have been extensively investigated by Several molecules derived from 8-hydroxyquilonine (HQ) have been synthesized in the literature and have been extensively investigated in hydrometallurgy for metallic cation extraction ( The extraction of metals 8-hydroxyquinoline complex has been reported by several authors ( The present work is aimed for studying the solvent extraction of zinc ion by using 5-azidomethyl-8-hydroxyquinoline (HZQ). This new product is synthesized by Absorbance–wavelength graphs were recorded on a UV–Visible Spectrometer Perkin Elmer Lambda 35. Absorbance was measured with a spectra 162 spectrophotometer with 1 cm quartz cell. The polarographic apparatus comprises a polarographic analyzer Pol 150 which constitutes the principle unit of system. This compact unit comprises the potentiostat and measures the current crossing the cell. This last is directly programmable by use of a PC equipped with powerful software which offers a great flexibility in use of the curves. Polarograms were recorded with a three electrode Radiometer MDE 150 polarographic analyzer. A Beckman pH meter was used for pH measurements. 5-choromethyl-8-hydroxyquinoline obtained form analytical grade 8-hydroxyquinoline according to procedure given by A mixture of 5-choromethyl-8-hydroxyquinoline (4.60 g), HCl (20 mmol) and NaN3 (7.84 g) in acetone was refluxed for 20 h under controlled atmosphere. After cooling, the solvent was evaporated under reduced pressure and the residue partitioned between CHCl3/H Twenty milliliter of aqueous and organic phases was contacted by agitation for 30 min at 25 °C. After phase separation, the organic and aqueous phases were analyzed for HZQ and metallic ion content, respectively. The solubility of HZQ in aqueous phase was assessed by UV spectrophotometer method. The UV–visible spectrum of 5-azidomethyl-8-hydroxyquinoline (HZQ) in chloroform is characterized by two absorption bands at If only mononuclear species are extracted, under the conditions in which perchlorate does not take part in the distribution equilibrium, the extraction process may be represented by the equation: In the acidic solutions, HZO reacts with H The model of extraction system is described by the following equations: For solving this system of equations, it is necessary to use a thermodynamic model for calculating the activity coefficient of each species in aqueous solution and to estimate a value of unknown parameters The molality The unknown parameters For studying the solubility of HZQ in aqueous phase, the following operating conditions were used: A value 4.23 is optimized for the logarithm of thermodynamic equilibrium constant The relative concentrations of HZQ in the three different species HZQ For metallic ion extraction, the following operating conditions were used: Because of the diversity of species mentioned in the literature, we considered three species that are suggested often in the previous works ( Different versions were tested in the present work: i) Zn (ZQ) For validation of the model developed in this work, the effect of initial concentration of metallic ion on the extraction of Zn (II) in the range 10 The model developed in this work was used for studying the influence of the HZQ concentration on the extraction of zinc ion in the range  Modified Debye–Hückel equation is used for modeling of Zn (II) ion extraction by HZQ in various conditions of use i.e. in a wide range of HCl concentration, HZQ concentration and metallic ion concentration initially contained in the treated aqueous solutions. The distribution of HZQ in the organic phase (chloroform) and in the aqueous phase has been treated. Values of coefficient of partition of HZQ and of constant of chemical equilibrium HZQ