Amino acids L-valine, glycine, DL-α-alanine and L-histidine were applied in the ammoniacal thiosulphate leaching of a pyrite concentrate. Amino acids formed more stable complexes with cupric ions than does ammonia, resulting in lower thiosulphate consumption due to reduced interaction between thiosulphate and the copper complexes. Overall gold extraction was largely improved by the addition of amino acids, despite lower initial kinetics. Thiosulphate consumption decreased with an increase in the amino acid concentration. Among the amino acids, L-histidine improved overall gold extraction and reduced the thiosulphate consumption to the greatest extent.Thiosulphate leaching has been considered a potentially viable alternative technology to the cyanidation of gold ores ( The critical stability constants show that amino acids have stronger abilities than ammonia to complex cupric ions ( Laboratory grade ammonium thiosulphate and ammonia water (25%) were provided by Westlab Chem Supply Pty Ltd., Australia. Analytical grade cupric sulphate, hydrogen peroxide (30%), and hydrochloric and nitric acids were obtained from Merck. DL-α-alanine, glycine, L-histidine and L-valine (analytical grade from Sigma Aldrich) were used to prepare their corresponding 0.1 A pyrite concentrate (P Solutions were assayed by ICP-OES. Thiosulphate concentration was determined by the iodometric method with the addition of acetic acid (10% solution) prior to titration with the indicator vitex in order to eliminate the effect of the cupric ammonia complex. Titration of thiosulphate was calibrated by ion chromatography. The concentrate was leached in a 1.5   After 24 The current study provides a technically feasible solution to stabilisation of the leaching system via use of commercially available amino acids, which form more stable complexes with Cu Despite slower gold leaching kinetics at the start, the overall gold extraction from the pyrite concentrate was improved using amino acids. The overall gold extraction increased with an increase in the amino acid concentration up to 10 The financial support from Newcrest Mining Limited, former Placer Dome Technical Services Limited, and the Australian Research Council is gratefully acknowledged.