Calc-silicate assemblages and skarn-type iron ores are associated with granite and granodiorite bodies intruding Triassic-Jurassic sedimentary strata in the Khak-Sorkh area in the central Urumieh-Dokhtar magmatic arc (UDMA), Iran. The intrusive bodies are metaluminous to slightly peraluminous, high-K calc-alkaline, and of I-type affinity. The skarn-type iron ore at Khak-Sorkh occurs in several ore bodies of variable sizes consisting of magnetite, subordinate hematite, and minor sulfides. The prograde assemblage of diopsidic pyroxene, andraditic garnet, and olivine is locally preserved, but the common intimate association of the iron ore with serpentine and lesser phlogopite suggests that ore formation occurred during retrograde hydrous reactions. Zircon dated using the isotope dilution TIMS U-Pb technique yields overlapping ages of 30.05 ± 0.06 Ma and 29.94 ± 0.09 Ma for two granite samples, consistent with the age of 29.51 ± 0.13 Ma for coexisting monazite, constraining the time of magma emplacement. A similar age of 29.53 ± 0.11 Ma was obtained for zircon grains from a highly epidotized granite offshoot enclosed in dolomitic limestones. Zircon from granodiorite provides a maximum age of 31.23 ± 0.16 Ma, with coexisting xenotime and titanite yielding 29.49 ± 0.10 M 29.67 ± 0.42 Ma, respectively. The 207Pb/204Pb ratios for epidote from both endoskarn and exoskarn (15.584–15.669) are identical implying a common fluid source. They are distinguished from those for calcite from the host limestone (15.774–15.779), the latter consistent with upper crustal sources. The new results confirm that significant arc-type plutonism occurred in the central UDMA during the Oligocene, consistent with the widespread I-type plutons in southern and northern sections of the UDMA.The Cenozoic Urumieh-Dokhtar magmatic arc (UDMA) in west-central Iran ( The Kerman belt in the southern section of the UDMA and the Arasbaran belt in the north are well studied due to their high ore potentials, in particular porphyry-type Cu-Mo deposits (e.g., Our study is focused on the Khak-Sorkh area, addressing the following questions: (1) the age of the intrusive activity; (2) the temporal relations between granitic emplacement and development of the iron ore; (3) the source of the fluids involved in the mineralization processes; (4) the genesis of magmatic rocks and mineralization; and (5) the relationships of these rocks in the broader context of the UDMA. The paper describes first the lithologies and mineralogy of the rocks in and around the deposit and reports ID-TIMS U-Pb on various accessory minerals to constrain the timing of magmatic, metasomatic and metamorphic processes. Lead isotope compositions were obtained from epidote and calcite from the endoskarn and exoskarn as well as the host dolomitic limestone to investigate the source of fluids involved in the development of the skarn. Intrusive bodies are prone to post-solidus alteration by fluids exsolved from the parent magmas and/or fluids introduced from external sources (e.g., The study area lies in the central part of the UDMA ( The Khak-Sorkh area is underlain by late Triassic to Jurassic shales, quartz-feldspar greywacke, and limestone/dolomitic limestone interbeds intruded by younger granitoids. Two granitoid bodies can be distinguished based on mineralogy and textures. Crosscutting relations between the two bodies cannot be verified, as the contacts are hidden under the metasedimentary rocks or covered by recent alluvial deposits ( The intrusions led to development of hornfels, marbles, and calc-silicate assemblages, as well as a skarn type iron deposit with an estimated reserve of 2Mt at average Fe of 34 wt% that is currently exploited by open pit mining (Madankaran Khak-Sorkh Nodushan The granite is composed of quartz, orthoclase, perthite, plagioclase, and biotite. Graphic and myrmeckitic intergrowths of quartz and feldspars are common ( The granodiorite displays a porphyritic to seriate texture and is composed of plagioclase, quartz, orthoclase, biotite and minor clinopyroxene in a fine-grained quartz-feldspar groundmass. Plagioclase crystals, 2–4 mm across, locally occur in clusters defining a glomerophyric texture. Accessory minerals, as identified under the microscope and in SEM studies, include magnetite, apatite, ilmenite, thorite, titanite, and xenotime. Magnetite is common and constitutes 1–5% of the modal composition of the rock. Zircon occurs as inclusions in the phenocrysts as well as in the matrix. Minor epidote occurs as an alteration product replacing plagioclase and biotite, whereas K-feldspar is locally altered to clay minerals. Both endoskarn and exoskarn are developed in the study area, the former being of limited extent. As in many other skarns (e.g., The endoskarn is dominated by a retrograde mineral assemblage consisting of epidote, tremolite-actinolite, biotite, magnetite, serpentine, and minor titanite and ilmenite. Epidote is the most abundant alteration product in the endoskarn and occurs both as replacement of plagioclase and mafic minerals, as well as in late veins associated with subordinate tremolite-actinolite and minor pyrite. A prograde assemblage dominated by garnet is locally preserved. The exoskarn is distinguished by a prograde calc-silicate assemblage dominated by diopsidic clinopyroxene, andraditic garnet, and minor olivine, as documented by microscopic studies and electron microprobe analysis ( An epidote-rich zone consisting of epidote, minor calcite and accessory zircon, ilmenite, apatite, and brookite (TiO The iron ore at Khak-Sorkh occurs as several irregular ore bodies up to 20 m long and 10 m wide in a plan view, and as scattered veins and small pods ( Serpentine is the main gangue mineral, occurring as irregular and brecciated aggregates intermixed with magnetite ± phlogopite in the ore bodies ( The mineral chemistry of the Khak-Sorkh skarn is discussed in Representative samples from the two intrusive bodies were analyzed for major oxides and minor and trace elements at MS Analytical Labs, Langley, Canada. The samples, 2–3 kg each, were crushed by jaw-crusher and powdered in a tungsten-carbide ring pulverizer to prepare < 200 mesh pulps. Major oxides were analyzed by XRF and minor and trace elements by ICP-MS following the lithium metaborate fusion method. Zircon grains can retain multiple ages of magmatic or metamorphic growth, and inherited components from older crust (e.g., Cathodoluminescence imaging was carried out using a Hitachi SU5000 Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) prior to dating to avoid picking grains with inherited cores. The isotope dilution thermal ionization mass spectrometry (ID-TIMS) data were obtained at the University of Oslo following the basic technique of Major and trace element compositions of samples from the granite and granodiorite intrusions are reported in Zircon grains from two samples, S1 and S7, representing the granite, and one sample, S5, representing the granodiorite, occur as colorless to pale yellow doubly terminated prismatic crystals with broken tips. They are 0.1–0.5 mm long and display morphologies typical of those frequently reported from water-rich granites and pegmatites (e.g., Depending on the morphology and size of a zircon population, ID-TIMS can be used to date certain parts of zircon grains, like tips, cores or outer walls of grains. Tips are more likely to be devoid of inherited cores and yield concordant ages (e.g., Zircon grains comparable in morphology to those in the granitoids were separated from sample KS-16 from an epidote-rich rock enclosed in a garnet-rich assemblage as described in the Titanite occurs as light brown euhedral to subhedral wedge-shaped grains <100–300 µm in diameter. A fraction of 12 titanite grains yielded 146 ppm U. The xenotime population consists of dark brown, prismatic, doubly terminated euhedral crystals, some with overgrowth textures, and ranging in size between 5 and 100 µm. One grain was analyzed: it contained 4794 ppm U and 2405 ppm Th. Monazite occurs as lensoid grains; a single grain tested contained 1022 ppm U and 27183 ppm Th. The U-Pb data are tabulated in The patterns (deviation from concordia) in For the granodiorite sample S5, four zircon analyses yield discordant to concordant data, the youngest one defining a Lead isotope analyses were carried out on epidote from an endoskarn in the granodiorite, and epidote and calcite from exoskarn ( Sample KS-22A is a metasediment consisting of epidote, calcite, and tremolite. The sample contains ~ 5% magnetite occurring as scattered grains and in veinlets. Calcite and epidote were separated from this sample ( The Pb-Pb data ( The Khak-Sorkh intrusive bodies are marked by high SiO The relatively high Ba/Ta and La/Ta ratios, 1225–1600 and 34–58, respectively, support an arc setting (c.f., The Zr/Hf ratios of 33–37 for granodiorite and 30–39 for granite are consistent with the ratios reported for unaltered granitic rocks (c.f., The plutons display similar chondrite-normalized REE and primitive mantle-normalized multielement patterns with steep LREE and rather flat HREE, distinct enrichments in LILE and LREE relative to HFSE and HREE, as well as distinct Nb, Ta, and Ti troughs, and a Pb peak, which are typical of calc-alkaline magmas at active continental margins (c.f., The zircon U-Pb ages obtained for two granite samples, S1 and S7, overlap within error at 30.05 ± 0.06 and 29.94 ± 0.09 Ma, indicating the time of final emplacement and crystallization of the granite. Monazite from sample S1 yielded a slightly younger age at 29.51 ± 0.13 Ma suggesting a late- or post-magmatic growth, or resetting of pre-existing monazite. The emplacement age of the granodiorite is more difficult to establish with certainty. The The age of 29.53 ± 0.11 Ma for the youngest zircons from an epidote rich skarn (sample KS-16) corresponds to the zircon age of the granite. The rock, as discussed in Overall the U-Pb results yield a fairly coherent picture, with magmatic and post-magmatic activity and mineralization in the border zones of the bodies mainly between 30.0 and 29.5 Ma, with some uncertainty regarding the emplacement age of the granodiorite (≤31.2 Ma). Formation of the skarn-type iron ore in the recrystallized dolomitic limestones and quartz-feldspar greywackes was thus coeval with the emplacement and crystallization of the intrusive bodies. The timing of mineralization in skarn-type ore deposits broadly coincides with the emplacement and crystallization of the associated fertile plutons (e.g., The distinct difference between the Pb isotopic values measured for epidote from the exoskarn and endoskarn, and for calcite from the host limestone with distance from the skarns indicates variations in the source of Pb, and suggests a critical role for fluid/rock interaction in the development of the skarn-type minerals. The similar Pb isotopic ratios for epidote from exoskarn and from an endoskarn developed in the granodiorite suggest a common fluid source and a possible genetic link between the two skarn types. Calcite sample (BH3-26) from a late calcite vein cutting a massive magnetite body did not contain measurable lead, but yielded the highest uranium content (19.3 ppm) compared to calcite from the limestone host rock which suggests an increasing uranium contents in the late fluids. By contrast all other calcite and epidote samples separated from the exoskarn and the granodiorite yielded low U/Pb ratios (0.05–2.08) for Pb contents of 5.2–21.3 ppm. Fluid inclusion data from the late calcite veins yielded trapping temperatures of 170–253 °C ( In the context of the Pb isotope model of Our epidote Pb isotope data overlap the fields of Pb isotope compositions obtained for galena from different types of Pb-Zn deposits including MVT, skarn, SEDEX, and polymetallic veins in the Central Iran Zone, the Alborz belt, and the UDMA, as reported by The abundant serpentine associated with iron ore at Khak-Sorkh developed as a retrograde product replacing the prograde Mg-rich silicates (olivine and diopside) that formed in the dolomitic limestones during the initial stages of skarn formation. This is supported by the serpentine pseudomorphs after pyroxene and olivine, and relict olivine and pyroxene within the ore zones ( The Cenozoic magmatism in the UDMA was associated with the convergence of Arabia and Eurasia and subduction of the Neo-Tethyan oceanic lithosphere underneath Central Iran (e.g., Unlike the Eocene magmatism, which was essentially of extrusive nature, the Oligocene and Miocene magmatism was mostly intrusive. The magmatic activity in the UDMA was diachronous and progressed, with time, from northwest to southeast (e.g., With continued subduction and collision, and thickening of the crust, adakitic magmas and porphyry-type Cu-Mo-Au deposits developed from the early Miocene in the northern UDMA ( Our U-Pb chronology data obtained from zircon, monazite, xenotime, and titanite for granite and granodiorite in the Khak-Sorkh area in the central UDMA portray a coherent picture, with magmatic and hydrothermal processes and associated iron mineralization mainly between 31.23 and 29.49 Ma. The overlapping ages obtained from minerals with different closure temperatures attest to rapid cooling and crystallization of the parent magmas. This is supported by porphyritic texture in the granodiorite, and the local occurrence of myrmeckitic texture in the granite. The skarn-type iron ore in the late Triassic- early Jurassic dolomitic limestones and quartz-feldspar greywackes was coeval with the emplacement and crystallization of the intrusive bodies. The common occurrence of hydrous minerals, serpentine and phlogopite, closely associated with magnetite suggest that ore formation in the Khak-Sorkh deposit occurred during retrograde skarn reactions. The age relationships and the Pb isotope data for epidote and calcite from various rocks support a link between intrusive processes, and development of calc-silicate assemblages and iron ore in the study area. The authors declared that there is no conflict of interest. We would like to thank Madankaran Khak Sorkh Nodushan Co. and Fariborz Baniadam for access to the mine and core samples, and generous logistic support. The study was supported by a scholarship to Sasan Maleki from the