The goal of this study was to compare accelerated weathering performance of neat polylactide (PLA) and its 1 mass% organically modified montmorillonite (Mt) nanocomposite; compounded and shaped by twin-screw extrusion melt mixing and injection molding, respectively. Accelerated weathering test system applied consecutive steps of UV irradiation and humidity in accordance with ISO 4892-3 standards for 200h. Chain scission reactions such as photolysis, photooxidation and hydrolysis resulted in significant decrease in the molecular weight of PLA; consequently reductions in the mechanical properties of modulus, strength, ductility and toughness of the specimens occurred. However, after comparing mechanical properties of PLA and Mt–PLA before and after 200h accelerated weathering, use of PLA with only 1 mass% Mt was extremely beneficial not only for “indoor applications” but also for “outdoor applications”. This was due to the effective nanoscale reinforcing and barrier actions of intercalated/exfoliated Mt layers. For example, flexural strength was 6% beneficial before weathering, but after weathering the benefit was 88%.Poly(L-lactic acid) (PLA) is a biodegradable biopolymer having aliphatic polyester structure with thermoplastic character. It has found wide range application in food packaging and biomedical applications and increasing commercial interest due to its desired mechanical strength, thermal stability and biocompatibility. PLA is also the center of interest with being an alternative to petroleum-based polymers, because PLA is synthesized from agricultural renewable resources. One of the drawbacks of PLA is its sensitivity to atmospheric conditions, i.e. UV irradiation, moisture and temperature. When viewed from this aspect, PLA with the enhanced outdoor performance is essential in many engineering applications such as automotive parts. Therefore, its weathering performance should be determined either naturally or artificially. In natural weathering, sun is the UV irradiation and temperature source while rain and atmospheric humidity are the source of moisture. Testing of polymeric materials under “natural weathering” conditions strongly depends on the chosen site and chosen exposure time which are usually very long periods such as 1–5 Until recently, biodegradation of PLA based materials have been clarified by many researchers, but less study has been performed on the weathering performance (hydrolytic degradation and/or photodegradation) of neat PLA ( Some of the studies ( Another group of studies ( In the literature, there are studies investigating the weathering performance of PLA composites reinforced with certain clay minerals such as bentonite ( Some of these Mt–PLA studies investigated effects of photodegradation either under artificial UV lamb irradiation ( There seems to be only one recent study ( Therefore, as the first of its kind, the purpose of this study was to determine accelerated weathering (both UV and moisture) performance of neat PLA and its 1 mass% Mt nanocomposite by comparing their mechanical properties and thermal behavior at four different weathering periods. Commercial The montmorillonite (Mt) used was Cloisite 30B obtained from Southern Clay Products (Gonzalez, TX). Cloisite 30B was organically modified with methyltallow bis-2-hydroxyethyl quaternary ammonium cation (MT2EtOH). The particle size range of the nanoclay was 2–13 Mt–PLA nanocomposite specimens were produced by two industrially compatible steps; i.e. “twin-screw extrusion melt-compounding” and “injection molding melt-shaping” with laboratory size equipment. In the first step, PLA granules and Mt powders were pre-dried for 15 In the second step, prior to shaping, pellets were allowed to re-dry for 15 When investigating the effects of various Mt contents and interfacial compatibilization on the behavior of PLA, our unpublished results revealed that use of 1 mass% Mt resulted in the best optimum mechanical properties. Therefore, in this study, accelerated weathering performance of neat PLA was compared with its nanocomposite having only 1 mass% Mt. Formation of Mt–PLA nanocomposite structure was first determined by X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis on a Rigaku D-Max 2200 with CuKα radiation (40 In order to investigate the weathering behavior of neat PLA and its 1 mass% Mt nanocomposite, an Effects of each period of accelerated weathering on the behavior of the neat PLA and its 1 mass% Mt nanocomposite specimens were investigated by comparing the changes in the results of the following tests and analyses conducted. Due to its higher sensitivity in the scanning range of 1°–8°, the same XRD equipment (Rigaku D-Max 2200) and the same parameters mentioned above was also used to reveal the effects of each accelerated weathering period on the variation in the intercalated structure of Mt layers. For the variation in the crystallinity of the neat PLA specimen and the PLA matrix of 1 mass% Mt nanocomposite specimen, XRD were conducted via Bruker D8 Advance A25 (CuKα radiation, 0.154 Variation in the color of the specimens after each accelerated weathering period was observed both visually and quantitatively. Visual observation was done by photographing the images of the weathered specimens and comparing their color with the unweathered one. The quantitative analysis for the color change was conducted by determining the CIELAB color space parameters ( For the variation in the chemical structure of the specimens, the first analysis was to observe the decreases in the molecular weight of PLA matrix after each accelerated weathering period. For this purpose, The second analysis was Variation in the fracture surface morphology of the neat PLA and its 1 mass% Mt nanocomposite specimens was observed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) via FEI Nova Nano 430. For this purpose, fractured surfaces obtained after fracture toughness tests were first coated with a thin layer of gold to avoid electrostatic charging and provide conductive surfaces. Variation in the strength and elastic modulus of neat PLA and its 1 mass% Mt nanocomposite specimens at each accelerated weathering period was determined by both flexural and tension tests. Three-point bending flexural tests were applied according to ISO 178 standard, while tension tests were applied according to ISO 527-2 standard. Furthermore, variation in the toughness of the specimens at each accelerated weathering period was determined by conducting For each specimen at each accelerated weathering period, these mechanical tests were carried out under 5 Variation in the thermal behavior of neat PLA and its 1 mass% Mt nanocomposite specimens at each accelerated weathering period was compared by two analyses. The first thermal analysis to determine transition temperatures and enthalpies of each specimen was differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) analyses. The heating profile used was − Weathering performance of PLA and its 1 mass% Mt nanocomposite were determined by comparing the deteriorative effects of accelerated weathering on the color, molecular weight, chemical structure, mechanical properties and thermal behavior of the specimens. Influences on the Mt intercalation and PLA crystallization were also discussed in the following sections. Mechanical and other properties of the Mt-polymer nanocomposites directly depend on the level of intercalation and/or exfoliation of the Mt layers. In this study, formation of Mt–PLA nanocomposite structure was investigated by XRD and TEM analysis. XRD diffractograms in After weathering, due to the deteriorative actions of photodegradation and hydrolytic degradation on the PLA matrix, it can be expected that there would be certain level of collapse of intercalated Mt layers. PLA is a partially crystalline biopolymer having a stable orthorhombic crystal structure named as α phase. It is known that (110)/(200) and (203) planes of α phase give XRD reflections at 2θ locations of 16.3° and 18.7°, respectively ( However, PLA has very slow crystallization rate; thus, due to the very fast cooling rate during injection molding, macromolecular chains of PLA have no sufficient time to crystallize. Therefore, XRD curves of the unweathered specimens (i.e. PLA-0 On the other hand, XRD diffractograms of the specimens after each accelerated weathering period indicated very sharp reflections of α crystal phase at 2θ locations of 16.3 In the outdoor applications, variation in the color of the polymeric components could be an important problem. Therefore, variation in the color of the specimens was evaluated by comparing their photographic images after each accelerated weathering period. It is seen in When 1 mass% Mt was added into PLA matrix, In order to quantify variation in the color of the specimens, their color was also evaluated by comparing the CIELAB color space parameters It is seen in The most significant variation in the chemical structure of the specimens during accelerated weathering via photodegradation and hydrolytic degradation would be their random chain scission actions leading to decrease in the molecular weight of PLA matrix. Thus, the first analysis used was static light scattering (SLS) spectrometry to determine the level of chain scission in the PLA matrix after each accelerated weathering period. SLS analysis revealed that weight average molecular weight (M Secondly, in order to observe variation in the chemical structure of the specimens after weathering, IR analyses were performed for all weathering periods. In The first spectrum in this figure reveals that PLA structure can be identified basically by five characteristic IR bands: C–C stretching peak at 867 UV irradiation deteriorates the structure of PLA via “Norrish II type photocleavage”, “photolysis” and “photooxidation” ( Photolysis leads to chain scission especially in the C–O bonds of the PLA ester backbone structure by absorption of a photon. After weathering, it is discussed that IR bands of C–O stretching peaks either decrease or shift to lower wavenumbers. Norrish II type photocleavage takes place at the ester group and ethylidene group next to the ester oxygen in the PLA structure leading to chain cleavage and the formation of C Bocchini et al. ( Another important parameter during accelerated weathering tests was the humidity (condensation) steps at 50 Effects of each accelerated weathering period on the variation of the fracture surface morphology of neat PLA and Mt–PLA specimens were examined by comparing the SEM images of their fracture surfaces. Note that these surfaces were obtained naturally just after their fracture toughness tests. On the other hand, it is seen in Effects of accelerated weathering on the variation in modulus and strength of PLA and Mt–PLA nanocomposite specimens were determined first by three point bending tests and then also by tension tests. After obtaining their stress–strain curves for each condition; influences of each weathering period on the values of “Flexural and Tensile Modulus ( It is seen in On the other hand, during accelerated weathering beyond 50 A similar trend was observed for both strength values (especially However, as shown in Variation in ductility of PLA and Mt–PLA nanocomposite specimens at each weathering period were evaluated by comparing their “%final strain at break” (ε Variation in the toughness of neat PLA and its 1 mass% Mt nanocomposite specimens at each weathering period were investigated by comparing their fracture toughness in terms of “Critical Stress Intensity Factor (  Lastly, in order to reveal benefits of using Mt–PLA nanocomposite rather than neat PLA, all the mechanical properties of these two specimens before weathering (0 According to the data given in For example, flexural modulus and strength ( Benefits of nanocomposite use were not only due to the very effective nanoscale reinforcing actions of intercalated/exfoliated Mt layers, but also due to their effective barrier actions of even collapsed Mt layers decreasing the detrimental effects of photodegradation and hydrolytic degradation. DSC thermograms obtained during first heating profile are given in It is seen in Of course the increase in the matrix crystallinity of the specimens would be not only due to the UV irradiation at 70 In order to determine variation in the thermal degradation temperatures of neat PLA and Mt–PLA nanocomposite specimens at each accelerated weathering period, TGA was conducted. Thermal degradation temperatures determined from thermogravimetric curves for each specimen are given in   XRD diffractograms between 2θ of 1°–8° indicated that before weathering, intercalated/exfoliated nanocomposite structure was obtained. After weathering, due to the chemical degradation in the matrix and organic modification of the nanoclay, there was collapse of intercalated Mt layers. XRD diffractograms also indicated that due to the very fast cooling rate during injection molding, neat PLA and the matrix of Mt nanocomposite specimens were mainly amorphous. However during weathering, UV irradiation cycles at 70 CIELAB color space parameters and photographs indicated that variation in the color of specimens occurred mainly during the first 50 IR spectrometry and molecular weight (M Mechanical tests pointed out that except slight increases during the first 50 It can be deduced that, after comparing all mechanical properties of neat PLA and its nanocomposite before and after 200 DSC and TGA thermograms exhibited no significant variation in the transition temperatures and thermal degradation temperatures of neat PLA and Mt–PLA nanocomposite specimens.