Parathyroid hormone participates in the metabolism of mineralized tissue. Its role in the formation of dentine is, as yet, incompletely understood. In the present study we analyzed the effect of transient (1 and 24-h/cycle) or continuous hPTH (1–34) treatment in odontoblast-like cells (MDPC-23) to the following parameters: mineral deposition detected by alizarin red, mRNA expression of the type I collagen (COL1), alkaline phosphatase (ALP), biglycan (BGN), matrix metalloproteinase 2 (MMP-2) and dentine sialophosphoprotein (DSPP) quantified by qRT-PCR. MMP-2 and ALP activities were quantified by zymography and colorimetric assay, respectively. The results showed that compared to Control group: intermittent PTH administration (1 and 24-h/cycle) decreased the mineral deposition and ALP activity. DSPP gene expression was not detected in both control and PTH treated cells. The PTH administration for 24-h/cycle increased the ALP, BGN and COL1 mRNA expression and continuous PTH treatment increased BGN and COL1 mRNA expression. Zymography assays showed that compared to Control group: PTH treatment for 1-h/cycle increased the total MMP-2 secretion and the continuous treatment decreased the secreted levels of MMP-2 active-form. Taken together, the results shown that PTH may regulate the odontoblast-like cells-induced secretion, and potentially this hormone can affect in vivo odontoblasts functions.Dentinogenesis is the dentine formation process in which the odontoblasts are responsible for the organic matrix synthesis, and posterior mineral crystal deposition in this matrix. This pattern of formation is similar to that of bone, another mineralized connective tissue. For both mineralized tissues, it is of fundamental importance understanding how the ions constituting the inorganic phase are transported from the circulation to the site of mineral formation and how this transport is regulated. Calcium is an essential ion for the composition of the mineral crystals during dentinogenesis. Changes in the serum calcium levels lead to structural alterations of the forming dentine. The overall function of endogenous PTH, an 84-amino acid peptide secreted by the parathyroid glands, is to maintain normal extracellular calcium levels by enhancing gastrointestinal calcium absorption, renal tubular calcium and phosphate resorption, and osteoclastic bone resorption, thereby releasing calcium from the skeleton. The expression of the PTHrP and/or PTHR1 (parathyroid hormone receptor 1) appears to be crucial to normal tooth development in both rodent and human. Understanding PTH function in cells associated with teeth formation is important for broadening our knowledge of the regulatory role of PTH during formation and regeneration of all mineralized tissues. Recently we showed that during mouse incisor formation the intermittent PTH administration caused an increase of the dentine apposition rate, dentine microhardness and also the relative concentration of Ca and P in the peritubular dentine. Murine odontoblast-like cells line MDPC-23 Cell viability was assessed by 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazolyl-2)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) reduction to formazan crystals by mitochondrial enzymes reductases, using a MTT biochemical assay (CellTiter 96 The cells were cultured in 96-well plates ( To determine the mineral deposition in response to PTH administration, the MDPC-23 cells were cultured in osteogenic medium supplemented with 10% FBS, containing 2 Reverse transcription followed by qPR was utilized in order to evaluate the effect of PTH administration on the expression of ALP, COL1, MMP-2, BGN and DSPP genes in MDPC-23 cells. The total RNA was harvested from cells in 6-well plates ( To evaluate whether PTH administration affect the MMP-2 secretion, MDPC-23 cells were cultured as previously describe in 96-well plate ( Data are presented as mean No significant differences were found between the vehicle-treated and untreated cultures, and therefore, in all of the figures only one control culture is presented (Control). MTT assay was used to determine the effect of PTH treatment on cell viability, and the results showed that PTH did not affect cell viability regardless the mode of administration ( The effect of PTH administration on the mineral deposition in MDPC-23 cells was assessed by Alizarin Red-S staining quantification. In the experimental time evaluated we have not found gene expression for DSPP in MDPC-23 cells in both control and PTH treated cells. Three bands were detected in the zymographic assays, one shaper band (pro-form MMP-2) with an approximate molecular mass of 72-kDa and two broader bands migrating at approximately 68-kDa (intermediate form MMP-2) and 62-kDa (active-form MMP-2) ( Parathyroid hormone (PTH) maintains calcium homeostasis through direct actions on bone and kidney, and through indirect actions on the gastrointestinal tract. Changes in PTH levels in blood are commonly found in parathyroid gland or renal associated diseases. In the present study, after three cycles of 48-h incubation, we did not find gene expression for DSPP in MDPC-23 cells. Although the other studied parameters are not specific for odontoblasts, the evaluated genes are certainly important for odontoblasts normal Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity is frequently used for the evaluation of osteoblastic differentiation. During the transition of predentin into dentine, the proteoglycans, such as biglycan and decorin, organize type I collagen into a more fibrilar form near the mineralization front in order to induce the proper mineral deposition along the collagen fibrils and inside the fibrils. The MMPs are gelatinases with collagen-degrading ability, and presumably contribute to organic matrix reorganization during the dentine mineralization. PTH can induce MMP-2 secretion in growth plate chondrocyte cultures, and its induction is involved in the programmed extracellular matrix degradation during endochondral bone formation. In contrast with our previous study which demonstrated that intermittent PTH administration caused an anabolic effect during mice dentine formation, The causes of the different response of the odontoblast-like cells to continuous or intermittent treatment is unknown, but it was demonstrated that PTH has diverse effects on osteoblast differentiation depending on the exposure time The results showed that PTH can modulate odontoblast-like cells in time-dependent manner. Furthermore, new studies have to be designed in order to elucidate other PTH roles in the odontoblast differentiation and in dentine formation.  None declared. Not required. The authors thank the Department of Oral Diagnosis from Piracicaba Dental School, SP, Brazil, for allowing the use of the real time PCR device. Dr. Marques is supported by