Purpose
                  The aim of this study was to investigate the incidence of Z-effect after dual lag screw intramedullary nailing systems and risk factors contributing to this effect. We hypothesized that long nails provide more neck strength due to a longer lever than short nails and are therefore less likely to develop a misbalance of a higher head compressive strength than neck compressive strength.
               
                  Methods
                  In this retrospective cohort study 103 patients treated operatively with a dual lag screw intramedullary nailing device for (sub)trochanteric hip fracture were included. We analysed patient charts regarding patient and operation characteristics. Furthermore we conducted radiologic measurements within the 2-year follow-up period to investigate the quality of fracture fixation, implant failure and predictors for Z-effect. The re-operation risk was investigated with multivariate regression analysis.
               
                  Results
                  The incidence of (reversed) Z-effect in this study was 9% (n = 80); 6 out of 7 Z-effects occurred in the short nail group, which was not significant. Patients who were treated with a long nail had a significant larger number of complications in comparison with the short nail group (median 2 vs 0.5, p = 0.001). The long nail group received more often erythrocytes blood transfusions (82% vs 31%, p < 0.01) and had a longer hospital stay (13 vs 21 days, p < 0.05). Migration of lag screws (p <0.05) and unstable fracture type (p < 0.05), were risk factors for re-operation. The re-operation rate within 2 year after surgery was 21%, of which one fourth was due to a Z-effect.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The nail length was not associated with the development of a Z-effect. Migration of lag screws after intramedullary nailing is common and a risk factor for re-operation.The worldwide incidence of geriatric hip fracture is increasing. This phenomenon can be explained largely through the extreme increase of incidence of hip fracture in most Asian countries in the last decades. It is expected that by 2050 more than 50% of all osteoporotic fractures will occur in Asia. Hip fracture is one of the most common orthopedic causes leading to hospital admission in the geriatric population and is associated with a high morbidity and mortality rate. The dual lag screw intramedullary nail systems This retrospective study was conducted in the department of Trauma Surgery in the Maxima Medical Center in the Netherlands, a large rural teaching hospital. From the 1st January 2006 till 31st December 2007 all patients treated with a dual lag screw intramedullary nailing for trochanteric hip fracture were analysed. In this period two types of nails were used: the Recon nail (Stryker, USA) and the Trigen nail (Smiths & Nephews, UK). A follow-up period of 2 years was chosen for implant-related failures. We selected all patients who received surgery for hip fracture and excluded the polytrauma patients and other fixation types. Patients with a malignancy in their history or pathological fractures were not excluded. A protocolised treatment algorithm regarding hip fractures was used. Standard work-up after admission to the emergency department consisted of a detailed history, a complete physical examination, an electrocardiography and standard biochemical and hematologic tests. All medical records were evaluated for patient and operation characteristics such as sex, age, American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) score, fracture type by the AO-classification system (Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Osteosynthesefragen, Switzerland), anesthesia type, delay to surgery, operation time and days of hospitalization. Furthermore we investigated postoperative complications and re-interventions during the 2-year follow-up. Radiological analyses were performed to measure the position of the superior and inferior lag screw, the cervicodiaphyseal angle and the Tip Apex Distance (TAD). The TAD is a clinically useful way to describe the position of the lag screws by the sum of the distance from the tip of the lag screw to the apex of the femoral head on the anteroposterior radiograph and the same distance on the axial radiograph with correction for magnification. By measuring the TAD over time we studied the incidence of (reversed) Z-effect. The maximum TAD (TAD The quality of the fracture reduction was based on the fracture alignment and the fracture displacement. This was judged by the cervicodiaphyseal angle, the degree of angulation and the displacement between fracture fragments and shortening. The fracture reduction status was subsequently scored as good (scored as: 2), acceptable (scored as: 1) and poor (scored as: 0). All analyses were performed with SPSS 16.0 statistical software (SPSS Inc., Chicago, Illinois, USA). During the study period of 2006–2007, 224 patients were operatively treated for trochanteric hip fracture. Of these patients 103 received an intramedullary nail system with dual lag screws. In 23/103 (22%) patients there was only one X-ray control postoperatively. These patients were regarded as loss to follow-up. In these 23 patients there were no signs of a Z-effect during hospitalization. The remaining 80 patients enrolled in this study had data of 2-year follow-up.   Seven patients developed a (reversed) Z-effect, leading to an incidence of 9%. Six of them were treated with a short nail, which did not reach significance in comparison with the long nail group. Radiological measurements displayed and classified by the presence of (reversed) Z-effect are summarized in There were 17 re-operations performed within two years after primary surgery: 4/17 (23%) of cases due to a (reversed) Z-effect and 13/17 (76%) of cases due to a screw-related implant failure. All reasons for re-operation are mentioned in All possible predictors for re-operation were entered in a logistic regression analysis ( The incidence of Z-effect in this study was 9%. The length of the nail was not associated with the development of a Z-effect. Migration of lag screws after intramedullary nailing is common, and a risk factor for re-operation. The re-operation rate within two years after surgery was 21%, of which one fourth was due to a Z-effect. Unstable fracture type was a predictor for re-operation. We hypothesized that long nails provides more neck strength due to a longer lever and are therefore less likely to develop a misbalance of a higher head compressive strength than neck compressive strength, contributing to the Z-effect. In this study we did not find any convincing evidence for this hypothesis. There was no association between nail length and the development of a Z-effect, although 6 out of 7 Z-effects occurred in the short nail group. These findings suggest that other variables are responsible for the occurrence of a Z-effect. More unstable fracture types and more high-energy trauma in the long nail group could explain the difference in quality of the osteosynthesis. This might also be the reason for the higher incidence of blood transfusion in the long nail group. The operation time was also longer in the long nail group but did not reach significance. The overall incidence of Z-effect in this study was 9%, which is in line with other studies that report an incidence of 7.1%–13% after the proximal femoral nail fixation with antirotation screw (PFNa, dual screw device). In 5 cases screw migration occurred with perforation of the acetabulum. Among them, 4 were due to cut-through and one developed a reversed Z-effect. The cause of this phenomenon is multifactorial. Osteoporotic bone and unstable fracture types have been previously mentioned to be risk factors. The principles behind the second or antirotation screw are clear, but strong clinical evidence for advantages lacks. In a randomized controlled trial the Dynamic Hip Screw (DHS) was compared to the PFNa, but no statistically significant differences were found regarding implant failure. We acknowledge a few limitations for interpreting the results of our study. Of 23 patients there was a limited follow-up available; therefore an underestimation of the results could be made. The loss to follow-up could be explained by early death or when no further radiologic follow-up was performed. Most patients loss to follow-up were suffering from dementia and discharged to a nursing home. Furthermore selection bias cannot be excluded because of the retrospective study design. Although this is one of very few studies that specifically report about Z-effect after intramedullary nailing, the number of patients is relatively small, making the risk of type II error higher. The measured TAD depends on the angle the X-rays are shot, which makes it difficult to compare accurately, but we did use all available X-rays in the follow-up and corrected for radiographic magnification. There exists an overall difficulty of comparing long and short nails with another as well as A1 fractures with A2 or A3 fractures. We corrected our analysis for the presence of unstable fracture types. In our study we did not only report implant-related complications but also looked at predictors for re-operation. Unstable fracture type was a predictor for re-operation as well as migration of the superior or inferior lag screw over time. The contributing effect of osteoporosis to implant failure was not included in our analysis. To prevent re-operations after intramedullary nailing, a stabile implant resistant to migration of lag screws is needed, even more in unstable comminuted trochanteric fractures. Dual lag screw systems have improved over the years. Henschel et al Another dual lag screw nail was reintroduced (Trigen Intertan, Smith-Nephew) and designed with two integrated lag screws to overcome Z-effect complications, and provides immediate intraoperative linear compression and rotational stability. Several studies have shown reliable outcome without the presence of Z-effect.