The ability of 4-tert-butyl-2-(α-methylbenzyl) phenol (t-BAMBP) to separate rubidium from potassium in an alkaline solution obtained from the treatment of rubidium ore has been assessed. The effects of various factors on extraction, scrubbing, and stripping were investigated under batch test conditions. A fractional extraction simulation test (3 stages for extraction and 10 stages for scrubbing) was conducted under the optimal extraction and scrubbing conditions of 1 mol/L t-BAMBP (in xylene), a contact time of 1.5 min, and a volumetric phase ratio (organic:aqueous; O/A) for extraction/scrubbing of 3:1. A Rb extraction efficiency of 98% and a K stripping efficiency of 99.5% were achieved. After 2 stages of countercurrent stripping with 1 mol/L HCl at a phase ratio (O/A) of 4:1 for 1.5 min, the stripping efficiency of Rb reached 99%. After the extraction, scrubbing, and stripping operations, a 97% total recovery of Rb was achieved and the concentration ratio of rubidium to potassium (Rb/K) increased 500 times, from 0.03 in the feed solution to 15 in the stripping solution. Theexperimentalresultsshowthat the efficient separation of Rb from K in rubidium ore liquor with high alkalinity can be achieved via fractional extraction.Rubidium, a soft, silvery-white The separation and purification of rubidium is Recent studies indicate alkaline leaching as a clean and effective method for extracting Rb from rubidium ores ( Rubidium ore liquor (Rb 0.47 g/L, K 15.5 g/L, NaOH 150 g/L) was obtained from the alkaline leaching of rubidium ore using sodium hydroxide. The commercial extractant The Rb/K separations were carried out in separatory funnels mechanically shaken with a shaker (TTL-800, Beijing Tong Tai Lian Technology Co., Ltd.). After phase disengagement, the aqueous phases were separated and analyzed for concentrations of metals by inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES; Optima 7000DV, PerkinElmer). Metal concentrations in the loaded organic (LO) phases were determined by stripping the LO phases with 5 mol/L HCl at an equal phase ratio and analyzing the metal concentrations in the stripping solutions. All the experiments were carried out at room temperature (25 ± 2 °C). The separation factor ( The mechanism of alkali metal extraction by Extraction stoichiometry and saturation extraction were mostly employed to study the extraction mechanism. Nevertheless, neither of these methods allow for deduction of the structure of the extracted Previous studies have shown that an increase in alkalinity is beneficial to the extraction of Rb from brines ( Generally, the diluent influences extraction efficiency and phase disengagement ( Experiments on the effect of Previous studies have focused on the extraction of Rb in low phase ratios (O/A ≤ 1:1), but the extraction efficiency at higher phase ratios is unclear. Therefore, variations in the separation factor and extraction efficiencies of Rb and K at varying phase ratios (O/A 1:1–4:1) were investigated. The concentration of In terms of kinetics, prolonging the contact time is often favorable in extractions. Extraction tests were conducted using contact times between 1.0 and 2.5 min, at a constant According to the results of Section 3.1.5, single stage extraction is insufficient for complete recovery of Rb, which instead requires a multistage extraction. Extraction tests were carried out at a To confirm this prediction, a 3-stage countercurrent extraction was carried out using a In the 3-stage countercurrent extractions, sufficient quantities of LO phases were obtained. However, the co-extraction of K into the LO phase was as high as 2.0 g/L, indicating the need for scrubbing of K. Potassium scrubbing from the LO phases, using weak hydrochloric acid solutions in the pH range of 1.0 to 3.0, suffered from the simultaneous stripping of Rb. As a result, deionized water was chosen as a more selective scrubbing agent. The contact time was maintained at 1.5 min for the scrubbing experiments. The key factor of the scrubbing tests, phase ratio, was investigated in the range of 1:1–5:1 (O/A). As shown in To determine the number of scrubbing stages required at a given phase ratio, the scrubbing isotherm was obtained by contacting the LO phases with deionized water at phase ratios (O/A) of 1:2, 1:1, 2:1, 4:1, 6:1, and 10:1. The scrubbing isotherm suggested that K concentration in the LO phase could decrease to 0.05 g/L after scrubbing by deionized water in 10 stages at a phase ratio (O/A) of 3:1 ( Based on the rubidium extraction and potassium scrubbing isotherms results, a simulation test of the fractional extraction was conducted using 100-mL separatory funnels under the test conditions displayed in Rb concentration in the aqueous solution decreased to 0.005 g/L after extraction, and the extraction efficiency reached 98%. After scrubbing, K concentration in the LO phase was merely 0.01 g/L, corresponding to a scrubbing efficiency of K calculated to be 99.5%. Although the extraction was carried out in an aqueous solution with a high concentration of sodium hydroxide, after scrubbing, the concentration of sodium in the LO phase was also low (0.01 g/L). The extraction is reversible and thus Rb can be stripped from the organic phase by an inorganic acid. Hydrochloric acid was used to strip the Rb from the LO phase after scrubbing. The effects of HCl concentration and phase ratio on the stripping of Rb were investigated. Contact time was maintained at 1.5 min in the stripping experiments. The stripping experiments were carried out at a phase ratio (O/A) of 1:1 while the concentration of the hydrochloric acid solution was varied between 0.5 and 1.5 mol/L. As depicted in  After the extraction, scrubbing, and stripping operations, a 97% total recovery of Rb was achieved. The concentration ratio of rubidium to potassium (Rb/K) increased from 0.03 in the feed solution to 15 in the stripping solution, a 500-fold increase which is far greater than the result reported by The separation of Rb from K in rubidium ore liquor with high alkalinity using This research was funded by the