Cu–Co–Fe matte obtained from copper converter slag by reductive-sulfidizing smelting was treated by magnetic separation-sulphuric acid leaching (MS-SAL) process to recover the metal values, copper and cobalt. The MS-SAL process was proposed on the basis of mineralogical analysis of matte, which showed that the main copper-bearing phases were bornite and chalcocite (non-magnetic substances), and the main cobalt-bearing phase was cobalt–iron alloy (magnetic substances). The matte sample was crushed, wet ground and then magnetic separated to produce magnetically susceptible concentrate (mainly Co–Fe alloy). 95.75% of cobalt was recovered by magnetic separation and 87.8% of copper and 44.39% of iron remained in the tailings. The concentrate was leached further by sulphuric acid. Under the optimum conditions of 1.15 times the stoichiometric amount of sulphuric acid, 1h of leaching time and temperature 80°C, 99.81% of cobalt in concentrate was selectively leached into the solution while the 99.86% of copper remained in residue. The tailings containing mainly bornite and chalcocite and the leaching residue containing mainly metal copper were treated by ore proportioning with copper concentrate and fed to the copper smelting furnace. In this process, cobalt in matte was selectively extracted and the copper was almost entirely recovered for copper smelting rather than extracted from leaching liquor as in existing copper matte leaching technologies. Recovery yields of cobalt and copper by MS-SAL were 95.57% and 99.98%, respectively.Converter slag generated from pyrometallurgical copper smelting generally contains considerable valuable metals such as copper, cobalt, nickel and zinc ( Several options like pyrometallurgical slag settling/reduction/reductive-sulfidizing ( In our previous research work of reductive-sulfidizing smelting of copper converter slag, the Cu–Co–Fe matte was obtained and the desired recoveries of copper and cobalt were 98.84% and 96.56%, respectively. The present work, the second of a series about the treatment of converter slag, proposes a new route for the selective recovery of copper and cobalt from Cu–Co–Fe matte by magnetic separation-sulphuric acid leaching (MS-SAL). The MS-SAL process was proposed on the basis of mineralogical analysis of matte, which showed that the main copper-bearing phases were bornite and chalcocite (non-magnetic substances), and the main cobalt-bearing phase was Co–Fe alloy (magnetic substance). So the magnetic separation was used to separate the cobalt from copper and achieve the separate recovery of cobalt and copper. The MS-SAL process consists of a magnetic separation from ground matte to produce concentrate (magnetic separation stage), followed by the sulphuric acid leaching of the concentrate (sulphuric acid leaching stage). The sulphuric acid leaching of concentrate with oxygen also was studied in this work as a comparison. The main chemical reactions and the standard Gibbs free energy change values involved in the sulphuric acid direct and oxidative leaching of copper, cobalt and iron from concentrate are the following: The Cu–Co–Fe matte ground was analyzed by inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrum (ICP-AES), atomic absorption spectrometry (AAS), infrared absorption carbon–sulfur analyzer and chemical titration. The contents (wt.%) of the main elements of matte were determined to be Cu 29.39%, Co 3.72%, Fe 41.71% and S 17.11%. The matte sample was crushed into 0.5–5 Reflected-light optical microscope, scanning electron microscope (SEM) and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscope (EDS) techniques were applied to identify the each phase of sample and the combination of latter two techniques was applied to determine the elemental quantitative of each phase. It should be noted that, as the segregation occurred during the crystallization of matte in pyrometallurgical process, the distribution of each phase in matte is uneven. In addition, the quantity of sample used for point analysis (SEM-EDS) is small. This results in a gap between the chemical analysis and SEM-EDS analysis. The slurry obtained from wet grinding of matte (grinding time 10 The batch tests of sulphuric acid leaching of the concentrate (obtained from magnetic separation) were carried out in a three-necked flask, stirred by a mechanical stirrer (RW20 digital, IKA, Germany) at 500 The X-ray diffraction pattern ( As can be seen from  Co–Fe alloy was enriched during the magnetic separation. Owing to the grinding characteristics of matte as mentioned in The copper-bearing phases in concentrate are metal copper, secondly Co–Fe alloy, and the cobalt-bearing phase and iron-bearing phase are both Co–Fe alloy, as shown in Concentrate was leached at 25, 40, 60, 70 and 80 Best leaching results were obtained at 80 The amount value of sulphuric acid is the key parameter of leaching according to reactions (1), (2) and (3). The experiments were carried out in 1 The effect of the amount of sulphuric acid on the extraction yields of copper, cobalt and iron is shown in The variations in metals extractions with various leaching time (0.5–4 The batch tests results show that the optimum conditions for the selective leaching of cobalt are: 1.15 times the stoichiometric amount of sulphuric acid, 1 Combining magnetic separation test results, the total recoveries of cobalt and copper by MS-SAL process were calculated to be 95.57% and 99.98% (only 0.02% of copper in total copper was leached), respectively. As a comparison, the case of the presence of oxygen in leaching was assessed in this study, dynamic leaching was carried out at 80 The presence of oxygen in leaching can significantly promote the leaching of copper. However, in this case, as mentioned in the Based on the present study, a schematic flow sheet is given in The paper is concerned with a new and simple magnetic separation-hydrometallurgical method for the selective recovery of copper and cobalt from Cu–Co–Fe matte obtained from industrial copper converter slag. Based on the mineralogical analyses of raw material, the following consecutive stages are proposed: grinding of matte, magnetic separation of ground matte to produce cobalt-rich concentrate (mainly Co–Fe alloy) and copper-rich tailings (mainly bornite and chalcocite), and selective leaching of cobalt from concentrate by sulphuric acid to produce cobalt-containing leaching liquor and copper residue. In this process cobalt in matte was selectively extracted, and the copper, as almost entirely remained in tailings and leaching residue, was returned for copper smelting rather than extracted from leaching liquor as in existing copper matte leaching technologies. The presence of oxygen in leaching promoted the leaching of copper, but almost had no effect on the leaching of cobalt. From the perspective of simplifying the process, the direct acid leaching of concentrate was considered to be more concise. The total recoveries of cobalt and copper by MS-SAL process were 95.57% and 99.98%, respectively. This work was financially supported by the 