Present paper reports an application oriented approach to recover precious metals such as silver (Ag) and palladium (Pd) from multilayer ceramic capacitors (MLCCs) of waste printed circuit boards (PCBs). These capacitors are being widely used in modern electronic gadgets to provide advance features as well as to enhance their performance. Due to the generation of large amount of e-waste as well as the loss of precious metals, a sincere R&D effort has been made to develop a process for the recovery of Ag and Pd from waste MLCCs. Initially, the MLCCs were depopulated from the PCBs by de-soldering using thermal treatment. Further, the depopulated material was pulverised to get homogeneous fine powder of MLCCs, which contained 0.14% Pd, 1.08% Ag, 1.76% Cu and 11.1% Ni. First of all Ni was removed/recovered selectively using two stages of leaching at optimized condition i.e. 2 M HCl, temperature 75 °C and pulp density 100 g/L. The obtained leached residue was washed, dried and further leached to get 99.99% Ag and Pd both in solution using 4 M HNO3, temperature 80 °C, pulp density 100 g/L and mixing time 1 h. From the obtained leach liquor, salt of Ag (purity 99.99%) was selectively recovered/precipitated using KCl. Further, Cu was extracted from the Ag depleted solution using LIX 84IC leaving Pd in the raffinate, which was evaporated to get pure Pd salt. The developed flow-sheet has potential to be commercialized after scale up trials.The growing demand of sophisticated and advanced devices have decreased the life span of electronic goods as well as tremendously increased the generation of electronic waste (e-waste). Printed circuit boards (PCBs) are essential component among all electronic devices, which is majorly populated with MLCCs and various other small components. MLCCs contain precious as well as valuable materials and metals. MLCCs are surface mounted devices (SMD), which have gained more attention over other capacitors due to its wide ranges of capacitance, superior frequency quality, reliability, higher voltage withstanding capacity, etc. The inner electrodes of MLCCs are usually made up of Ag Large number of high capacitance MLCCs are found to be populated on the PCBs of various electrical and electronic devices due to their low equivalent series resistance (ESR) value, which enhances the performance of devices. Some electronic gadgets such as mobile phone, personal digital assistant and television contain about 150, 200 and 300 pieces of MLCCs, respectively ( Only few studies have been carried out for the recycling of metals from MLCCs mounted on the PCBs. Mechanical separation ( Studies indicate that no sufficient research work were carried out for the recovery of metals from the small electronic components viz. connectors, integrated circuits, capacitors, transistors, etc. mounted on the PCBs. Keeping in view of the above, present research reports a novel, feasible and scientifically validated hydrometallurgical process to recover precious metals (Ag and Pd) from MLCCs depopulated from PCBs of personal computers. MLCCs depopulated from PCBs of personal computers were used as raw material for experimental purpose. Nitric acid (HNO MLCCs were separated by size screening from the de-soldered and de-populated parts of PCBs. Further, the MLCCs were pulverised to convert it as fine powder. The metal content present in the pulverised fine powder of MLCCs were leached in a three necked Pyrex glass vessel fitted with a condenser to retain the evolved gases. Hot plate assembled with temperature sensor and magnetic stirrer was used for the leaching experiments. Vacuum filtration unit was used for the separation of leach liquor from the leached residue. The leach liquor containing Ag and Pd was further put to systematic precipitation studies to get salts of precious metals, whereas the residue left was dried in a vacuum oven at 90 °C for 2 h, which will further be used to recover other non-ferrous metals (Ba, Ti, Sn and Zn). During the experimental studies, chemical analysis of all samples were carried out using Atomic Absorption Spectrometer (AAS) (Perkin Elmer model, Analyst 200; Make: USA) as well as Inductively Coupled Plasma-Optical Emission Spectrometry (ICP-OES) (VISTA-PMX, CCD Simultaneous; Make: Australia). The SEM-EDS studies were carried out using JXA-8230 Electron Probe Micro Analyzer (JEOL, Japan). The Eh-pH of the solution was measured using Eutech pH 700 (Thermo Scientific; Make: Singapore). Initially, PCBs of personal computers were de-soldered using thermal treatment to de-populate and isolate the small electronic components viz. MLCCs, integrated chips, transistors, diodes, resistors, etc. The small electronic components liberated from PCBs were further classified to separate the MLCCs from other components. The separated MLCCs were pulverised to 100–150 mesh size. Initially, the dissolution of metals from the pulverised MLCCs was carried out using nitric acid leaching followed by selective precipitation of Ag by KCl and complexation of Ni/Pd by controlled DMG precipitation. As DMG was found not selective for Pd/Ni thus, experimental plan was little modified to HCl leaching for Ni-removal followed by nitric acid leaching of leached residue to dissolve Ag, Pd and Cu. Further obtained leach liquor was processed for Ag precipitation using KCl followed by Cu extraction using LIX 84IC and Pd remained in the raffinate. To recover precious metals (Ag and Pd) as value added products, hydrometallurgical route comprising of chemical leaching, selective precipitation followed by solvent extraction has been developed. Initially the selective leaching of Ni from pulverised MLCCs was carried out using HCl followed by HNO Ni present in MLCCs was essential to be removed prior to the recovery of precious metals to maintain the purity of precious metals/salts product. Removal/recovery of Ni from pulverised MLCCs was carried out using different concentration of HCl varying from 1 M to 3 M, temperature 75 °C, pulp density 100 g/L and mixing time 2 h. Leaching of Ni was found to increase from 68.2 to 95.01% with the increase in acid concentration from 1 M to 3 M as shown in Selection of leachant for effective dissolution of metals mostly depends on the nature and chemical properties of the metals to be leached. Therefore, different mineral acids like HCl, H Further, studies were carried out by varying the concentration of HNO In order to investigate the effect of temperature on leaching of Ag and Pd from the Ni-depleted leached residue of pulverised MLCCs, experiments were carried out by varying temperature from 25 °C (room temperature) to 80 °C using 4 M HNO Studies for the effect of time on the leaching of metals from pulverised MLCCs sample was also carried out by varying leaching time between 5 and 60 min. It was observed that complete leaching of Ag (99.99%) was achieved in 20 min, whereas 99.99% Pd was leached out in 60 min ( Pulp density is an important parameter of leaching experiments, which can be maintained by optimizing solid to liquid ratio for providing required surface area of material and volume of the leachant. Thus, systematic studies were carried out to optimize the pulp density for maximum dissolution of Ag and Pd present in pulverised MLCCs. Pulp density was varied between 25 and 100 g/L at 80 °C maintaining leaching time 1 h using 4 M HNO The leached residue obtained after nitric acid leaching of metals was washed with hot water, dried and then characterized. The SEM-EDS plot of pulverised MLCCs before leaching and after leaching have been compared and presented Systematic precipitation studies were carried out to precipitate Ag selectively from the leach liquor of MLCCs as marketable product. The obtained leach liquor was found to contained ~0.54 g/L Ag. Various parameters for precipitation viz. effect of precipitant concentration, precipitant dose, time, etc. were studied and optimized for maximum recovery of Ag as salt. The precipitates obtained were filtered, washed and dried in vacuum oven for 2 h at 90 °C. The salts obtained were chemically analysed for purity. The results obtained are discussed below: Initially, studies were carried out to select suitable precipitant for effective precipitation of Ag. The use of different reagents such as HCl, KCl, NaCl, CuCl Experiments were carried out to observe the effect of precipitant concentration on Ag precipitation by varying the concentration of KCl in the range of 1 to 20% in mixing time of 10 min at room temperature. Further studies were made to optimize the minimum time required for Ag precipitation from leach liquor of MLCCs at other optimized conditions. By varying the mixing time from 2 to 15 min, the Ag-precipitation experiments were carried out by adding 1 mL of 1% KCl to 50 mL of leach liquor at 25 °C. In order to validate the result of Ag precipitation, standard Eh-pH diagram was drawn using Factsage 6.4 database. The experimental results obtained for leaching/dissolution of Ag followed by selective precipitation was validated with well-established theoretical interpretation i.e. Pourbaix diagram as shown in The filtrate generated after the recovery of Ag mainly contained Pd, Cu and K in trace as impurities. In order to produce pure solution of Pd, the solvent extraction experiments were carried out using LIX 84IC to separate Cu selectively from the solution. As already reported, LIX 84IC is very selective for the extraction of Cu at equilibrium pH ~2 to 2.5 ( Based on the laboratory scale work carried out for the recovery of precious metals from waste MLCCs the following conclusions could be drawn: MLCCs present in electronic devices are potential secondary resource for precious metals such as Ag and Pd along with non-ferrous metals Ni and Cu in majority. In order to get high purity salts of Ag and Pd, the impurities (Ni and Cu) were also removed/recovered as marketable product. Initially, Ni was removed by selective leaching using 2 M HCl at 75 °C maintaining 100 g/L pulp density in two stages. The Ni-depleted leached residue was processed for the leaching of Ag and Pd. About 99.99% of both Ag and Pd along with Cu were leached out using 4 M HNO Authors of the paper are thankful to Director, CSIR-National Metallurgical Laboratory, Jamshedpur, India for his kind permission to publish this paper. One of the authors Ms. Rekha Panda would like to extend her heartfelt gratitude to