This work investigates the effects of potassium addition on light olefin production from CO2 hydrogenation over the Al2O3-supported Fe–Co bimetallic catalysts. The addition of small amount of K on the Fe–Co catalyst significantly enhanced C2–C4 olefin formation. The C2–C4 olefins predominated among C2
                     + hydrocarbons at K/Fe atomic ratio of 1. Temperature-programmed desorption experiments demonstrated that K addition diminished the weakly adsorbed hydrogen but enhanced CO2 adsorption on the catalyst surface, which led to significantly enhanced production of light olefins. For C2–C4 olefin synthesis at 573K and 1.0MPa, the K-promoted Fe–Co/Al2O3 catalyst also showed better performance than the K-promoted Fe–Mn/Al2O3 catalyst which is known as a good catalyst for olefin production, under the present conditions employed. The pathway of olefin formation from CO2 hydrogenation was analyzed. Light olefins were formed via two-step reactions over K-promoted Fe–Co catalysts with the formation of CO or CO-like intermediate as the first step. Some of these olefins could be further hydrogenated to paraffins, depending on the type and concentration of chemisorbed hydrogen on the catalyst surface.Carbon dioxide (CO CO Potassium has been regarded as an effective promoter for CO and CO Recently, a significant promotion of C The K promoted Fe–Co catalyst would have high activity for light olefin formation from CO In this work, the K-promoted Fe, Co and Fe–Co bimetallic catalysts (Co/(Co K-promoted catalysts were prepared by a two-step incipient wetness impregnation method using γ-Al CO The surface area (SA), pore volume (PV) and average pore diameter ( The adsorption properties of H For CO To investigate the pathway for olefin formation from CO  To study the pathways for these hydrocarbons, the CO and hydrocarbon selectivity were plotted as a function of CO The light olefin and paraffin selectivity together with CO selectivity of Fe–Co(0.17)/K(0.3)/Al To modify the surface coverage of H The light olefin yield and the olefin to paraffin atomic ratio (O/P) for the Fe–Co/K catalysts are illustrated in A K-promoted Fe–Mn/Al The physical properties of calcined K-promoted Fe–Co(0.17)/Al For the study on hydrogen adsorption states on the Al To investigate the effects of K on the H Since type (I The effect of K addition on the CO As discussed in Section 3.2, the K addition resulted in a significant increase in light olefin (C CO selectivity slightly increased with K/Fe atomic ratio because K could promote the RWGS activity of the catalysts by providing the additional active sites to generate the formate species (intermediate species of RWGS reaction), which was verified by DRIFT analysis (not shown here) The Fe–Co(0.17)/K( The pathway for CO This research was supported in part by the Pennsylvania State University through Penn State Institutes of Energy and the Environment. The authors also wish to thank the Thailand Research Fund and Graduate School of Chulalongkorn University through the Royal Golden Jubilee Ph.D. Program Scholarship to RS at PSU.