INTRODUCTION
                  The wear of polyethylene components is a well-recognised long-term complication of total knee arthroplasty.
               
                  PRESENTATION OF CASE
                  We present a case of fatigue fracture of a geomedic tibial tray 17 years after implantation. The symptoms were masked by primary osteoarthritis of the contralateral knee.
               
                  DISCUSSION
                  The mode of failure in this case differs from that most commonly reported in the literature in that it occurred late as the result of prolonged use, not due to implant failure, physiological factors, or surgical technique. The case also demonstrates the incredible ‘masking’ effect of arthritic knee pain.
               
                  CONCLUSION
                  This case highlights the importance to clinicians of keeping a high index of suspicion for prosthesis complications in patients with unilateral joint replacement with contralateral arthropathy.The wear of polyethylene components is a well-recognised long-term complication of total knee arthroplasty. A 49-year-old man underwent left total knee arthroplasty at our institution in February 1990. A standard midline incision with medial para-patellar approach was used to implant a Geomedic Total Knee prosthesis (Howmedica). The procedure and post-operative rehabilitation were uneventful and he was followed-up routinely. In September 2007 the patient re-attended our out-patient department (OPD) complaining of severe contra-lateral right knee pain. This pain had started three years previously and had been gradually increasing in severity. At time of presentation he reported a walking distance of 500 yards and regular sleep disturbance. He reported a pain-free left knee and examination demonstrated a range of motion of 0°–110°. Radiographs of both knees showed primary osteoarthritis of the right knee, and apparent distortion of the tibial component of the left knee prosthesis, with metallic debris in the posterior soft tissues ( He was admitted to our institution in January 2008 and underwent right total knee arthroplasty. Prior to this procedure he remained pain-free in the left knee, but post-operative rehabilitation of the right knee arthroplasty was limited by severe pain in the left knee. His weight was recorded as 90 In November 2008 this man was admitted for revision arthroplasty of his left knee. Pre-operative radiographs showed further damage to the medial aspect of the tibial tray ( On extraction of the fragments the medial aspect of the tibia showed cavitation of the cancellous bone under the medial weight-bearing surface. All metal and debris were removed and a revision prosthesis was implanted. This implant incorporated modular stemmed components in the femur and the tibia. Medial and lateral augments were incorporated into the tibial component to address the bony deficiency caused by the subsidence of the primary implant. The post-operative period was unremarkable and the patient was discharged home to continue his rehabilitation. He was reviewed regularly for the first twelve months post-operatively, and annually thereafter. He was most recently reviewed in January 2013 and he has excellent pain free range of motion in both of his knees. Radiographs from January 2013 can be seen in This case demonstrates the incredible ‘masking’ effect of arthritic knee pain. This patient maintained good pain-free function in his left knee despite catastrophic failure of the tibial load-bearing implant. The extent of this ‘masking’ effect was only revealed when the pain from the contralateral arthritic knee was addressed. Bartel et al. Analysis of the tibial tray in the case described here showed a fatigue fracture at the narrowest antero-posterior diameter of the prosthesis. This area corresponds to the corner between the middle ‘bridge’ and the medial weight-bearing surface of the tray. Morrey and Chao In the reported case it is difficult to say with certainty what factors initiated failure. At 49 years he was relatively young at the time of arthroplasty. His physical demands could only be described as moderate, although his BMI was 30 at the time of implant failure. Kerkhoffs et al. The mineral density of trabecular bone is associated with the quality of the bone and this is considered to be an important predictor of failure in total knee arthroplasty. In this case, the prosthesis lasted for 17 years before the fracture was detected. The patient had not attended our OPD for ten years prior to detection of the fracture, and as such had no radiographic imaging of his left knee performed between 1997 and 2007. It is apparent from reviewing the patient's history that the pain of the fractured implant was ‘masked’ by the pain from the contra-lateral arthritic knee. The pain he suffered in his right knee had been increasing in severity over a three year period. This would suggest that the fracture of the tibial prosthesis had occurred during this three year period. This ‘masking’ phenomenon prevented early diagnosis and intervention, and resulted in further varus loading and impaction of the cancellous bone under the broken part of the tibial tray. We hypothesise that the wear of the polyethylene liner was biased towards the medial plateau, mimicking the varus deformity seen in osteoarthritis with chondral wear. This abnormal loading of the tibial tray altered the mechanical axis of the knee, resulting in abnormal loading of the medial tibial component, increasing the stresses across the junction between the medial plateau and the narrow inter-chondylar bridge. When fracture occurred the stresses were then transferred to the medial bone endplate which subsided significantly. This subsidence required augmentation with bone cement and a 10 Although tibial tray fracture is well reported in the literature, it is generally found to be an early complication secondary to implant impurities, poor surgical technique, or poor bone quality. We describe a case of implant failure after 17 years, where the mode of failure seems to mimic the mode of failure of the biological knee in osteoarthritis, and where the diagnosis was masked by primary osteoarthritis of the contralateral knee. This case highlights the importance to clinicians of keeping a high index of suspicion for prosthesis complications in patients with unilateral joint replacement with contralateral arthropathy. It also highlights the benefits of long-term clinical and radiolographic review of arthroplasty patients to enable early detection and prevention of late complications. None. None. The patient referred to in this case report has given signed written consent for the case to be published. Barry J. O’Neill wrote the manuscript. May Cleary revised the manuscript and took the clinical photographs. John P. McElwain is the senior surgeon responsible for the case and the overall care of the patient.