Synchysite is a rare mineral which has potential as a new source of rare earth elements. The influence of roasting temperature and time on the solubility of rare earth elements from a synchysite concentrate is examined. The maximum solubility of rare earth oxides in 57% HNO3 was 97% in a sample roasted at 700°C for 120min. Increasing the roasting temperature decreased solubility due to formation of cerium (IV) and calcium oxides.The demand for cerium and other rare earth elements for advanced materials applications has increased the demand for concentrates. The main natural source of cerium is bastnaesite (RECO Synchysite is a fluorocarbonate mineral of rare earth elements with general formula CaRE(CO Preliminary work indicated that decomposition of the carbonate was required for significant extents of dissolution. Nitric acid was also found to give greater dissolution than either sulphuric or hydrochloric acids. This paper describes a method for decomposition and leaching of synchysite concentrate. The raw materials were collected from Lugiin Gol deposit, southern Mongolia. Synchysite ore was purified with a spiral separator and concentration table ( The chemical composition of the concentrate (in wt%) determined by wet chemical method is given in  The particle size of the concentrate was 50–400 Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) and differential thermal analysis (DTA) were performed with derivatograph (MOM, D-1500) over the temperature range from room temperature to 1000 Roasting of the synchysite concentrate was achieved by placing 10 The whole of the sample of roasted concentrate was leached in 10 The roasting of synchysite concentrate as a pretreatment process is required to decompose the carbonate minerals. The second large endothermic effect centered at 570 Further decomposition of the concentrate takes place from 720  After roasting at different temperatures, samples were subjected to leaching at room temperature. Increasing the roasting temperature reduced the dissolution of cerium. This is probably due to oxidation of Ce  Roasting and leaching experiments, suggest that the roasting of the synchysite should be performed at temperatures sufficient to decompose synchysite but below that for decomposition of the calcite which appears to lead to the formation of insoluble compounds. XRD of the roasted product can be seen in Present research indicates that synchysite is a good potential source of cerium and light rare earths. The simple process for extraction involves decomposition of the mineral by roasting followed by leaching in nitric acid. Subsequent separation and recovery from solution can be made using well established techniques, such as ion exchange. Roasting of synchysite concentrate improves its solubility in nitric acid. Roasting at 700 This research was partially supported by the Ministry of Agriculture and Food, Ministry of Education, Culture and Science and Technological Foundation of Mongolia under the projects “Technological investigation on the preparation of the ecologically pure activated phosphorus fertilizer from natural phosphate rock” and “Physical and chemical investigation on the process of dissolution, sorption and extraction of precious and rare metals”.