Subduction thrusts exhumed from seismogenic depths may record the dynamic slip processes during subduction zone earthquakes. The thrust faults in the Shimanto accretionary complex of southwest Japan imbricate the mélange derived from sedimentary rocks and basalt, which represent a duplex underplating associated with the downward step of the subduction thrust at seismogenic depths (4–6 km in depth, temperature=130–150 °C). One well-exposed duplex-fault zone consists mainly of foliated cataclasites and ultracataclasites derived from basalt. The fault zone structure suggests slip localization along the 2–20 cm thick ultracataclasite layer at the boundary between different lithologies. The common features observed along the ultracataclasite layer are the injection of granular material into the mélange without the sorting of fine-grained particles along with a small detection probability of the fragmented counterparts in the injected materials, which suggests a rapid injection of fluidized granular material during faulting. The ultracataclasite layer is marked by fluid-related processes, as indicated by the alteration and precipitation of amorphous silica gel along the ultracataclasite and the concentration of veins near the ultracataclasite. The fluidization during localized slip under fluid-infiltrated conditions could be due to thermal pressurization, which causes the fluid pressure to approach lithostatic values. The injection of fluidized granular material may result from hydraulic fracturing in response to an increase in the fluid pressure associated with thermal pressurization. The plate boundary subduction thrust could be lubricated when the granular material fluidizes due to thermal pressurization during earthquakes.Most of the global seismic moment release is achieved through earthquakes on subduction thrust faults ( Here, we describe the structure of the fault zone and the fault rocks of a subduction thrust exhumed from seismogenic depths. Based on the interpretation of the structures found in ultracataclasites, we then discuss the possible deformation processes that could correspond to seismic slip in subduction zones. The studied fault developed in the Late Cretaceous to early Tertiary Shimanto accretionary complex of eastern Shikoku, southwest Japan ( The fault zone is approximately 19 m thick and is mainly composed of foliated cataclasites and ultracataclasite derived from basalt ( The foliated cataclasites are widely distributed in the fault zone, which are shown at the mesoscopic scale by the cataclastic foliation defined by the alignment of brecciated basalt in the cataclasite matrix ( The ultracataclasite is 2–20 cm thick but is mostly a few centimeters thick. It is continuous along the strike and separates the mélange above from the basalt ( In places, the cataclasite derived from the mélange is observed with a thickness of less than 20 cm. Cataclasite is commonly mixed with the ultracataclasite; however, it is locally separated from it by a single, planar, and sharp slip surface (described later). The ultracataclasite and basalt at a distance of less than 1 m from the ultracataclasite constitute the altered zone where the magnetic susceptibilities are one or two orders of magnitude lower than those of foliated cataclasites, pillow basalt, and pillow breccia due to a loss of magnetite and maghemite ( Veins are concentrated in the mélange at a distance of less than a few meters from the ultracataclasite ( In summary, the fault zone structure indicates the slip localization along the narrow (mostly a few centimeters thick) ultracataclasite layer separating different lithologies, whereas the deformation associated with the foliated cataclasites is represented by the distributed shear along the We identified three structures along the ultracataclasite layer at the boundary between the basalt/foliated cataclasites and mélange: (1) injection structures, (2) dilation breccias, and (3) silica layer. A common feature observed along the ultracataclasite layer is the injection of the basalt-derived material into the mélange ( The particle sizes of the injected material were measured on photomicrographs taken under plane-polarized light (2-D measurement), using the method shown by Commonly, individual particles in the injected material are randomly dispersed, and fragmented counterparts tend to be rarely identified (e.g., The upper boundary of the fault zone dips steeply toward NNW but dips moderately toward NNW at two localities ( The basalt-derived ultracataclasite and the mélange-derived cataclasite are locally juxtaposed by the single, planar, and sharp slip surface. This slip surface is discontinuous along the strike due to the development of injection structures, indicating that the formation of the slip surface was followed by the injection of granular material. On a microscopic scale, a thin layer with a thickness from a few tens of μm to 100 μm can be observed along the ultracataclasite boundary ( The observations of the microcrystalline quartz grains by transmission electron microscope (TEM, JEOL JEM-3200FSK) revealed that inclusions of 10–100 nm in size are present in the anhedral quartz grains ( The injections of granular material into the mélange may represent hydraulic fracturing in association with a rapid increase in the fluid pressure along the slip zone during a seismic slip. In this case, the hydraulic fractures would be immediately filled with the granular material. Alternatively, the injection structures may result from a passive response to the opening of the fractures at the base of the hanging wall during a slow slip (e.g., less than plate convergence rate) ( A small detection probability (0–15%) of the fragmented counterparts in the injected material ( The non-planar geometry of the upper boundary of the fault zone, the slip geometry of the fault strands and the spatial distribution of the dilation breccias ( The silica layer characterized by the anhedral aggregates of microcrystalline quartz grains would not be due to crystalline plasticity, because quartz grains are mostly free of dislocations without lattice-preferred orientations, and because the inferred temperature condition of the duplex fault during underplating is too low (i.e., 130–150 °C ( The nanometer-sized inclusions observed under TEM are not fluid inclusions, because they show a darker diffraction contrast that is peculiar to the crystalline phase. The size and composition of very-fine grained silica inclusions are suggested to represent the colloidal silica particles ( The formation of the silica gel requires for the fluid to be supersaturated with amorphous silica ( In summary, the injection structures and dilation breccias observed in the ultracataclasite layer are considered to originate from fluidization and implosion brecciation during a seismic slip, respectively. The silica layer, which is truncated by injections of granular material, would represent a precipitation of amorphous silica gel from fluids infiltrated in the fault zone before the fluidization of granular material occurred (earthquake rupture). The concentration of fluid-related processes along the ultracataclasite layer, injections of granular material, and the ambient conditions of the subduction thrust (4–6 km in depth, temperature The reduction in the normal stress on the fault can also occur by a normal interface vibration during stick–slip ( Fluidization during the seismic slip can also result from the reduction in the effective normal stress associated with a rapid increase in the fluid pressure. The heat production rate per unit volume ( Overall, the fluidization during localized slip under fluid-infiltrated conditions appears to be best explained by thermal pressurization, which causes the fluid pressure to approach lithostatic values. The injection structures that are oriented almost perpendicularly to the ultracataclasite layer suggest that the shear resistance in the slip zone was low when fluidization occurred. In fact, if the slip zone was lubricated, the normal effective stress and the shear stress would be low and the rocks could easily fracture under tension (i.e., the main principal stress was oriented at 90° from the slip zone). This is in agreement with the thermal pressurization model according to which pore fluid expansion due to frictional heating increases up to sustain the lithostatic load. Consequently, the fault could be fully lubricated when the granular material was injected. This would suggest large dynamic stress drops, at least along this fault segment. The fault zone structure, which was developed during a duplex underplating associated with the downward step of the subduction thrust in the upper part of seismogenic depths (4–6 km in depth, temperature This research was funded by a Grant-in-Aid for Science Research (B) of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (project number 17340152). We thank Yoshinobu Motomura, Yukihiro Taguchi, J. Casey Moore, and Aitaro Kato for their useful discussions during this study. Reviews by Giulio Di Toro and an anonymous reviewer helped greatly to improve the manuscript.