Ultrasonic P-wave velocity (UPV) is commonly used in different fields such as civil, mining, geotechnical, and rock engineering. One of the significant parameters which affect the UPV of rock materials is likely to be the length of test cores although it is not mentioned in the literature. In this study, in order to explore the influence of the specimen length on the UPV, rock samples were collected from eight different locations in Turkey. The NX-sized core specimens having different length of 50, 75, 100, 125, and 150 mm were prepared. Before the analyses, rocks were divided into two groups in terms of their geological origins such as volcanic and chemical sedimentary (limestone) rocks. The UPV tests were carried out under dry and saturated conditions for each 200 core specimens. By evaluating the test results, it was shown that the length of the specimens significantly affects the UPV values. Based on the regression analyses, a method was developed to determine the threshold specimen length of studied rocks. Fluctuations in UPVdry and UPVsat values were generally observed for cores smaller than the threshold specimen length. In this study, the threshold specimen length was determined as 79 mm for volcanic rocks and 109 mm for limestones.Determination of the engineering characteristics of rocks is considered to be among the most significant components in geoengineering projects. One of the ultrasonic techniques, UPV, has been widely used physical parameter of rocks which is determined both in the laboratory and on-site. It is destructiveness and simple to perform, which is why it has been used for many years in civil, mining and geotechnical engineering such as quarrying, rock slopes, underground opening, blasting and ripping. The UPV is affected by many factors such as lithology, unit weight, grain shape and size, anisotropy, porosity, degree of saturation, weathering and alteration, confining pressure, temperature, and discontinuity properties (roughness, filling material, orientation, etc.). Additionally, the shape and size of the samples may affect the UPV ( Most researchers have investigated the relationships between the UPV and engineering properties of rocks (uniaxial compressive and tensile strengths, Schmidt rebound hardness, Poisson's ratio, modulus of elasticity, porosity, unit weight, etc.). They obtained that UPV is closely related with properties of rock (e.g. The effect of saturation and porosity on the sound velocities was studied by some researchers.   Since the researchers prefer to perform the UPV and other rock mechanics tests on same specimens, the length of the specimens are chosen according to the standards or suggested methods. For example, according to the Eight rock types were sampled and rock blocks were collected from different locations in Trabzon, Giresun, Gumushane, Amasya, and Mugla regions of Turkey ( As the anisotropic characteristics of rocks directly affect the ultrasonic P-wave velocity ( Another significant factor that influences the UPV is the grain size of the minerals. The travel length of the pulse though the rock samples shall be at least 10 times the mean grain size based on the The NX-sized core specimens used in the experimental studies were obtained from blocks to the required dimension using core drilling machine. The ends of the samples were machined for flat ground and made parallel to each other. The cut end faces of the core samples were smoothened to maintain precision of within ±0.02 mm and made perpendicular to within ±0.05 mm to the core axis using comparator. After a macroscopical checking, only unweathered, homogeneous, and free of visible joint specimens were considered. In order to obtain the exact results as well as the best comparison, the experiments were carried out under the same conditions. Core specimens were prepared at five different lengths with the same diameter for each rock type. The core length for the smallest specimen is 50 mm and 150 mm for the longest specimen. The core diameters are the same (NX: 54.7 mm) in order to minimize the interaction between the UPV and the core diameter. The UPV testing applied on the dry and saturated specimens. Ultrasonic pulse method for the UPV testing was performed using the Pundit-plus model equipment. An accuracy of 0.1 mm for the length of the measuring base was used. Before the measurements, the cut ends of samples were polished to provide flat and smooth surface. A thin film of petroleum jelly (vaseline) was fulfilled to the surface of the transducers (receiver and transmitter) so as to provide full contact and to remove the air gap between transducers and the specimen surface. In the laboratory, direct, semidirect and indirect methods could be performed for UPV measurement. The direct procedure known to be the most reliable and satisfactory method, was performed during the test in order that the receiver and transmitter might be positioned on the opposite cut end surfaces of the samples used. In the tests, the ultrasonic pulse time was measured with an accuracy of 0.1 μs. The UPV was obtained by dividing the length of the NX-sized core and the travel pulse time. Mean UPV value was obtained by averaging the P-wave values of five tests on the same lithology type. A total of 200 core specimens having different lengths were used in the experiments. Core specimens used for UPV measurement were also evaluated in the calculation of apparent porosity. The sample volume was determined from an average of three caliper readings. Samples were saturated with distilled water at room temperature for 24 h. Achieving 100% saturation is theoretically impossible for homogeneous rocks apart from the clastic rocks due to unconnected voids in their structures. However, the assumption of 100% saturation is made after 24/48 h in distilled water for homogeneous volcanic, plutonic rocks and limestones which have apparent porosity (e.g. After the saturated core specimens were performed for UPV tests, weight of each specimen was calculated. The dry weight of samples was defined after drying for 24 h at a temperature of 105 °C in oven. The values of apparent porosity were obtained using saturation and caliper techniques. The volume of pores was determined from dry and saturated weights. Apparent porosity values of each sample were derived from the ratio of the void volumes to the sample volume. All tests were implemented based on the Evaluation of the data obtained from laboratory studies were performed in two stages. In first stage, the relationships between ultrasonic P-wave velocities under dry and saturated conditions (UPV The regression analyses were performed for each specimen length varies between 50 and 150 mm. As shown in The average UPV In the literature, there is a great deal of research exploring the effect of specimen size on the UCS (e.g. In this study, NX-sized cores having lengths between 50 and 150 mm were evaluated to investigate the specimen length on the UPV. According to the findings derived from the present study, the main results were presented below; The UPV UPV values versus specimen length were plotted for all rocks. Core specimens having lengths 50 mm and 75 mm, an increase in the UPV values based on an increase in length was shown for the volcanics. Further, a significant increase in the UPV was obtained for limestone specimens having lengths 50 mm, 75 mm and 100 mm. Over the length of 75 mm for the volcanic rocks and 100 mm for the limestones, higher decreasing on UPV values was seen. This study showed that both the UPV According to the results of the statistical analyses, threshold specimen length for the volcanic rocks and limestones were determined as 79 and 109 mm, respectively. UPV Threshold specimen length was tried to predict for some rocks studied (i.e. volcanics and limestones). However, this only goes for the eight types of rock used and additional research on different rock types are needed especially for intrusive and metamorphic rocks as well as anisotropic rocks. Authors would like to express their sincerest gratitude to the editor and reviewers for their excellent comments. Also thanks to Dr. Bayram Ercikdi for improving paper quality and English editing of the text.