Natural bone is one kind of compounds consisting of hydroxyapatite (HAp) nano-rods, which are embedded in the template of collagen matrix in vivo with the same crystallographic organization. Herein HAp nano-rods precursors were synthesized via wet chemical method. Large-scale HAp nano-wires with the same crystallographic organization as the template of anodic aluminum oxide (AAO) were obtained by the electrophoretic deposition and the technology of the template. It provides a meaningful method to study and understand the information of biological molecules’ mineralization process.Hydroxyapatite (HAp, Ca Ca(OH) The synthesis involved two steps: (1) wet chemical synthesis of nano-scaled HAp precursors; (2) electrophoretic deposition of HAp into the pores of AAO. In order to prepare HAp precursors, an ultrasonic treated 0.01 mol Ca(OH) HAp hosted in the pores of AAO was obtained via electrophoretic deposition X-ray diffraction (XRD) was recorded on RIGAKU D/max-IIB X-ray Diffractometer using Cu-Kα radiation (1.5406 Å) of 40 kV and 20 mA. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy was conducted at FTS135 infrared spectroscopy (Bio-Rad, USA). Transmission spectrum (FT-IR) of the HAp precursors was obtained by forming thin transparent KBr pellet containing the interesting materials. Transmission spectrum of the HAp in the pores of AAO was obtained by subtracting spectrum of HAp/AAO with that of AAO membrane (obtained directly as pellet). As AAO membrane had almost no transmission in the range of less than 995 cm Electron diffraction (ED) was performed on JEOL-JEM-2010 (JEOL, Japan) electron microscopy operating at 200 kV. For ED observation, AAO was removed from HAp/AAO membrane by dissolving the AAO in 0.5 M NaOH solution and washing several times with ethanol. Samples were prepared by casting one drop of the HAp suspension onto a standard carbon-coated (200–300 Å) formvar film on copper grid (230 mesh). Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was performed on JEOL-JXA-840 (JEOL, Japan) electron microscopy operating at 200 kV. HAp/AAO membrane was etched in NaOH to exhibit the cross section of the HAp in the pores before SEM measurement. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was conducted using a VG ESCALAB MK II spectrometer (VG Scientific, UK) employing a monochromatic Mg-Kα X-ray source (  The individual size of crystallite was calculated as 19.2 nm where (0  In order to discern the relative alignment of the electrophoretic HAp nano-wires with respect to AAO pore channels, the HAp nano-wires taken from the pores of HAp/AAO membrane were characterized by electron diffraction (ED), which was demonstrated in  In general, the electrophoretic deposition product in the pores of AAO should be HAp Thus, crystalline order of the HAp precursors was retained in the electrodeposited nano-wires, and large-scale HAp single crystal nano-wires with In the organization of natural bone, collagen triple helices spontaneously form nano-scale bundles of protein, which act as one template and play a critical role in controlling the crystallization of HAp nano-crystals. And the In conclusion, large-scale HAp single crystal nano-wires were synthesized via template technology, and characterized with XRD, FT-IR, TEM, SEM, ED and XPS. The results confirmed that crystalline order of the HAp precursors was retained in the electrodeposited nano-wires. The HAp single crystal nano-wires grew in This work was financially supported by Outstanding Youth Fund (No. 20125513) from the National Natural Scientific Foundation of China, 100 People Plan from Chinese Academy of Sciences and 100 Outstanding Ph.D. Thesis Award of China.