ZnCr–CO3 layered double hydroxide (LDH) has been prepared by a two-step process combining direct coprecipitation and anionic exchange. To investigate the influence of thermal treatment on ZnCr–CO3 LDH photocatalytic activity, the thermal decomposition of the matrix was studied by in-situ thermal X-ray diffraction and thermal analysis (TGA/DTA). The structure and the textural properties of the materials obtained upon different thermal treatment have been characterized by several techniques such as X-ray diffraction, FTIR, UV–vis diffuse reflectance spectroscopy, N2 adsorption, scanning and transmission electronic microscopy. Prior to study Orange II (OII) photodegradation, adsorption behavior of uncalcined and calcined ZnCr–CO3 LDH toward OII was studied evidencing that LDH thermal decomposition leads to a net decrease of the adsorption behavior. All the samples induce the photodegradation of OII. The compounds obtained after calcination above 600°C display the highest photocatalytic activity attributed to the formation of well crystallized ZnO and ZnCr2O4 spinel leading to complete mineralization of OII. Optimal photocatalytic conditions were defined as 0.5gL−1 of photocatalyst and basic pH conditions. To further highlight the oxidation process, experiments with 4-chlorophenol, which is not adsorbed on LDH surface and with isopropanol and terephthalic acid, used as HO radical trap, were carried out. In terms of photodegradation mechanism, both hydroxyl radical generation in bulk and direct interaction with hole on the surface of the photocatalysts were evidenced.Recently, advanced oxidation processes (AOPs) have attracted a considerable attention as efficient methods allowing a complete mineralization of organic pollutants, compared to adsorption phenomena which are solely based on pollutant immobilization. Particularly, semiconductor based photocatalysts are of great interest for hazardous wastewaters remediation and toxic air contaminant reduction. In such processes, catalytic reactions are stimulated by UV and visible-light absorption which create in the materials electron–hole pairs, able to migrate to the surface and to further generate free radicals. Various materials such as TiO In this study, carbonate intercalated ZnCr–LDH has been prepared with the aim to better understand the mechanism of photocatalytic organic pollutant degradation. Orange II (OII) and 4-chlorophenol (4-CP) were used herein as models of adsorbing and non adsorbing organic molecules, respectively. Evolution of the physico-chemical features and photocatalytic properties of ZnCr–CO Powder X-ray diffraction patterns were recorded on a X’Pert Pro Philips diffractometer with diffracted beam graphite monochromator using Cu Kα radiation source in the 2 All the reagents were analytical grade and used without further purification. Zn Then, [Zn ZnCr–CO Adsorption measurements were carried out using a batch method at a controlled temperature of 20 The photocatalytic efficiency was measured by degradation of OII and 4-CP as model pollutants. Experiments were performed with a constant sample concentration of 0.5 To measure the photoproduction of HO Carbonate intercalated LDH phases were considered as precursors of choice to produce derived mixed oxides due to the carbonate anions full decomposition at rather low temperatures. ZnCr–CO To get further insight on the thermal behavior of LDH precursor compound, both TGA/DTG and high temperature In parallel, PXRD patterns were also recorded classically on samples calcined at various temperatures for 4 Due to the dehydroxylation of the LDH layer at moderate temperature inducing a huge change of the surface properties, the zeta potential of the particles decreases from +25 Generally for LDH matrices, an maximum value of surface area is reached upon moderate thermal treatment (250–350 The hysteresis loop is type H3 corresponding to slit shape pores usually observed for LDH materials due to the presence of aggregates of plate like particles. Such morphology is confirmed by SEM and TEM images presented in Prior to UV–vis irradiation, adsorption isotherms of OII on uncalcined and calcined ZnCr–CO According to the classification proposed by Giles et al. The pristine LDH displays the greater adsorption properties, saturation of the surface is obtained at equilibrium value Ce of 2.5 After the OII adsorption on ZnCr–CO The band gap of calcined ZnCr–CO The increase of the calcination temperature leads to the increase of the calculated band gap value. This trend indicates that calcinations which induce the oxide crystallization strongly influence the absorptive properties of the resulting materials. It should be underlined that for higher calcination temperature, the phase displaying the higher band gap value is favored. The photocatalytic activities of ZnCr–CO The photocatalyst concentration also takes an important role in the degradation of OII. As the calcined sample ZnCr-600 The influence of pH on the photocatalytic degradation was also studied in the range of pH 5–9.5 for a dye concentration of 5.10 It is noteworthy that in presence of calcined ZnCr-600 In attempt to describe the possible contribution of oxidative species (HO At first, the photoproduction of HO For ZnCr-600 As another step, tests were performed by inhibition of HO For ZnCr–CO For the better understanding of reaction mechanism, 4-CP was used as another model compound. After 0.5 Then clearly, in presence of a model compound not adsorbed on the mixed oxides photocatalyst surface, only HO To see if the OII undergoes complete mineralization by degradation with ZnCr-600 Photocatalytic activity of ZnCr–CO Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are Supplementary data to this article: