Background
                  The last decade has shown a shift toward operative treatment of a subset of midshaft clavicle fractures. However, it is unclear whether there are differences between plate fixation and intramedullary fixation regarding complications and functional outcome. The aim of this systematic review and meta-analysis was to compare plate fixation and intramedullary fixation for midshaft clavicle fractures.
               
                  Methods
                  The Medline, Embase, and Cochrane databases were searched for both randomized controlled trials and observational studies. The methodologic quality of all included studies was assessed using the Methodological Index for Non-Randomized Studies.
               
                  Results
                  Twenty studies were included. Ten of the 20 included studies used a fracture classification. Seven of these studies reported exclusion of patients with comminuted fractures. No difference in the total re-intervention rate was found (odds ratio [OR], 1.21; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.71 to 2.04). Major re-interventions occurred more often after plate fixation (OR, 1.88; 95% CI, 1.02 to 3.46). The mean implant removal rates were 38% after plate fixation and 73% after intramedullary fixation. Re-fracture after implant removal occurred more often after plate fixation (OR, 3.42; 95% CI, 1.12 to 10.42). The Constant-Murley scores showed no differences at both short term (mean difference, −1.18; 95% CI, −13.41 to 11.05) and long term (mean difference, 0.15; 95% CI, −1.57 to 1.87). No differences were observed regarding nonunion (OR, 1.50; 95% CI, 0.82 to 2.75). The rate of infections showed no differences when outlier studies were excluded (OR, 1.54; 95% CI, 0.88 to 2.69).
               
                  Conclusion
                  Major re-intervention and re-fracture after implant removal occurred more frequently after plate fixation of non-comminuted, displaced midshaft clavicle fractures. No differences in terms of function and nonunion between plate fixation and intramedullary fixation were observed.Clavicle fractures are most commonly observed in male patients younger than 30 years and typically occur as a result of a contact sport or road traffic accident. Midshaft clavicle fractures (MCFs) account for approximately 80% of all clavicle fractures, and 30% of these fractures are sports-related injuries. Both plate fixation (PF) and intramedullary fixation (IMF) have shown superior results regarding nonunion rates compared with nonoperative treatment for MCFs in randomized controlled trials (RCTs). Compared with RCTs, observational studies are generally more suitable for detecting (long-term) complications, especially for surgical procedures. The aim of this systematic review and meta-analysis is to compare PF and IMF for MCFs reported in both RCTs and observational studies. The primary outcome is the re-intervention rate, defined as all re-interventions requiring general anesthesia except elective implant removal. Secondary outcomes are elective implant removal, setting of implant removal (hospital or outpatient department; local or general anesthesia), re-fractures after implant removal, short- and long-term functional results, nonunions, and infections. RCTs and both prospective and retrospective observational studies comparing PF and IMF for acute displaced MCFs were included in this systematic review and meta-analysis. Two reviewers (R.M.H. and O.A.v.d.M.) independently searched Medline, Embase, and The Cochrane Library on April 20, 2015. Articles written in English, French, or German that were available in full text were included. Eligibility disagreement was resolved by discussion (R.M.H. and O.A.v.d.M.). The search syntax is provided in Two reviewers assessed the methodologic quality of all included studies (R.M.H. and O.A.v.d.M.). Studies conducted by the first author (R.M.H.) and last author (O.A.v.d.M.) were assessed by 2 other reviewers (D.P.J.S. and M.C.K.). The Methodological Index for Non-Randomized Studies (MINORS) methodology was used to assess the included studies. The primary outcome parameter of this meta-analysis was re-intervention rate. All re-interventions requiring general anesthesia except elective implant removal were considered major re-interventions. Minor re-interventions were defined as re-interventions in the outpatient department with the patient under local anesthesia. Secondary outcomes were elective implant removal, defined as removal of the implant according to hospital protocol or according to the patient's wishes. The location (hospital or outpatient department) and the type of anesthesia used for implant removal (local or general anesthesia) were recorded when provided. The Constant-Murley score was used to collect information about long-term functional results. Two reviewers (R.M.H. and O.A.v.d.M.) independently extracted the following baseline study data: authors, year of publication, study design, institutional review board approval, performance of sample size calculation, definition of fracture displacement as described in the Methods section, classification used for inclusion, type of plate used, position of the plate, number of patients treated with PF, type of IMF and technique used for IMF, number of patients treated with IMF, and postoperative rehabilitation protocol. Outcomes reported by 2 or more studies were pooled in meta-analyses. Dichotomous and continuous outcomes were presented as odds ratios (ORs) and weighted mean differences, respectively. Data were pooled using the Mantel-Haenszel method for dichotomous outcomes and the inverse-variance method for continuous outcomes. Trials with 0 events in both arms were excluded from meta-analysis. Trials with 0 events in 1 arm were included in the analysis by adding a continuity correction of 0.5 to all cells in the 2 × 2 table of that study. As a robustness assessment, meta-analyses of RCTs with 0 events in 1 arm were also performed using risk differences in a sensitivity analysis. For all analyses, the 95% confidence interval (CI) was calculated. Absolute risk of re-fracture after PF and IMF was analyzed using the Fisher exact test. Heterogeneity was calculated with the Higgins χ After primary analysis, subgroup and sensitivity analyses were performed for the primary outcome parameter. Because minor re-interventions are not possible for PF, major re-interventions were used for subgroup and sensitivity analyses. Subgroup analysis was performed for study type (RCT vs observational). In subgroup analysis, results of both groups were presented. Sensitivity analysis was performed for study quality, type of implant for PF, and infections. In the sensitivity analysis on study quality, all studies with a MINORS score above 16 were included arbitrarily. Biomechanical data showed inferior results of reconstruction plates compared with newer-generation locking compression plates. The electronic search identified a total of 580 articles ( Of the 20 included studies, 6 were RCTs, 4 were prospective cohort studies, and 10 were retrospective cohort studies, enabling meta-analysis of a total of 1382 patients ( A summary of the critical appraisal of included studies is provided in Seventeen of the 20 included studies reported re-interventions. Major re-interventions occurred more often after PF, and the difference was significant. The The mean implant removal rates were 38% after PF and 73% after IMF. Implant removal after IMF in the outpatient setting was reported in 3 studies with patients under local anesthesia. Re-fracture after implant removal occurred significantly more often after PF. This complication was described in 7 studies. Five studies reported short-term Constant-Murley scores. In addition, no significant differences were observed regarding long-term functional outcome. Constant-Murley scores were reported by 10 studies. All included studies reported nonunion rates ( Reported infections occurred significantly more often after PF ( Sensitivity analysis excluding outlier studies resulted in an OR of 1.54 (95% CI, 0.88 to 2.69; In this systematic review we observed no differences in terms of re-interventions in general and function between PF and IMF. When we focused on major re-interventions, re-fracture after implant removal, and infections, we found an advantage for the IMF treatment. However, not all fracture types are suitable for IMF. Of the 10 studies that reported a fracture classification, 7 excluded comminuted fractures (AO type C and Robinson 2B2). A recent meta-analysis on this subject by Zhu et al Surgical treatment of displaced MCFs can be considered a 2-stage procedure. PF offers the chance that a second operation will not be required, whereas IMF generally mandates a second operation. In this study, implant removal rates after PF vary between 3% and 100%, whereas implant removal after IMF is common clinical practice in multiple studies. An important confounder for re-intervention might be the use of reconstruction plates. Reported infection rates were shown in this study because there are likely unreported infections in both groups that might result in reporting bias. Infections occurred more often after PF. The much larger surgical dissection required for plate placement could in fact result in a higher surgical infection rate. Infections were analyzed as 1 group. However, definitions used in the various studies were heterogeneous, and consequences of superficial and deep infections differ substantially. A deep infection generally resulted in a re-intervention, whereas a superficial infection could be treated with oral antibiotics. Two studies used in the meta-analysis had deep infection rates after PF of 11% and 36%. In this study we decided deliberately not to report migration rates but reported the most important consequence of migration: re-intervention or implant removal. However, in the study of van der Meijden et al, The MINORS methodology was used for quality assessment of both randomized and observational studies. Re-intervention is a relevant complication, which can be well defined and probably represents the most important distinction between the two techniques. Because the Clavien-Dindo classification makes a clear distinction between interventions or re-interventions without general anesthesia (3A) and those with general anesthesia (3B), we used this division as well. A potential limitation of this study was the fact that the search strategy focused on full-text articles and that abstracts and congress presentations were not included. We chose this approach because important information such as inclusion criteria, type and techniques of surgery, and methodologic quality cannot be assessed reliably based on an abstract alone. In addition, because of language restrictions, one article written in Chinese was excluded. Although various types of plates and IM devices were used, all studies were analyzed as a group. Consequently, some within-group differences may exist. We attempted to alleviate the influence of these differences by accounting for heterogeneity when present and by performing a sensitivity analysis for possible confounders (eg, use of reconstruction plates and outlier studies for infection rates). Major re-intervention and re-fracture after implant removal occurred more frequently after PF of non-comminuted, displaced MCFs. No differences in terms of function and nonunion between PF and IMF were observed. Future research should focus on fracture selection for IMF and further improvement of plates and IM devices. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following is the supplementary data to this article:        