For solid particles it is energetically favorable being situated at the interface of fluid phases and removing a particle from an interface requires a high force. The capillary force effects the particle and causes an interfacial deformation during detachment. In this study the detachment force of hydrophilic and hydrophobic particles is measured via CP-AFM. In order to calculate the detachment force, a simple analytical model is developed and compared with the classical capillary force model. The new model is grounded on an energetic approach in compliance to the interfacial deformation and wetting of the particle. A model spring is assumed for both sub-processes and the force affects onto these two springs. The calculated force in the new model referred to goes better with experimental values than the capillary force model which does not consider interfacial deformation.Interfacial processes play a key role in many industrial processes. Especially the attachment and detachment of particles at fluid interfaces strongly affect the overall performance of processes like agglomeration From a thermodynamic point of view, it is energetically favorable for particles to be placed at the interface of two fluid phases. Compared to molecular surface-active substances like surfactants the adsorption of particles is not a reversible process. Therefore the adsorption of particles cannot be described by an adsorption equilibrium for small particles. This is due to the magnitude of the energy of adhesion, which is much larger than the thermally induced kinetic energy Many authors have measured and reported capillary forces acting on microspheres which are in contact with a fluid interface, either if the particle has been moved from the gas phase (air) into an air-water interface (drop, system A-AW) An atomic force microscope (AFM) XE-100 from Park Systems is used throughout this investigation. An external data recording system, which extends the standard system of the AFM, records the force acting on the cantilever while it is being moved by the stepper motor instead of the piezo-system. This is necessary to reach moving distances far above 10 In order to vary the interfacial energy of the fluid, ethanol is added to the liquid phase from 1 to 15 The measuring procedure is presented in At first, the cantilever is moved to the interface with a constant velocity of 5 Moving the cantilever further in the direction of the drop will deform the interface in the counter direction. Thus, a repulsive force is acting on the particle against the direction of movement (position 5). At this point, the direction of movement is reversed and the cantilever is moved away from the interface until the detachment of the particle occurs. After passing through the equilibrium point, once again, the interface is deformed in the opposite direction (position 6). Finally, at large forces, detachment of the particle from the interface occurs and the force measured becomes zero again (position 7). Measurements of the detachment from bubbles in the respective liquid were done as well, at the least to measure the snap-in distances for calculation of the receding contact angle. The presented force model does not fit the obtained data as well as at the detachment of particles from drops. One reason could be, that the behavior of bubble deformation is due to compressibility of the air different compared to the deformation of drops. Thus, in this study only the detachment of particles from drops is demonstrated. For the investigations some assumptions have to be taken into account. The Laplace pressure, which forces the particle out of the drop is neglectable for the system used. This is because of the small size of the particle compared to the size of the drop of approximately 1–2 The maximum force of detachment, obtained by the analytical model of the acting vertical capillary force, can be found in literature and is shown in the following Eq. To calculate this force, the dynamic contact angle at the TPC has to be known. It is assumed, that during the detachment of a particle from a drop a receding contact angle and during the detachment from a bubble an advancing angle is formed. The formation mechanism and the true nature of the contact angle at the TPC are not widely understood. Some research groups report, that the TPC of the particle is pinned for the first part of the detachment and the contact angle between the liquid and the surface is changing from a static angle to the dynamic hysteresis contact angle. In the second part of detachment the behavior is reversed and the contact angle remains constant, while the TPC is moving along the particle until detachment Another approach for calculating the force of detachment is a free-energy analysis The energies The Gibbs free energy can be calculated as the sum of these energies with the condition that the interfaces between solid/gas and solid/liquid are summarized while the liquid/gas interface is defined as an interface, which will be reduced and has to be subtracted. The force, which is needed to change the vertical position of the particle within the interface, can then be calculated by: Finally the linear force-distance trend is: The two presented calculation models, the Gibbs free energy analysis (Eq. The large forces obtained using the Gibbs free energy approach derive from the fact that the model (Eq. This paper will show the difference of the classical calculation models of the detachment force of particles from interfaces and provide a simple analytical model which is based on energetic considerations, in order to calculate detachment forces while considering the deformation of the interface. The total energy of adhesion is the difference of the Gibbs free energies between the state, where the particle is being situated at the equilibrium position and when it is completely surrounded by one of the bulk phases (air at the A-AW-system or water at the W-WA system, respectively). It can be calculated discretely by Eq. As mentioned before, when calculating the force curve using the Gibbs free energy approach ( Combining the linear force-distance curve with the total deflection of the system of springs yields: It is considered that the maximum value for the energy which can be stored in the spring system, is equal to the total energy of adhesion. If this value is reached, the particle will definitely detach from the interface. The spring of interfacial deformation can store more energy than the spring of wetting, due to its lower spring constant assuming equal acting forces on both springs. Thus, the required distance for complete detachment is enlarged. The total deflection  Comparing the distance Applying the spring model to other systems than the previously presented ideal water-air systems result in larger differences between calculated and measured detachment forces. In The assumption of a fixed deformation spring constant in the measured systems and the contact angles calculated from the snap-in-distance cannot be assumed here. These two values have the biggest influence on the accuracy of the fit: The spring constants of drops are neither equal nor can be assumed as the value of the exact interfacial surface energy over the whole distance of detachment. During the measurements with drops, the parameter of interfacial deformation The contact angle which is used to calculate the energetic situation of the particle is constant at any state of detachment in this model. The real behavior of the contact angle in correlation with the deformation of the interface cannot be measured and is still unknown. For this model the contact angle is required to determine the theoretic total distance until the particle leaves the interface. A possible reason for the correlation of the detachment of a hydrophilic particle from a drop could be the high energy of adhesion. The particle attaches deep into the drop due to the distinctive wettability. Therefore, the accuracy of the energy measurement of particles with small contact angles is a bit better compared to larger ones. Nevertheless, in the case of detachment of a hydrophilic particle from a drop the calculated forces with the assumption This paper presents an alternative model for calculating the force needed to pull a particle out of a droplet. The main assumption of the model is a theoretic spring system of two springs which are deflected during the detachment process. The springs represent the deformation of the interface and the wetting of the particle. The real values of the interfacial spring constant and the change of the contact angle during the detachment are unknown and need to be assumed. Nevertheless, this work gives a contribution to the understanding of the detachment of micro particles from deformable liquid interfaces and shows the deviation of measured and calculated forces from the commonly used model of vertical capillary force in this case. The authors gratefully thank the German Research Foundation (DFG) for supporting the Collaborative Research Center CRC 920, subproject B04.