In general, Mg alloys are difficult to process at low temperature (below 200 °C), due to the limited slip systems. High-temperature deformation easily results in the grain growth, which seriously restricts the improvement of mechanical properties. In this study, we report a subsequent low-temperature extrusion technology for ultra-fine grained (UFG) Mg–Zn–Ca–Mn alloys processed through equal channel angular pressing (ECAP), and successfully fabricate the extruded alloy with high yield strength (∼332.8 MPa) and superior ductility (∼17.9%) through grain refinement and texture modification. The initially fine-grained structure in the as-ECAPed alloy is beneficial to improving its low-temperature deformability, because the compatibility stress at grain boundaries can effectively promote the activation of the non-basal slip systems. Although the strength is dramatically increased, the alloy extruded at 100 °C exhibits the poor ductility, which can be ascribed to the dislocation accumulation behavior. With increasing extrusion temperature, the yield strength is remarkably increased at very small expense of ductility, because of the grain refinement, stacking faults, recovery of basal texture and fine secondary phase particles. The dislocations formed during the extrusion can be rapidly annihilated through a dynamic recrystallization process, which contributes to the improved ductility.In last decade, Mg and its alloys have been widely applied in automobile, aerospace and biological industries as the structural materials, because of their low density, high specific strength/stiffness and excellent biocompatibility [ Unfortunately, the room-temperature yield strength of currently commercial wrought Mg alloys (such as ZK60 or AZ31) is only ∼240 MPa, which is much lower than that of medium-strength of Al alloys (∼300 MPa) [ As a typical technology of severe plastic deformation (SPD), equal channel angular pressing (ECAP) can achieve the ultra-fine grained structured (UFG) Mg alloys and dramatically improve their mechanical properties [ Zn and Ca are not only the essential elements in the human body, but can effectively improve the yield strength of Mg alloys, through the solution strengthening and grain refinement [ The purpose of this study is to recover a conventional basal texture in the ECAPed Mg–Zn–Ca–Mn alloy through a subsequent extrusion, and the as-received UFG structure may be beneficial to the low-temperature deformation. The microstructure, texture evolution and mechanical properties will be systematically investigated, in order to achieve the fabrication of a high-strength Mg alloy with applicable ductility. The relevant strengthening and toughening mechanisms will be further discussed, which will provide a theoretical guidance for the design of high-performance Mg alloy. The nominal Mg-5.0Zn-0.6Ca-0.3Mn (wt.%) alloy was carried out through ECAP processing (250° for 4 passes, route Bc). The as-received alloys were subsequently extruded at low temperature (100 °C and 150 °C) along the ECAP direction, with the extrusion ratio of 5:1 and ram speed of 1.0 mm‧s The Mg alloy samples were machined parallel to normal direction (ND) and extrusion direction (ED) through a wire-electrode cutting. After polished by metallographic abrasive paper (from 500 to 4000 mesh) and diamond paste, the microstructures of etched Mg alloys were observed by an Olympus optical microscopy (OM) and a Hitachi S-4800 field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) with an electron backscattered diffraction (EBSD) apparatus (TSL MSC-2200), which can provide the microcosmic orientation or texture information. Image-Pro Plus 5.0 software was used to calculate the average grain size, with the grain number more than 800 for each specimen. The samples prepared by ion beam thinning technology were observed using a Philips Tecnai-F20 transmission electron microscope (TEM), to investigate the microstructure of α-Mg grain, various dislocations or secondary phases. The microhardness was evaluated through a FM700 Vicker tester (with the load of 200 g), and five measurements were taken on the cross-section of each alloy to calculate an average value. Dog-bone shaped samples were processed along the longitudinal planes (parallel to ED), and the tensile tests were carried out on an Instron 5569 at ambient temperature. Three trials were taken on each specimen, in order to decrease the measurement inaccuracy. The fracture morphologies were analyzed by the FESEM, to reveal the probable fracture mechanisms of Mg alloys.  The irregular particles with dark contrast were related to Ca In order to further investigate the orientation information,     After the extrusion process, the non-basal texture components almost disappear, exhibiting an obvious basal fiber texture, regardless of the different temperature. The maximum texture intensity is decreased to 6.485 and 6.442 MRD in the alloys extruded at 100 °C and 150 °C, respectively (   In general, the mechanical properties of bulk metallic materials can be improved through the plastic deformation processing, to achieve the grain refinement or reduce the casting defects [ The room-temperature critical resolved shear stress (CRSS) of the basal slip system for Mg alloy is approximately 1/100 that of non-basal slip systems (prismatic and pyramidal). The basal slip system only provides two independent slip systems [ In this study, the as-received alloy can been extruded at 100 °C and 150 °C, due to its UFG microstructure. No twinning activation is observed during the extrusion process, because the CRSS value of twinning deformation will be increased with the decrease of grain size [ In addition, many stacking faults are related to the low-temperature deformation. The stacking faults energy for pure Mg is only 60–78 J m The non-basal shear texture in the as-received alloy is transformed to the basal texture after low-temperature extrusion, which indicates that the basal slip system is dominated, and most of basal planes are gradually parallel to ED. Furthermore, it is worth noting that this basal fiber texture is very weak, whose distributions is broadly dispersed on the Generally speaking, the deformation behavior of Mg alloy at ambient temperature is primarily controlled by basal slip and twinning activation. In the current study, the fine-grained structure seriously hinders the twinning behavior. The improved mechanical properties of extruded Mg–Zn–Ca–Mn alloys are mainly ascribed to the limitation of basal slip system, which is mainly influenced by the grain size and texture evolution. According the Hall-Petch equation [ The formation of basal texture in the as-extruded alloy also effectively restricts the activation of basal slip system, which contributes to the increased yield strength according to Equation More significantly, the extrusion process at 150 °C not only achieves the increased yield strength, but also retains the good ductility, representing an excellent balance between the strength (or hardness) and elongation. In order to investigate the fracture behaviors during the tensile tests, In this study, we fabricate a high-strength (∼332.8 MPa) Mg–Zn–Ca–Mn alloy with superior ductility (∼17.9%) through a low-temperature extrusion process. Compared with the previous studies about the similar chemical compositions, even some high-cost Mg–Zn–Ca-RE and Mg–Zn–Ag–Ca–Zr alloys [ A relatively low-temperature (100–150 °C) extrusion process of Mg–Zn–Ca–Mn alloy can be achieved in the current study, through refining its original grain (ECAP processing) and recovering the basal texture, which achieves the high strength and excellent ductility, and the key conclusions are drawn as follows: The low-temperature extrusion process achieves the grain refinement (0.7–0.8 μm) through dynamic recrystallization, and many stacking fault structures can be formed within the α-Mg grains. The initially coarse secondary phase (Ca The typically non-basal texture in the as-ECAPed alloy is gradually transformed to a weak basal texture after extrusion, regardless of deformation temperature. Some basal planes are inclined to the ED about 0–15°, which is ascribed to Ca microalloying, the activation of non-basal slip, orientation nucleation and dynamic recrystallization. The Mg alloy extruded at 150 °C exhibits a good balance between the yield strength and elongation. The increased yield strength is related to the grain refinement (grain boundary strengthening), the modification of grain orientation (texture strengthening), the existences of fine secondary phase particles (dispersion strengthening) and many stacking faults (dislocation strengthening). Both the dislocation annihilation at higher extrusion temperature and refinement of secondary phase particles contribute to the improvement of ductility.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Thanks to the financial supports from the