The development of a hydrometallurgical hydrochloric acid based leaching process for the treatment of nickeliferous laterites of various types is described. Work carried out in the Department of Mining and Mineral Engineering, Leeds University, U.K. over a number of years, on the development of a route for treating all types of lateritic nickel ore, is reported in fairly general terms. This paper presents an update on the work carried out and a discussion of a possible final process. Conceptually the process comprises leaching of the ores in azeotropic HCl; counter-current washing to maximise nickel recovery; separation of iron either by precipitation as goethite or by solvent extraction; cobalt recovery by solvent extraction with a tertiary amine; recovery of nickel by solvent extraction followed by electrowinning, hydrogen pressure reduction or pyrohydrolysis and regeneration of hydrochloric acid by pyrohydrolysis with by-product recovery of magnesia some of which might be used for acidity control in the process. Attempts to leach successive batches of ore in a cyclic or counter-current manner to build up metal concentration were unsuccessful due to passivation by formation of a product layer around the ore particles. A key process step is concentration of the nickel in the leach liquor (1–5g/L) and its separation from magnesium and/or iron to a tenor compatible with recovery methods. This can be achieved using solvent extraction with Cyanex®301, Cyanex®302 or Versatic 10, the last of which displayed the best extraction characteristics. Cyanex®301 showed excellent selectivity for nickel but stripping required high concentrations of acid whilst Cyanex®302 showed appreciable co-extraction of magnesium. Whilst some of the process steps have been thoroughly researched, others remain to be proven and it was not possible to test the process as a whole or to carry out an energy balance, so that nothing can yet be stated definitively regarding the economics of the route but some factors regarding energy consumption in pyrohydrolysis are discussed. Relevant up to date literature on chloride based hydrometallurgical processes for laterites has been briefly reviewed. The contributions of individual research workers are acknowledged at appropriate points in the text.Shortly after joining the Department of Mining and Mineral Engineering, Leeds University, it was suggested to me by an external advisor ( Nickeliferous laterites occur as two main types that differ in iron, silica and magnesium content. They are the weathering products of ultrabasic rocks and different forms often appear in several horizons of the same deposit. They are distributed worldwide, mainly in tropical areas ( Processes have been described by The main methods that have been used include direct smelting of the ore to either matte or ferronickel in electric arc or blast furnaces; reduction roasting followed by either ammonium carbonate leaching (Caron process), (  In general, however, silicate ores (saprolite or serpentinite) are usually treated by pyrometallurgy whereas hydrometallurgical techniques like the Caron and Moa Bay processes seem more suitable for limonites especially if the magnesia content is low. These processes consume less energy than pure pyrometallurgy but extraction of nickel from serpentine ores is not efficient. Nitric acid was tried unsuccessfully as a leaching agent for U.S laterites (  Pressure acid leaching appeared to offer the best economics for treating limonite if the Neomet and DNi processes did not produce saleable by-products. If by-product hematite and magnesia were saleable, particularly if the hematite could be sold for more than the price of iron ore, the Neomet and DNi processes looked distinctly superior. Of the established processes for saprolite, heap leaching would appear to offer the best economics, but if the by-products were saleable Neomet would offer better economics. Pyrometallurgy appeared to be economically inferior to the hydrometallurgical processes. The scope for developing a laterite process whereby high purity nickel and cobalt are recovered at reduced energy expenditure is, intuitively, greater using hydrometallurgy. There is therefore a place for such a process capable of treating several different ore types by a single flow sheet without the need for preliminary thermal treatment, high pressure or high energy consumption and if possible with a closed cycle to regenerate acid which would be of environmental benefit. Despite its poor selectivity hydrochloric acid leaching seemed to offer the potential for such benefits though no economic assessment of the process has been attempted here.   Aqueous chlorination in sea water was applied to leach reduced limonitic ore ( The use of HCl to strip and concentrate Ni, Co and Zn from the Cyanex®301 extract from partially neutralized HPLA leach liquor in the Goro Process was reported by Other studies involving HCl leaching of lateritic nickel ores of both types ( The Jaguar process for Guatemalan ore involved leaching with HCl followed by precipitation of Fe Ni and Co as hydroxides using MgO recycled with the HCl from either pyrohydrolysis or distillation of azeotropic HCl. It would appear that Jaguar was unable to control either the extent of Mg leaching, or maintain acid addition at reasonable levels so that further work on the development of the process was discontinued (    Solid samples and leach residues were analysed by standard decomposition methods as set out in the departmental analytical laboratory manual (  There was clearly a need to purify the solution and recover the nickel and acid but this did not seem difficult in view of the relative ease of solvent extraction of many metals (except nickel) from chloride media and the development of the spray roasting process for, the regeneration of hydrochloric acid from metal chloride solutions ( The electrolytic method was later applied to a so-called ’Egyptian oxidized copper ore’ also containing 0.5% Ni (   Strong also investigated the effects of particle size, time, temperature, acid concentration and heat treatment on the extraction of Ni, Fe and Mg and the loss in weight during leaching. DTA, infrared spectroscopy and X-ray diffraction were used to characterise both samples and products. Detailed results were also given earlier by This work was done at a low solids content to avoid significant changes in acid strength. Using azeotropic HCl, i.e.18% w/v or 5.1 Both methods caused some reduction in % nickel recovery and increased acid consumption. It was observed that after several successive contacts the addition of fresh acid did not raise the % nickel extracted further even though the acid strength had been restored ( A similar effect had been observed by This effect was investigated further by This passivation was not caused by cessation of the leaching reaction but was shown by microscopy (  To minimise reactor size and costs the nickel tenor from leaching should be as high as possible. To enable this to be achieved together with high extraction could require some sort of counter-current washing process. A New Caledonia serpentinite ore was leached at 80 As a 15-stage wash using thickeners is obviously impractical, the use of some such device as the Dell counter-current decantation column (   Hayman attributed the slowing of the rate in the later stages of leaching to the presence of spinel-phases such as chromite and particularly magnetite. He did not observe any increase in extraction of nickel and other cations with increasing pulp density as noted before by Jimenez-Novoa. Attempts to use EPMA to analyse leaching residues were unsuccessful due to the friable nature of the ores. From Precipitation as Fe(OH) Solvent extraction, using liquid cation exchangers, anion exchangers or neutral solvating extractants. Of the precipitation methods, only the “Goethite process” (  The nature of the precipitate formed under various conditions from chloride leach liquors was studied using infrared spectroscopy, DTA, XRD and SEM/EDAX methods for characterisation. The particular form that precipitated was dependent on pH, iron concentration, temperature and the rates of oxidation and addition of MgO (BDH Technical grade). α, β and γ-FeOOH as well as γ-Fe The β-FeOOH as precipitated contained about 2 to 3% Cl At higher measured pH values other forms of FeOOH precipitated as well as magnetic γ-Fe Studies of the losses of Ni and Co by XRD and SEM/EDAX indicated that although some were due to adsorption or co-precipitation on the FeOOH phase, much could be attributed to precipitation of Ni(OH) These difficulties and the lack of any need to oxidise the iron led to abandonment of the precipitation method of iron control even though it had originally been considered inherently simpler than solvent extraction. Iron (III) forms a series of chloro-complexes which are of moderate stability and hence it can be extracted from chloride media as either cationic Fe Extraction with cation exchangers requires a pH around 2–3, lower than for the other metals present.  This reaction would lead to an organic phase from which it was thought that iron could easily be removed by hydrolytic stripping (  For interest’s sake direct leaching of a high iron laterite with Versatic 911 in Shellsol T was tried but proved totally unsuccessful. In the presence of 200   Cobalt (II) can be extracted from chloride media either as anionic species such as CoCl Azimi also attempted to measure the thermodynamics of the Aliquat–CoCl The extraction of Co from MgCl  Not only would large quantities of MgO be needed for pH adjustment to about 4 but the Mg co-extraction would complicate the separation by co-extraction and the extraction of Co would also be reduced by high concentrations of MgCI The chief difficulty in applying the flow sheet proposed (   Ni Recently Mintek in South Africa have developed a synergistic mixture of the carboxylic acid, Versatic 10 (Shell) and an undisclosed synergist, Nicksyn™, for the separation of Ni and Ca especially for use in Botswana ( Synergistic mixtures studied in attempts to lower the pH of nickel extraction were reviewed by   Only about 40–50% of the Ni was extracted by the oxime on its own in xylene diluent under the same aqueous conditions. The composition of the extracted Ni complex was investigated by slope analysis and spectrophotometry but no definite formulation was proposed. Ni distribution was independent of Ni concentration indicating that the extracted species is probably monomeric. Varying Cl  100 Up to 30% of any Mn present was co-extracted with Ni, with 5 However, tests using continuous lab scale extraction equipment at BP Minerals’ laboratories (Sunbury, U.K.) showed that because of the need to use high acid concentrations for stripping (10% H Alkylthiophosphinic reagents from the Cyanex® series (  Cyanex®301 in Escaid 110 was tested for Ni/Mg separation. Ni is extracted strongly from solutions of very low pH. Concentrations of Cyanex®301 of 10%, 20% and 30% v/v (unmodified) gave pH From equilibrium isotherms a feed of 5 Clearly this extractant works very well in acidic media but stripping requires very acidic solutions. Stripping isotherms were obtained for 2, 4, 6 and 8 Pressure reduction of Ni is usually done in ammoniacal media and Ni can easily be precipitated from ammonium carbonate media by steam stripping of NH In the Goro Process, see Another problem observed with Cyanex®301 ( Stripping rates were also slow, requiring several hours for equilibrium. Increased temperature and acidity gave some improvement. Decreasing extractant concentration from 30% to 10% reduced the stripping time from over 3 Addition of modifiers also led to a marked increase in the rate of stripping of Cyanex®301 by 6.19 Preliminary test work ( From equilibrium data, varying concentrations of Cyanex®302 (10%, 20% and 30%) give pH  Significant quantities of Mg were co-extracted with Ni during cross-current loading trials, using mixed metal feed solutions and MgO slurry for pH adjustment. Scrubbing such extracts with pure 10 A McCabe–Thiele diagram for stripping of 20% Cyanex®302 loaded to 4.3 The use of 2 During extraction tests using mixed Ni/Mg solutions, it was observed that the organic phase viscosity of 30% (v/v) solutions of Cyanex®302 increased to such an extent that a thick tar-like dispersion was obtained. It is believed that co-extracted Mg was the major factor; scrubbing of Mg from the extract by Ni solutions reduced the viscosity. The use of higher temperatures (e.g. 55 A further problem also relating to phase condition was the occurrence of cruds after phase disengagement. The crud associated with extraction was greatly exacerbated by the use of MgO slurry for pH control. Attempts to remove the wispy films formed at the interface, including use of increased temperature and modifiers such as octan-l-ol, MIBK and MIBC, were only moderately successful; the crud was not fully eliminated. During stripping, a distinctly different crud consisting of fine black particles was observed, but again not eliminated. The stripping data obtained for Cyanex®302, were in general, encouraging, apart from the incidence of crud. Cyanex®302 may be stripped to produce solutions of high Ni concentration. Stripping with H Another problem with alkylthiophosphinic extractants is that they are somewhat unstable with respect to oxidation by air and slowly degrade unless precautions such as nitrogen cover are taken. This may have been the cause of some of the crud problems observed here. It appears that the perceived advantages of both Cyanex®301 and 302 were not fully realised. In particular, Cyanex®302 did not have any significant advantage over the use of carboxylic acids (more specifically Versatic 10) in terms of ΔpH Cross current loading simulation of extraction of Ni by Versatic 10 from mixed Ni/Mg solution (using MgO for pH control) revealed that any Mg co-extracted by excess capacity in stage 1, is displaced fully in stages 2 and 3. Scrubbing of the extract, if required, would be easily accomplished. The 10% (v/v) Versatic 10 solution was loaded up to 11 In the conceptual flow sheet ( As noted earlier in this paper (Section To quote For that reason Neomet (Canada) ( Very briefly, the Neomet process is based on the following principles ( The vapour pressure of HCl over concentrated MgCl Experimental work has shown that nickeliferous laterites of both main types can be readily leached by HCl at concentrations of 1 The nickel tenor in the liquor should be as high as possible prior to the metal recovery step. Recycling of the leach liquor to build up Ni concentration is not feasible due to passivation by the formation of a product layer on the solids leading to lower recovery as the metal concentration increases ( Unlike H Solvent extraction with TBP gives excellent iron removal. Other types of extractant were less successful. Amines would be non-selective in acidic chloride media; cationic extractants, such as D2EHPA or carboxylic acids, need careful pH control and exchange extraction with the Mg salt of Versatic acid (to be followed by hydrolytic stripping to produce Fe Cobalt is easily separated from nickel and recovered as the CoCl For the important nickel concentration and recovery step various possibilities were tested. Most synergistic mixtures have poor kinetics or display other difficulties. D2EHPA suffers from lack of selectivity for Ni over Mg especially at high Mg tenors. Mixtures of D2EHPA with alkyl-oximes showed strong selectivity for Ni over Mg but the oximes were unstable at the acidities needed for stripping. This leaves the alkylthiophosphinic Cyanex® extractants or carboxylic acids. Dow M4195 resin was unavailable at the time of testing. 10% or 20% Cyanex®302 can extract nickel at pH 5.5 to 6, still but separation from Mg might be require scrubbing. Stripping with dilute HCl or H The use of Versatic 10 could be preferable due to the ready displacement of extracted Mg by Ni, by a suitable pH Cyanex®301 on the other hand readily extracts Ni from strongly acidic HCl media but is difficult to strip. The rate of transfer is also a problem in chloride media, which does not seem to be the case with sulphate, compared to its application in the Goro process ( A similar flow sheet is proposed here with two alternatives ( Another approach could be the use of Versatic 10 ( These ideas remain speculative and any final decision as to whether to use such possible HCl based hydrometallurgy would of necessity require careful assessment of energy requirements and costs before even laboratory scale integrated test work or pilot plant investigations might take place. These have not been attempted during the course of this research. Also the behaviour of certain other metals including Al, Ca and Mn has not been studied. However, the original idea of a process able to treat a mixed type of ore with a potentially effluent free closed circuit remains attractive. A technically feasible process for the recovery of nickel from lateritic ores based upon HCl leaching followed by the removal of iron and cobalt by solvent extraction has been developed up to the point of nickel recovery from solution. Of the extractants tested for the Ni/Mg separation, Versatic 10 appears to offer significant advantages over Cyanex®302 reagent. Cyanex®301, despite excellent separation results is a powerful extractant for Ni from acidic chloride media but slow transfer rates and the need to use very high acid concentrations for stripping could lead to problems in its application and pyrohydrolysis is needed to recover NiO. Cyanex®302 is only able to selectively extract Ni from Mg if scrubbing is employed. Stripping of such extracts can yield solutions of high Ni concentration, and at a pH which may be useful for Ni recovery options. Further work is necessary on the overall energy balance and the economics of the process but preliminary calculations indicate that pyrohydrolysis is probably too energy intensive for economic operation. The author wishes to express his thanks to all who have participated in this project: Final year students, S.P. Barber, H.A. Wilson, J.A. Lupton, G.L. Perry, A.J. Carter and J.M. Noone; research students: Drs. L.W. Strong, C.E. Jimenez-Novoa, J.A. Hayman, A. Azimi, R.W. Gibson and Mr. D.C. Smith; all the companies and organizations who have provided samples of laterites, extractants and time for discussion including Dr. J. Greig formerly of B.P. Minerals (UK), the late Dr. W.A. Rickelton of Cytec Corporation (Canada) for the samples of Cyanex®301 and 302 and Mr. R.J. Bosman, Mr. H. De Bruyckere and Mr. G. De Luca of Exxon Chemicals, Europe, for Escaid 110 diluent;