A number of other separation processes warrant discussion, even if they are not explicitly filtration processes. In some cases, the equipment discussed can be considered as an alternative to a filtration device, but often they can be used together with filtration, capitalizing upon the inherent advantages or suitability offered by each.Sizing of particles Removal of sized crystals from crystallizing systems, the overflow returning for further concentration Removal of coarse particles from thickener feeds with substantial reduction in consumption of flocculants Preparation of filter feeds Preparation of finely sized abrasives Preparation of ceramic clays Cleaning of filter bed sand De-gritting of water or suspensions Desanding of water supplies Removal of grit from paper pulp De-gritting of clays De-gritting of milk or lime Removal of grit and dirt from fruit juices Removal of grit and dirt from wool scour liquor De-gritting of effluents before discharge to settling ponds, to eliminate silting with great reduction in wear on pumps and pipelines De-sliming Removal of ultra-fine particles from granulated materials De-sliming ahead of leaching processes Removal of clay from building sands Preparation of mine backfill Closed circuit grinding Preparation of solutions or suspensions Separation by specific gravity Removal of organic matter from sugar beet effluent Removal of peat from sand Separation of shells from nut kernels Separation of light and heavy minerals, using a heavy suspension as the ‘medium’ Gravity Separators and Thickeners Flotation Sedimenting Centrifuges Scroll-discharge sedimenting centrifuge Disc-stack centrifuges Solids-retaining separators Solids-ejecting separators The nozzle separator Cyclones and Hydrocyclones Coalescers Wet and Dry Scrubbers Wet scrubbers Semi-dry scrubbers Mist Eliminators  The focus will remain on the separation of one distinct phase from another, thus excluding, for example, distillation, adsorption or other processes for separating, say, multiple miscible liquid species. Gravity separators are used to remove one phase from at least one other, either totally or to a certain degree, and rely upon a difference in density between these phases. Isolated particles, in a large volume of fluid at low concentration, settle with a terminal velocity given by Stokes’ law, given here simple to illustrate how measurable quantities affect this velocity: For suspensions of high concentrations of solids in a contained volume, the solids will displace fluid as they fall, causing an upflow. The falling solids will now experience an upwards drag with the result that the rate of settling of solids overall will be somewhat lower than that given by Stokes’ law. This is a condition known as The arrangement of a simple, conventional, thickener or clarifier is shown in Sizing and design of thickeners is a task beyond the scope of this handbook, but important design considerations include: Settling characteristics of the suspension, often determined at laboratory- or pilot-scale. Type and quantity of flocculating agent, and required mixing and conditioning arrangements. Average residence time of liquid in the vessel (this must be considered in relation to the time required for solids to settle). Rake design and required motor/gearbox arrangement. The rake will guide the bed of solids towards a central exit well and must be strong and powerful enough to perform this duty. A lifting mechanism may be required if the rake becomes bogged. The feed should be uniformly distributed in order to avoid rapid currents that will transport solids upwards towards the overflow. A special case, sometimes known as a high-rate or filter bed thickener, introduces the feed into a flocculated bed of solids, so that solids will be captured within the bed as the liquid passed through, rather like a very loose filter cake ( Lamella separators tend to be used in applications at smaller scale, e.g. in industrial waste treatment or local water treatment works. The concept is to provide a larger area for solids to drop onto, by shortening the length of the vertical path, and then a surface for solids to migrate downwards along to the base of the tank. This can reduce the footprint required for a certain duty ( A large variety of alternative designs of thickener exist, and in many cases it is possible to upgrade the performance of existing thickener vessels, for example, by improving the flocculation system or rake arrangement. Many solid–liquid filtration processes are preceded by thickeners and/or clarifiers. In general, such devices offer extremely cost-effective water or solids removal, but are not able to deliver the final degree of separation, in terms of filter cake concentration or fluid clarity. So, good process design will often incorporate these unit operations operating together, each optimized according to their own strengths. While not discussed in detail here, similar devices can be used for the separation of immiscible liquids, the obvious example being oil and water. Flotation is another extremely important separation method, exploiting an extremely simple principle – fine bubbles of air, under certain conditions, will attach to particles and float upwards to the surface. The flotation foam, or froth, that emerges from the top of the tank will contain solids, and can be collected ( This method is used in hundreds of mining and minerals processing locations throughout the world. Chemicals can be added to make the particles more, or less, hydrophilic and attractive to bubbles. In this way, a flotation process can be made selective, bringing certain minerals to the surface, while other mineral species leave as underflow. Certain metallic ores may be mined with, say, a 1% copper-bearing component. After flotation, the concentrated copper fraction in the foam overflow can be more than 50%. If suitably controlled, a flotation process can be used for the removal of selective particle sizes, or classification. One of the most significant solid–liquid filtration duties globally, certainly in terms of tonnage, is the dewatering of the froth taken from the top of flotation columns. One of the main motivations for this is the removal of water prior to transportation, for both cost, i.e. not transporting water, and safety reasons Bench-scale batch centrifuges are found in many industrial laboratories and are used to spin small batch vessels (often simply test tubes) to generate acceleration for sedimentation many thousands of times higher than gravity. This massively reduces the time required for particles to settle and also increases the compaction of the solids bed. Sedimenting centrifuges externally resemble filtering centrifuges and share a number of similar key components; however, in contrast to filtering centrifuges, they do The operating principle of the scroll-discharge sedimenting is shown in The solid–liquid suspension is fed into the device through a stationary feed pipe. Solids settle rapidly and the liquid forms a ‘pool’, the depth of which is determined by an annular weir at the liquid discharge end. The relative rotation of the helical screw conveys the solids out of the liquid into the tapered part of the bowl towards a solids discharge zone. As the bed of solids emerges from the pool, it is subjected to high acceleration and liquid will drain back into the pool. Depending upon the nature of the feed, these units can deliver a continuous stream of relatively dry solids. The liquid ‘centrate’ will flow from the end of the parallel section ( The principle design variables, from a separation point of view, are: Bowl Diameter Length of the parallel zone Length and angle of the tapered draining zone Liquid height (which can potentially be adjusted by adding to or replacing the annular weir) Helical screw Pitch (number of rotations) Operation Rotational speed of the bowl Rotational speed of the screw If clarity of the centrate is the important consideration, then each of the above factors will exert some influence. In particular, the diameter of the bowl, for a given rotational speed, will strongly influence the settling force in proportion to the diameter, while the enhanced gravitational force will be proportional to the speed squared. Increasing the length of the bowl increases the liquid residence time, and hence centrate clarity. The difference in rotational speed between bowl and screw will also influence the liquid content of the discharged solids – if there is a high relative speed, In addition to consideration of separation effectiveness and capacity, which are largely a matter of geometry and speed, other design considerations include the mechanical integrity of the machine and the compatibility of the materials of construction with the process solids and liquids (abrasion and corrosion resistance). The disc-stack bowl incorporates a large number of conical discs, with a suitable wall thickness to provide sufficient rigidity, spaced at intervals of 0.4–2 The angle of tilt (half-cone angle) of the discs is limited by the angle of repose of the solid matter removed, as it is in the wet state and under the influence of the centrifugal force. To enable the solids to slide down the underside of the discs, the angle The number of discs depends primarily on the overall height of the bowl. To ensure good stability under rotation, the ratio of the outside diameter of the bowl to the bowl height should not be much below 1. The number of discs also depends on the disc thickness, which is limited by the mechanical stability of the discs. The spacing of the discs depends on the concentration of the solid matter in the feed liquid, the solid particle size and consistency, and must be wide enough to prevent clogging. Disc-stack centrifuges are particularly suitable for separating and clarifying liquids, where there is a small to moderate proportion of suspended solids present. Although there are many solids-retaining versions in use, most of these machines have some way in which the separated solids can be discharged, either continuously – in the nozzle bowl centrifuge – or semi-continuously – in the valved nozzle or opening bowl variants – which can be automatically controlled by the amount of solid separated, and so are effectively continuous. The original type of disc-stack centrifugal separator is the solids-retaining machine, used on liquid–liquid or liquid–solids separation when the solids content in the feed is very low: up to a maximum of 1% by volume. Because of its mechanical simplicity this type of centrifuge can attain a very high G-force and is thus very efficient for separating two liquids with simultaneous removal of small quantities of solids, for polishing liquids or for recovering fine particles. Physical separation of the two liquid components (and the suspended solids) occurs within the disc stack, the light liquid phase accumulating near the bowl axis and the heavy phase building up at the bowl wall. The dividing surface between the two regions is called the separating zone; this should be located along the line of the rising channels for the most efficient separation. The rising channels are a series of holes evenly spaced around each disc and arranged so that each vertical row of holes provides a vertical channel through the entire disc stack. The location of the separation zone is controlled by adjusting the back pressure of the discharged liquid phase or by using exchangeable ring dams at the liquid exits. These rising channels also provide the entrance for the liquid mixture into the spaces between the discs. As centrifugal force separates the two liquids, the solids move outwards to the sediment-holding space adjacent to the bowl wall. A channel is shown in An enclosed design of disc-stack centrifuge uses double pump discharge of the separated liquids, which keeps them under pressure. They are used primarily for mixtures where the heavy and light liquid components are approximately equal in volume. Double pump separators are particularly suited for the separation of volatile mixtures containing solids, where valuable products might evaporate. The double pump configuration also minimizes danger from either liquid phase. Pressurized liquid discharge has the additional advantage of reducing or eliminating pumping requirements downstream of the centrifuge. Solids-ejecting variants of disc-stack centrifuge are normally used when the continuous clarification of a process liquid is desired, together with relatively continuous discharge of the separated solids phase. This form of centrifuge discharges the separated solids around the periphery of the bowl, either continuously, through a series of small openings (just large enough to allow a thick slurry to pass, but not the liquid contents of the bowl), or intermittently through a set of openings whose discharge period and interval is dependent on the solids volume in the liquid to be separated. If the solids concentration is fairly constant, the interval is controlled by a timer or by means of a built-in hydraulic system. Generally, these units are used when: the required clarity of the separated liquid is very high the solids are sub-micrometre particles the solid particles are sticky, hazardous or otherwise difficult to deal with the solids concentration in the feed is high the solids concentration in the feed varies and cannot easily be predicted. The disc-stack centrifuge with continuous solids discharge is called a nozzle discharge machine. The special nozzles mounted in the periphery of the bowl allow for continuous operation with a liquid–liquid–solid feed, separating this mixture into two relatively clean liquid streams and a thick solids suspension. The concentration of this solids discharge can be controlled to meet process requirements. A more refined version of the nozzle type of centrifuge has valved nozzles, in which each nozzle is individually closed by a valve, hydraulically opened when the solids level in the bowl reaches a pre-defined level. There are several important considerations in evaluating whether or not the nozzle centrifuge is the most effective choice when confronted with a liquid–liquid–solid separation problem. Some of these considerations are: particle size: experience has shown that the ideal particle size range for nozzle centrifuges is between 0.1 and 30 density difference: the greater the difference in density between solid–liquid and liquid–liquid elements to be separated, the more effective the centrifugal separation will be feed material characteristics: these are important to centrifugal separation efficiency (they include particle shape – sphere, plate, filament, etc, tendency to flocculate or disperse, hardness, corrosiveness of the liquid, degree of homogenization of the two liquids, foaminess, vapour pressure etc.) – should there be any doubt, laboratory test work or pilot-plant experiments will indicate whether a given slurry sample is a viable prospect for effective centrifugal separation viscosity: the lower the viscosity the better the separation temperature: higher temperature slurries generally yield more effective separations as heat lowers viscosity and increases density differences. A strainer or pre-filter must be included in the feed lines of nozzle-type centrifuges, to retain coarse impurities that are likely to clog the nozzles, or indeed throw the unit off-balance. Cyclones work on the principle of inertial forces generated by the velocity of the incoming fluid stream as it passes through a, usually, conical geometry of the device. As with centrifuges, the rotational action of the fluid creates a centrifugal force, so that the settling rate given by Stokes’ law for normal gravity settling is now multiplied by the extra rotational force, The feed suspension is introduced tangentially with a high velocity at the top of the shell of the hydrocyclone ( Cyclones should be fabricated from materials that resist both abrasion and corrosion (a sacrificial liner, perhaps ceramic or polyurethane, may sometimes be Hydrocyclones fitted with replaceable elastomeric wear liners are widely used in a number of applications where the solid material in suspension is abrasive, including mineral processing, flue gas desulphurization and coal processing. Some examples of the wide range of use are given in Liquid contamination in the oil, gas and chemical industries, for example, can cause final products and fuels to be off specification, or cause de-activation of downstream catalysts, corrosion of downstream storage facilities and increase the costs of wastewater treatment. Separating liquid–liquid dispersions, typically to reduce the level of contamination, can be difficult and depends on the physical properties of the two liquid phases. The specific gravity, viscosity and interfacial tension of the two liquid phases are important parameters in determining how easily two liquids can be separated. Generally, conventional coalescers begin to lose efficiency when the interfacial tension is below 20 In their basic form, coalescers can be described as a separator designed to collect highly dispersed droplets, present in a carrier fluid, and form or coalesce these droplets into larger drops that will rapidly separate out of the carrier fluid. Specifically, they are often used to separate water from oils and most commonly from fuel oils. In principle, this is achieved by passing the contaminated oil through a dense inorganic fibre bed or filter mat. Water droplets are intercepted by, and impinge onto, these fibres. The oil on the fibres is thinned by displacement and the effect of viscous drag, until ultimately the oil film ruptures and allows the water droplets to attach themselves completely to the fibre, with the oil film dispersed and passed on through the mat. Other water droplets are now collected by the fibres in a similar matter, and these will join with others, forming streams along the fibres. These droplets continue to grow in size until drag and gravity forces break them away from the fibre, so that they drop away from the filter mat into a sump. In practice, a final stripping stage is usually desirable, such as a fine mesh screen located downstream of the coalescer to collect smaller water droplets, which may bypass or dislodge from the mat and be carried along with the oil stream, rather than settle under gravity. A cutaway drawing of a filter/coalescer is shown in Pre-filter elements are made from a specifically selected synthetic fibre medium, which is pleated. The structure also provides a good dirt-holding capacity, eliminates element distortion and ensures that the complete filter area is utilized to maintain maximum flow. In addition to removing particulates down to, say, 5 The coalescer element consists of a cylinder of fine inorganic fibres, pressed to a predetermined density and depth, sufficient to ensure maximum water coalescing action. The element is also designed to maintain a flow of relatively low velocity through its depth to ensure efficient water removal. Flow rates that can be achieved, through a cartridge measuring 435 Typical industrial applications for coalescers include the: removal of carried-over caustic from refinery fuels, downstream of caustic treating processes separation of various oils from water removal of water and caustic from online analyser systems separation of water from hydrogen peroxide working solutions separation of hydrogen peroxide working solutions from hydrogen peroxide removal of carried-over amine from hydrocarbon, downstream of a liquid–liquid amine contactor removal of oil from ammonia. To extend the life of a coalescer and to reduce particulate concentration, so as to meet fluid specifications, solid contaminants should always be removed with a Generally with coalescers, the overall cost of contaminant removal can be low, even when compared with other less-efficient methods, like salt driers, electrostatic separators and sand filters. Coalescers can also be used to remove water from lubricating oils, hydraulic oils etc., provided that these contain no detergent additive. Detergents reduce interfacial tension and inhibit the formation of large droplets on the coalescer. Generally speaking, a scrubber is a device used to clean or purify an air- or gas stream. It can consist of a packed bed of solid granules, which acts as a deep-bed filter, or of a spray tower with the contaminated gas passing up the tower against the flow of a liquid or powder spray, or of a packed bed of granules, with a liquid trickling over the granules. They may work through a physical process (filtration, absorption) or by chemical reaction ( A successful scrubbing process depends upon an appropriate selection of equipment and a scrubbing medium that is capable of collecting pollutants or combining The overall efficiency of a scrubber is determined by the chance that all the particles flowing through it collide with an obstacle on their way. Theoretically, wet scrubber efficiencies are inversely proportional to liquid droplet diameter and directly proportional to droplet quantity (spraying ratio). In practice, droplet agglomeration can limit these influences considerably and may be unrealistic to attempt to improve the performance of a scrubber by introducing a finer spraying and a higher spraying ratio. Vapour condensation is an important factor in improving scrubber efficiency. Condensation onto smaller particles that act as nuclei results in their becoming bigger and thus encourages agglomeration. Condensation on cold droplets pulls vapour towards them and so draws particles together. Especially when working with fine particles, it is necessary to precool and saturate the gases. Wet scrubbers are used to wash fume- or dust-laden gases with a spray or sheet of water (or occasionally another liquid) to remove contaminants, leaving only clean air or gas to be exhausted from the system. They are capable of cleaning many gases from industrial processes and are particularly applicable to hot gas processes, where it is possible to quench the gas stream by direct introduction of water as close to the process as possible. Quenching in this manner can render a dusty gas stream easier to handle. Scrubbers may be open or fully enclosed. An example of the former is the venturi scrubber, used on a process vessel or storage tank, which needs to breathe, with the consequence that it releases objectionable fumes. The action of water sprayed into a venturi section creates suction, drawing the fumes into the scrubber, where they are removed and carried down by the scrubbing water, leaving only cleaned gas, together with entrained water, to be exhausted. The efficiency of such an arrangement is largely dependent on the venturi design and the forced water injection system, yielding maximum scrubbing energy (i.e. maximum pressure drop). With venturi-type scrubbers, high water feed rates are necessary, but savings can be realized by recirculating the water through a suitable water cleaning system. Entrained moisture in the exhaust gases will be in droplet form or as a mist, which may or may not be acceptable. In some processes, for example, the scrubbing liquid may not be water but an aggressive fluid, such as an acid, in which case it may become necessary to eliminate it from the final exhaust by some form of demister, Other types of wet scrubbers in common use include spray towers, vertical and horizontal packed towers, jet ejectors, extended surface scrubbers, fan spray scrubbers and various individual designs, some of which may be described as cleaners. Semi-dry scrubbers involve a chemical reaction with a wet slurry, and a dry scrubbing of the gases with dry collection of co-products. Typically the process is used to treat acid gases in a spray dryer, coupled with a pulse-jet fabric filter. In the scheme shown in The heat of the flue gas evaporates the water present in the slurry, leaving fine, dry particles of salt, fly-ash and excess alkali to be collected in the fabric filter (other forms of filter medium, including ceramic and metallic, are possible). As the gas passes through the cake on the filter bags, a further reduction of the acid gas occurs as it reacts with the excess reagent in the filter cake; purified exhaust gases are then vented through a chimney equipped with a continuous monitoring system. The fly-ash, salts and a minimal quantity of excess free agent are then transported from the fabric filter hoppers by mechanical or pneumatic conveying systems to a solids storage silo. A particular advantage of this process is that it allows control of high acid gas concentrations in large gas volumes. Most chemical or petrochemical process gas streams contain various liquid droplets. These are caused by condensation, for example, after cooling processes, generated by liquid injection in absorption or gas scrubbing processes, by carry-over in evaporator processes, or generated in a chemical reaction process in the gas phase. These droplets – tiny particles of liquid or solutions of dissolved solids, suspended in a stream of gas – can cause problems such as corrosion of equipment, contamination of products, The mechanical performance of a mist eliminator is measured by two curves: the collection efficiency versus particle size, and the pressure drop versus the vapour load. To operate at high efficiency, a mist eliminator should have a fibre or mesh pad with a high surface area to volume ratio. The key elements of performance of a fibre or mesh mist pad are efficiency, re-entrainment, pressure drop and corrosion resistance. When comparing the efficiencies of mist eliminators, it is appropriate to consider efficiency on the basis of the percentage of particles collected, classified by particle size rather than by weight. This distinction is important because many problems, such as opacity, are caused primarily by the smaller particles. Because a 0.5 A typical fibre bed mist eliminator, as shown in Other forms of de-mister may be used, and the characteristics of these individual forms of mist eliminator are summarized in Theoretically, efficiencies that approach 100% are possible, but practical efficiencies realized are lower, being restricted to a design limiting drop size. For a particular design of mist eliminator, the limiting drop size is a function of the face velocity.