A novel leaching method for selectively separating vanadium from calcification roasted vanadium‑chromium slag (VCr slag) was proposed, using sodium bicarbonate (NaHCO3) as the leaching medium. Vanadium disulfide (VS2), which can be used as an energy storage material, was prepared in-situ by a hydrothermal reaction from the vanadium-containing leaching solution, without purification. VS2 was characterized by XRD, SEM, XPS, and BET. Results show that the leaching extent of vanadium was 92.98% when the calcification roasted materials were treated with 80 g/L NaHCO3 solution and leached at 100 °C for 120 min. Additionally, only 1.84% silicon, 0.05% chromium, 0.06% iron, and 0.05% manganese were co-leached along vanadium, meaning that an effective selective vanadium extraction was achieved. The leaching solution was treated with thioacetamide (TAA) in a hydrothermal reaction at 140 °C for 16 h, which resulted in a vanadium recovery of 96.00%. The reaction generated flower-like VS2, with vanadium and sulfur in the form of V4+ and S2−. The BET specific surface area of the flower-like VS2 was 21.63 m2/g. As an anode material for Li-ion batteries, the initial discharge capacity of the flower-like VS2 reached 1119.83 mAh/g at current density of 100 mA/g, which was favorable for ion storage. This process not only achieved the selective extraction of vanadium, but also provided a new mechanism to shorten the preparation process of VS2 while generating a product with added value.Vanadium is a strategic metal in China due to its vital role in the development of modern industry ( The traditional vanadium extraction process is dedicated to the preparation of vanadium products including ferrovanadium, vanadium oxides such as V The in-situ preparation of VS Herein, the traditional vanadium extraction method from V V-Cr slag used in this work was obtained from Chengde Jianlong Special Steel Co., Ltd. Calcification roasted materials of V Additionally, In this work, NaHCO In which m represents an element, including vanadium, chromium, silicon, iron or manganese; C The above-described vanadium-containing leaching solution was used as the vanadium source, substituting the traditional vanadium-containing chemical reagent. In order to avoid excessive VS In which C The chemical composition of V  Based on this phenomenon, vanadium leaching extent increases from 78.03 to 92.98% when the leaching time is extended from 30 to 120 min, proving that the transformation from vanadate to carbonate requires a specific amount of time. Moreover, the leaching extent of silicon, obtained from the dissolution of SiO    Furthermore, After NaHCO During VS  After the preparation of VS  In order to investigate the valence states of vanadium and sulfur in flower-like VS In order to study the energy storage characteristics of the flower-like VS  In this work, an efficient leaching process for vanadium extraction from calcification roasted materials of V After leaching the calcification roasted materials of V 96.00% vanadium was transformed into flower-like VS The synthetic flower-like VS No conflict of interest exits in the submission of this manuscript, and manuscript is approved by all authors for publication. The work described was original research that has not been published previously, in whole or in part.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was financially supported by