Organic solvents were evaluated through the determination of froth volume and bubble collapse rate in a froth column meter under various solvent dosages and aeration rate levels. There is a non-linear relationship between the froth volume and the gas flow rate for polyglycol ether type solvents. It is inappropriate to apply the concept of linearity retention time to describe the frothing characteristics of polyglycol ethers. Two new parameters are derived to characterize the foam stability and non-persistency of the frothers. The new parameters are initial dynamic froth index (IDFI) and initial dynamic froth collapse rate (IDCR). IDFI represents the froth volume formation properties, and can be used to relate to the ultimate recovery, Rm, and the flotation rate constant, K. IDCR describes the non-persistency of the froth, and can be used to relate to the quality of flotation concentrates. IDFI value depends on chemical structure and molecular weight of a solvent. Increasing solvent molecular weight and number of hydrophobic groups increases the IDFI value. Both ultimate recovery and flotation rate constant can be maintained at a desirable level, if the solvent dosage is applied in the amount to give the same product value of IDFI and solvent dosage. The selection of potential frothers from solvents tested is made by using IDFI and IDCR and comparing with laboratory fine coal flotation performance.In flotation, when mineral particle surface has been rendered hydrophobic by the use of a collector, the particle-bubble attachment and froth persistence depends upon frothing characteristics of a frother. The frothability of the frother, therefore, plays an important role in enhancing flotation efficiency. The recognization that flotation process is a complex interactive system, individual chemical frother specie has rather well defined optimal feed particle sized and rate of flotation has lead to extensive frother blending. Many investigations have been taken on frother blending. It was found that the impact of the blended frothers on total recovery is noticeably greater than any changes possible by changing the collector dosages ( A good frother must achieve a delicate balance between balance and non-persistency. Ideally, the froth should produce a high froth volume to get high mineral recovery while maintaining some bubble coalescence or collapse rate to guarantee concentrate grade feasible. Froth height has been used as one of important parameters to evaluate frothability of a frother in liquid phase. A frother with strong frothing ability tends to produce a high and stable froth. However, there are some limitations in using froth height only to explain some phenomena in coal and mineral flotation: (1) Some frothers can not produce a high froth, but the good flotation performance in practice is observed. (2) The froth height changes with frother dosage and the measured froth height has been reported at the arbitrary frother concentration. (3) For two froths with the same froth height, they might have different bubble size distribution, coalescence rate and further a different flotation performance. (4) Froth height is a quantitative parameter, it is not a material constant index which is independent of frother dosages. The froth height also can not be correlated well with the quality of froth products because of complicated effect of drainage by bubble coalescence. During coalescence, the weakly attached particles would be rejected first. It can be postulated, therefore, the coalescence would be beneficial for gangue rejection from the froth. There are many factors that can influence the bubble coalescence in froth. These main affecting parameters or variables include bubble size distribution, frother dosage, aeration rate, and hydrophobic particle content in pulp etc. There exists an optimized bubble size distribution of getting good flotation results ( Froth volume and bubble coalescence are important parameters influencing the quality of froth. With a reasonable high froth volume and a high hydrophobic particle recovery is expected. But a high froth is always accompanied by a relative low bubble coalescence rate; a high recovery is reached at sacrifice of some flotation selectivity. Coordination between froth height and bubble coalescence is necessary to get an optimized flotation results. However, there is no simple correlation between coalescence inhibition and froth height. Different methodologies have been developed to compare and evaluate the frother performance. The procedures were summarized and evaluated by Conventionally, batch flotation is used to make a comparative analysis of frother performance. The results are compared in terms of valuable mineral recovery and flotation kinetics ( Several frothing parameters and criteria have been proposed to evaluate frothers.  In this study, we were emphasized on frother evaluation only. Two improved parameters for evaluation of froth volume ( The solvents tested in this evaluation are supplied by Union Carbide Research Corporation, South Charleston, WV and are summarized in The schematic diagram of a froth column meter is shown in To start the test, the froth column is filled with 2 For measuring the froth collapse rate or bubble coalescence rate, the aeration is turned-off, while simultaneously starting to record the changes of the froth height with time until the froth layer disappears. The bubble coalescence proceeds gradually from the top of froth layer to the interface of air and solution. The froth collapse rates as a function of solvent concentrations and aeration rates are determined. When the air flow is shut off, there is a residual air remained in the solution. The residual air will continue to support the froth layer until the air completely evolves off the column. Five repetitive runs are made for each solvent concentration level and airflow rate. All the experiment is conducted at a room temperature of 20 The coal used in this study is Pittsburgh seam coal from Bentleyville, Green County, PA. It is an appropriate coal for reagent evaluation and comparisons because of its typical flotation characteristics of Bituminous coal. The raw coal as received is air dried and crushed by a jaw crusher and then screened through a 5 Denver laboratory flotation machine (model D-12) with a 2000 The froth is collected at intervals of 20, 40, 60, 120, and 180 The flotation tests were evaluated using frothing rate and the ultimate coal recovery as the principle criteria of merit. To determine the optimal frothing model parameter, a generalized parameter estimation computer program was used. The criteria used for estimation of parameter values are the derivations at a given concentration between observed and calculated combustible coal recovery. Conjugate gradient method is used to approach the minimization in above sum of squares. The relationship between the froth height and gas flow rate for the distilled/de-ionized water is shown in The instantaneous retention time, Rt, is then defined as A typical plot for the dependencies of IRT values on the solvent concentration is presented in IRT represents the longest retention time during aeration in column froth meter at a given solvent concentration. However, IRT is not connected with dynamic properties of frothing. Thus, IRT values characterize only the solution with a given concentration but not the solvent itself. IRT is used instead of RT to compute Dynamic Froth Index for Polyglycolethers. The IDFI index was defined as the limiting slope of the IRT versus concentration curve for It fulfills the demands of the material constant searched. The expression Therefore, the IDFI values can be defined on the basis of a complete set of experimental data not only on the basis of the limiting values for In coal flotation, the froth dosage, At low solvent concentration, the product of IDFI and From It has been known that increase in the length of the hydrophobic group of the frothers results in higher frothability. Introduction of branching or unsaturated chains into the hydrophobic group of the frother increases solubility in water and leads to loosely packed froth. The dependence of IDFI on the solvent molecular weight is shown in the The IDFI values of two frothers who come from different families will show great difference even though they have same molecular weights. Although Solvent 5 has a lower molecular weight (190.3) than Solvent 3 (206.3), it still shows a higher IDFI than Solvent 3. The hydrophobic property difference of different frothers may contribute to the gap of their IDFI values. The range of IDFI on molecular weight for frothers from different family can be overlapping when their molecular weights are close or same. In general, in polyglycolethers, the hydrophobic end includes butylene oxide (BO) and propylene oxide (PO). The hydrophilic groups include ethylene oxide (EO) and hydroxyl –OH. The relative length of hydrophobic and hydrophilic ends in polyglycol ethers can be modified by changing the number of corresponding groups, and thus to alter its frothing properties. Increasing the number of hydrophobic groups PO and –CH The value of hydrophilic–lipophilic balance (HLB) was an index or a scale to measure the hydrophilic–lipophilic balance of a solvent ( The HLB results are given in HLB values for flotation frother used in coal and mineral flotation generally falls between 6 and 11 and for most of good frothers the HLB values were close to 6. HLB value alone is not sufficient to characterize the solvent for flotation frother ( HLB value can not describe structure effect of froth molecular either. It may be difficult to calculate HLB number of some frothers with aromatic hydrocarbons, containing one or more side chains, aromatic rings, or unsaturated bonds. Some branched alcohols are known to be less surface active than the corresponding straight chain alcohols. Long EO chains are coiled in aqueous phase and forms a bulky froth. All these effects cannot at present be properly accounted for in the HLB calculation. Some of the solvents provided for this study are the mixture of solvents, or unknown in chemical structure. Therefore, no correlation of HLB and their molecular weight is performed in this study. For all types of tested solvents, IDFI value decreases with HLB values. With same HLB numbers, an aliphatic alcohol type frother will tend to show a lowest IDFI value, while aliphatic alcohol has a lower IDFI value than corresponding branched alcohol. For a triethylene glycol ether type frother to reach same HLB number as that of a polypropylene glycol ether type frother (Dow Froth), it is necessary to add more hydrophobic group –CH Froth height begins to decrease due to bubble coalescence once the aeration is stopped. Froth collapse rate is determined by plotting the froth volume or height versus elapsed time. Initial collapse rate, ICR, is a limiting slope of –d To evaluate the coalescence ability of the froth by a solvent, a new parameter, Initial dynamics collapse rate (IDCR), is derived. IDCR represents the changes of initial collapse rate (ICR) with solvent concentration ( The relationship between ultimate combustible material recovery and coal flotation rate constant versus IDFI∗  The evaluating of fourteen solvents is conducted through the measurement of froth volume in a column froth meter and the batch test of fine coal flotation. The major conclusions derived from this work are presented as follows: For water and alcohol type frothers, there is a linear relationship between froth height and aeration rate because the froths consist of large loosely packed bubbles, which will show a constant retention time. Polyglycol ether type frothers can produce densely knit froth formed by small bubbles; there exists a typical non-linear relationship between froth height and aeration rate. For polyglycol ether type frothers, considering the way in which froth retention time varies with aeration time even at a constant frother concentration, Initial dynamical froth index, IDFI, is used instead of retention time to illustrate the frothability of frother. IDFI is defined as the limiting slope of the initial retention time vs. concentration where concentration approaches zero. The product of IDFI and frother concentration gives the estimated initial retention time difference of froth between that in liquid and that in pure water. It gives the frothing properties of the solution studied under dynamic steady-state conditions. IDFI value depends not only on molecular weight, but also on molecular structure of solvents. Solvents in the same family with a higher molecular weight or with a lower hydrophilic–lipophilic balance value (HLB) will result in a higher IDFI value. Increasing number of hydrophobic groups PO and –CH The ultimate combustible recovery and kinetic rate constant are constant provided the frothers are applied in amounts assuring the same initial retention time (IDFI∗ IDCR is the indication of froth non-persistency, which can be used to estimate the clean coal ash content. To select the potential frothers among the solvent testes requires a balance between IDFI and IDCR values. A solvent (Solvent 3, 8 or 11) with an IDFI value of 250–350 yields a high coal recovery, but less selectivity. A solvent (Solvent 5, 6, 9 or 10) with an IDFI value slightly higher than 350 or less than 250 will yield a reasonably high combustible recovery while keeping good selectivity. A solvent, such as 1, 4, 7 or 12, with a too low or too high IDFI value tends to produce froths, which will yield higher ash content of clean coal product by sacrificing too much combustible recovery. Various solvents might be blended to achieve desired properties for better flotation performance through improved recovery and rate constant.