Volar plating has become the standard of care for most distal radius fractures. When done for the right indication and with adequate mastering of the technique complication ratio is low. The concept of subchondral support is key in this technique. Osteoporotic patients will especially benefit from this type of fixation which allows early immobilization, quick return to activities of daily living and early good outcome.Distal radius fracture management continues to evolve and many treatment methods are available. Comparison of the different modalities has shown that palmar plating produces better early functional results than cast treatment or external fixation. However, complications of palmar plating may be as high as 16% Most complications can be avoided if palmar plating is correctly indicated and properly performed. The goal of operative distal radius fracture treatment is to obtain an anatomic reduction and a stable fixation to permit early mobilization of the wrist without loss of reduction. Cast free after-treatment following volar plating renders the patients independent for activities of daily living in the postoperative period. Placing the volar locking plate on the palmar aspect of the radius has two mayor advantages: It neutralizes the dorsally directed deforming forces. The plate with angular stable screws supports the distal fragment and transfers the load to the shaft of the radius ( Placing the hardware palmarly just below the watershed line produces less tendon irritation than dorsal plating Operative treatment of an extra-articular distal radius fracture is indicated if fracture displacement persists after closed reduction, with more than 20° dorsal angulation, dorsal impaction of more than 5 For intra-articular fractures with a displacement between the fragments of more than 2 The contra-indications for operative treatment may be general or fracture related: General contra-indications include those for the use of local anaesthesia, the presence of local or general infectious diseases and skin problems localized on the volar aspect of the wrist. The fracture related contra-indications depend on bone quality and fracture pattern. Dorsal fracture patterns as in dorsal Barton's fractures, radiocarpal fracture dislocations, isolated radial styloid fractures, small avulsion fractures of the volar rim and dorsal impacted articular fractures with intact or non-displaced volar cortex are contra-indications for palmar plating. There is also a trend to avoid palmar plating in cases of high energy fractures with massive intra-articular comminution of the distal fragment and/or bone loss. These fractures have a higher risk of avascular necrosis of the distal fragments, and the chances of obtaining an anatomic reduction are highly diminished. Also in extreme osteoporotic patients with highly displaced and multi-fragmented fractures, palmar plating may be difficult to perform. Subchondral support of the distal fragment may be problematic and lead to protrusion of the distal screws/pegs through the distal fragment into the joint space. However, these problems were not encountered in a recent study of 42 intra-articular volarly plated distal radius fractures. As stated in the article, this was probably related to the correct placement of the DVR plate in the distal fragment Most of the surgeons who deal with distal radius fractures are familiar with the technique of palmar plating. A flawless technique is mandatory to avoid complications, and small technical details usually make the difference. Fracture reduction may be obtained manually with disimpaction of the fragments and restoration of the continuity of the volar cortex. Temporary fixation with two or three Kirschner-wires is recommendable ( Starting the incision distal from the wrist crease is mandatory, and its length may vary according to the fracture pattern and surgeons needs. The FCR tendon is dissected and the sheath opened as it enters the carpus distally and proximally as far as possible. The tendon is retracted to the ulnar side, therefore protecting the median nerve and the flexor tendons. The space of Parona is opened and the pronator quadratus is exposed between the flexor pollicis longus ulnarly and the radial artery radially. The pronator quadratus is released from his radial insertion, leaving a little edge on the radius to facilitate later reinsertion. The pronator quadratus is mobilized to the ulnar side of the distal part of the radius providing full exposure including the most ulnar corner of the volar radius ( For more complex fractures a release of the distal insertion of the brachioradialis is recommended to neutralize the deforming forces on the radial styloid. At this point the palmar aspect of the sheath of the 1st dorsal compartment is opened, permitting exposure of the radial aspect of the distal fragment and radial styloid. Pronation of the radial shaft out of the fracture site permits intrafocal reduction of intra-articular fracture fragments Following reduction, the volar locking plate is applied in a conventional manner Most complications concerning flexor tendons and palmar plating of radius fractures occur in mal positioned plates; if the plate is placed too radially, the flexor pollicis longus is at risk, and if the plate lies distal to the watershed line, the flexor digitorum profundus can be at risk In osteoporotic patients it is advised to place the plate as distal as possible without crossing the watershed line. This is achieved by placing the K-wire through the most ulnar proximal K-wire-hole in a subchondral position. The double row of locking pins and screws in the maximal subchondral position prevents secondary settling of the fragments without loss of initial reduction. With the plate perfectly positioned, it is then fixed with one screw through the oval hole in the proximal part of the plate and one K-wire in the most ulnar proximal hole of the distal part of the plate. Fracture reduction and implant position are controlled with the fluoroscope with AP, strict profile and elevated 30° profile views of the wrist. If the plate is well positioned, but the K-wire lies intra-articular, this is due to insufficient restoration of the volar tilt of the distal fragment. This problem is solved by repositioning the plate with “distal fragment first technique” as shown in If the dorsal ulnar fragment (ulnar/dorsal die punch) is insufficiently reduced and reduction cannot be obtained with closed manipulation, there are three technical options: (1) using the intra-focal exposure by pronating the proximal radius out of the fracture site and pushing the lunate fossa fragment against the carpal bones through the FCR extended approach. (2) Exposing the fragment through a small dorsal approach between the 4th and 5th compartments. Fixation is achieved with the most ulnar pegs/screws of the plate. (3) Closed percutaneous or mini open manipulation under arthroscopic control. Having finalized reduction with the plate correctly applied, final fixation of the plate is simple. If the ulnar proximal K-wire is in the correct position, none of the pegs/screws will be intra-articular, provided the fracture is anatomically reduced ( The length of the screws/pegs may be difficult to measure due to comminution of the dorsal cortex. Too long screws will lead to tendon irritation and too short ones can lead to loss of support of the dorsal fragments. For this reason the authors recommend the use of smooth pegs except for the most ulnar proximal screw hole (that is directed to fix the dorsoulnar corner) as well as the radial styloid screw. The blunt tips do not harm tendons even if these protrude dorsally. Due to the anatomical orientation of the pegs, fixation and support of the fragments is just as good as with screws For the radial styloid it is sometimes useful to place a multi-directional screw. Careful measurement of its length is necessary. Since the screw should not penetrate and irritate the tendons of the first extensor compartment. For fixation of the proximal part of a “cross lock plate” it is sufficient to use the two locking screws in addition to the conventional screw, which was initially inserted through the oval hole. There is a definite trend towards volar locking plate fixation of distal radius fractures. Predictable good results are directly dependent of the correct indication and good surgical technique. This method has shown to produce better early functional results; however, late functional and radiographic outcomes show no significant difference with other treatment modalities. The complication rates are similar: loss of reduction and pin tract infection are more common with external fixation, percutaneous pinning and plaster, while in distal radius plating series extensor and flexor tendon problems are more common. Volar locking plates remain the best option for osteoporotic fractures. The author has a consultant agreement with BioZimmer and Synthes.