Using a hydroferite desilication reagent, calcium hydroferrocarbonate (CHFC), the desilication reaction in concentrated caustic aluminate solution was studied. The results indicated that process parameters, such as temperature, Na2O concentration, molar ratio of Na2O to Al2O3, and initial mass ratio of alumina to silica (mass ratio of alumina to silica), significantly affected the reaction efficiency. The reaction kinetics were found to exhibit a reaction order of 1.3 ± 0.15 for desilication; the empirical rate constant k was 64.4 ± 2.4 and the apparent activation energy Ea was 25.8 ± 3.2 kJ/Mol, which was much lower than the values obtained by adding Ca(OH)2, C3AH6(calcium Hydroaluminate, 3CaO·A12O3·CaCl2·6H2O), and Friedel's salt (3CaO·A12O3·CaCl2·10H2O). In the desilication process, silica reacts with CHFC on the surface to form hydroandradite and calcium aluminum iron hydroxide. Subsequently, with an increase in Na2O concentration and temperature, hydroandradite and calcium aluminum iron hydroxide dehydrated to form calcium aluminum iron silicate and Fe(OH)3The Bayer process is the main method for the production of alumina from bauxite worldwide. This process consists of three key steps: the dissolution of alumina-rich minerals into a hot caustic solution, solid/liquid separation of the insoluble phases, and gibbsite precipitation ( About 98% of the bauxite in China is a low-grade diasporic mineral with a high silica content and low mass ratio of alumina-to-silica. Even if this mineral is processed by the traditional Bayer method at elevated temperatures of 220–300 °C and high pressures of 3–10 MPa, only an incomplete extraction of alumina (less than 80%) can be achieved in practice ( Angell found that electron exchange in redox/electrochemical reactions is influenced by the Lewis acidity/basicity of the medium ( It has been demonstrated that more than 95% alumina in Chinese diaspore can be dissolved in a concentrated alkali solution using the sub-molten salt process at low temperatures of 140–200 °C and pressures of 0.3–1.2 MPa. Simultaneously, the silica components in the mineral, including kaolinite, quartz, chamosite, and illite become dissolved in the alkaline medium, resulting in a 90% dissolution of silica in the liquor. The molar ratio of Na In traditional Bayer/lime Bayer/iron-hydrogarnet Bayer/sub-molten salt processes for alumina production, a digestion or pre-desilication stage in which the slurry is maintained at high volume fractions at high temperatures for several hours is included to encourage the precipitation of solubilized silica into desilication products (DSPs) ( To produce high-quality sandy alumina, deeply desilication of the sodium aluminosilicate solution is required after pre-desilication; for this purpose, CaO and Ca(OH) Because the Fe In this study, the solution parameters affecting the desilication reaction, such as reaction time, desilication temperature, Na All the chemical reagents used in this study were analytical-grade chemicals obtained from the Chemical Co. of Beijing; they were used as received without further purification. The water used in all the experiments was purified using a Milli-Q instrument (Millipore Corp.). The experimental apparatus used was a 2-L glass mixed-tank reactor, which was baffled, equipped with a two-flat-blade turbine mixer, and heated by a water jacket. The temperature was controlled using a band heater inside the reactor. Ferric hydroxide was synthesized before the synthesis of CHFC. The procedure for the same was as follows. A saturated NaOH solution was slowly added to saturated Fe CHFC was prepared by adding slaked lime, the newly formed wet ferric hydroxide, and sodium carbonate in water according to the chemical stoichiometry of 3CaO·Fe Experimental sub-molten salt solutions containing aluminosilicate were prepared before the desilication reaction; solutions of different concentrations were prepared by dissolving predetermined amounts of NaOH in high-purity water. Sodium aluminate solutions containing silica at different concentrations were prepared by dissolving predetermined amounts of aluminum hydroxide and sodium silicate in hot sodium hydroxide solutions in a polytetrafluorethylene (PTFE) vessel. Desilication experiments were conducted in a 1-L stainless steel reactor which was baffled, equipped with a two-flat-blade turbine mixer, and heated by an oil jacket. The temperature was controlled using a temperature controller inside the reactor. Dry desilication reagent samples were added to pre-determined amounts of a silicate-containing sodium aluminate solution, which was heated to a pre-set temperature. The reaction was carried out for prescribed time intervals. After the reaction, the slurry was suction-filtered at 120 °C and the liquor was analyzed to determine the final metastable silica concentration. The DSP was filtered, washed with high-purity water, dried in a vacuum oven at 60 °C for 12 h, and analyzed to determine the chemical and phase compositions. The concentration of silica in the initial and desilicated liquor was analyzed by inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES, DV5300, Perkin Elmer). The percentage of desilication of the solution was calculated using Eq. The silicate ratio in solution (mass ratio of Al X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the DSP were recorded on a powder diffractometer (X'Pert Pro, PANalytical, Netherlands) with Cu K The compositions of Na The Na The product synthesized at the optimized conditions was characterized by chemical composition analysis, XRD, and FESEM.  The effect of reaction time on the efficiency of desilication and the compositional characteristics of the resulting DSP was studied. As shown in CHFC is a rhombohedral compound with a microlayer structure, in which carbonate groups act as the supporting ions between different layers. In the desilication process, the microstructure of CHFC undergoes a change and silicate in the solution penetrates the microlayers of the DSP, ultimately affecting the desilication efficiency. Upon comparing the peak heights of the different compounds in the DSP, it can be observed that hydroandradite and CAIH increased and decreased, respectively, with an increase in reaction time; further, the peak intensity of CAIS increased with an increase in the reaction time. This means that CHFC degrades into iron hydrogarnet (3CaO Fe In order to verify the XRD results, the chemical composition of the DSP at different reaction times was investigated. As shown in This result is consistent with the trend of phase changes in the DSP, indicating that CHFC leads to effective desilication from highly concentrated caustic solutions with very low loss of caustic soda and alumina from the solution; the values obtained are quite different from the high contents of caustic soda/alumina in DSPs obtained using traditional CaO/tricalcium aluminate that the composition of soda/alumina is 5.0 wt% and 26.4 wt% respectively.   As shown in  In order to study the effect of desilication temperature on the morphology of the DSP and crystal structure of hydroandradite, DSPs at different temperatures were analyzed by FESEM. As shown in It was found that Na  The percentage of desilication as a function of molar ratio of Na   The effect of initial silica concentration on the desilication efficiency was analyzed. To calculate the rate constant and reaction activation energy, isothermal experiments are usually conducted to collect reaction data at different temperatures. The disadvantage of the isothermal method is the large experimental workload and the high data process capacity required. In this study, the dynamic method was used to monitor the relationship between silica concentration and desilication time under non-isothermal conditions. Firstly, the reaction temperature and silica concentration in the solution were separately tested as functions of the reaction time, after which the kinetic parameters were determined by computational analysis.  According to the Arrhenius equation, the power-law relationship of reaction kinetics may be quantified using the following expressions According to the data in Figs. 17 and 18, the relationship between ln(–dS/dt) and t was regressed, as shown in Eq. Using the data in Fig. 18 and Eq. Through matrix transposition by Matlab, the desilication reaction order, empirical rate constant k, and apparent activation energy were calculated to be 1.3 ± 0.15, 64.4 ± 2.4, and (25.8 ± 3.2) kJ/mol, respectively. The apparent activation energy is much lower than the value obtained using Ca(OH) An equation set was built to calculate the kinetic parameters. The overall rate equation for the desilication reaction by CHFC may be written as When 134.2 g/L CHFC (1 mol CHFC to 0.4 mol SiO In the reaction process, silicates react with rhombohedral CHFC on the surface to form hydroandradite. Because of the poor crystallinity and high surface area of hydroandradite, crystal transformation provides silicate ions the opportunity to enter the bulk of hydroandradite; therefore, the crystallinity of DSPs improves under the effect of reaction time and at higher temperatures. At the same time, It was found that Na In this investigation, the desilication of concentrated sodium aluminate solution by Calcium Hydroferrocarbonate was studied. The results of desilication tests indicated that reaction parameters, such as temperature, Na The reaction kinetics of the desilication reaction were found to follow a non-integer order; the desilication reaction order was 1.3 ± 0.15 and the empirical rate constant k was 64.4 ± 2.4. In addition, the apparent activation energy was calculated to be (25.8 ± 3.2) kJ/mol, which was much lower than the values obtained by adding Ca(OH) During the desilication process, silica reacted with CHFC on the surface to form hydroandradite. The crystallinity of hydroandradite improved with an increase in the reaction time and temperature. Silica and alumina exchanged with OH The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of the