Resveratrol (RE), a polyphenolic compound present in some food and plants, is characterized by anti-inflammatory and antioxidant properties. However, it is quickly metabolized with consequent loss of its efficacy. In this study, the antioxidant effect of 2-phenyl-benzoselenophene derivatives (VD0, VD1 and VD2) was detected in intestinal myofibroblast and osteocyte cell lines in which the oxidative stress was induced by GSH depletion or starvation, respectively. In fact, the oxidative stress is involved in pathogenesis of inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD) and in increased osteoclastogenesis in osteoporosis. Our results show that these derivatives have major antioxidant power in reducing and/or restoring radical oxygen species to control values than RE itself in both cell types. Moreover, derivatives have different antioxidant capacity in myofibroblasts and in osteocytes and this can be due to different degree of oxidative stress and structural characteristics of these compounds. Some of the synthesized RE analogs have shown anti-bacterial role in IBD and anti-resorptive activity in bone pathologies related to inflammatory and osteoporotic processes. Thus, we suggest benzoselenophene derivatives as good candidates for alternative therapy and/or therapeutic support in these pathologies.Resveratrol (RE) It is well known that selenium plays a crucial role in antioxidant system and selenium-containing compounds are essential for biological activities. In this context, organoselenium compounds have continued to attract considerable attention for their essential role in many biological processes, showing for instance antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, and neuroprotective properties In this study, we compared RE effects to that of 2-phenyl-benzoselenophene derivatives, VD0, VD1 and VD2, in countering the oxidative stress, induced in myofibroblast cell line derived from human colonic mucosa (18Co), and in murine osteocyte-like cell line, MLO-Y4. In particular, the antioxidant ability of RE derivatives in restoring the physiological redox state of these cells was studied. All common reagents were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (Saint Louis, Missouri, USA), GE Healthcare (Little Chalfont, Great Britain) and Thermo Scientific (Waltham, Massachusetts, USA), unless specified in the text. Sigma-Aldrich: Minimum Essential Medium Eagle, GE Healthcare: fetal bovine serum, calf serum, penicillin/streptomycin 100X solution, phosphate buffered saline (PBS), alpha-MEM medium. Thermo Scientific: Pierce BCA protein assay kit, trypan blue. CCD-18Co (18Co) cells, obtained from American Type Culture Collection (Manassas, VA), were used in our experiments with PDL 27–36, given that the line begins to senescence at about PDL = 42. MLO-Y4 osteocyte-like cells were a gift from Dr. Lynda Bonewald, University of Missouri-Kansas City. 18Co cells were cultured at 37 °C in a 5% CO The cytotoxicity of RE and its benzoselenophene derivatives has been detected, by Trypan blue exclusion test, in 24 h-starved 18Co or in unstarved MLO-Y4 treated or not for 24 h with RE or derivatives at the respective highest concentrations used, 50 μM for 18Co cells and 200 μM for MLO-Y4. RE benzoselenophene derivatives VD0, VD1 and VD2 were obtained by direct selenylation of RE with SeCl The intracellular production of ROS was assayed, as previously described All experiments were carried out six times. Data are expressed as the mean ± SEM and statistical significance of the differences was determined using one-way ANOVA analysis with Bonferroni's multiple comparison test, using the GraphPad Prism Software. p ≤ 0.05 was considered statistically significant.  ROS production was measured in the absence or in the presence of various concentrations (2.5–50 μM) of RE or its benzoselenophene derivatives in BSO-treated 18Co cells. In 18Co cells BSO treatment induced a significant increase in ROS production of about 60% in the short-term study (3 h) ( Starvation induced a remarkable oxidative stress in MLO-Y4 as indicated by ROS production that increased of about 1300% in the short-term study ( In the long-term study only 100 and 200 μM RE reduced significantly ROS production, as compared to starved-MLO-Y4. It is to note that the value obtained by treating cells with 200 μM RE was approximately similar to values measured with 50 μM benzoselenophene derivatives ( In the prevention study, 18Co cells were treated, 1 h before BSO treatment, with concentrations ranging from 10 to 50 μM for RE and from 2.5 to 10 μM for derivatives ( In this study, the antioxidant effect of RE and its benzoselenophene synthesized derivatives (VD0, VD1 and VD2) was detected in both cell types. The oxidative stress was experimentally induced in 18Co by treatment with BSO, compound normally used to induce GSH deficiency 18Co cells have many properties similar to those of intestinal subepithelial myofibroblasts that have a very important physiological role MLO-Y4 cells have a similar phenotype and many characteristics of mature osteocytes ROS production in starved BSO-treated 18Co is significantly lower than that detected in starved MLO-Y4. The concentrations used of RE and its benzoselenophene derivatives do not have cytotoxic effects in both cell types and their non-toxicity is confirmed by their antioxidant effect. Literature data show that different resveratrol analogs were synthesized and their effect on oxidative stress is related to their structural characteristics and cell types Our results show that RE benzoselenophene derivatives reduce oxidative stress in 18Co and MLO-Y4 cells much more than RE itself, confirming the data previously demonstrated in a non-biological system In the long-term study all derivatives restore ROS production to control values in 18Co at concentrations 20 times lower than that of RE. In this experimental condition derivatives are more efficient than RE in reducing oxidative stress in ML0-Y4 cells, however restoration of the redox state occurs only with 200 μM VD0. Also in the prevention of the oxidative stress benzoselenophene derivatives are more effective than RE both in 18 Co and MLO-Y4 cells. In fact, in both cells, this preventive effect is complete at concentrations lower than those of RE. Indeed, altogether our data show that derivatives are able to restore the physiological redox state in 18Co and in MLO-Y4 but at different concentrations, and this can be due to degree of oxidative stress, cell type and structural characteristics of compounds. Considering high antioxidant capacity of RE benzoselenophene derivatives both in the down-regulation and/or prevention of oxidative stress, we suggest the potential use of these compounds to reduce the inflammatory state in IBD or excessive bone resorption in various pathological bone disorders. In fact, given that RE is quickly adsorbed and metabolized This study shows, for the first time, that RE benzoselenophene derivatives have major antioxidant power than RE itself in intestinal myofibroblasts and osteocytes, especially in prevention and in long-term study. Moreover, altogether all derivatives are more effective than RE in restoring physiological redox state. They act at lower concentrations than RE that did not reduce efficiently oxidative stress after the long-term treatment. In particular, VD1 and all derivatives have major antioxidant role in MLO-Y4 after short-term and long-term treatments, respectively. In 18Co cells the highest antioxidant effect has been observed with VD1 during the prevention study. It has been speculated the use of benzoselenophene derivatives as an alternative therapy and/or therapeutic support in intestinal inflammatory disease and osteoporosis. In fact, oxidative stress is responsible of an increased production of inflammatory mediators by intestinal myofibroblasts as well as of enhanced osteoclastogenic factors and bone loss due to osteocytes. The authors have no conflict of interest. We would like to thank Dr. Lynda Bonewald for the MLO-4Y cells. This study was supported by a donation from the  Transparency document related to this article can be found online at