Predicting the performance of the semi-autogenous (SAG) mill is necessary for the best circuit design which is possible by suitable modeling and simulation. Numerous models of the SAG mill are studied in the literature, but the majority of them do not evaluate the predicted model for full-scale mill performance. Mill powers of the semi-autogenous mill have an effective influence on the mill performance. In this regard, a new predictive model based on gene expression programming (GEP) was developed to predict the mill power of the SAG mill. To achieve this purpose, a total number of 186 full-scale SAG mill works were investigated and the most effective parameters on SAG mill power, i.e., feed moisture, mass flowrate, mill load cell weight, SAG mill solid percentage, inlet and outlet water to the SAG mill and work index were measured and utilized to develop the GEP model. In order to determine the relationship between the input and output parameters, the GEP model was developed and the results were compared with non-linear multiple regression (NLMR) method. The results show the capability of the GEP model in predicting the mill power. It shows that the mill power is more sensitive to mass flowrate and work index than other input parameters.Semi-autogenous grinding (SAG) has been recently selected as the primary stage of grinding due to the economic considerations in most mining companies. SAG mills have some advantages such as lower physical space requirements, lower investment and maintenance costs and higher processing capacity, compared to the conventional circuits The specific energy of a circuit is higher than what this equation predicts; thus, it is assumed that this equation has less efficiency. Bond's equation with a high applicability is used for the comparison of different circuit designs and specially the use of so-called “operating work index” ( The comparison of different circuits with different feed and product sizes can be carried out using the operating work index in the theory The JA Herbst and Associates also developed the powerdraw model (Eq. Apelt et al. combined the mill powerdraw, weight models and the related plant measurement to study the indirect measurement of the mill inventories. They showed that the investigation from the weight based models has the least uncertainty This work investigates the use of feed moisture, mass flowrate, mill load cell weight, SAG mill solid percentage, inlet and outlet water to the SAG mill and work index to obtain the estimated mill power. The SAG mill circuits can be optimized using the modeling and simulation that can predict the throughput, power draw and product size distribution. For this aim, a new predictive model based on GEP is suggested to estimate the SAG mill power. In order to show the capability of the constructed model in predicting SAG mill power, non-linear multiple regression was performed. Finally, the performance predictions of the developed models were compared and discussed. Statistical analysis of the dataset is performed based on the 186 SAG mill operations collected from Aq Darreh gold processing plant 32 In datasets, the outlying data points can have an adverse influence on the relationships clear understanding among the variables. In order to make a predictable model of the SAG mill power, the outlying data points are identified from the dataset to be eliminated for building a more homogeneous dataset using multivariate statistical tools of the principal components and factor analyses. The basic descriptive statistical analysis of the original dataset is shown in In order to detect the outliers and natural groups of data, the multivariate statistical tool of the principal components analysis is also used  The results showed that the mill power has an inverse relation with the feed moisture, and a direct relation with work index, inlet and outlet water to the SAG mill, SAG mill solid percentage, mill load cell weight and mass flowrate. One of the important factors in the SAG mill power is the work index. The feed hardness influences on SAG mill operation is more significant than other mill operations such as rod mill and ball mill. The feed hardness affects both the power draw and the grinding performance of the mills. The variation in size and hardness of feed led to changes in the mill mass flowrate Ferreira (2001) proposed a new population-based evolutionary algorithm to overcome the shortages of GA and GP techniques called gene expression programming (GEP) GEP enjoys the simplicity of the genetic algorithm and the capabilities of genetic programming In GEP, chromosomes are made from the random combination of terminals and functions. Each one of the genes represent a sub-ET that will be finally linked to each other by the linking function (e.g. + According to Then, the genetic operators including mutation, inversion, transposition and recombination are applied to the chromosomes in order to create the modified individuals for the next generation. In a recursive path, this process is repeated for special numbers of generations until the appropriate solution is found. Genetic operators have been introduced in the following Mutation is the most efficient operator with intrinsic modification power which can occur anywhere in the chromosome length. In the head, mutation can change any function or terminal to each other whilst in the tail, it can only convert a terminal to another terminal. Scholars suggest the range of 0.01 to 0.1 for this operator The activity domain for this operator is limited in the head of chromosomes. Inversion reverses a fragment in the head usually with the length of 1 to 3. The suggested ratio for this operator is 0.1. There are three kinds of transposition operators including: 1) Insertion sequence transposition (IS transposition): a fragment with function or terminal in the first position transposes to the head of its own or other genes; 2) Root insertion sequence (RIS) transposition: a segment with a function in the first position transposes the root of the genes; 3) Gene transposition: This operator transposes all genes to the beginning of the chromosome. Scholars suggest the range of 0.01 to 0.1 for this operator More details about the genetic operators can be found in the literature Prediction of the SAG mill power is evaluated using NLMR and GEP. The performance of these methods are compared with each other. In order to identify the relationship between the input and output variables systematically in the form of a function, a regression analysis can be done as a suitable statistical tool. The multiple regression analysis is a technique which is used to fit a model into the data observations when there are several independent variables. NLMR is a regression in which the dependent or criterion variables are modeled as a non-linear function of model parameters and one or more independent variables. There are several types of NLMR models in the form of exponential, power and logarithmic The main objective of this section is developing the mathematical equation based on the GEP method in the form of Mill power First of all, all of the 142 datasets were separated randomly to two sections of training and testing datasets. According to Swingler (1996) and Looney (1996), 80% of all data (114 datasets) were considered to develop the models and the remaining 20% of data (28 datasets) were selected to test the constructed model performance. The process of GEP modeling can be summarized in the following five steps: In the first step, the fitness function should be assigned to evaluate the fitness of the generated chromosomes (solutions). In the present study, the root mean square error (RMSE) was considered as the fitness function. The root mean squared error The second step is choosing the set of terminals and functions to create GEP chromosomes. In this study, terminals are seven input parameters which are listed in The third step is the determination of the chromosomes architecture. The structure of each chromosome depends on the head size and the number of genes. For determining the appropriate values for head size and genes number, a single gene with the head size of 2 was initially set and then increased during each run until the best fit was obtained. Finally, the values of 14 and 5 were obtained as the optimum values for head size and the number of genes per chromosome, respectively. In addition, during this trial and error procedure, the numbers of chromosomes were varied from 30 to 200 and it was found that the population size of 100 gives the best results. In the fourth step, the genetic operators and their rates should be determined. In this study, we used all the genetic operators described in In the last step, we need to select a function to link the genes (sub-ETs). In the current study, addition (+) was used as a linking function because it gave the better results compared to the other functions such as subtraction, multiplication and division. By considering all of the above five steps, the GEP model was executed for 2000 generations (iteration) to predict the mill power parameter. The changes related to the fitness value and coefficients of determination (R The best solution obtained from the GEP modeling is a five genic chromosome in which each one of the genes are linked to each other by the addition (+) function. The expression tree of each gene (sub-ETs) is shown in In this section, the performance prediction of the two developed predictive models namely GEP and NLMR for the prediction of SAG mill power is evaluated. For this aim, three statistical performance indices including coefficient of determination ( The most effective input parameter on output can be evaluated using the sensitivity analysis. In this regard, the sensitivity of the mill power model that is developed using GEP is calculated based on the fact that each parameter changes between the minimum and maximum of its value while the other parameters remain constant at their average value. Thus, it is possible to investigate the effect of each change in input parameter on the output parameter (mill power). For example, for the investigation of the TPH changing sensitivity on the mill power, all parameters except TPH are constant in their average value while the TPH changes. Therefore, sensitivity to all input parameters was similarly evaluated. The units of each input parameter to estimate mill power are different. The simultaneous display of input parameter changes on mill power is difficult because of the difference in size and value of the input parameters. Therefore, the parameters (between their minimum and maximum value) that were used for sensitivity analysis should be standardized. The z-score is used for standardization of parameters. The simultaneous display of mill power changes versus changes any input parameters are shown in Performance prediction of semi-autogenous (SAG) mills in the full-scale mill performance can be evaluated for circuit optimization by suitable modeling and simulation. Mill powers of the semi-autogenous mill have an effective influence on the mill performance. In this study, the mill power model was developed for the full-scale SAG mill using GEP and MLMR methods. The influence of effective parameters such as feed moisture, mass flowrate, mill load cell weight, SAG mill solid percentage, inlet and outlet water to the SAG mill and work index are evaluated to predict the SAG mill power in full-scale. The efficiencies of GEP and NLMR were compared with each other for the prediction of the SAG mill power. The results showed that the efficiency of the new proposed GEP model is more than that of the NLMR in predicting the SAG mill power. The correlation coefficient and mean square error values for the testing sets for SAG mill power using the GEP and NLMR methods were 0.9946, 42.2343 and 0.5788, 68.396, respectively. The correlation coefficient and the mean square error values of the testing sets in GEP are less than those in NLMR that show the greater efficiency of GEP for this study. The sensitivity analysis was also evaluated to determine the most effective input parameters on output. It shows that the mill power is more sensitive to TPH and WI than other input parameters. The results in this study showed that the proposed model, according to the parameters affecting the SAG mill power, can be used to predict the SAG mill power with a reasonable error.