Multi-objective optimization using genetic algorithm (GA) is carried out for the desalination of brackish and sea water using spiral wound or tubular modules. A few sample optimization problems involving two and three objective functions are solved, both for the operation of an existing plant (which is almost trivial), as well as, for the design of new plants (associated with a higher degree of freedom). The possible objective functions are: maximize the permeate throughput, minimize the cost of desalination, and minimize the permeate concentration. The operating pressure difference, ΔP, across the membrane is the only important decision variable for an existing unit. In contrast, for a new plant, ΔP, the active area, A, of the membrane, the membrane to be used (characterized by the permeability coefficients for salt and water), and the type of module to be used (spiral wound/tubular, as characterized by the mass transfer coefficient on the feed-side), are the important decision variables. Sets of non-dominated (equally good) Pareto solutions are obtained for the problems studied. The binary coded elitist non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm (NSGA-II) is used to obtain the solutions. It is observed that for maximum throughput, the permeabilities of both the salt and the water should be the highest for those cases studied where there is a constraint on the permeate concentration. If one of the objective functions is to minimize the permeate concentration, the optimum permeability of salt is shifted towards its lower limit. The membrane area is the most important decision variable in designing a spiral wound module for desalination of brackish water as well as seawater, whereas ΔP is the most important decision variable in designing a tubular module for the desalination of brackish water (where the quality of the permeate is of prime importance). The results obtained using NSGA-II are compared with those from recent, more efficient, algorithms, namely, NSGA-II-JG and NSGA-II-aJG. The last of these techniques appears to converge most rapidly.permeability coefficient for water (m active area of membrane (m permeability coefficient of salt (m osmotic coefficient (Eqs. salt concentration (kg operating cost of desalination unit ($ cost of electricity ($ maintenance cost of membrane ($ capital cost of membrane ($ capital cost of the pump ($ hydraulic diameter of channel (m) mass diffusivity of salt (A) through water (B) (m ith objective function (m penalty parameter defined in Eq. crowding distance rank volumetric flux of water (m mass flux of salt (kg mass transfer coefficient of salt in feed side (m length of chromosome length of substring string length of jumping gene defined in Eq. exponent for the pumping cost (Eq. generation number maximum number of generations total number of chromosomes in the population crossover probability jumping gene probability mutation probability pressure, bar penalty parameter (Eq. volumetric flow rate (throughput) (m observed rejection Reynolds’ number Schmidt number Sherwood number temperature of the feed (°C) velocity of water in feed channel (m reference value of power for estimating pumping cost (Eq. bulk brackish water desired lower bound permeate reference, Yuma plant ( salt seawater upper bound difference efficiency of the pump kinematic viscosity of salt solution (m osmotic pressure (bar) density of seawater (kg Desalination of seawater and brackish water is routinely used nowadays for overcoming the huge scarcity of potable water in different parts of the world. Desalination involves the reduction of the concentration of the total dissolved solids (TDS) to less than about 200 RO has several advantages over other desalination processes such as distillation, evaporation and electro-dialysis ( Rigorous optimal design (or operation) of RO modules will help in reducing their cost. Attempts have been made to obtain optimal designs of RO units considering cost as the single objective function. Over the last few years, scientists, engineers and economists have used AI-based evolutionary techniques, particularly, genetic algorithms (GA; Several workers have extended SGA to solve multi-objective optimization problems. Any of these techniques, reviewed recently by The present work involves the simulation of the desalination plant ( Various mathematical models are available that describe the local behavior and performance of the RO process. The transport through RO membranes is well described by the widely accepted solution diffusion model ( Eq. (1a) is an implicit nonlinear algebraic equation that can easily be solved numerically to give The plant at Yuma, AZ, USA ( Yuma plant; specified We could also study the optimization of desalination units under more flexible (design stage; specified The constraint on The NSGA-II ( The NSGA-II computer code was tested on a few test problems ( In Problem 1, there is only one degree of freedom (a selected value of Problem 2 is a more interesting, design-stage multi-objective optimization problem, involving more than a single degree of freedom. Pareto sets are obtained, as shown in   The occurrence of a minimum in (design stage; specified  Two recent improvements of NSGA-II ( A few two-objective (maximizing the throughput while minimizing the cost) and three-objective optimization problems (maximizing throughput while minimizing the cost as well as the permeate concentration) are studied for the desalination of brackish water and sea water. Pareto optimal sets of equally good non-dominated solutions are obtained. The optimal solutions for spiral wound modules are compared to those for tubular modules. The membrane area, Partial financial support from the Department of Science and Technology, Government of India, New Delhi (through grant III-5(13)/2001-ET) is gratefully acknowledged.  Generate box, Classify these chromosomes into fronts based on non-domination ( create new (empty) box, transfer the compare chromosome, if if if repeat, sequentially, for all chromosomes in create subsequent fronts in (lower) sub-boxes of Evaluate the crowding distance, rearrange all chromosomes in front, find the largest cuboid (rectangle for two fitness functions) enclosing  assign large values of Copy the better of the select any pair, identify the better of these two chromosomes. copy (without removing from repeat till copy all of Not all of Carry out crossover and mutation (   Do JG or aJG operation: select a chromosome (sequentially) from Check if JG/aJG operation is needed, using a random number and generate a random number between 0 and 1; multiply this by JG or aJG: JG: generate another similar random number and identify a second location (end of the JG) in the selected chromosome (say, the after the seventh binary); aJG: fix the second end of the JG using the specified string length, replace the set of binaries between these two locations by a new set of binaries (use random numbers). For example, we may get 110|00 Copy all Reclassify these 2 Take the best This completes one generation. Stop if criteria are met. Copy The volumetric flux, For brackish water, the kinematic viscosity, For seawater, For laminar flow, i.e., for The osmotic pressure, The cost of production of desalinated water is given by the following equation (