This study aims to obtain mechanistic understanding of the formation and development of biomedical CaP coating on a model polymer surface of plasma treated polycaprolactone (PCL). Oxygen plasma treatment changed the surface morphology at nanometre scale and introduced negatively charged groups to PCL surface. Nucleation of CaP on the treated PCL surface occurred via two modes of growth, Volmer–Weber and Stranski–Krastanov. EDX and FTIR analysis suggested that the coating progressed from compositions with low Ca/P ratios and solubility to the phases of higher ratios and stability. The results also indicated that CaP clusters formed through Volmer–Weber mode were rich in the CaP phases of the higher Ca/P ratios. This study thus provided mechanistic insights into the coating process of CaP from solution onto functionalized surfaces which could be useful in designing coatings to suit different requirements.Calcium phosphates (CaP) coating has been extensively investigated as a means to improve integration of an implant with host bone and in periodontal and bone tissue engineering Since different calcium phosphate phases have different bioactivity and resorption kinetics, understanding their formation and growth during the coating process would be particularly useful for optimizing the coatings for different applications. Reports in literature have referred to three major models of epitaxial growth of thin films Polycaprolactone (Purasorb, Mw ∼ 120 kDa) films with a thickness of 110–130 µm were prepared and treated in O Static contact angle were measured using a FTA200 with MilliQ water. A formulation of 10X SBF containing high ion concentrations was used to study the coating process Samples were carbon coated and used for imaging and EDS analysis with scanning electron microscopy. Samples were also analysed using ATR-FTIR spectroscopy (Nicolet iS50). At least three samples per group and 3 areas per sample were analysed and We first investigated the effects of plasma treatment on PCL films which showed increased nanometre roughness when treated for extended periods (7 and 15 mins, The coatings exhibited wo key components including spherical clusters and planar layers ( The coatings had thickness of c.a. 0.8–1.2 μm with some slight increase from 30 to 60 mins and slight decrease following NaOH treatment (no statistical significance, Elemental maps showed co-localization of Ca, P and O with the clusters ( Two key phases of interest were ν The DCPD phase increased sharply from 30 min to 60 min of coating indicating the higher formation rate of DCPD, and significantly decreased with post treatment likely due to DCPD degradation by NaOH ( There are only few studies on CaP which reported formation of high Ca/P ratio materials (such as HA) and association with the VW growth mode This study aimed to obtain mechanistic understanding of the mineralization process of polymer surface through precipitation from supersaturated solutions like 10X SBF. We showed the presence of both Volmer–Weber (islanding) and Stranski–Krastanov (mixed islanding and layer formation) growth modes and the former created phases of higher Ca/P ratios. The changes in different CaP phases demonstrated the evolution from phases of lower Ca/P ratio to higher Ca/P and stability. This study therefore provides important insight into the process of solution-based CaP coating which could be useful for developing coating suitable for specific needs.