In the modern industrialized rare earths production, solvent extraction facilities possess many problems such as long extraction time, large occupation area, high processing cost and so on. The present work attempts to extract samarium (III) from hydrochloric acid solution in a rectangular cross-section Y-junction microchannel, using 2-ethylhexyl phosphonic acid mono-2-ethylhexyl (EHEHPA or P507). The effects of flow rate, channel length and width on the extraction efficiency, slug length and mass behavior of a liquid-liquid extraction system are assessed. The slug length decreased with increase in the flow rate, increased in channel length and channel width. The maximum extraction efficiency of 75.1% could be achieved at the longer channel length (pH = 1.5, channel width = 300 μm, flow rate = 10 μL/min). The volumetric mass transfer coefficients (k
                     La) of the microfluidic extractor was compared with the conventional extractor and found to be several orders of magnitude higher, authenticating the beneficial effects such as: Higher specific interfacial area and shorter diffusion length.Rare earths, are known as “industrial vitamins”, which are important strategic resources. Rare earth elements have been widely used in batteries, chemical, metallurgy and new materials. Among the rare earths, samarium(III), as one of the most abundant and important elements, has extensive application in many spheres, such as permanent magnet, heat-insulating ceramic, catalyst, and in biological research and healthcare ( The conventional extraction methods apply solvent extraction with 2-ethylhexyl phosphonic acid mono-2-ethylhexyl ester (EHEHPA or P507) as a main extractant, typically utilizing conventional process separation equipment such as: mixer-settler, centrifugal extractor, packed column ( In the recent past, utilization of microfluidic technology has gained wide attention and rapid development in the field of chemical engineering ( In the present work, the extraction of Sm is attempted using a rectangular cross-section micro-channel, with saponified P507 in sulfonated kerosene solution and the Sm (III) hydrochloric acid solution as organic and aqueous phase, respectively. Using the photo imaging system containing a microscope and digital camera, the dispersed phase droplet diameter of the extraction system was determined. The effect of influencing factors such as flow rate, channel width and length on the extraction efficiency, specific interfacial area and volumetric mass transfer coefficient are presented. The Sm The schematic of experimental apparatus is shown in The Y-junction is not expected to affect the rate of mass transfer rate significantly, since it takes place in a short length under parallel flow, known for poor mass transfer characteristics ( At all experimental conditions, a thin film of the continuous phase separating the aqueous slug from the wall, indicates the entire slug surface is available for mass transfer. In cases where the film is absent, only the caps of slug are available for mass transfer and the interfacial area reduces by 3–4 times ( The specific interfacial area of two-phase flow is the significant influencing factor in the process of microfluidic extraction, which is related to the shape of droplet. The calculation of the specific interfacial area depends on capillary number. Magnified pictures taken during the experiments presented in Two parameters are used to characterize the mass transfer performance of the small scale extractor, i.e., extraction efficiency ( In this study, different channel lengths were used to control residence time. The residence time of the mixture in the channel is calculated by: The effect of flow rate on the extraction efficiency is shown in The residence time of the either of the phases in the microchannel can be accurately controlled by changing either the flow rate or channel length. Any change to the flow rate can alter the circulation patterns or any other hydrodynamic characteristics of the two phases, successively influencing the mass transfer rate ( The channel width is also known to be a significant influencing factor of the slug size and hence the mass transfer. The effect of microchannel width from 300 to 700 μm on the samarium extraction is assessed and presented in The volumetric mass transfer coefficient (   The potential of Y-type microchannel, is compared with other types of conventional liquid–liquid contactors in The samarium extraction using 2-ethylhexyl phosphonic acid mono-2-ethylhexyl was conducted in a rectangular cross-section Y-junction microreactor, and the main conclusions as follows: The slug length decreased with increase in flow rate, and with increase in channel length and channel width. The extraction efficiency is found to decrease with increase in the flow rate, and channel width while increase with increase in the channel length. A maximum extraction efficiency of 75.1% could be achieved at the longer channel length (residence time is 45 s). The mutual effect of slug size and wall film thickness made specific interfacial area decreases slightly as the flow rate increases, it is reasonable to deem it holds an approximate constant. The same regular change is also true in the effect of channel width. The volumetric mass transfer coefficient ( The high separation efficiency due to high mass transfer rates encourage adoption of microfluidic extractors to be suitable alternative to conventional liquid-liquid extractors that could favorably alter the economics of mineral processing. Financial aid from the following programs is gratefully acknowledged: