Purpose
                  Frontal sinus fractures (FSF) have potentially catastrophic consequences due to frontal recess (FR) obstruction and proximity to the brain and orbit. Lack of follow-up and ability to predict which type of fractures predispose to complications has biased surgeons toward definitive interventions such as sinus obliteration and cranialization. These procedures carry inherent risk and may be unnecessary in a subset of patients. This study seeks to better characterize spontaneous ventilation in subjects with FSFs, including those involving the FR.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  Review of a prospectively maintained trauma database between 2009 and 2013 at a level 1 trauma center. Patients with frontal sinus fractures with follow-up imaging (>6weeks) available were included. The medical records and imaging were reviewed for evidence of spontaneous ventilation of the frontal sinus.
               
                  Results
                  Nineteen patients sustained frontal sinus fractures in the study period with mean imaging interval of 67.4weeks (range, 6–188.4weeks). Injury mechanisms included fall (32%), assault (31%), motor vehicle accident (17%), pedestrian-versus-automobile (12%), and gunshot wound (8%). 8/19 patients (42%) sustained FSFs involving the FR and 7/8 (87.5%) spontaneously ventilated by time of interval imaging. The one patient with persistent radiographic sinus opacification was associated with a naso orbital ethmoid and medial orbital blowout fracture. 6/19 patients (32%) sustained FSF sparing the FR, and all spontaneously ventilated by the time of interval imaging. 5/19 patients (26%) underwent surgical intervention.
               
                  Conclusions
                  An expectant, sinus-preserving approach to acute FSFs involving the FR is safe and effective. Etiology of re-ventilation failure may be due to tissue obstruction, rather than the frontal recess fracture itself.Frontal sinus fractures account for 5–15% of all maxillofacial injuries Lack of patient follow-up and an inability to accurately predict which type and pattern of fracture predisposes patients to complications has historically biased surgeons toward expeditious, non-specific, and definitive interventions such as frontal sinus obliteration or cranialization Various treatment algorithms for the management of frontal sinus fractures have been proposed but vary widely and lack consensus In addition, present-day frontal sinus fracture patterns may no longer reflect those seen in prior studies. With the advent and mandated adoption of the airbag injury mechanisms have evolved from high-impact injuries associated with automobiles to lower-energy means such as assault The present study seeks to better characterize the rates of spontaneous ventilation in subjects with fractures of the frontal sinus including those that involve the FR as seen on interval imaging. The University of California, San Diego Hillcrest Medical Center is a level-1 trauma center that prospectively maintains a database of admitted patients. After institutional review board approval, a 5-year review from January 2009 to December 2013 was performed on all patients who had sustained a skull-base fracture, which includes all frontal sinus fractures. The complete medical records and initial high-resolution (1-mm) CT findings were reviewed to identify patients with acute frontal sinus fractures. Associated facial fractures, demographic data, injury mechanisms and frontal sinus interventions were recorded. All patients were evaluated at the time of admission and treated by either the plastic surgery or otolaryngology services. Conservative management involved monitoring for complications while inpatient and return precautions upon discharge. Patients who had sustained acute frontal sinus fracture and received a CT scan 6 Follow-up CT scans were reviewed and frontal sinus re-ventilation was operationalized into either spontaneous re-ventilation of the sinus or persistent opacification ( For statistical analysis, the chi-square test was used for discrete variables, and t-test was used for continuous variables. A value of A total of 669 adult trauma patients who sustained acute traumatic skull-base fractures (ICD-9 801.00–801.99), which include frontal sinus fractures, were identified during the study period. A total of 102 patients (15%) had suffered acute traumatic frontal sinus fractures involving at least one-subsite (anterior table, posterior table, or FR). Of patients with frontal sinus fractures, 19 (31.6%) patients had at least 6-week (67.4 18 of 19 patients had concomitant maxillofacial (79%), ocular (84%), or intracranial injuries (74%). 5 of the 19 patients (26%) in the group underwent surgical intervention for treatment of frontal sinus fractures. All of these patients had anterior and posterior wall as well as FR involvement. 3 patients underwent cranialization, 2 patients underwent obliteration (38%). One of the patients who underwent obliteration suffered a hardware complication requiring a return to the operating room. Mean follow-up for the group that underwent surgery was 61.5 Based on our series, in the majority of cases (4/5, 80%), surgically management of the frontal sinus, either cranialization or frontal sinus obliteration, was performed during an approach to address intracranial pathology. One patient underwent cranialization for significant involvement of the FR. 8 of 19 patients (42%) sustained frontal sinus fractures involving the FR. 7 of these 8 patients (88%) were managed conservatively and spontaneously cleared by time of follow-up scan. A representative CT scan is shown in The present study characterizes a cohort of patients who sustained a spectrum of acute traumatic frontal sinus fractures, including those involving the frontal recess, in order to understand the likelihood of spontaneous ventilation after conservative management. Patients who sustained frontal sinus fractures at any sub-site and underwent conservative management demonstrated a high likelihood (13/14; 93%) of spontaneous re-ventilation as evidenced on follow-up imaging. 13/19 (68%) of patients suffered injury to the frontal recess, a rate similar to that cited in previous literature Smith et al. The mechanism of injury we describe here reflects previous studies describing a trend from devastating high-energy etiologies such as MVA to more focal, lower-energy injuries such as assault. This shift in injury mechanism for frontal sinus fractures is temporally correlated with improved motor vehicle safety standards, airbag technology, and seat-belt use This study has some important limitations. Opacification of the frontal sinus was used as a surrogate for the development of late complications, such as mucocele, due to obstruction of the frontal recess. While it is generally accepted that obstruction at the frontal recess can lead to persistent sinusitis, animal studies have shown that not all obstructions of the frontal recess may lead to mucocele formation Frontal sinus fractures can be associated with devastating complications both at initial presentation (e.g. intracranial bleed, infection secondary to a CSF fistula) and beyond initial hospitalization (e.g. mucocele, mucopyocele). Patients who require early neurosurgical interventions may undergo cranialization or frontal sinus obliteration, but patients with no intracranial pathology demanding intervention offer a clinical dilemma. Early intervention on the frontal recess through obliteration or endoscopic sinus surgery potentially over exposes patients to the risks associated with surgical intervention as some may clear spontaneously. Conversely, expectant management may risk late presentations of frontal sinus mucoceles with potentially catastrophic consequence. The present study describes the management and clinical course of a cohort of patients with frontal sinus fractures, which have historically been treated with sinus obliteration or cranialization. Our results support the role of sinus preserving, expectant management for most frontal sinus injuries, with the caveat of a heightened concern for those injuries involving NOE fractures with obstruction of the frontal recess by orbital contents.