Using the first-principles calculations, the elastic properties, anisotropy properties, electronic structures, Debye temperature and stability of Fe-Al (Fe3Al, FeAl, FeAl2, Fe2Al5 and FeAl3) binary compounds were calculated. The formation enthalpy and cohesive energy of these Fe-Al compounds are negative, and show they are thermodynamically stable structures. Fe2Al5 has the lowest formation enthalpy, which shows the Fe2Al5 is the most stable of Fe-Al binary compounds. These Fe-Al compounds display disparate anisotropy due to the calculated different shape of the 3D curved surface of the Young’s modulus and anisotropic index. Fe3Al has the biggest bulk modulus with the value 233.2GPa. FeAl has the biggest Yong’s modulus and shear modulus with the value 296.2GPa and 119.8GPa, respectively. The partial density of states, total density of states and electron density distribution maps of the binary Fe-Al binary compounds are analyzed. The bonding characteristics of these Fe-Al binary compounds are mainly combination by covalent bond and metallic bonds. Meanwhile, also exist anti-bond effect. Moreover, the Debye temperatures and sound velocity of these Fe-Al compounds are explored.The calorized steel in the alloy layer of the stable Fe Some Fe-Al compounds have been investigated by experiments and theory in recent years. Many researchers concentrated on the DO All the theory calculations in this paper were implemented using first-principle calculations based on density functional theory (DFT) which was performed in Cambridge Sequential Total Energy Package (CASTEP) code We calculate the elastic constants of Fe-Al binary compounds based on the generalized Hooker’s law by the stress-strain method. Several different strain patterns were used to calculate the crystal structure, and the Cauchy stress tensor for each strain mode was evaluated. The related elastic constants were identified from these strain-stress relations shown in Eq.  The chemical stability of these Fe-Al binary compounds was able to evaluate by calculating the formation enthalpy and cohesive energy. In this paper, in order to investigate the thermodynamic stability of Fe-Al binary compounds, the formation enthalpy and cohesive energy were calculated and the two energy formulas are defined in Eqs. In this paper, after optimization of crystal structure, we can get the lattice parameters. The formation enthalpy and cohesive energy of Fe, Al and Fe-Al binary system are summarized in In The elastic constant ( Cubic system Orthorhombic system Monoclinic system After obtaining the elastic constants, the bulk modulus ( As shown in The bulk modulus( Further depict the mechanical properties of these Fe-Al binary compounds, the Poisson’s ratio ( Mechanical anisotropy is very important in the application of materials. The micro cracks often form in materials and harm the performance of the materials. And the appearance of micro cracks in materials is always connected with the anisotropy. The Fe-Al compounds as a potential high-temperature structural materials, so it is necessary to study the mechanical anisotropy of these compounds. In order to improve the durability, it is very important to investigate the elastic anisotropy of Fe-Al compounds. In this paper, a number of metrics, including the anisotropy index In order to better depict the features of elastic anisotropy is to plot a curved surface of a three-dimensions (3D). In this work, the Young's modulus was plotted at different directions using spherical coordinates. And the directional dependence of Young’s modulus can be given by following equations  Orthorhombic crystal: Monoclinic crystal: In order to analyze the chemical bonding characteristics and electronic structures of these Fe-Al compounds, we calculated the states total density (TDOS), partial density of states (PDOS) and electron density distribution maps. The calculated electronic structures as shown in The calculated electron density distribution maps of these Fe-Al binary compounds are shown in From what has been discussed above, we may safely draw the conclusion that the bonding characteristic of these Fe -Al compounds are combinations of covalent bond and metallic bonds, also exist anti-bond effect. Meanwhile, the Fe The Debye temperature is a fundamental parameter and is related to some physical properties of the materials, such as specific heat, elastic constants and melting point The calculated the sound velocities and Debye temperature of the Fe-Al binary compounds and the values are shown in Generally speaking, the high value of positive population indicate that the covalent bond has a high degree In conclusion, the chemical stability, electronic structures, anisotropic elastic properties and Debye temperature of these Fe-Al compounds were studied by the first-principle calculations. The cohesive energy and formation enthalpy illustrate their thermodynamically are stable. The elastic constants of these Fe This work was supported by the