When a machine is in operation, two moving surfaces interact to generate a large amount of wear particles. The wear debris generated inside the machine or contaminants from outside plays important roles in both two-body and three-body wear. For all mining and port machinery, their lubricants are very likely to be polluted by contaminants such as silica and other metallic debris such as iron and nickel. In order to seek a deeper understanding of the effects of different contaminants on wear process, this project investigated sliding wear processes when silica powder and iron powder exist in lubricants.
                  Four sliding wear tests were conducted on a pin-on-disc tester with and without the contaminants. Visual inspection, ferrography analysis, particle quantity analysis using a particle analyzer, and numerical surface analysis using confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) were conducted to study the wear particles and wear surfaces. Supported by the data generated from the comprehensive analyses on the wear particles and wear surfaces, the investigation of the effects of the added contaminants to the wear processes and wear mechanisms have been carried out and presented in this paper.Condition monitoring and maintenance are two essential components of modern industry. The purpose of condition monitoring is to detect faults occurring in machinery; maintenance is to maintain and extend, if possible, the lifetime of the machinery. Among many monitoring methods, oil analysis is considered as an accurate and effective approach due to its capability of being able to reveal the wear condition of the machinery through the analysis of oil properties and wear particles When a machine is in operation, wear particles generated by the interaction of two moving surfaces or carried in from outside may cause abrasive wear if these particles have a relatively high hardness The effect of the hardness of particles on abrasive wear has received considerable interest as well. The influence of hard silica or quartz particles on wear process has been investigated by many researchers Based on above reasons, this project is to study the independent and dependent role of silica and iron powder in sliding wear processes using a pin-on-disc tester. It is believed that the knowledge gained in this study is significant for a deeper understanding of the wear mechanisms and wear characteristics when the contaminants are present in lubricants. Wear experiments were conducted on a pin-on-disc sliding tester, which is one of the most commonly used wear test rigs. The tester can provide rotational speed ranging from 0 to 3000 rpm and a load from 0 to 3000 N. The friction coefficients were recorded on-line by a computer connected to the tester. The schematic diagram of the tester is shown in The ball samples, with a diameter of 8 mm, were standard E52100 balls (ASTM material code) with chemical compositions of 0.95–1.05% C, 0.20–0.40% Mn, 0.15–0.35% Si, and 1.30–1.65% Cr. The counterface disc samples were made from 5140 steel (ASTM material code) with chemical compositions: 0.37–0.45% C, 0.50–0.80% Mn, 0.20–0.40% Si, 0.80–1.10% Cr. The disc samples were quenched and tempered to a hardness of 52 HRC, and then machined using a turning process on a lathe to a diameter of 50 mm with a height of 8 mm. The surface roughness ( Four sliding wear tests were conducted using the pin-on-disc tester to study the role of the contaminants in the wear processes. Details of the tests are described in The N32 lubricant is one type of hydraulic oil. Its viscosity is 29.3 cSt at 40 °C. The NC100 iron powder is the most widely used iron powder in the powder metallurgy industry. This spongy particle has a very high green strength and edge strength with a relatively low surface hardness than the discs and balls. According to the hardness value provided by product company and the measurements conducted by the authors in the study, it has confirmed that the surface hardness of the NC100 iron powder is far less than 10 HRC (60–70 HV). The apparent density of the NC100 iron powder is 2.45 g/cm In addition to the iron powder, the silica powder with a hardness of 1000 HV was added to the lubricant to examine the role of the hard particles in the wear processes. The silica particles have very high edge strength. Having the same advantage as the iron powder, the identification of the silica particles from natural particles through the test is achievable. At the beginning of test 2, 1.0 g of the iron powder was added to 60 ml N32 lubricant. For test 3, 1.0 g of the silica powder was added to 60 ml N32 lubricant when the test started. For test 4, with the combination of the iron particles and the silica particles, 0.5 g of silica particles and 0.5 g of iron particles were first weighed using a scale, then the silica particles and the iron particles were fully mixed in clean glassware before they were added to the lubricant. Therefore, the concentration of the foreign contaminants was 16.7 mg/ml for tests 2, 3 and 4. All the tests were carried out using the N32 lubricant at room temperature with a relative humidity of 30–40%. The nominal applied load was 200 N. The calculated maximum Hertz contact pressure is 2.49 GPa for each test. The sliding velocity was controlled at a value of 0.21 m/s. When the tester was in operation, the contact area of the rubbing pair was submerged in the lubricant. An agitating device was set up in the oil box to ensure that the turbulent flow of the lubricant was formed around the contact area. In this way, most of the foreign particles were kept in suspension in the lubricant, particularly around the contact area. A full wear process including running-in, steady wear and severe wear stage was completed in all the sliding tests. During each test, the evolutions of the friction coefficient and the oil temperature were measured and recorded. The three wear stages were identified based on the characteristics of wear particles generated from the tests, the surface topologies of the tested samples and the trend of the friction coefficient curves. Oil samples were collected during the tests. Only one oil sample was collected at the end of the running-in stage. Oil samples were collected every 2 h during the steady wear stage, and one oil sample was collected during the severe wear stage. All the oil samples were collected immediately after the tester was stopped. The surface topology of the ball samples was observed using a microscope with digital image acquisition. So was the final surface morphology of the ball samples after testing. In order to keep the sliding wear occurring at the same location, the disc sample was not removed and inspected during testing. Due to this reason, only the final surface topography (worn surface) of the disc samples was inspected using microscopy after testing. In this project, the friction coefficients during the tests were recorded on-line. The changes of the friction coefficients reflected to some extent the evolutions of wear process from running-in stage to severe wear stage. The characteristics of the wear particles and the surfaces of the tested samples were observed and analyzed. It is well known that wear particle analysis, including the analysis of particle size, type, shape, quantity and surface texture, is a useful means to examine wear mechanisms. Furthermore, the investigation of the surface textures of the tested samples can offer detailed information on the progress of the wear processes. The tests progressed through three main stages corresponding to running-in, steady wear and severe wear stages. The trends of the friction coefficients for the sliding wear tests using the pin-on-disc machine are shown in The following two observations can be found by examining Wear particles generated from the tests were studied using ferrography, a particle analyzer and confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) in this section. The following procedures were used to prepare and perform the ferrographic analysis: (i) ferrogram slides were made using a dual ferrograph analyzer, and (ii) then ferrogram slides with wear debris collected in different wear stages were observed using an Olympus Ferroscope with a CCD camera. Using a 100× and 500× magnification, various aspects including quantity, size distribution, composition and morphology of the wear particles in different wear stages were examined. Representative ferrographic images and comparison of the wear debris characteristics in the wear stages in the wear tests are shown in Quantitative measurements of the amount of the wear particles were conducted using a particle analyzer. The CSI particle analyzer is a complete “minilab-in-a-box”, and can be used to accurately measure particle quantity in diluted oil samples. The CSI particle analyzer uses a laser-based particle counter to simultaneously count particles in 11 different size ranges when the fluid is forced through the sensor at a constant flow rate. In order to gain the relative proportions of the wear particles generated from the tests to the contaminating particles, 1.0 g of the iron powder and 1.0 g of the silica powder were added to 60 ml new lubricant, respectively. Then, particle counting was conducted in the same condition as tests 1, 2, 3 and 4 and the quantities of the contaminants added to the tests are shown in  For test 2, the quantity of the wear particles whose size was greater than 50 μm was less than that of test 1 although the total quantity of the wear debris in the lubricant was higher in test 2 by adding the iron particles. The above figures have indicated that the iron particles have possibly reduced wear in the test. Comparisons have been also made to study the effects of the silica powder to the wear process. For test 3 with only the silica particles, the amount of the wear debris whose size was larger than 20, 50 and 100 μm in the three wear stages was much more than that in the other tests, i.e., tests 1, 2 and 4. It is believed that the high amount of the wear debris was caused by the strong cutting effect of the silica particles. When the iron powder and silica powder were mixed in the N32 lubricant, the most significant difference to test 3 (with only the silica powder) is that the amount of the wear particles whose size was bigger than 20 μm decreased significantly in test 4. This result has confirmed that the iron powder plays an important role in sliding wear process of rubbing pairs. It appears that the cutting effect of the silica particles is weakened by the iron powder. The actual amount of the wear particles generated from the tests excluding the contaminants was calculated in this study. The amount of the added contaminants is assumed to be stable in the wear process. Accordingly, the approximate amount of the wear particles generated from the tests was calculated by subtracting the amount of the added contaminants from the total particle counts for tests 2, 3 and 4, and the results are shown in According to the data in Numerical analysis of the surfaces of wear debris was conducted in this study using computerized image analysis techniques with a high quality confocal laser scanning microscope. Firstly, CLSM was used to acquire appropriate 3D images of the wear particles. Then, the wavelet theory was used to separate roughness, waviness and form. Lastly, computerized image analysis techniques were used to quantify surface average roughness For the numerical analysis of the surfaces of the wear debris generated from the tests, Only the iron particles that had distinct changes on the morphology observed in microscope were selected to conduct the numerical surface analysis. This means that the iron particles which appeared to migrate into the wear process were analyzed. For the silica powder, it is clear that the size of the silica particles decreased after these particles got involved in the wear process. The silica particles were crushed down when they caused abrasion. Therefore, the size of the silica particles decreased during the wear process. However, the morphology of these crushed silica particles did not change significantly because the silica powder is crystal. Accordingly, the numerical surface analysis of the silica powder was not conducted in this study.  For all the tests, there was no significant difference in BFD of the wear particles generated during the wear process from the running-in to severe wear stage, which was all around 1.1. But for test 3, BFD of the wear debris in all wear stages was greater than that in the other tests. It is clear that the silica powder has promoted a three-body cutting process, resulting in a more irregular boundary outline of the generated particles.  For all the wear debris, both generated particles and the iron powder, there was no obvious trend on TFD. This has indicated that the change of the surface morphology is very complicated during the wear process. The surface topographies of the disc and ball samples in different wear stages were analyzed using an optical microscope with digital image acquisition. For the sliding wear tests using the pin-on-disc tester, the surface topology of the ball samples in different wear stages was observed. In order to keep the sliding wear occurring at the same location, the test samples were not removed and inspected during testing. Only the final surface topography (worn surface) of the disc samples was examined. Wear surface topographies of the worn surfaces of the samples ( Further numerical analysis of the surfaces of the tested samples was also conducted using the CLSM and computer assisted image analysis techniques. Surface roughness ( The results in The TFD of the worn sample surfaces listed in The geometry of the wear scar is assumed to be spherical in shape. For a wear scar of spherical geometry, the wear volume was calculated by measuring the diameter of wear scar After the wear scars of the ball samples in different wear stages were measured, the wear volumes of the ball samples in different wear stages were calculated and the results are shown in According to the data in According to the above experimental results, it has been demonstrated that contaminants of the iron powder and silica powder added to the lubricant play different roles in the wear processes. The following is the discussion of the independent role and dependent role of the iron powder and the silica powder in the wear processes. Test 1 was a normal sliding wear process under the boundary lubrication condition. The main wear mechanisms were delamination, adhesion and fatigue. For test 1, the friction coefficients ranged from 0.10 to 0.14 before the severe wear took place. It is believed that this test was operated in the boundary regime before severe wear occurred. For the boundary lubrication regime, there is a considerable asperity interaction. So, there were few large particles but some elongated particles generated by peeling off of asperities in the running-in stage and the friction coefficient curve was wavy. Since the large asperities of the surface contact area of the rubbing pair had been peeled off during the running-in stage, this has resulted in a smooth surface at the end of the running-in stage. In the steady wear stage, the particles generated from the tests became uniformly small rubbing or laminar particles and the friction coefficient curve became flat. Due to the continuous frictional process, the surface shear mixed layer of the test samples was broken down and significant adhesive and fatigue wear occurred when the severe wear stage was reached. This is why there were many rough large particles and fatigue chunky particles were found in the oil sample collected during the severe wear stage. Due to the progress of the wear process described as above, the For the test with only the iron powder in the N32 lubricant (test 2), compared with test 1, the distinct points are: (1) the friction coefficient curve was smoother; (2) it took longer time to reach the severe wear stage; (3) the wear rate of the ball sample in test 2 was smaller than that in test 1 during all the wear stages; and (4) the roughnesses of the surfaces of the wear particles and tested sample became smaller when the iron particles were added to N32 lubricant. So, it is clear that the iron particles did get involved in the wear processes and reduced wear. The hardness of the iron powder is very low, less than 10 HRC. The hardness of the disc sample is 52 HRC. The hardness of the ball sample is about 50 HRC. So, the iron particles are much softer than the tested samples. The rate of abrasive wear depends strongly on the shape and edge of the abrasives Compared to the other tests, for test 3 (only adding the silica powder in the N32 lubricant), not only did the friction coefficient curve fluctuate but it also took the shortest time to reach the severe wear stage. The wear rates of all the wear stages of the test are the highest among the four tests. The hardness of the silica powder is 1000 HV (about 75 HRC). So, the ratio of the hardness of the abrasive to the hardness of the rubbing pair materials is bigger than 1.4. According to the study done by other researchers For test 4 (both the iron powder and the silica powder added in the N32 lubricant), compared with test 3, the significant differences are: (1) it took much longer time to reach the severe wear stage; (2) the number of the wear particles whose size is bigger than 20 μm decreased significantly; (3) the Compared with test 3 (with only the silica powder added in the lubricant), the relative proportions of the generated wear particles to the contaminants became smaller in each wear stage of test 4 (with both the silica powder and the iron powder added in the lubricant). This result indicates that the strong cutting effect of the silica powder was weakened by the presence of the iron powder in test 4. This point was proved by the fact that the quantity of the cutting particles decreased based on the wear debris analysis for test 4. So, the roughness of surfaces of wear particles decreased and the time of it coming into the severe wear stage (i.e., the duration of the steady wear stage) was prolonged compared with test 3. Furthermore, in general, the average size of the iron particles which got involved in the wear process became smaller and smaller from the running-in to severe wear stage. This is due to the fact that the soft iron particles can be easily broken into smaller particles during the wear processes. This was confirmed by the analysis of the iron particles using the CLSM. Furthermore, the surface roughness Four sliding wear tests have been conducted on the pin-on-disc tester to investigate sliding wear processes when the silica and iron powder exist in the N32 lubricant. Visual inspection, ferrography analysis, the particle quantity analysis using a particle analyzer, and numerical surface analysis using CLSM were used to study the wear particles and wear surfaces. The following main conclusions can be summarized. Contaminants added to the lubricant play an important role in wear processes. The hard silica powder has a strong cutting effect, generating abrasive wear to accelerate the wear process. The wear rate of the ball sample becomes higher when the silica powder gets involved in the wear process. The involvement of the low hardness iron powder has played a role of reducing wear in the wear processes. The wear rate of the ball sample decreases when the soft iron particles are added to the lubricant. When the silica and the soft iron powder are mixed in the lubricant, the cutting role of the silica powder is weakened by the presence of the soft iron powder. It is believed that the findings gained from this study and observations on the progress of the wear processes are significant. Some hard particles such as silica and soft contaminants coexist inevitably in the lubricant of these machines. To evaluate the operating condition of machinery and develop a strategy to maintain the machinery in a healthy condition, we need to understand fully how hard and soft contaminants influence the wear processes. Further studies using gearboxes in mining machinery with contaminants will provide more insight into how these particles affect wear processes in practice. The authors will report their findings in due course. The authors would like to express their sincere gratitude to the Australian Research Council (ARC) for fully funding this research project (ARC file number DP0209766) and the support of the international cooperation project (project number 50311120207) between James Cook University and Wuhan University of Technology funded by the Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC). The advice of Prof. Jian Li from Wuhan Research Institute of Materials Protection, China, on conducting the wear tests is also gratefully acknowledged.