Ilmenite separated from beach sands of Bangladesh was oxidized for 1 h at 950 °C and then reduced in charcoal for 4 h at 1050 °C. This was followed by leaching in 5% to 15% hydrochloric acid solution in temperature range of 30 to 75 °C for periods of up to 2 h. The results were compared with those obtained by leaching of ilmenite reduced without oxidizing. Oxidation prior to reduction of the ilmenite was found to increase both the extent and the rate of leaching. The residual iron contents after leaching were also found to be lower than that obtained for non-oxidized samples. The kinetic data of leaching of ilmenite reduced after oxidation was found to follow first order reaction model, i.e., G(α)=−ln(1−
                     α) up to an α value of 0.5 (i.e. up to 50% reduction) and then changed to spherical model, i.e., G(α)=[1−(1−
                     α)]3. On the other hand, leaching of ilmenite reduced without oxidizing was found to follow the Ginstling-Brounshtein reaction, i.e., G(α)=1−(2/3)α
                     −(1−
                     α)2/3 throughout the leaching process. Oxidation of ilmenite prior to reduction was also found to have decreased the activation energy of leaching from 43 kJ/mol, found for samples leached after reduction without oxidizing, to 30 kJ/mol.With the progress of the titanium industry a gradual depletion of known reserves of natural rutile is taking place. This has led to efforts to convert still abundant ilmenite to what is known as synthetic rutile. The conversion of ilmenite to synthetic rutile involves removal of iron contained in ilmenite. In one of the routes for the conversion of ilmenite to synthetic rutile, the iron oxides present in natural ilmenite is first reduced to metallic iron and the metallic iron is subsequently removed by leaching in acids. Naturally occurring ilmenites contain variable amounts of the different oxides of iron and this gives rise to different rates of reduction. To eliminate this variation in the rate of reduction, naturally occurring ilmenites are, sometimes, oxidized and then reduced. This oxidation converts the lower oxides of iron to higher oxides and enhances the subsequent rate of reduction to metallic iron. Ilmenite constitutes about 25% of all the heavy minerals found in the beach sands of Bangladesh ( Leaching of ilmenite of different origins in hydrochloric acid solutions (both diluted and concentrated) has been well studied ( Sample of Bangladesh ilmenite containing 24.2% FeO, 33.0% Fe Sample of oxidized ilmenite was then reduced by charcoal for 4 h at 1050 Leaching was performed in the temperature range of 30 to 75 During leaching the variables considered were acid concentration and time and temperature of the leaching solution. Attempts have also been made to identify the reaction mechanism and to determine the activation energy for the reaction. Wet chemical analysis of the oxidized ilmenite showed that the oxidation process (at 950 °C, for 1 h) converted all but 0.5% FeO of ilmenite to Fe  The effect of HCl acid concentration on the rate of leaching is shown in  To identify the reaction mechanism of leaching, the so-called reduced time plots were used. Such plots are quite extensively used in kinetic studies (  First order reaction: Spherical reaction: Ginstling-Brounshtein reaction: It can be seen in The plots of Both the conventional integral approach and differential approach were used to evaluate the activation energy of the leaching reaction. In the integral form, In the differential approach, Thus the activation energy values obtained by the two approaches are nearly identical. This may be taken as evidence to support the kinetic mechanisms identified for the two sets of samples. Besides, a marked increase in the values of activation energy beyond  Leaching of reduced ilmenite was found to be a rapid process and about 50% of leaching was completed within the first 5 to 10 min of leaching. The extent of removal of iron was found to increase with time, temperature and concentration of acid in the leaching solution. The leaching of ilmenite was enhanced by the presence of cracks formed during oxidation and the leaching mechanism was found to follow the first order reaction up to an