The results of a leaching kinetics study of low-grade zinc silicate ore with sulfuric acid are presented. Effect of ore particle size, reaction temperature, and acid concentration on zinc dissolution rate were determined. The results obtained show that leaching of about 94% of zinc is achieved using −200+270 mesh ore particle size at a reaction temperature of 70°C for 180 min reaction time with 10% sulfuric acid concentration. The solid:liquid ratio was maintained constant at 1:20 g/ml. Leaching kinetics indicate that diffusion through the product layer is the rate controlling process during the reaction. The activation energy was determined to be about 3.2 kcal/mol, which is characteristic for a diffusion-controlled process.The increasing demand for metals in the world has required intensive studies for the extraction of metals from low-grade ores. Extraction of zinc can be performed either by hydrometallurgical or pyrometallurgical routes. Leaching represents the first step of the hydrometallurgical route and the leaching kinetics is very important for economic metal extraction. The processing of zinc silicate ores is becoming more attractive due to the depletion of zinc sulfide ores as well as the restriction on sulfur emissions during their processing This paper presents the results of a study of the leaching kinetics of an Egyptian zinc silicate with sulfuric acid. Zinc silicate ore from Umm-Geig area, Eastern Desert (Egypt) was used. It was characterized elsewhere Sulfuric acid from Fischer Scientific was used in this study. It has a concentration of 95% and a density of 1.83 g/ml. The reaction between zinc ore and sulfuric acid was performed in a 500-ml round-bottom flask placed in a thermostatically controlled water bath. The reaction mixture was agitated at a rate of 550 rpm. The samples were taken with a syringe filter. Twenty grams of ground zinc ore was added at one time to the agitated sulfuric acid solution (400 ml) of the required concentration at the required temperature. Defoamer (oleic acid) was added when necessary. At selected time intervals, about 1 ml solution sample was taken using a syringe filter of 1 μm pore size, and the solids corresponding to that volume were discarded. Consequently, the solid:liquid ratio was maintained constant at 1: 20 g/ml. The cumulative volume removed by sampling was not significant compared to the original solution (about 3%). The samples were chemically analyzed for the determination of zinc content. After that, the percentage extraction of zinc was calculated. The effect of particle size on the leaching of zinc was studied using different size fractions (−65+100, −150+200, and −200+270 mesh). Within the series of tests, the initial sulfuric acid concentration and leaching temperature were kept constant at 10% and 50°C, respectively. The solid:liquid ratio was 1:20 g/ml. The results are given in A plot of the percentage of extracted zinc against time is presented in The effect of reaction temperature on the percentage of extracted zinc at different reaction times is plotted in Zinc minerals are reacted with sulfuric acid according to the following reaction equations The reaction of the zinc silicate minerals can proceed in a topochemical manner, whereby the thickness of an outer shell of insoluble product is progressively increased while the inner core of unreacted particle is decreased. It is clear in  Based on the experimental data in When the diffusion through the product layer is rate controlling, the kinetics may be correlated graphically using the Valensi equation: Again, based on the experimental data in According to Habashi Leaching of low-grade zinc silicate ore with sulfuric acid was studied. Extraction efficiency of about 94% of the zinc present in the ore was achieved under the following conditions: particle size −200+270 mesh, temperature 70°C, reaction time 180 min, acid concentration 10%, and solid:liquid ratio 1:20 g/ml. The kinetic study indicates that the leaching of zinc is controlled by the rate of diffusion during all the leaching time, and the reaction rate increases with temperature. The activation energy was calculated to be about 3.2 kcal/mol (13.4 kJ/mol), which is consistent with the values of activation energies reported for the diffusion-controlled reactions.