Leaching of a copper residue, produced by selective oxidative leaching of a nickel matte, in oxygenated sulfuric acid solution in the presence of chloride ions was investigated. The leaching behaviors of copper and nickel in the copper residue were determined. The effects of chloride addition, oxygen flowrate, sulfuric acid concentration, and temperature were studied as leaching variables. Addition of chloride in small amounts into the leach slurry was found to enhance copper leaching from the residue.Nickel matte, produced from nickel converter smelting, consists principally of synthesized nickel and copper sulfide minerals and a minor quantity of nickel–copper alloy. Nickel in the matte is present predominantly as heazlewoodite Ni In two-stage counter-current oxidative leaching of nickel matte, nickel is dissolved in the first stage leach via metathesis or oxidation, shown as follows: No copper is leached from the copper residue in this stage. On the contrary, the copper in solution is precipitated by replacing the nickel in the residue according to The nickel remaining in the partially leached residue of the first stage is further dissolved by metathesis and oxidation in the second-stage leach under elevated pressure according to the following equations in addition to A certain quantity of nickel remains undissolved in this stage and is left behind in the form of NiS and Ni Basic copper sulfate in the discharge of the first stage leach is digested in the second stage: A small amount of chalcocite is also oxidized under the oxidation conditions of the second stage. Nickel in the copper residue is leached according The covellite generated in the first step is further oxidized and more copper is brought into solution, with elemental sulfur and/or sulfate as oxidation product: The copper residue tested in this investigation, supplied kindly by Fukang Smelter, was produced from a two-stage counter-current oxygenated leaching of a nickel matte in sulfuric acid solution Although the mineralogical characterisation of the copper residue used was not made, its phase composition can be deduced from the process chemistry of its oxidative leaching As the residue was not washed thoroughly, copper and nickel salts were observed on the surface of the residue particles. Also, it needs to be noted that a variety of insoluble alteration products was found to be formed on the surfaces of the residue particles during stockpiling of the moist residue prior to further processing, according to an internal report of the residue supplier. These surface compounds may hinder the oxidative leaching of the copper residue. All chemicals used in the work were of chemical grade and the water was deionized. Tonnage oxygen was employed as oxidant. The leaching reactor consisted of a four-necked 500 mL round-bottom glass flask immersed in a thermostatted bath, the temperature of which was controlled within ±0.2°C. The reactor was equipped with an overhead stirrer driven by a variable-speed motor, water-cooled condenser, sample outlet and thermometer. The reactor was charged with 400 mL of deionized water which was pre-saturated with oxygen, 40 g copper residue and a measured amount of sulfuric acid, and then heated. Oxygen was sparged into the leach slurry and agitation began immediately after the temperature of the reaction mixture reached the desired value, and timing was started at the same time. Aliquots of sample were withdrawn at intervals for analysis of copper and nickel, and Cu and Ni extractions were thus calculated. At the end of each test, the content of the reactor was poured out and the reaction mixture was filtered. The filter cake was washed and air-dried. The solid was weighed and analyzed for copper and nickel. These analysis results were used for mass balance. Copper and nickel in the leach solutions and solids samples were analyzed using atomic absorption spectroscopy. A leaching test was carried out in a solution containing 2 mol/L sulfuric acid and 2 mol/L sodium chloride at 90°C. Oxygen was sparged at the bottom of the reactor at a flowrate of 900 mL/min into the leach slurry of L/S=10:1. The leaching rates of copper and nickel are depicted as a function of retention time in Except for 15% of copper present in the residue that dissolved immediately, which is attributed to the simple digestion of soluble copper salts in the residue, copper leaching was relatively slow initially, and speeded up 20–30 min later as the passive film on the particle surfaces is dissolved. Copper leaching was slowed down again when chalcocite was converted into covellite. The oxidation of covellite is reversible and leached Cu Some amount of nickel in the copper residue was dissolved instantaneously at the beginning as a result of the dissolution of water-soluble nickel salts in the residue. Nickel leaching became very slow afterward, which is probably attributed to the alteration that occurred during stockpiling of the moist residue. Also, Ni Oxygen acted as oxidant to convert Cu For oxidation leaching of nickel sulfides, it was surprising to note that too high a flowrate of oxygen had a negative effect. The nickel leaching at 900 mL/min of oxygen, for instance, was less than that at 600 mL/min, as seen in The oxidative leaching of chalcocite is acid consumptive. The required sulfuric acid for the leaching can be estimated by the following equation: As seen in The nickel leaching occurred basically within the initial 10 min. As leaching proceeded, nickel extraction at low acid concentrations, 0.25 and 0.5 mol/L for example, did not change much. This behavior implies the simple dissolution of soluble nickel salts entrained in the copper residue, while nickel sulfides remained untouched at such a low acidity, probably as a result of the formation of insoluble nickel compounds on the surfaces of the residue particles during storage of the moist residue. At acid concentrations higher than 0.5 mol/L, the oxidation of nickel sulfides started, and the nickel extraction increased slowly with the increase of leaching time, reflecting that the insoluble nickel compounds on the nickel particle surfaces were dissolved with acid and the surfaces were exposed to oxidation. Further increase of acid concentrations did not favor nickel leaching any higher, indicating that the role of sulfuric acid in the leaching was simply to remove the insoluble film on the surface of nickel particles. Oxygenated leaching of copper residue at ambient pressure in sulfuric acid solution was very slow, and only about 50% of copper was extracted after 6 h of reaction. However, addition of chloride, even in a small dose, into the leach slurry can remarkably improve the leaching of copper from the residue, as seen in In contrast to this situation, chloride enhanced nickel leaching in the whole range of chloride concentrations tested, as seen in A rise in reaction temperature was generally favourable to copper oxidative leaching but too high a temperature, particularly near boiling point, affected copper leaching negatively due to decreasing oxygen dissolution in the leach slurry. As seen from the The effect of temperature on nickel leaching followed a similar trend. The following concluding remarks can be drawn from this investigation. (1) Copper residue consisting of chalcocite or similar copper sulfide minerals can be leached efficiently with oxygen under ambient pressure in sulfuric acid solution with the aid of chloride, but the leaching becomes more complicated as a result of alteration occurring on the particles of moist residue exposed to air on stockpiling. (2) Excess sulfuric acid is required due to the presence of a passive film on mineral surfaces. (3) Chloride in small amount enhanced oxidation of copper sulfides either by moving (4) Both the increase in oxygen flowrate and the improvement of oxygen dispersion in the leach slurry benefit oxidative leaching of chalcocite. However, too much oxygen did not favor nickel leaching. (5) Although higher temperature favours the oxidation of copper sulfides, temperature above 85°C is not desirable because of the decrease in oxygen solubility in the slurry at higher temperature, especially near the boiling point of the slurry.