Espresso machines maintain constant the extraction process of espresso coffee (EC), however, it is difficult to grind roasted coffee in homogeneous way. This research aims to investigate grinded beans at specific particle sizes in three variously designed filter baskets and to compare the concentration of bioactive compounds while decreasing the amount of ground coffee. Analyses on caffeine, trigonelline and chlorogenic acids are carried out with HPLC-VWD, while volatiles with HS-SPME/GC–MS. Extracting with smaller particles escalates the quantity of bioactive compounds. The amount of caffeine/cup increased moving from 500–1000 µm to 200–300 µm particle size, both in Arabica and Robusta for all filter baskets. Keeping constant the volume of EC at various heights of perforated disc, the amount of bioactive compounds at 12 g were only around 9% lower than at 14 g. The outcomes will support further studies on different extraction processes, to develop more sustainable and economically affordable coffee.Espresso coffee (EC) is the most consumed beverage in Italy (after water), more than 50 million cups being drunk daily ( Standards of caffeine, trigonelline, 5-O-caffeoylquinic acid (5-CQA), 3-O-caffeoylquinic acid (3-CQA) and 3,5-di-O-caffeoylquinic acid (3,5-diCQA) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (Milano, Italy). Divinylbenzene-carboxen-polydimethylsiloxane (DVB-CAR-PDMS) Stable Flex fiber of 50/30 µm was acquired (Supelco, USA) and used for the HS-SPME. Formic acid (HCOOH – 99%), cyclohexane (C Roasted coffee samples (Arabica 100% – “Le Piantagioni Del Caffe”, and Robusta 100% – Bali) of certified geographical origins from two production areas (America and Asia) were suggested by certified roasters for EC preparation, while the fully automatic espresso machine (Vittoria Arduino, VA388 Black Eagle) and the grinding machine (Mythos 1) were provided by the espresso machine manufacturing company Simonelli Group SpA. (Belforte del Chienti, Italy). From now on, the two different coffee cultivars used for the EC samples, are simply referred to as The Arabica and Robusta medium roasted coffee samples were brought under sealed packages. Packages were opened just before grinding. All coffee beans were milled between fine and medium sizes and were separated by sieve plates (vibrational sieve machine, Retch, AS 200 Control, Germany). The grinded coffee was separated into sieve plates with 200–300 µm, 300–400 µm, 400–500 µm and 500–1000 µm. An analytical scale (Gibertini, Crystal Series analytical scale, Italy) was used to weigh 12 and 14 g of separated ground coffee. Coffee beans, after passing comminution process, were analysed by Mastersizer 3000 Aero Series dry dispersion units (Malvern PANalytical Ltd., UK), which uses a laser diffraction to measure the size of particles (from 0.01 to 3500 µm). The instrument operates with continuous air flow, generated by industrial compressor at 6.5 bar, that penetrates into Aero dry dispersion units, which transfers the particles at 2–3 bar to laser diffraction. In this way, the particles move in laminar flow and the vacuum extraction unit (KARCHER Professional NT 45/1 Tact, Germany) removes samples from Aero dry. The grinded and separated coffee powder with various particle sizes were collected: one fifth for Mastersizer 3000 and the rest for extraction of espresso coffee. The size of particles for each sample were examined in fivefold and the mean value was used for comparison. Separated microns (200–1000 µm) and weights (12–14 g) of ground coffee were transferred in three different filter baskets ( The total dissolved solids (expressed as mg l 1 ml of each EC sample was diluted 50 times in the mobile phase. The solution was centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 10 min and filtered at 0.45 μm (PTFE filter) before HPLC-VWD analysis ( Sample injection techniques with HS-SPME was implemented through PAL3 auto sampler system. Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) fiber (Sigma Aldrich, Milan, Italy; 10 µm thickness) was in HS-SPME. For the analysis, 2 ml of EC sample was placed in a screw top vial. The vial was tightly screwed on magnetic cap with septum and the system was set for automatic functioning mode. The sample was placed into a stirrer, incubated at 60 °C, and stirred at 250 rpm for 20 min. Then, HS-SPME automatically was inserted in the sample and remained 20 min for adsorption. After adsorption, HS-SPME automatically injected the analytes into the gas-chromatographic system. A desorption time of 10 min was sufficient to desorb analytes from the fiber. Cleaning was automatically performed with PAL system by inserting the fiber in the conditioning port at 230 °C for 20 min after each process. A gas chromatograph/mass selective detector (GC/MSD – Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA, Agilent 7890B GC Hardware with Agilent 5977 Series MSD and Mass Hunter GC/MSD Data Acquisition) was used. The column used for separation was DB-WAX (0.25 mm × 60 m × 0.25 µm – Agilent 122–7062, CA, USA). The workstation in the GC–MS system was an Agilent Chem. The flow rate (He) was 1.2 ml min Data on selected volatile compounds were examined by principal component analysis (PCA) using Statistica v.7.1 (Stat Soft Italia, Vigonza, Italy). PCA was applied in order to visualize information at various particle sizes that were used for EC extraction in three filter baskets. The analysis of particle size distribution was implemented with Mastersizer 3000 instrument. The process of analysis was rapid due to the laser diffraction. Measurements were repeated fivefold for single sample and the mean value was used to create the Gaussian graph. The graphs ( In general, consumers description of the “strength” term in coffee can be characterized as its overall concentration of beverage, which in chemical terms broadly associate with the total solids content of coffee (  On the other hand, Robusta coffee that was used to extract 14 g yielded the highest TDS in Filter  It is evident that decreasing the amount of coffee allow to obtain similar amount of TDS when increasing the heights of the perforated disk. The validation of the method has been carried out in relation to linearity, repeatability and with-in reproducibility, limits of detection (LODs) and limits of quantification (LOQs) ( The effect of particle sizes on EC extraction in different filters has been studied. EC samples (thirty samples of Arabica and thirty samples of Robusta for different particle size with three different filters, and eight samples of Arabica with various heights of the perforated disc) were analysed for detecting caffeine, trigonelline and derivatives of chlorogenic acids (3-Caffeoylquinic acid, 5-Caffeoylquinic acid and 3,5-di- Caffeoylquinic acid). The extraction of EC was performed in triplicate in the same conditions for each filter and each particle size ( Preliminarily, for each filter basket, the grinding machine has been tuned and calibrated so as to obtain optimal EC without separating ground coffee by sieves. To extract EC with 14 and 12 g of ground coffee, the variables of the espresso machine were set at the following conditions: 25 s at 93 ± 2 °C and 9 bars. After calibration, grinded coffee was separated by a vibrational sieve. From each different sieve, 14 and 12 g of ground coffee were used for extraction. According to previous research studies ( In In Volatile compounds in EC were analysed on DB-WAX column, which suits for coffee analysis. The brewed samples were inserted into GC–MS using HS-SPME and the analyses of volatiles acquired in full scan mode. The scanned ions of each sample were calculated through their percentage of relative peak area (RPA). All volatiles above sixty percent were collected and divided into chemical classes ( Between 3 and 40 key odorants are typically composing a specific odour code of a food, which could feature in fact more than 10,000 volatiles ( The members of pyrazine group are found in extracted EC at the following mean RPA: 5.62% methylpyrazine, 4.69% 2,5-dimethylpyrazine, 3.61% ethyl pyrazine, 4.41% 2-ethyl-6-methylpyrazine, 3.95% 2-ethyl-5-methylpyrazine, 3.71% 2-ethyl-3-methylpyrazine, 0.41% 2-( The components of furan group in EC were obtained at different mean RPA %: 0.78% 2-(methoxymethyl)-furan, 0.98% dihydro-2-methyl-3 (2H)-furanone, 0.99% 2-furanmethanol, 0.96% 5-ethylmethyltetrahydro-2-furanmethanol, 3.55% 1-(2-furanyl)-ethanone, 1.44% 2- Chemicals of phenol group were 1.60% 4-ethyl-2-methoxyphenol and 1.91% 2-methoxyphenol detected at retention time 45.587 and 47.139 min. Key-odorants that come with this group are mostly spicy and smoky. Members of ketone and aldehyde groups were in moderate mean RPA in EC: 4.36% 1-hydroxy-2-propanone, 0.92% 3-hydroxybutanone and 1.89% benzaldehyde. Normally, the aroma of these groups is close to buttery, almond and caramelly (Aroma Components of pyrrole groups, as 0.68% 2-formyl-1-pyrrole, 1.04% 2-acetylpyrrole, and 2.05% 1-furfurylpyrrole in EC aroma, release nutty, musty, hay-like, mushroom-like, and herbaceous notes ( Chemical groups found in different EC aroma areas are compared by extraction conditions. As the amount of ground coffee and the size of grinded particles has varied, resulting GC–MS chromatogram highlighted that the smaller particles develop stronger aroma, because of the relative increase of the surface area in the coffee cake. The principal component analysis was applied to evaluate the relationship among the different particle sizes (200 µm and 400 µm) and three different filter baskets ( The comparison between different extractions of EC with three different filters while reducing the amount of ground coffee from 14 g to 12 g provides information and results about the influence of different particle sizes of grinded coffee, and various heights of perforated discs in the extraction process. Three filter baskets were used to extract EC with 14 g and 12 g of ground coffee, and it was found that, at the same particle sizes, volatiles had a similar percentages area although reducing the amount of ground coffee. Moreover, the changes in the structure of the perforated disc can help generate almost equal concentration of bioactive compounds when the mass of ground coffee in the basket is only 12 g. The implementation of different filters for smaller particle sizes, and of different heights of perforates discs for reduced amount of ground coffee, are both easy adjustments to apply in coffee houses (bars, coffee shops etc.). Simple and feasible as it is, this optimization of the coffee brewing process could lead in fact, in the long run, to a more sustainable consumption of EC, by reducing in the end the amount of the raw material and produce less amount of waste while maintaining the same quality of beverage. The environmental sustainability is mainly linked to a significant reduction in the waste production (e.g. packaging, coffee waste, plastic, energy consumption). Less discards not only result in a more sustainable waste reduction but also in a decrease in the disposal costs. Some of the main advantages presented in the study contemplate sustainability also at the socio-economic level, since the availability and use of such filters do not require  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. G K and S A are grateful to Simonelli Group SpA (Belforte del Chienti, Macerata, Italy) for partially funding their fellowships and for providing coffee samples, espresso coffee machines, the grinder “Mythos 1” and the separation sieve “Retch AS200”. The authors declare that no competing interests exist. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article:  