In this work, new composite membranes were successfully prepared via phase inversion technique using polyvinyl chloride (PVC) and polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) as polymers and tetrahydrofuran (THF) and N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) as solvents. The prepared membranes have been characterized by scanning electron microscope (SEM), and fourier transforms infrared spectroscopy (FTIR). The scanning electron microscope results prove that the prepared membranes are smooth and their pores are distributed throughout the whole surface and bulk body of the membrane without any visible cracks. The stress–strain mechanical test showed an excellent mechanical behavior enhanced by the presence of PVP in the prepared membranes. The membranes performance results showed that the salt rejection reached 98% with a high flux. This, in turn, makes the prepared membranes can be applied for sea and brackish water treatment through membrane distillation technology.Recently, the need for fresh water for various applications is raising with the growth of the world population. It was noted that most of the world water resources are mainly saline water. Furthermore, the fresh water (~ Many ways could be used to prepare porous polymeric films, such as stretching, sintering, phase separation processes and track etching. Controlled phase separation of polymer solutions is the most common technique through the above mentioned ways The membrane works as a semi-permeable barrier which allows passing of single or more species or compounds of a gaseous and/or liquid mixture or solution under a certain driving force Membrane distillation is a thermally and pressure driven process in which hot and cold water streams could be separated through a hydrophobic micro porous membrane. Liquid water is prevented from passaging through the membrane due to its hydrophobic nature; however, vapor is allowed to pass, and vapor pressure gradient is evolved due to the difference in temperature. This consequently leads to the passage of water vapor through the membrane and condensation of it on the colder surface Both polymeric and inorganic membranes of hydrophobic nature could be used for MD process. However, commercial microporous hydrophobic polymeric membranes made of polypropylene (PP), polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) and polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) have attracted much more attention as a result of low values of surface tension This study provides three types of VMD composite membranes that can be used for water and wastewater treatment, especially for sea water desalination through MD process. These composite membranes were prepared Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP 360000K) was obtained from Applichem. Panreac (Saxony, Anhalt). Tetrahydrofuran (THF) was purchased from Carlo ERBA reagents (chaussée du vexin, France). In the present work, membranes were prepared using phase inversion method. In this process, a polymer is transformed from a liquid or soluble state to a solid state. Tetrahydrofuran and Scanning electron microscope (SEM) was used to inspect the cross-section and surface morphology of membranes by using Quanta FEG 250 SEM. The dried samples were coated by gold sputtered for producing electric conductivity. Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR) was used to analyze organic materials and certain inorganic materials, since it has the ability to provide specific information about chemical bonding and molecular structure. The Jasco FTIR-4100 spectroscopy was applied to investigate the chemical bonding and molecular structure of the prepared membranes. Mechanical properties of PVC/PVP membranes were measured by the Lloyd Lr10K, screw-driven testing machine fitted with a 1 kN load cell with a bespoke 30 The membrane porosity was found by dividing the pores volume by the total volume of the porous membrane. The pore size distribution, pore volume and pore area of the prepared membranes was determined through using a Hg porosimeter (Type No. 9810). The contact angle of membranes was measured using a Compact video microscope (CVM) manufactured by SDL-UK; the contact time was 10 The permeability measurements, permeate flux, and salt rejection of the investigated membranes were carried out on vacuum membrane distillation (VMD) system as shown in The top surface, the cross-section and the bottom surface of membranes morphologies were investigated using scanning electron microscope (SEM) as a visual verification of how the combination of PVC and PVP polymers influence the membranes morphology. SEM was used to predict the surface texture, homogeneity and cracks in the prepared composite membranes.  Membrane 3 (M3) is prepared without using PVP, but the solvent mixture was formed from THF (82.6%) and NMP (17.4%) instead of using THF only in the case of M1. The percentage of PVC to solvent mixture is 14% to 86% respectively. According to Fourier-Transform Infrared (FTIR) was used to study the distribution of functional groups and molecular orientations in the membranes under investigation. The FTIR test was conducted in this study using Jasco FTIR 4100.The FTIR responses for M1 that relate the wave number and absorption for different peaks are illustrated in As indicated before, M2 was formed using a blend of PVC and PVP polymers. This can be confirmed by the FTIR responses of this membrane as shown in It should be noted that M3 was prepared using the same PVC content of M1 (14% PVC and 86% solvent), but in the presence of a solvent mixture of THF and NMP instead of using THF solvent in the case of M1 (see Mechanical behaviors of investigated membranes were measured by Lloyd-Lr10k testing machine at ambient temperature. This test was performed at a crosshead speed of 5 It is observed that the evaporation surface area increases with the increase in porosity level of the membrane. This consequently leads to higher permeate fluxes. Moreover, membrane porosity affects the amount of heat loss by conduction The results indicate that M1 was too fragile to perform the porosity test and therefore, there are no results considering the porosity of this membrane. The porosity, pore size and density were measured for membranes 2 and 3. As shown in Contact angle measurement of membranes is very an important parameter for membrane characterization and indirect indication of the hydrophilicity and flux behavior. The porosity and hydrophobicity of the membrane can be used to determine the flux of the membrane. It is expected that the highly porous membrane will give high flux, but the amount of hydrophobicity/hydrophobicity may be a barrier to doing that. So, it is important to investigate the effect of porosity and hydrophobicity/hydrophobicity of the considered membranes on the flux rate.Vacuum membrane distillation process was applied to measure the membrane flux where the synthetic salty water (10000 The hydrophobicity results indicate increased membrane wettability and reduced filter pressure. This could be as a result of lower water contact angle of that type of membrane that has a significant effect on the reduction of filter media capillary pressure The membrane distillation process was also applied for measuring the salt rejection for the investigated membranes. The aqueous feed solutions of NaCl were prepared and were continuously fed to the investigated membrane distillation process. The TDS (mainly NaCl) of aqueous feed was 10000 The calculated salt rejections of M2 and M3 were 97.8% and 98% respectively. It is clear that the two types of membranes give approximately the same salt rejection value of 98%. However, M2 is favored over M3. This is because M2 has better mechanical properties and higher flux than that of M3. The mechanical and physical properties of the produced M2 were compared to other types of membranes contained PVC in their compositions. As an example, the characteristic of the polyvinyl chloride and co-polybutadiene-acrylonitrile (PVC/PBA) blend membranes prepared by Islam and co-workers The present research work provides a new composite membrane for the purpose of water treatment especially the saline water treatment through MD process. The following conclusions can be given from the present work: Three types of membranes were prepared, namely M1, M2, and M3. The proposed membranes composed of PVC only or PVC/PVP combination that can improve the membrane performance. The developed membranes were characterized using scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and Fourier transforms infrared spectroscopy (FTIR). Also, porosity, flux, and salt rejection measurements were conducted using synthetic solutions. The SEM results showed that M1 is a dense membrane compared to M2 and M3. This consequently may enhance the salt rejection of M1 if it practically applied without problems. According to SEM results, M2 and M3 surfaces were smooth and pores are uniformly distributed with no sign of visible cracks. M3 which was prepared using PVC without the addition of PVP but in the presence of solvent mixture of THF and NMP instead of using THF only as in the case of M1, provides enhancement in the membrane performance. Also, M2 is composed of a blend of PVC and PVP polymers. Provides good performance due to the presence of functional groups belongs to PVC and PVP in M2 polymers matrix. The porosity and the average pore diameter of M2 are approximately twice the corresponding values of M3 due to the presence of PVP. The permeate flux through M2 is higher than that of M3. This can be attributed to higher porosity and hydrophilicity of M2 compared to M3. It is found that M2 and M3 have approximately the same salt rejection percentage of 98%. However, M2 is favored over M3 in water treatment purposes due to its better mechanical properties and higher flux. The expected application of the developed membranes especially M2 could be directed to the desalination of the sea or brackish water