A technological scheme for copper slag processing is proposed. It comprises 5 stages, namely: (i) air oxidation of the copper slag at a temperature above 800°C for 2h; (ii) hydrothermal treatment of the oxidized slag with sodium hydroxide solution (140g/l) at 190°C for 3h; (iii) separation of the solid from the liquid phase by hot filtration; (iv) gel formation through hydrolysis of the liquid silicate phase by changing pH; (v) obtaining of amorphous SiO2 (silica gel) by drying at 80°C. The processes used for slag manipulation were elucidated and optimized for silicon extraction. It was established that the increase in the oxygen partial pressure in the oxidizing gas does not change the mechanism nor significantly intensifies the oxidizing process. A decisive factor for the extraction of SiO2 during hydrothermal treatment was the concentration of NaOH. Its increase from 60 to 140g/l reduced the amount of residual SiO2 more than half and significantly decreased the formation of analcime (NaAlSi2O6·H2O) in the solid phase. Hydrolysis of the liquid silicate phase by changing pH is an appropriate process for gel formation.Copper is derived mainly from copper–iron–sulphur minerals such as chalcopyrite (CuFeS With minimal treatment, the slag is often used in the production of cement and concrete ( A new approach has been proposed for recycling the copper slag into iron oxide concentrate, alkali metal silicate or a solution of silicon in alkali metal hydroxide, which can be used to produce water glass and silica gel ( Silica gel is a hydrophilic absorbent, with a wide range of applications in the chemical and construction industries. We believe that a more in-depth study of the utilization of silicon containing slag is needed to achieve better extraction of silicon in the form of silica gel. Thus, integrated production of sulphuric acid, silica gel and iron concentrates could be developed eventually leading to the full utilization of all waste products and the minimization of environmental pollution. The present study is an extension of the method proposed by Two types of experiments were performed. The non-isothermal oxidation of copper slag was carried out using the computerized combined thermal analysis apparatus LABSYS evo (SETARAM Company, France) in the temperature range 25–1000 The isothermal oxidation was carried out at temperatures of 250, 400, 600, 800 and 1000 The oxidized slag was treated with a solution of sodium hydroxide or a mixture of sodium hydroxide and sodium carbonate in an autoclave installation under continuous stirring. The system was set to operate at temperatures up to 250 The resulting mixture of solid iron rich residue and liquid silicate was separated by hot filtration. Then the solid residue was treated again with water in the autoclave in order to achieve additional extraction of the silicon. Two methods were used for carrying out the gelation of the silicate phase: Natural formation of gel from the hydrosol extracted from the alkaline filtrate at room temperature for ten days; Changing the pH of the liquid phase by acidification with hypo chloric acid down to pH The phase composition of the solid phases was determined by XRD analyses using an automatic Bruker D8 Advance powder X-ray diffractometer with CuKα radiation (Ni filter) and registration by LynxEye solid-state position-sensitive detector. The X-ray spectra were recorded in the range from 5.3 to 100° 2θ with a step of 0.02° 2θ. A rotating speed of 30 SEM images were recorded and the distribution of the chemical elements was determined using a JEOL JSM 35 CF scanning electron microscope with a TRACOR NORTHERN TN – 2000 X-ray microanalyser using JEOL standards. Infrared spectra of the samples were recorded in KBr tablets (13 The silicon content in the liquid phases was determined spectrophotometrically in the form of soluble complex β-silicomolybdic heteropolyacid at λ The copper slag used in the experiments was a waste product from the pyrometallurgical production of copper in Aurubis Bulgaria AD Company. Mineralogical analysis indicated the presence of fayalite Fe The slag was sifted through a 100 mesh sieve, and the fraction with particle size below 100 mesh was used in the experiment. In our previous works ( XRD analysis of the slag oxidized in a furnace at different temperatures ( The results of the experiments on the oxidation of the slag showed that the optimum conditions for carrying out the process of oxidation in air are: temperature above 800 Treatment of the oxidized slag with an alkaline solution (aqueous sodium hydroxide and/or carbonate) is a key stage in the recycling process. Its purpose is to divide the oxidized slag into two components: an iron-rich phase (iron concentrate) and a silicon-bearing solution. The SEM image of a cross section of a slag oxidized at 900 The results ( XRD analysis of the solid residue obtained after hydrothermal treatment showed that in addition to the silicon extraction in the solution as sodium silicate, synthesis of the silicon-containing crystalline phase NaAlSi The amount of analcime mainly depends on the concentration of sodium hydroxide and decreases with the increase in NaOH concentration,  Quantitative X-ray analysis of the solid residue after treatment of the oxidized slag with 140 The alkaline silicate solution obtained after filtration containing 17–21 The gel resulting from each of the variants was dried at a temperature of 80 The IR spectra ( A technological scheme for copper slag processing was proposed and the process conditions were optimized. The scheme comprises 5 stages, namely: Air oxidation of the copper slag at a temperature above 800 Hydrothermal treatment of the oxidized slag at 190 Separation of the solid from the liquid phase by hot filtration; Gel formation through hydrolysis of the liquid silicate phase by changing the pH; Obtaining of amorphous SiO The results were obtained with the financial support of the The authors wish to thank “Aurubis Bulgaria” AD for supplied slag.