This work proposes a method for the evaluation of the effect of galvanic interactions between intergrown sulfide-mineral grains present in a thiosulfate leaching system, based on a combination of electrochemical measurements. Several common associated minerals in complex sulfide ore (CSO), as well as high purity sulfide minerals (pyrite, arsenopyrite, chalcopyrite, sphalerite, and galena), were used to develop and test the method. The reactivity of the CSO and each individual sulfide mineral in an ammoniacal thiosulfate solution was determined by voltammetry and chronoamperometry, using carbon paste electrodes and rotating disk electrodes (RDE). Secondary phase formation and the surface alteration of both the individual and associated minerals were evaluated by in-situ Raman spectroscopy and ex-situ cyclic voltammetry in 0.1 M NaNO3 aqueous solution. Chalcocite (Cu2S) and covellite (CuS) were identified as intermediate products of chalcopyrite leaching, while pyrite was oxidized to ferrous hydroxide and later to magnetite. Results showed that pyrite in CSO acts as a cathodic side, promoting the reduction of oxygen. Thus, the oxidation of pyrite was delayed due to the galvanic protection offered by arsenopyrite and chalcopyrite. Mineralogy and evaluation of the mineral textures both of the ore and its modification as a result of leaching were used to validate the method.Sulfide mineral deposits are an important source of various precious and base metals. Pyrite, pyrrhotite, chalcopyrite, sphalerite and galena are considered ‘rock forming’( Minerals other than gold ore in a concentrate can react with the leaching reagents and affect the extraction and recovery of gold in a positive or negative manner ( Static carbon paste electrodes (CPE) have proven to be useful in characterizing the leaching behavior of sulfide minerals ( When gold is associated with different grain minerals such as sulfides, dissolution can be made difficult by the textural characteristics of the ore. In traditional processes such as cyanidation, or alternative processes like thiosulfate leaching, galvanic interactions between the phases and gold, as well as between sulfide minerals themselves, generates the formation of secondary phases that act as passive layers, decreasing the oxidation of minerals and therefore decreasing the dissolution of gold ( The aim of this work is to assess the ability of this new methodology to provide a more detailed knowledge of the anodic dissolution of the sulfide minerals normally associated with gold in a concentrate. Special attention is paid to the interactions between sulfide minerals and the identification of solid intermediate products formed, as well as the relative galvanic dissolution rate for the intergrown sulfides such as pyrite, arsenopyrite, chalcopyrite, galena and sphalerite; thereby establishing which phases are preferentially dissolved in the leaching solution of thiosulfate. The robustness of the method is based on the results of previous investigations as well as those presented here. High-purity mineral specimens were obtained from Excalibur Mineral Corp., NY. These consisted of arsenopyrite and galena from Mexico, chalcocite, covellite and chalcopyrite from Canada, and pyrite from Colombia. The identification of the samples was confirmed by powder X-ray diffraction (not shown in this work). The single crystals were ground and sieved through a Tyler 200 mesh screen (75 μm opening). The “Centro Provincial de Gestión Minero Agroempresarial” (the regional center for mining and agricultural industry management) supplied a representative sample of a gold–bearing sulfide concentrate taken from the Remedios mining district in Antioquia, Colombia. This sample also was ground to <200 mesh. The complex sulfide ore (CSO) grains, both pristine and after leaching in the ammoniacal thiosulfate solution, were embedded in epoxy resin and polished to a mirror finish. In order to determine the volumetric concentration of the mineral components in the sample, mineralogical characterization was carried out using the dot counting technique. A high-resolution Carl Zeiss AXIO SCOPE-A1-POL with chromatic correction flat image compensation and 10, 20 and 50× magnification targets was used for this purpose, in accordance with ASTM D-2799 (2009). For the micro-chemical analysis, as well as the micro-textural evolution of the product minerals of the dissolution process, a JEOL JSM 6490 LV scanning electron microscope (SEM) coupled to an OXFORD INCA Penta FET-x3 energy dispersive X-ray spectrometer was used. Samples were preassembled in polished sections and metalized with gold. Detailed descriptions of CPE preparation can be found elsewhere ( All solutions were prepared from reagent grade chemicals and deionized water (18.2 MΩ cm). The reagents used were anhydrous ammonium thiosulfate (NH The electrochemical experiments were carried out in a conventional three-electrode cell, incorporating a graphite rod counter electrode (5 mm in diameter, 99.9995%, Alfa Aesar) and an Ag/AgCl (3.0 M KCl) reference electrode placed in a Luggin capillary. The carbon paste electrodes described above were used as working electrodes, both for static and for hydrodynamic measurements. Potentials were converted to the standard hydrogen electrode (SHE) scale, assuming the Ag/AgCl electrode has a potential of 0.209 V versus the SHE. All potentials reported herein correspond to the SHE scale. The reactivity of the mineral samples was studied by voltammetry, chronoamperometry and potentiodynamic polarization using a 302 N Autolab potentiostat/galvanostat (Metrohm Autolab) controlled with the NOVA 1.11 software. The solution (50 mL) was N Measurements were performed in a homemade electrochemical cell using a potentiostat/galvanostat (GAMRY 600) and the Echem Analyst software. The working electrode (WE) consisted of a carbon paste electrode with dispersed pyrite grains. A Pt wire with a geometric area of 2 cm Leaching of complex sulfide ore (CSO) was performed with ammoniacal thiosulfate solution. In these experiments a 2:1 liquid-to-solid mass ratio was used. Firstly, oxidation pre-treatment was performed in an ammonium hydroxide solution composed of 0.6 mol L The complex sulfide ore (CSO) concentrate was composed of pyrite (58%), galena (15%), sphalerite (4%), chalcopyrite and arsenopyrite (3%), aluminosilicates (about 19%), and free gold (<1%). These minerals were identified in the CSO by polarized reflected light microscopy (  The cathodic peaks C This study focuses on the oxidation of both thiosulfate and sulfide minerals, under conditions where dissolution of gold contained in a sulfide ore could occur in ammoniacal thiosulfate solution, assisted by the oxidizing effect of Cu(II) ions. Thus, it is necessary to determine the formal potential of the Cu(II)/Cu(I) couple in order to detect possible interferences on the part of the redox process of the Cu ions during the anodic scans of the CV curves. Assuming that the diffusion coefficients of the oxidized and reduced copper species are similar, the half-wave potential of the Cu(II)/Cu(I) couple in aqueous 0.05 M Cu(II), 0.025 M EDTA, 0.2 M S  In order to quantify and differentiate the anodic response associated with mineral oxidation phenomena, the values of the voltammogram slope in the positive sweep (between 0.2 V and 0.35 V) and the anodic potential value when the anodic current reaches a value of 20 μA have been extracted from the voltammetry responses ( In a gold mineral intergrowth with any sulfide, different reactivity of the phases has been reported ( The control of convective mass transport by the rotating disk electrode (RDE) enables a distinction between reactions that result in soluble products and those resulting in solid-state surface-confined species. Therefore, the effect of electrode rotation during the potential sweep for different sulfides in RDE electrodes will now be analyzed. Voltammograms obtained under hydrodynamic conditions using rotating disk sulfide electrodes are shown in There is a considerable change in the voltammogram when the CPE-arsenopyrite is rotated, which is characterized by the appearance of the two anodic peaks; A According to this, soluble species like thioarsenates, thiosulfate and arsenates are, together with iron hydroxides, the final species formed during the leaching of arsenopyrite in alkaline media. Meanwhile, iron arsenate (FeAsO The three oxidation peaks A As described above, the oxidation products of iron–bearing sulfides in ammoniacal thiosulfate solution are iron oxyhydroxides and oxides, in addition to some sulfur compounds. Owing to their crystal structure similarity, the rearrangement of the cations and loss of OH can facilitate the conversion of oxyhydroxides to oxides by dihydroxylation, an interconversion that can require dissolution followed by reprecipitation of the new species ( In situ Raman spectroscopy measurements were performed during the anodic electro-oxidation of pyrite grains dispersed in a CPE that was immersed in the ammoniacal thiosulfate solution. Two anodic overpotentials, of 0.100 V The spectrum at 0.4 V Nitrate aqueous solution under neutral conditions is a convenient medium in which to carry out the solid-state electrochemical characterization of sulfide minerals, due to the vast amount of knowledge available on the reactivity of individual sulfides and mineral assemblages by voltammetry (  The passivation of arsenopyrite at 0.3 V and 0.4 V in ammoniacal thiosulfate solution is described above, in the analysis of In the case of electrochemically leached chalcopyrite, peak A  On the other hand, two active-passive zones are observed on the chalcopyrite electrode. The first of these is up to 0.3 V overpotential, and is characterized by an initial oxidation process shown in Galena also exhibits a passive/active/passive behavior. Initially, there is an oxidation process at overpotentials below 0.2 V, which passivates the surface between 0.1 V and 0.2 V, followed by an activation of the surface at 0.3 V (A1 peak, The experiments described above were designed to facilitate the study of the effect of grain bonding relations (intergrowth between minerals) that can result in preferential dissolution of one sulfide mineral over another. Thus, a representative sample of a CSO containing pyrite, galena, sphalerite, chalcopyrite, and arsenopyrite was dispersed in carbon paste. The surface of the CSO grains dispersed in CPE was leached in the ammoniacal thiosulfate solution by holding the potential at 0.1, 0.3, 0.4 and 0.5 V The dissolution features of the CSO grains are shown in The reduction of dissolved molecular oxygen plays an important role in the leaching processes of sulfide minerals ( Another important issue to highlight with respect to the polarization curves is the fact that cathodic currents of the pyrite observed at all rotation speeds are always larger than those observed in the other ores. This means that pyrite catalyzes the cathodic reaction more efficiently than the other ores. This can be observed more clearly in As can be seen in SEM and microchemical analyses (EDS) of the CSO were carried out before and after leaching in ammoniacal thiosulfate solution. SEM images of the CSO after the leaching process are shown in An electrochemical methodology was developed in order to study the effect of grain bonding relations (intergrowth between minerals) on the galvanic interactions in the thiosulfate‑copper-ammonia-EDTA leaching system. This involved the use of rotating disk electrodes of high purity sulfide minerals and a gold–bearing sulfide concentrate dispersed in carbon paste. In this concentrate, the intergrowth between minerals was used to illustrate the methodology. The results obtained show that the method is able to identify the minerals whose dissolution rates increase more than others due to galvanic coupling. Additionally, they provide information on the solid intermediates formed. The use of this methodology contributes to a better understanding of the reaction mechanisms involved. Indeed, this type of information is not available using current methods. Therefore, the methodology proposed in this work can be used for any type of sulfide mineral concentrate or leaching system. The main results obtained from the anodic dissolution of sulfides in the copper-catalyzed ammoniacal thiosulfate-leaching system can be summarized as follows: (1) Chalcopyrite grains are converted, firstly to chalcocite by the release of iron, and then to a copper-deficient sulfide (e.g. digenite), to form covellite. (2) Ferrous hydroxide is formed as an intermediate product of the early stage of pyrite oxidation, and is later oxidized to magnetite and precipitated on the pyrite surface at higher oxidation states. (3) Chalcopyrite–pyrite and arsenopyrite–pyrite form galvanic couples because they are intergrown in the gold–bearing sulfide concentrate studied. (4) Chalcopyrite and arsenopyrite act as the anode and they are dissolved faster than where there is no intergrowth. (5) The dissolution rate of chalcopyrite is several times higher than that of the other sulfides in the concentrate. (6) Pyrite acts as the cathode and provides a catalytic surface for oxygen reduction, intensifying the anodic dissolution of the other minerals that could be in a galvanic couple with it. Further studies are needed in order to understand the effect of certain intergrowth textures on the rates of the anodic and cathodic reactions that occur at the surface of each mineral. The authors are pleased to acknowledge the financial assistance of the