A double barrier release system is designed for herbal essential oils which possess tremendous anti-fungal activity, even against drug-resistant fungi. However, their utilization is limited owing to their sensitivity towards pH, temperature and light. Three essential oils (thymol, eugenol, carvacrol) are microencapsulated in polylactic acid shell with a high encapsulation efficiency of 80% in order to leverage their synergistic anti-fungal activity. These microcapsules are further incorporated in bacterial cellulose – a naturally produced nanofibrous hydrogel. This unique system offers double barrier to the release of oils – the polymeric shell and the nanofibrous matrix. The anti-fungal testing was carried out on model fungus- Candida albicans (cause of common oral, vaginal infections). In vitro transvaginal drug release study was performed to compare release from microcapsules as colloids and the composites, where the later exhibited a controlled release. Mathematical modelling was performed to understand the release, which is governed by matrix swelling, diffusion of oils and erosion of microcapsules. The time-kill curves show that the composites were able to achieve fungicidal endpoint with half the oil dosage as compared to the colloidal microcapsules and were far more effective than commercial antifungal fluconazole.Drug resistance is a major healthcare challenge today with the increasing incidence and prevalence of invasive fungal infections, especially amongst immunocompromised patients and/or those hospitalized Essential oils (EOs) readily penetrate into the cell, being lipophilic, and target the ergosterol biosynthesis pathway, thus, impairing its biosynthesis. Simultaneously, they also react with the cell membrane, owing to their polarity and disrupt the membrane integrity, causing the cell death Various essential oils and their active components have been studied, including thyme, oregano, cinnamon, clove, citronella, lemongrass, mint, peppermint, geranium, and eucalyptus, which have been evaluated against pathogenic microbes and have been found to be effective antimicrobials Unfortunately, the essential oils are quite sensitive to temperature, light, and pH, which diminishes activity. Thus, there is a considerable interest in developing carrier systems to protect these oils and also to assist in controlled release. Various formulations for thymol, eugenol, and carvacrol, individually, such as direct incorporation in thin films, microspheres, nanoemulsions, nanoparticles, hydrogels, supercritical impregnation and microcapsules Moreover, there are reports which have demonstrated the synergistic activity of combinations of these oils on drug-resistant fungal species Hestrin Schramm (HS) media for the production of BC includes glucose, peptone, yeast extract, citric acid, and disodium hydrogen phosphate of microbiological grade, which were purchased from Himedia, India. Solvents of analytical grade - Ethanol, Dimethylformamide (DMF), Dichloromethane (DCM), Hexane, Ethylacetate - were purchased from SD fine chemicals, India. Sebourad dextrose agar (SDA) and Sebourad dextrose broth (SDB) of bacteriological grade were purchased from SRL. Poloxamer 188 of analytical grade was purchased from Alfa Aser, India. Poly(DL-lactide) (PLA ester terminated, HS media consisting of glucose 20 g L Microcapsules of PLA with thymol, eugenol, and carvacrol were prepared by coacervation phase separation method. First, the o/w emulsion was produced by dispersing chosen amounts of the three oils in water with poloxamer 188 (a nonionic surfactant) using Omni tissue homogenizer at 11,000 rpm for 90 s followed by stirring at 500 rpm. The required amount of PLA solution in DMF was added dropwise to the o/w emulsion. Upon contact with water, the homogeneous solution of PLA in DMF stimulates the precipitation of PLA around the oil core. The encapsulation process was continued under stirring for one hour at room temperature. The microcapsules formed were hardened by adding OCMTS, and allowed to stand for one hour. After hardening, the microcapsules were decanted and sequentially washed with ethanol and hexane in order to remove any remaining polar and apolar components. Pluronic F68 was added to preserve the microcapsules during the washing process. Four different samples with two different weight percentages of PLA and surfactant (as described in Freeze-dried BC pellicles of 13 cm diameter and 0.5 mm thickness which weigh 60 mg were taken to prepare composites. The BC pellicles were soaked in 15 ml of microcapsules (which corresponds to 5 to 6.5 w/w% of total oil loading with respect to BC) for 2 h and then freeze-dried. Table T6 of supporting information illustrates the total oil loaded in BC. The microcapsules in colloidal form were analysed by optical microscopy using a Leica DFC 295 microscope with 10X ocular lens and 100X objective lens. Size and polydispersity index (PDI) of colloidal microcapsules were determined by dynamic light scattering (DLS) using Beckman coulter Zetasizer and further details are mentioned in supporting information (Fig. S1 and Table T1 Supporting information). The morphology of composite was observed using JEOL scanning electron microscope operating at 3 kV with 10 s of gold deposition. Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR) (using (Model: Alpha-P, Bruker Corporation, USA) was performed for individual oils, combination of oils, and the composites from 400 cm The quantification of oils was performed by gas chromatography GC/FID. The analyses were carried out using a GCMS-QP2010 Ultra, Shimadzu instrument equipped with split/splitless injector, two CP-Wax 52 CB bonded fused silica polar columns (50 A modified Franz diffusion cell was used for the trans-mucosal vaginal release studies. It consisted of an upper donor chamber and a lower receiver chamber. In between these two chambers, a multi-pore membrane of ~0.3 µm pore size was placed (which mimics the vaginal mucosa) upon which oil microcapsules loaded BC composite was placed. The simulated vaginal fluid (SVF) of pH ~ 4.5 was used for the release studies to match the pH of the vaginal mucosa. The composition of SVF is included in supporting information table T2. The donor chamber was filled with 20 ml of SVF and the entire set up was kept at 37 ± 1 °C with 50 rpm rotation. For microcapsules release study, measured quantity of freeze-dried microcapsules was placed in dialysis tubing of 2 kDa pore size and was kept in 20 ml of SVF and then placed in incubator at 37 °C with 50 rpm. 3 ml aliquots were collected at specified time intervals for measurements and replaced with the fresh buffer to maintain sink conditions. All the experiments were conducted in triplicate. The amount of drug oil was estimated from the GC-FID of the removed aliquots by correlating with a predetermined calibration curve. . Disc diffusion test was performed by inoculating the SDA Petri plates with 200 µL of the Prior to the time-kill assay, MIC was determined for all the three oils by broth dilution method where the MIC was the lowest concentration which resulted in inhibition of visual growth. The Candida albicans strain was sub-cultured at least twice on SDA plates for 24 h at 35 °C. The inoculum was then adjusted to the density of a 0.5 McFarland turbidity standard at 530 nm using spectrophotometer. The final inoculum with 1 × 10 The time-kill curve of individual oils and the combination of three - Eugenol, Thymol, and Carvacrol at 1 MIC (120 µg/ml) (labeled as TEC(40+40+40)) and 2 MIC (240 µg/ml) (labeled as TEC(80+80+80)) were performed Sebourad Dextrose broth (SDB) cultures (5 ml final volume) were incubated at 35 °C with agitation (200 rpm). At pre-determined intervals of time (0, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10 and 12 h), an aliquot of 100 µl was removed from each tube and replaced with the fresh SDB and then the aliquots were centrifuged at 3900 g at 4 °C for 1 min and rinsed twice with 0.9 ml of sterile distilled water to obtain debris-free cells. Pellets were then re-suspended in 100 µl of sterile distilled water and serial dilution was done. An appropriate volume (100, 50 or 20 µl, based on the concentration and dilution of the test samples) was spread onto SDA plates and incubated at 35 °C for 48 h (until visible and well-separated colonies) to determine the CFU/ml. When the colony counts were expected to be less than 1000 CFU/ml, aliquots of 10 to 20 µl were taken directly from the test solution and plated without dilution. The lower limit of accurate and reproducible detectable colony counts is 100 CFU/ml. All time-kill curve studies were conducted in triplicates and on two separate instances. The reduction in fungal growth and the killing activity was obtained by plotting Log For statistical analysis, triplicate data are presented as mean ± SD and were analysed by ANOVA using Origin Pro 8.0 software. The compatibility of the entrapped oils with each other and also with the polymers was evaluated qualitatively through FTIR analysis. FTIR spectrum of pristine BC ( The FTIR spectrum for Thymol ( The FTIR of microcapsules colloid (PLA-MC in The EE obtained for all samples is listed in The morphology and size distribution of the microcapsules were obtained by optical microscopy ( The morphology of the composites was observed by SEM. The SEM images of the microcapsule loaded BC demonstrates regular distribution and spherical shape that appear to be well separated and stable over the steps of the preparation process ( The cumulative drug release profiles for 8 h of microcapsules colloid and composites are represented in A burst release of oils was observed in case of colloids varying from 35% for PLA In order to further investigate the drug release mechanism of oils from the microcapsule colloids and composites, four pharmacokinetic models (zero-order, first-order, Higuchi and Korsmeyer–Peppas) were explored to fit the drug release profiles, equations for which are mentioned below. Zero-order model: First order model: Higuchi model: Korsmeyer–Peppas model: Where K, Q, n and t are the kinetics constant, cumulative release ratio, diffusion exponent and release time, respectively. Korsmeyer-Peppas model was plotted for the initial 60% of release (Mt/ M∞ ≤ 0.6) in which Mt is the amount of drug released at time t, and M∞ is the total amount of drug loaded. The n and k values were calculated from the slope and intercept of the plot of ln(Mt/M∞ ≤ 0.6) against ln t, respectively and are tabulated in From the fitting results for release profiles of colloids, as summarised in The fitting parameter (R2) for the release profiles of composites for various models is listed in The antifungal testing of oils was performed by disc diffusion method and the results are reported in supporting information ( The time-kill plots for fluconazole, oils, microcapsules colloids and composites are presented as CFU/ ml (log10) versus time in The killing activity of individual oils and in equi-weight combination of the three oils is represented in The time-kill curve of all microcapsule colloids and composites corresponding to oil content equivalent to 0.5 MIC (60 µg/ml), 1 MIC (120 µg/ml) and 2 MIC (240 µg/ml) are represented in The fungistatic activity of composites was observed to be superior to that of colloids at all concentrations. At 60 µg/ml (0.5 MIC), an additional reduction of 1-log in CFU/ml was observed for composites when compared to colloids. However, the 99.9% reduction was not attained, given the sub-optimal concentration of oils. At 120 µg/ml, BC-PLA In the previous reports, researchers tried encapsulating essential oils (Eos) in cellulose and cellulose acetate (CA) Electrospun Nanofibers. Essential oils of cinnamon, lemon grass and peppermint were used directly for encapsulation. However clear zones of inhibition were hardly detected with 25% w/w of oils loaded CA nanofibrous mats against The microcapsules obtained with a high concentration of surfactant are spherical, uniform and monodispersed. Larger sized microcapsules with uneven and polydisperse microcapsules were obtained with lesser surfactant. On the other hand, the microcapsules synthesized with high polymer and less surfactant displayed spherical microcapsules with uniform distribution. At low surfactant concentration, small emulsion droplets were not stable and the resulting microcapsules were larger in size than those prepared with higher surfactant concentration. When the concentration was increased, a significant reduction in particle size was noticed with a low polydispersity ( Here two different weight percent of PLA (1.5 and 3.0%) was used. During synthesis, polymer precipitates on the surface of the micelles formed during emulsification and consolidates later with the help of cross-linker. If the polymer is not sufficient enough to cover the micelles, the oil leaks out from the core during precipitation and disfigure. The smaller microcapsules which are not fully covered with the polymer may coalesce to form bigger microcapsules due to high interfacial energy. The encapsulation efficiency was also highest for microcapsules synthesized with high polymer concentration. Hence, optimum concentration of polymer is needed to get uniform and stable microcapsules with high encapsulation efficiency. Keeping the surfactant concentration same and changing the polymer concentration, the size of the microcapsules obtained is larger in case of high polymer concentration because of the increase in wall thickness which is evident from the In SEM images of composites, microcapsules are well anchored to BC Nanofibers. As pre-synthesized microcapsules are loaded in BC fibres, the matrix has a limited role in determining the initial size of the microcapsules; however, it plays an important role in preserving the size of the microcapsules by preventing the agglomeration of microcapsules during storage. The burst release in case of colloids in the first 2 h may be attributed to the microcapsules which have imperfections in the capsule shell, leading to a quick permeation and effusion of oil. Beyond this, the cumulative release is governed by the gradual erosion of PLA shell, leading to a slower release. In the final stage (6 to 8 h), the drug release is minimal due to the reduction in the concentration gradient. The relatively higher degree of drug release in case of BC-PLA In case of composites, swelling of BC matrix, along with PLA shell erosion and diffusion from the matrix to fluid, determines the release of oils observed in the initial stages. Once the matrix swells; PLA absorbs water and starts eroding which causes the release of oil. The oils have to diffuse first from the microcapsules and then permeate into the swollen BC matrix from where the oils diffuse into the buffer. This explains the slight delay in release and much smaller initial burst release in case of composites. After 2 h, matrix is fully swollen, the polymer shell gradually erodes; voids are generated in the capsule shell which leads to the release of oils. However, this release is not immediately observed. The oils have to travel all along the swollen BC matrix to enter into the buffer. The diffusion path is much higher than that in case of colloids and additionally, the differential concentration is maintained between the composite and the surroundings. Hence, a controlled release of oils is observed in composites. This suggests that by using composites, high loading capacity and long-acting drug delivery systems without burst release can be prepared. From the time kill curves, it was observed that the antifungal activity of composites is superior to colloidal microcapsules at all the concentrations tested. This could be attributed to the drug release behaviour of colloids, where there is higher initial burst release leading to potential denaturation of available excess oils and loss of activity. The BC composites containing oil microcapsule exhibit a better and sustained antifungal activity than the microcapsule colloids and a 99.9% reduction could be achieved with half the amount of oil in composites than colloids within 12 h. Besides, at 240 µg/ml, composites exhibit fungicidal activity after 8 h, which can help to combat recurrent infections. In case of composites, BC acted as a secondary barrier for the burst release of oils and offered lesser burst release with controlled release till 8 h. This prevents the denaturation of oils and enables the composites to maintain oil release within the therapeutic window and achieve superior activity with a lesser dose as compared to colloids. Also, the oils have shown superior (to fluconazole) and synergistic antifungal activity. The developed material may be used as antimicrobial covers and garments in hospitals, and as an absorbent core in female hygiene products. A double-barrier drug delivery system based microcapsules containing a combination of three essential oils loaded in bacterial cellulose was successfully obtained which exhibited sustained fungistatic and fungicidal activity. The average size and size distribution of microcapsules was found to depend on the concentration of polymer (PLA) and surfactant (poloxamer) used. The size and wall thickness of capsules is higher for higher polymer concentration, while a narrower size distribution was obtained for higher surfactant concentration. The microcapsules synthesized with high poloxamer and high PLA have shown the best encapsulation efficacy (84%) and stability. The composites displayed better control over burst release than the colloid where the double barrier played an important role. From the release kinetic models, the release profiles of colloids fit first order profile, while the composites largely follow a Korsmeyer Peppas profile. The composites and the colloids were able to release the loaded oils and showed the anti-fungal activity better than that of commercially available drug fluconazole. The antifungal activity was sustained for about 72 h for both colloids and composites; however, the decrease in activity was more significant for colloids. The composites are able to achieve 99.9% fungistatic action within 12 h at an equivalent oil concentration of 120 µg/ml whereas colloidal microcapsules achieved the same with 240 µg/ml. The composites achieved fungicidal endpoints by 12 h at 240 µg/ml. In conclusions, a double-barrier release system, like microcapsule-BC composites, allows efficient utilization of sensitive therapeutic agents like essential oils by preventing burst release, thus requiring lesser dosage. There are no conflicts of interest exist for the authors with the submitted work. Authors acknowledge the financial support of The manuscript was written through the contributions of all authors. All authors have given approval to the final version of the manuscript. Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 