The International Conference on Processing of Lean Grade and Urban Ores (IC-LGO 2015) organized by the CSIR—National Metallurgical Laboratory, Jamshedpur, India in association with the Indian Institute of Metals (IIM), Jamshedpur Chapter during January 20–22, 2015 was a grand success. The conference provided a global forum and unique opportunity to exchange and discuss scientific information, technological innovations and applications amongst experts and practitioners from different disciplines on a common platform for exploitation of lean grade ores, fines and urban ores considering the challenges and problems. The main objective of the conference was to find a rapid solution for the utilization of lean grade and urban ore by developing technically viable and eco-friendly processes/technologies to meet the future demands and simultaneously receive useful products at the end of the cycle. The scope of the conference was processing of lean grade ores, fines and slimes, processing of urban ores and environmental issues. The International Conference IC-LGO 2015 attracted about 260 delegates including 34 international and 226 national delegates from industries, R & D organizations and academic institutions across the country and abroad. More than 170 technical papers were presented as lectures and poster presentations. The papers covered different areas viz. Characterization and Beneficiation, Hydrometallurgical Processing, Processing of Fines, Pyrometallurgical Processing, Solid Waste Utilization, Environmental Issues, Energy Materials and Bio-processing. Based on the abstract, quality of scientific input, current relevance of the work, etc. the Scientific Committee selected the most interesting contribution for this special issue of Hydrometallurgy. The special issue comprises of papers related to alkaline leaching of zircon, adsorption of metals like Zn and Co using novel adsorbents, heap leaching as well as column leaching methods to recover metallic values from low grade ores, recovery of metallic values from spent materials such as Ni–Cd batteries, glucometer strips, permanent magnets, etc. These papers are extended and updated based on the reviewers' report as per the highest international standards. We highly appreciate the efforts of the authors and conference editorial board members (Dr. Sushanta Kumar Sahu, Dr. Jhumki Hait, Dr. Navneet Singh Randhawa, Ms. Archana Kumari, Ms. Rekha Panda and Dr. N. G. Goswami). I feel immense pleasure to extend my heartfelt thanks to Prof. Jae-chun Lee who actually conceived the idea for the special issue (IC-LGO 2015) and my gratitude to Prof. Jochen Petersen for giving us the opportunity. We are also thankful to Dr. Rakesh Kumar (Head, Metal Extraction & Forming Division) and Dr. S. Srikanth (Director, CSIR-NML, India) for facilitation, permission and all kinds of support for the release of this issue. We would also like to thank all the Sponsors who made IC-LGO 2015 possible.