Vitamin A (all-trans retinol) and all-trans retinoid acid (ATRA) interacted with human annexin A6 (AnxA6) as evidenced by AnxA6-induced blue shift of retinoid absorption maxima, by AnxA6-Trp fluorescence quenching and by a fluorescence resonance energy transfer from a Trp residue of AnxA6 to retinol. In addition, both retinoids stimulated the calcium-dependent binding of AnxA6 to liposomes, accompanied by oligomerization of AnxA6. Up to our knowledge, it is a first report supporting the hypothesis of a direct implication of AnxA6 in vitamin A-dependent tissue mineralization.The all- In this report, we examined whether AnxA6, considered as one of the effectors of chondrocyte proliferation, could interact with retinoids. This hypothesis is supported by the fact that retinoids are able to interact with intracellular and extracellular proteins, changing their properties Human recombinant AnxA6 was expressed in 10 The molar absorption coefficients of all- Aliquots of retinoid in ethanol were added to the cuvette containing 0.8 The binding of AnxA6 to membrane was measured by FRET between Trp ( 50 The band shape of amide-1 band at 1652 Addition of retinoids caused quenching of AnxA6 intrinsic fluorescence accompanied by FRET in the case of all- FRET was observed between Trp residue of AnxA6 and dansyl-DPPE in the assay medium containing Ca Separation of peptides by SDS–PAGE in the absence of glutaraldehyde revealed a single band of Recent findings underlining the stimulatory effect of ATRA on the mineral formation To obtain more insight into the consequences of AnxA6-retinoid interactions, we investigated Ca In conclusion, the in vitro effects of retinoids on AnxA6 could promote interactions of physiological relevance during mineralization. Retinoids can either decrease the calcium concentration necessary to AnxA6-membrane binding within matrix vesicles or directly interact with AnxA6, targeting the protein to the specific plasma membrane microdomains corresponding to the sites of matrix vesicle formation. We thank Dr. Aneta Kirilenko for help in fluorescence measurements. This work was supported by Polish Ministry of Science and Education (2 PO4A 029 29). Mr. Marcin Balcerzak was a recipient of a FEBS Collaborative Experimental Scholarship for Central & Eastern Europe. We thank Dr. John Carew for the manuscript editing.