Introduction
                  Malunion following open reduction and internal fixation of distal radius fracture threatens wrist function. Fixed-angle palmar plates provide rigid fixation that is stable over time; however, the pronator quadratus sectioning required by the anterior approach entails a risk of pronation strength loss and of distal radioulnar joint destabilization. The present study assessed recovery of grip, pronation and supination strength following such internal fixation.
               
                  Patients and method
                  A prospective study included 26 distal radial fractures with dorsal displacement, osteosynthesized using a fixed-angle palmar plate, in 25 patients (mean age: 47.5years; range: 17–72years). Assessment concerned the classical parameters, plus grip and pronosupination strength recovery.
               
                  Results
                  At a mean 14months follow-up (range: 6–30months), patients had recovered 91% grip strength, 88% pronation strength and 85% supination strength with respect to the healthy side. Complications comprised three cases of malunion, two of reflex sympathetic dystrophy syndrome, and four of post-traumatic carpal tunnel syndrome.
               
                  Discussion
                  A study of the literature found 75–95% grip strength recovery following osteosynthesis using fixed-angle plates. Few studies, however, have focused on pronosupination strength, and none reported its evolution following osteosynthesis.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The present study found no drawbacks associated with a technique which usually involves sectioning the pronator quadratus. Except in case of malunion or joint stiffness, fixed-angle palmar plate osteosynthesis was followed by recovery of grip and pronosupination strength.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  Level IV: prospective non-randomized, non-comparative observational study.Reduction defect and secondary displacement following distal radius fracture osteosynthesis can impair wrist function. The 2000 Sofcot symposium An anterior approach to the distal radius requires pronator quadratus sectioning, entailing a risk of pronation strength loss and possible destabilization of the distal radioulnar joint. Johnson and Shrewsbury Recovery of grip and pronosupination strength was assessed in a series of 26 distal radius fractures managed by fixed-angle palmar plate. A single-center continuous non-randomized and non-comparative prospective study recruited 25 patients (14 male, 11 female) presenting with distal radius fracture with dorsal displacement, managed by fixed-angle palmar plate, between January 2007 and May 2008. Three cases involved bilateral fracture. Twenty-six fractures in all were managed by fixed-angle palmar plate, and two conservatively. Inclusion criteria were: potentially unstable lesion on Lafontaine's radiologic criteria no prior or concomitant forearm lesion liable to impair pronosupination; patient in work; minimum 6 Mean age was 47.5 All surgery was performed under pneumatic tourniquet and visual control, using a classic Henry approach. Particular attention was paid to the pronator quadratus muscle: its volume varies greatly and was classified as In 12 cases, the osteosynthesis plate was a Matrix Postoperative care comprised 20 Clinical functional assessment, at 20 Grip strength was measured classically on a Jamar Pronosupination moment was measured on a Baseline Recovery was considered good when strength at end of follow-up was at least 90% that of the non-operated side. Radiologic assessment, at 20 Data were analyzed on Chi Mean follow-up for the 26 fractures was 14 There were 10 complications: one severe local edema associated with a 5 The grip strength recovery results showed a mean grip strength of 40.6 Factors influencing functional recovery were investigated. There was a moderate correlation between malunion and poor recovery of grip and pronation strengths (Pearson coefficient respectively 0.23 and 0.28) and a weak correlation between malunion and poor recovery of supination strength (Pearson coefficient 0.08): evolution towards malunion impaired recovery of pronation and grip more than of supination. Fracture type (extra- or intra-articular) on the Sofcot classification did not, in the present series, correlate significantly with recovery of grip ( Distal radioulnar joint lesion (proximal cubital styloid fracture and/or suspected TFCC lesion on the Sofcot classification) did not correlate significantly with recovery of grip ( Remote joint stiffness correlated moderately with grip, pronation and supination strength recovery (Pearson coefficient respectively 0.44, 0.33 and 0.45). Supination strength recovery was the most affected by joint stiffness. The solidity of the pronator quadratus muscle suture influenced recovery of grip and pronation strength, but only moderately (Pearson coefficient respectively 0.32 and 0.33). Supination strength recovery seemed unaffected by pronator quadratus suture solidity at end of surgery (Pearson coefficient, 0.15). The radiological results ( Grip strength assessment is part of the functional check-up following distal radius osteosynthesis. Certain authors have reported recovery as compared to the healthy side, ranging from 75% at 12 Pronosupination strength recovery does not presently feature in functional assessment of the wrist. Distal radius fracture, however, is frequently associated with ligament lesions, as shown by Fontes et al. The pronator quadratus is a rectangular muscle extending forward of the distal extremity of the forearm skeleton. Johnson and Shrewsbury The classic anterior approach involves complete vertical full-body sectioning of the pronator quadratus muscle. It has good cicatrization potential, having a large anastomotic arterial network between the anterior interosseous, radial and ulnar arteries Several surgeons have sought to conserve the pronator quadratus muscle, either with an outward-return running suture The present study involved certain limitations: small series; use of different plate models, which could induce bias; and lack of postoperative imaging to assess pronator quadratus aspect. Further studies should provide more precise assessment of recovery of strength after osteosynthesis for distal radius fracture. Analysis of the recovery of grip strength and especially of pronosupination strength found no harmful effect of fixed-angle palmar plate osteosynthesis, despite impact on the pronator quadratus muscle. In the absence of malunion or joint stiffness, this technique allows recovery of grip and pronosupination strength. Finally, measuring pronosupination strength seems to us to be an excellent means of assessing overall recovery of wrist function: to mobilize the dynamometer in rotation, the patient needs to have a functioning hand, with sufficient grip strength, a stable radioulnar joint and adequate muscles. The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest concerning this article. Thanks to Pr P. Chaffanjon, of the LADAF Surgery School and Joseph-Fourier University, Grenoble (France), and to Ms A.L. Razimbaud, biomedical engineer in Annecy Regional Hospital.