The oxidation of Mn(II) and precipitation as MnO2/Mn2O3 occurs spontaneously using SO2/O2 gas mixtures in the pH range 1–6 and temperature range 25–80 °C. The rate of Mn(II) oxidation with SO2/O2 is first order with respect to SO2 partial pressure up to 5.7% SO2 at 80 °C and half order with respect to [H+]. The rate of oxidation of Mn(II) is slow at pH<3 and increases rapidly at pH>4. Any Fe(II) is oxidised and precipitated before Mn(II).
                  Low concentrations of manganese (0.01 M) can be selectively oxidised and precipitated from cobalt and nickel solutions at pH 3–4 with less than 1% co-precipitation of cobalt and nickel in the laboratory batch tests. The selectivity of manganese precipitation at pH 3–4 is consistent with thermodynamic data for the Mn–Ni/Co–H2O systems.Nickel and cobalt are often associated with manganese in ocean nodules In the sulphurous acid leaching of nodules and manganese wads, Mn(II) goes into solution together with nickel and cobalt. However, the separation of these valuable metals has proved difficult due to co-precipitation upon neutralisation. In the high temperature acid leaching of nickel laterites, Ni and Co are typically separated from manganese in the neutralised leach liquor by selectively precipitating nickel/cobalt sulphides or by precipitating mixed hydroxides with magnesia and re-leaching nickel/cobalt with ammonia/ammonium carbonate Likewise in the processing of cobalt ores, Mn(II) is one of the impurities in the leach liquor. If Mn(II) transfers to the cobalt electrolyte, it is oxidised at the anode to higher valence species which oxidises and degrades the organic phase in the SX–EW circuit. Thus, all or most of the manganese has to be removed before cobalt electrowinning. Hence, it is of practical interest to investigate the removal of Mn(II) by oxidative precipitation from cobalt and nickel in solution. The Mn(II) is oxidised to Mn(III) and disproportionates to insoluble MnO This paper reports the work on the oxidative precipitation of Mn(II) with SO The apparatus, Eh and pH monitoring and controlling systems used in this work were the same as that used in the previous study All the chemicals used in this study were of AR grade. The synthetic cobalt leach liquor contained 0.1 M Co(II) and 0.01 M Mn(II)/Ni(II)/Fe(II) as sulphate salts. Researchers at INCO Based upon the reported potential of the SO The Eh–pH relationships show that the reduction potential for The potentials of the [Co(OH) For comparison, the Eh–pH diagrams of Co–H As shown in The Ni–H  The amount of Mn(II) oxidised in solution was found to be identical to that precipitated, verifying that the disproportionation reaction of Mn(III) to MnO  It can be seen that the rate of Mn(II) oxidation with varying SO  Both iron and manganese can act as catalysts for oxidation with SO  The rate of oxidation of Mn(II) at pH 6 was measured over the temperature range of 25–80 °C. In order to test the application of the above results for hydrometallurgical processes, a series of experiments was carried out to determine the selectivity of manganese precipitation from solutions containing both cobalt and nickel, since manganese is often associated with nickel and cobalt oxide ores.  As given in In other experiments, in the presence of iron, the loss of cobalt from the solution at pH 3.5 increased to about 2% based on the precipitate analysis. This is believed to be due to adsorption of Co(II) on both Fe(OH) In order to confirm the nature of the cobalt and nickel precipitates, further experiments were carried out by sparging 2% SO As given in The XRD pattern of the manganese precipitate showed a broad band at 2 The oxidation of sulphur dioxide or sulphite species catalysed by trace amounts of manganese has been studied for many years in the area of atmospheric and environmental science. Several researchers In this work, the kinetic features observed for Mn(II) oxidation are essentially similar to those observed for Fe(II) oxidation of Fe(II) to Fe(III) and As(III) to As(V) by a free radical mechanism Although the effect of the concentration of Mn As can be seen in The dependence of the length of induction period on the amount of hydroquinone added and the quench of both Mn(II) and sulphite oxidation with 2.7 mM hydroquinone strongly suggest the involvement of Mn(III) species in the initial step of the reaction mechanism which is dominant for Mn(II) oxidation. The lack of Mn(III) in the solution results in a longer induction period and stops the reaction completely. These observations essentially agree with those by The rate of oxidative precipitation of Mn(II) with SO In the laboratory batch tests, low concentrations of Mn(II) can be selectively oxidised and precipitated from Co(II) and Ni(II) solutions at pH 3–4 with <1% co-precipitation of cobalt and nickel. However, Co(OH) The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from Murdoch University and from the A.J. Parker Cooperative Research Centre for Hydrometallurgy. They also thank Bob Bourne of Normandy Mining for his interest and contributions.