The great advantages of hybrid composite materials reside in the synergistic effect of their constituent materials and that make them very attractive for advanced applications. Nevertheless, the interactive effect of the intrinsic properties of each element further complicates understanding of their behavior. In this study, an experimental analysis of the mechanical behavior of interply hybrid laminates (glass/carbon/epoxy) and the estimation of the hybridization effect with respect to mono-reinforced laminates were carried out. It has been found that the incorporation of 25% carbon fibers in the glass/epoxy laminates contributes significantly to improving their tensile mechanical properties but they degrade as the number of glass plies increase. In addition, investigations were carried out on the sensitivity of these materials to geometric imperfections. To this end, the influence of a circular notch has been highlighted. From the results obtained, it was found that the greatest loss of properties is recorded for the hybrid materials; however, they remain the most resistant.High performance composite materials such as reinforced by carbon fibers are mainly used in high-tech fields. However, many drawbacks hinder their employment in many areas, such as, sudden failure, low damage tolerance, low residual strength as well as their high cost and limited production. The resort to hybridization has allowed to overcome some limitations of these materials and to extend their applications in more diverse sectors, from where a significant improvement in their performance has been proved, justified by the synergistic effect of intrinsic properties of different constituents. In fact it consists by using at least two reinforcements having different properties (physical, mechanical … etc.) in the same matrix and it is distinguished by the layout fibers configuration (interply, intraply or intermingled). It has been proven that the combination of glass fibers and carbon fibers have important considerations, because coupling of high specific strength and stiffness reinforcements to those having high elongation is very advantageous, allowing improvement in strain failure, as demonstrated by Manders et al. [ In fact, the incorporation of carbon fibers with GFRP (glass fiber reinforced polymer) is one of the techniques adopted in the automotive industry to reduce the weight without a significant increase of the cost. Also, carbon/glass hybrid polymer composite can be applied in the construction of wind turbine rotor blades [ A great interest has been given to the determination of mechanical response of these materials under various loading, whence experimental, numerical and analytical investigations have been retained in many references [ Different glass/carbon ratios and stacking sequences were investigated analytically and experimentally against the tensile, compressive and flexural responses of hybrid composite laminates made of epoxy matrix [ Another experimental study was carried out on mechanical behavior of hybrid composite based on carbon fabrics and E-glass fabrics with epoxy resin. It was found that the tensile properties can be improved by placing glass fabric layers in the exterior and carbon fabric layers in the interior [ Song [ Also, it was be noticed that the stacking sequence is the important parameter which affect strongly the flexural properties of the interply hybrid composite and all the stacking sequences showed a positive hybridization effect [ Dong and Davies [ Another parameter that can effectively affect the performance of hybrid composites is the presence of geometric discontinuities such as notches which are inevitable for some applications to facilitate the assembly operation. The residual properties in terms of strength and stiffness were evaluated experimentally by many researchers [ Our work aims to analyze the mechanical behavior and to estimate the properties at failure of inter-ply hybrid composite subjected to uniaxial tensile loading. Carbon fabric and glass fabric were used as reinforcement within epoxy matrix to produce laminates panels through hand lay-up process. The effect of central circular notch as well as the number of plies of glass fabrics has also investigated. It's important to underscore that the results of hybridization had compared with those of the full carbon and glass configurations. Finally, analyses of final fracture characteristics at macroscopic and microscopic levels were performed in order to understand the effects of holes and the contribution of carbon fibres into glass laminates on the strength of our materials studied. The materials used in this study are composite laminates based on an epoxy matrix reinforced by two types of reinforcements (carbon and glass). These constituents are intended for aeronautical applications, they are delivered by the Boeing company and their high performances justify the reason of their choice in this work. The carbon and glass reinforcements are plain fabric and woven satin fabric respectively ( Three systems C/E (carbon/epoxy), G/E (glass/epoxy) and C/G/E (glass/carbon/epoxy) were manufactured by hand lay-up process ( The laminates are oriented in the same direction (0°), which are parallel to the loading axis. An illustrative scheme of the stacking sequence of hybrid laminates composed of eight plies is shown in The dimensions of manufactured plates are 300mmx300 mm; they are cut out by a diamond disc under jet of water. Drying of the test specimens is important before mechanical test in order to eliminate any traces of moisture which can consequently affect the properties of our materials. Static tensile tests were carried out on an Instron universal machine using a load cell with a capacity of 100 kN, the deformations were measured by a strain gauge of 25 mm length and the test speed was set at 1 mm/min. The dimensions of the specimens correspond to the standard standardization D3039. Glass fabric/epoxy tabs of 1 mm thickness were glued at their ends to prevent damage of the attachment points.  The mechanical properties of G/C/E are intermediate between laminates consisting of single type reinforcement. Their strength and stiffness are higher than those of G/E laminates in the order of 30% and 37% respectively. This improvement is due to the preponderant effect of carbon fibers, whereby the glass fibers do not contribute fully to the strength of material due to the premature failure of the carbon fibers, but they are responsible for the enhancement of the strain failure and the energy dissipated during the fracture, as reported by Muñoz et al. [ The effect of the ply number on tensile response of hybrid composite is analyzed. Laminates with 8, 16 and 24 plies are the three cases considered, whose the stacking sequence is symmetric as follows (0 According to the results obtained, as illustrated in the graphs of The presence of geometric singularities such as holes in certain applications of composite materials is inevitable because they constitute the junction zones between the different parts of the structure, take them into account in the design and dimensioning structures is essential. In this part, the effect of the notch diameter (2, 6 and 10 mm) as a function of the number of plies of the HCM laminates is demonstrated. The notches are obtained by drilling in the central part, while keeping the specimen width constant. Moreover, in order to better evaluate the residual strength of the HCM, a comparative analysis on laminates based on a single reinforcement is necessary. Thereby analysis on galss/epoxy laminates at eight plies have been carried out. From Furthermore, the hybrid composite material composed of eight plies represents the highest strength and stiffness values, whereas the lower values correspond to the GE laminate, in which a reduction of its ultimate strength in order of 23.46%, 26.45% and 45.04%, compared to the virgin specimens, for hole radius 2 mm, 6 mm and 10 mm respectively. It can be seen that 10 mm diameter of the hole represents an important dimension, leading to a tensile stiffness loss of approximatively 20% of the most laminates. So, a diameter of 10 mm represents almost half of the sample width, in fact, 50% reduction of the transverse surface amplifies the notch bottom stress exponentially with the interaction of the specimen edge effect. On the other hand, at the level of perforated zone, the woven fabrics is torn or damaged, thus causing a strong anisotropy leading to the reduction of the rigidity of the material. It should also be mentioned that the reduction in the tensile strength of hybrid specimens in the presence of a 10 mm hole is even more important with the reduction in the ply number. It's in order of 36.34%, 27.01% and 23.57% respectively for hybrid laminates of 8, 16 and 24 plies. On the other hand, it's clear that the decrease of the glass ply in the HCM, produces an improvement in the failure load. To better understand the mechanical behavior of materials, examination of fracture surfaces can provide information about the different modes of damage that may occur. From In the case of hybrid MCH laminates, another form of failure that intervene effectively; the delamination, as illustrated in To better understand the degradation mechanisms involved, SEM microstructural analyzes were carried out on glass/epoxy and carbon/epoxy laminates. The phenomenon of stress concentration caused by the presence of a hole is the cause of the localized rupture in the vicinity of the perforation ( It should be noted that for small notches, the initiation to the fracture will be propagated by the development of delaminated zone, under the effect of the driving force of the notch generated by the force applied on the specimen. But for large hole, the delaminated areas are reduced more and more, due to the high stresses at the bottom of the hole, which precipitate afterwards the early failure of the specimen. According to the results of the tensile test, the increase in the size of the notch significantly contributes to reducing the integrity of the material. To better estimate the notch effect on different laminates, histograms illustrating the rate of mechanical properties loss; the ultimate stress and modulus are shown below. A diminution in strength is recorded for all laminates tested and this loss is proportional to the diameter of the notch ( Although the materials based on glass fiber (GE) are more susceptible to the perforation in terms of strength, but their stiffness is better preserved compared to hybrid stratified materials, at the exception of the largest notch diameter considered. In addition, strength loss of hybrid composite materials is less significant by increasing ply number of glass reinforcement, but the stiffness will tend to decrease. In this paper, the fabrication and the study of mechanical behavior of glass/epoxy, carbon/epoxy and hybrid laminated composites used in aeronautical field, are carried out. Through the experimental analyzes under static tension loading, the following observations can be made: Type of the reinforcements, ply number and notch diameter don't affect the mechanical behavior of the composite laminates, but their impact is rather on their mechanical properties (strength and stiffness). The notched glass/epoxy specimens with radius of 2 mm, 6 mm and 10 mm; the reduction of the ultimate strength is in order of 23.46%, 26.45% and 45.04%, compared to the specimens without geometric defects. Incorporation of 25% carbon fiber in glass/epoxy laminate contributes to improve significantly their mechanical properties. The performances of the hybrid laminates degrade with the increase of number of glass/epoxy layer. The presence of circular notch affects more particularly the strength of the laminates which stratified glass/epoxy composites are the more sensitive. The reduction of ultimate strength of notched specimens is proportional to the increase in geometric ratio (notch size/width of the specimen).