This study is a first attempt to investigate the impact of urban contamination on metal tolerance of heterotrophic river biofilms using a short-term test based on β-glucosidase activity. Tolerance levels to Cu, Cd, Zn, Ni and Pb were evaluated for biofilms collected at three sites along an urban gradient in the Seine river (France). Metallic pollution increased along the river, but concentrations remained low compared to environmental quality standards. Biofilm metal tolerance increased downstream from the urban area. Multivariate analysis confirmed the correlation between tolerance and contamination and between multi-metallic and physico-chemical gradients. Therefore, tolerance levels have to be interpreted in relation to the whole chemical and physical characteristics and not solely metal exposure. We conclude that community tolerance is a sensitive biological response to urban pressure and that mixtures of contaminants at levels lower than quality standards might have a significant impact on periphytic communities.Over the past decades, human activities in urban areas have contributed to the increase of chemical contamination of aquatic ecosystems ( The PICT (Pollution-Induced Community Tolerance) approach was proposed as an efficient ecotoxicological tool to relate tolerance acquisition at the community level to exposure to toxicants ( Biofilms (or periphyton) are complex, natural assemblages of micro-organisms that develop on submerged substrata. They typically consist of bacteria, micro-algae, protozoa and fungi embedded in a polymeric matrix. Because of their short-generation time, these micro-organisms respond quickly to disturbances and are thus regarded as early-warning indicators to detect the effects of toxicants ( Most PICT studies have focused on tolerance measurements of phototrophic algal communities (periphyton or phytoplankton) exposed to herbicides or Cu (for instance The objective of our study is to detect pollution-induced effects on fluvial biofilms collected in a typical urban river (the Seine river, France), under chronic, multi-metallic exposure at low, environmental concentrations. For that purpose, we used the recently-developed short-term toxicity test based on β-glucosidase activity to detect differences in Cu, Cd, Ni, Pb and Zn tolerance levels of the heterotrophic component of fluvial biofilms collected in situ. Biofilms were collected along the Seine river (France) upstream (site 1) and downstream (sites 2 and 3) from the Paris urban area after several weeks of in situ colonization. Biofilms were analyzed using general descriptors such as dry weight (DW), ash-free dry weight (AFDW) and chlorophyll Biofilms were collected on three sites located along the Seine river (North of France). Site 1 (Marnay-sur-Seine) was located in a non-urbanized area, approximately 200 km upstream from Paris (Strahler: 6, median annual flow 50 m Biofilms were grown on Low Density PolyEthylene membranes (approximately 15 × 30 cm At each sampling date, biofilm DWs, AFDWs and Chl-a concentrations were measured in triplicate as in ARISA fingerprints were obtained at each sampling date as in The tolerance to metals (Cd, Cu, Ni, Pb, Zn) of heterotrophic biofilm micro-organisms was assessed using the normalized EC Community tolerance to metals was assessed by calculation of a normalized EC Cu tolerance levels were measured on the biofilms collected on day 28 at the three sites, Cd and Zn tolerance levels on the biofilms collected on day 35, and Ni and Pb tolerance levels on the biofilms collected on day 42. The influence of the environmental parameters on biofilm tolerance levels and biofilm parameters was investigated using Principal component analysis (PCA). The data was log-transformed and normalized before analysis. Statistical analyses were performed using XLStat 2010 (Addinsoft, France). An increase in metallic concentrations was revealed between site 1 (upstream) on the one hand and sites 2 and 3 (downstream from Paris) on the other hand. Mean metal concentrations ( Mean physico-chemical parameters of the river water at the three sites ( MDS analysis of ARISA fingerprints clearly groups biofilms according to the sampling sites ( Biofilms could not be distinguished between site 1 on the one hand and both downstream sites on the other hand according to classical biofilm descriptors ( Concentrations of metals accumulated within the biofilms reflected the increase of the multi-metallic exposure along the river as they were always lower for the site 1 biofilm, except in the case of Ni and Cr ( Dose/effect curves obtained from the toxicity tests are shown in The PCA plot is shown in Identifying the biological impacts of toxic pressures is difficult in the field as toxicant-induced effects have to be discriminated from effects induced by other biotic or abiotic factors. Hence, identifying stressors and demonstrating a causative link between stressors and ecologically-relevant biological responses in the field remains a major scientific challenge for ecotoxicologists ( PCA showed that there was a positive correlation between biofilm tolerance and the majority of environmental parameters, including both metals and physico-chemical parameters. This is not surprising as many parameters are inter-dependent, since urbanization induces a rise in both metal and nutrient concentrations. Variations of environmental parameters like light ( Co-tolerance to metals is a well-known phenomenon in algal and bacterial species and has been observed for indoor-exposed periphyton ( β-glucosidase activity used as endpoint to measure community tolerance appeared to be a particularly sensitive biological variable to detect the impact of multi-metallic exposure. Indeed, no clear relationship was revealed between contamination levels and the other biofilm descriptors, whereas periphyton tolerance to Cd, Cu, Ni, Pb and Zn increased along the river as already observed in a study focusing on biofilm tolerance to Cu ( It is noteworthy that an increase of biofilm tolerance to metals down the Seine river was actually detected despite low exposure levels. For instance, in a previous study using β-glucosidase activity measurements in microcosm experiments ( Another explanation to the difference of sensitivity between laboratory- or in situ-exposed biofilms could also be related to the mixture of micropollutants (both metallic and organic) in the Seine river. Mixture toxicity can indeed be observed even when the mixture components are present at low, non-significant effect concentrations ( This study was designed as a first attempt to relate heterotrophic biofilm metal tolerance to diffuse urban contamination at low exposure levels using a short-term test based on β-glucosidase activity. The results showed that periphyton tolerance to Cd, Cu, Zn, Pb and Ni increased upstream to downstream from the urban area of Paris (France) along the Seine river. Although the Seine river has long been subjected to metal contamination ( This study was supported by The following are the Supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at