Purpose: This study evaluated the outcome of arthroscopy-assisted reduction with internal fixation for treating tibial plateau fractures at 2- to 10-year follow-up. Methods: Fifty-four patients with tibial plateau fractures treated by arthroscopy-assisted reduction with internal fixation were enrolled in this prospective study. According to the Schatzker classification, the fractures types were as follows: type I, 1 (2%); type II, 21 (39%); type III, 4 (7%); type IV, 10 (19%); type V, 8 (15%); and type VI, 10 (19%). The mean age at operation was 48 years (range, 22 to 68 years). The mean follow-up period was 87 months (range, 28 to 128 months). Clinical and radiologic outcomes were scored by the Rasmussen system. Results: The mean postoperative Rasmussen clinical score was 28.4 (range, 19 to 30), and the mean radiologic score was 16.1 (range, 12 to 18). Good or excellent clinical and radiologic results were achieved in 96% of patients. The 6 fracture types did not significantly differ with regard to Rasmussen score or rate of satisfactory results (P > .05). Secondary osteoarthritis was noted in 10 injured knees (19%). All 54 fractures were successfully united. The mean preoperative fracture depression was 13.7 mm (range, 6 to 25 mm). Fracture depression at the final follow-up averaged 0.3 mm (range, 0 to 4 mm). No complications directly associated with arthroscopy were noted in any of the 54 patients. Conclusions: Arthroscopic surgery for tibial plateau fractures with associated soft-tissue injuries is a safe, reproducible, and effective procedure that provides precise diagnosis and effective treatment in a 1-stage procedure. Level of Evidence: Level IV, therapeutic case series.Note: To access the supplementary Although tibial plateau fractures comprise only 1% of all fractures, The advantages of arthroscopic reduction–internal fixation (ARIF) for tibial plateau fractures are direct visualization of intra-articular fractures, accurate fracture reduction, reduced morbidity in comparison to arthrotomy, simplified diagnosis and treatment of meniscal and ligamentous injuries, and thorough joint lavage and removal of loose fragments. Good early- to medium-term results of arthroscopically assisted osteosynthesis of tibial plateau fractures have been reported previously. Between November 1995 and March 2004, 54 consecutive patients (25 men and 29 women) with closed tibial plateau fractures and associated intra-articular soft-tissue injuries who had undergone arthroscopy-assisted surgery were enrolled in this prospective study. All patients were given a consent form before surgery and underwent the same treatment protocol for arthroscopy-assisted surgery with buttress plate fixation for closed tibial plateau fractures. The mean age at operation was 48 years (range, 22 to 88 years). The follow-up period ranged from 22 to 128 months, with a mean of 87 months. No patients were lost to follow-up in this consecutive case series. Tibial plateau fractures were categorized by the Schatzker classification. Preoperative evaluations included detailed physical examination of the condition of the soft-tissue envelope, sensorimotor function of the limb, and vascular status in terms of pulsation over the dorsalis pedis and posterior tibialis arteries. All patients underwent plain film study in anteroposterior and lateral views as well as computed tomography of each knee. The readiness of the soft-tissue envelope was determined by resolution of swelling marked by the return of skin wrinkles, re-epithelialization of fracture blisters, and reduction of edema. The patients were positioned supine on the operating table and given general endotracheal anesthesia. Before surgery, a complete knee evaluation was performed with the patient under anesthesia. A pneumatic tourniquet was applied to the thigh, but a leg holder was not required because most arthroscopic manipulation was conducted in the “figure 4” position. The anterolateral and anteromedial portals were used to insert the arthroscope as well as working instruments. Fluid extravasation was not problematic because inflow was achieved by gravity. The arthroscopic joint inspection permitted evacuation of the hematoma and loose bodies during the initial procedure. The capsuloligamentous structures were then probed, and the associated intra-articular lesions were evaluated. Incisions were made on the side of the fracture directly medial-lateral (types I through IV), starting from approximately 1 cm proximal to the articular surface and extending approximately 8 cm distally. The tibial metaphysis was carefully exposed, and care was taken to avoid arthrotomy and minimize periosteal stripping. The depressed fragment was located with a standard tibial guide for anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) reconstruction, and a Kirschner wire was inserted through the metaphysis into the center of the displaced fragment. This procedure permitted accurate placement of the cortical window, through which the subchondral bone and articular surface could be elevated. The resulting bone defect was then filled with either autogenous iliac crest bone graft or allogeneic bone graft alone, and the tibial plateau was reduced under direct vision by use of an arthroscope before fixation with a buttress plate. In the case of a bicondylar fracture (types V and VI), the 2 incisions were made as far apart as possible, and similar procedures were performed for reduction. This surgical approach would benefit from less soft-tissue dissection and have no necessity of arthrotomy when a traditional open technique is used. Some cases required interfragmental screws to stabilize large fragments, and when dual buttress plates were used, intraoperative radiographs were routinely taken for all 6 fracture types to reconfirm adequate reduction before wound closure. The associated intra-articular pathology was treated in the appropriate sequence after fracture fixation. Meniscal tears were repaired regardless of patient age because of the likelihood of healing, only when they were within 5 mm of the meniscosynovial junction. Of the various techniques for meniscal repair, we favored the inside-out technique using meniscal repair cannulas for middle one-third to posterior one-third horn tears and the outside-in technique for anterior one-third horn tears. ACL injuries were treated by arthroscopy-assisted fixation of the ACL avulsion fracture in a 1-stage surgical procedure and second-stage reconstruction after fracture healing for complete ACL tears. Immediate postoperative care included compressive Cryocuff therapy (Aircast, Summit, NJ) and knee brace. Non–weight-bearing ambulation was restricted to the use of crutches or walkers until radiographic evidence of healing was noted, which generally occurred about 3 months postoperatively. Partial weight-bearing was then allowed for another 2 weeks, after which full weight-bearing was permitted. The clinical and radiologic scales were recorded according to the Rasmussen system ( A radiographic evaluation, including bipedal examination and examination of both knees, was done preoperatively and at 3 months, 6 months, and 1 year postoperatively and then annually thereafter. Long-leg standing films (with standing scanography used to measure the tibiofemoral angle) were obtained annually, postoperatively. Union was defined as the presence of bridging callus on 2 radiographic views. Each radiograph was evaluated by 5 observers (visiting orthopaedic staff) in a blinded fashion to assess interobserver variance. The 5 observers also classified fracture type and measured articular depression in the 54 patients. Statistical analysis determined the interobserver variance in the diagnosis for secondary osteoarthritis, fracture type, and articular depression. The interobserver variability by use of the κ method in the diagnosis of secondary osteoarthritis, fracture type, and articular depression was in all cases insignificant ( Data of the surgical patients are shown in Of the patients, 44 had excellent results, 8 had good results (1 type IV, 1 type V, and 6 type VI), 1 had a fair result (type V), and 1 had a poor result (type VI) (  Of the 54 patients in this series, 35 (65%) had associated intra-articular lesions ( Of the patients, 30 (55%) received autogenous iliac bone graft alone and 23 (43%) received allogeneic bone graft. Only 1 patient with a type I fracture did not receive bone graft. All 30 patients were investigated with regard to minor complications of harvest site morbidity such as walking deficiency (immediate and long term) and the formation of seromas, hematomas, adynamic ileus, and more serious complications, such as retroperitoneal hemorrhages, abdominal hernias, ileus fractures, and nerve lesions (immediate and long term). However, no donor site morbidity of bone grafting was found. Only 1 patient with a Schatzker type II fracture had joint depression exceeding 4 mm resulting from inadequate fixation. One month after the index procedure, this patient underwent repeat arthroscopy-assisted surgery with adequate reduction and stable buttress plate fixation. Another patient with a Schatzker type V fracture had residual intra-articular loose bodies 3 months after surgery that were removed arthroscopically. Four patients had minor wound dehiscence over the incision lines. The wounds were healed successfully by wound care with antibiotic therapy. Condylar joint surface depression was noted in 5 patients without functional instability. Five patients had paresthesia over the lateral calf of the lower leg. No patient had serious complications such as infection, compartment syndrome, knee stiffness, or deep venous thrombosis evaluated by clinical symptoms or signs at final follow-up. Most patients exhibited only minor scarring, and most had satisfactory range of motion at the knee joint. No complications directly associated with arthroscopy were noted in any of the 54 patients. As with any other intra-articular fracture, the tibial plateau fracture is always challenging for orthopaedic surgeons because of its widely varying trauma, and associated soft-tissue injuries add further complexity. Tscherne and Lobenhoffer Open reduction introduces tremendous complication risks, especially in wound healing after traditional dissections. On the basis of the Rasmussen system score, satisfactory (good to excellent) results were obtained in 96% of cases at 2- to 10-year follow-up. The results were acceptable or even better than those observed for open reduction–internal fixation. Other studies, using different rating systems, report good results in 80% to 90% of cases. Concomitant injury is another important factor. Tscherne and Lobenhoffer Although the theoretic danger of compartment syndrome complicating arthroscopy for tibial plateau fracture warrants some caution, only 1 case of compartment syndrome in the leg after arthroscopic examination of a tibial plateau fracture has been reported. Another major concern with traditional open reduction is the soft-tissue condition and wound infection, which has been reported in as many as 50% of cases. Clearly, ARIF surgery for tibial plateau fractures is a technically demanding procedure requiring extensive experience, and the learning curve is much longer than that of open techniques. Some experience in arthroscopy is necessary. Clear visualization during arthroscopy-assisted surgery is vital for effective fracture reduction and management of associated soft-tissue injuries. Patients with poor bone quality or severe comminution may require a single buttress plate fixation with bone grafting. In types V and VI fractures, dual–buttress plate fixation can be applied through medial and lateral metaphyseal incisions. However, some limitations and weaknesses of this study must be acknowledged: there was no control group, this was not a randomized study, only a single surgeon was involved, all patients were rated by the same author, the sample size was limited, and follow-up to determine further osteoarthritic change needs to be longer. Tibial plateau fractures, though uncommon, exhibit a wide range of associated injuries. With the assistance of arthroscopy, the 2- to 10-year follow-up results in this series were satisfactory. Arthroscopy-assisted surgery for tibial plateau fractures with associated soft-tissue injuries is a safe, reproducible, and effective procedure that provides precise diagnosis and adequate treatment in a 1-stage surgical procedure. The authors thank Song-Shu Lin for help with statistical analysis.