In this paper a new comprehensive method for fault detection and classification for a complex process is presented. This paper focuses on the process data and expert knowledge, a small amount of labeled data and a large amount of unlabeled process data are used for constructing the neighborhood weighted graph. The optimal prediction label matrix of unlabeled data and the optimal regression function are obtained by solving the optimal problem. Then the monitoring data is projected to the low dimensional with the regression function, and the state label matrix of monitoring data can be acquired. This method can guarantee intrinsic structural of data by constructing an undirected weighted graph, and is suitable for the complex process with nonlinear trait. This method can simultaneously get the results of fault detect and fault diagnosis in a monitoring process. The presented method is used in TE simulation process and real ore grinding-classification process. Results of algorithm analysis and fault detection experiments indicate the validity and practicability of the presented method.In the modern industrial production process, different ways and techniques for reducing the risks and accidents which may result in public damage and large economic losses have been always concerned. The monitoring of an industrial process is quite necessary to ensure the safety of producing. With the ever increasing complexity of industrial processes, more and more process data are collected, and the machine learning based methods have been widely used to realize process monitoring in recent years. Several techniques using multivariate statistical analysis have been developed for the monitoring and fault detection in recent decades Some supervised learning methods have been done for fault diagnose and classification. Supervised learning methods only use labeled data to construct learning model, which is used to guide the fault detection and diagnosis of the new process data. The main methods include: Neural network The collection of labeled data in supervised learning requires expensive human labor, accurate expert experience and interactions in the industry process. Meanwhile it is much easier to obtain unlabeled data, but they do not give feedback information about the leaning results and are seldom used in training In this paper, we present a method of fault detection and classification based on process data. In the modeling process, few expert knowledge guided data samples are labeled and a large amount of process data samples are unlabeled. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The main step of semi-supervised learning is introduced in We denote the sample set as We also define a binary label matrix We denote In the prior work In the training process, we aim to find the optimal prediction labels Then the problem is expressed as We set the matrix as the diagonal matrix with the first and rest diagonal elements as In addition, the matrix should be set as the graph Laplacian matrix in order to utilize the manifold structure (i.e., Replacing If the matrices To obtain the optimal solution, we set the derivatives of the objective function in Eq. By setting the derivative of this objective function with respect Then the prediction labels Using So we can get the optimal Once the projection matrix In the testing process, for any data point According to the class label, the state of the process can be judged directly. The whole monitoring process can be summarized as the following listed steps: Input a binary label matrix Construct the neighborhood graph with setting the Laplacian matrix. Calculate the optimal Monitoring the on-line process (testing data) with the project function and Eq. In our experiment, we take a batch process with two kinds of fault as example. According to the prior knowledge, we select few data samples in normal mode, fault state 1 and fault state 2 to be labeled through defining the binary label matrix, respectively. Then a large volume of process data including these three states is used to be the unlabeled data in the training process. First, the validation of the presented method should be verified by the TE process. The TE process is the simulation system which is based on the real industrial process. It mainly concludes four reactions, four feed-stocks and two products. The whole process concludes 41 measured variables and 12 control variables A batch run is used to test the feasibility of the method. We select all the measured variables to be modeled and monitored. In the simulation process, we set two kinds of fault. Fault 1 is caused by the abnormality of reactor pressure and fault 2 is caused by the abnormality of reactor temperature. In the simulation result, the highest line represents the current state of the batch run. As shown in In all the experiments, the two regularization parameters From From the above, semi-supervised learning is suitable for process monitoring and fault diagnose. The validity of the presented method has been verified with the TE simulation data. However, the simulation process is quite stable either in normal or abnormal mode. Besides, the suitable parameters need to be identified by experimental comparison and much investigation still needs to be done to determine the optimal parameters. Then, the practicability of the method in a spot process will be verified in the following part. Based on the discussion in As one of the most important parts of mineral processing, the production target of ore grinding process determines the follow-up production operation, mineral utilization rate, material recovery rate and etc., which play an important role in the benefit of a dressing mill. The whole technological grinding process can be divided into two main parts, which are the ore grinding process and selection process. The flowchart of the whole technological grinding craft process is shown in During the ore grinding process, by adjusting the feeding device and joining the proportionally water and steel ball, the cracked raw ore will be grinded into pulp in the ball mill and sent to slime dam which is the beginning of the selection process. Then, through the turning pump, the pulp will be conveyed to the hydro-cyclone. If the pulp satisfies the technological requirements, it will be sent to the next step. Otherwise, it will be returned to the ball mill and grinded again. From In the hydro-cyclone grading process, supplementary water of slime dam and slurry pump revolution speed serves as the control variables, and feed concentration of hydro-cyclones, pressure and liquid level of slime dam serve as the manipulated variables. Serious coupling and nonlinearity exist in the control process of these manipulated variables. It may lead to the blocking of hydro-cyclones, the pressure fluctuation of hydro-cyclones, the overswelling of liquid level and so on in the grading process. During the beneficiation process, the main common faults include the abnormal of the following five parts: pressure of hydro-cyclones, feed concentration of hydro-cyclones, liquid level of slime dam, supplementary water of slime dam, overflow particle size of hydro-cyclones. The accompanying phenomena and the possible reasons for these malfunctions are listed in Comprehensively considering The hydro-cyclones utilize the centrifugal force field to separate the mixture of multi-granularity. In the actual mineral beneficiation process, the problems of pressure, concentration and such other problems may cause the abnormality of hydro-cyclones. One of the advantages of the presented method is the application of experienced worker knowledge. In the ore grinding process, some typical abnormal modes occur usually. Values of some variables may change regularly when the running state of the process changes. The experienced worker may know the typical change of variables in each mode. The knowledge of experienced worker is quite valuable and it will be used in our monitoring experiments. In our experiment, the normal data comes from the regular producing process, and the fault data comes from the debugging stage. The same as Compared with the TE simulation process, the spot process fluctuates much more strongly and nonlinearity of the data is more obvious, especially when it comes to the abnormal mode. Based on the analysis in For each kind of fault, 3 labeled and 5 labeled samples are used in the modeling process, respectively. 1500 unlabeled process data samples (including 3 running states) are used in the modeling. Due to the volatility and nonlinearity of the data, we properly reduce the value of Four monitoring experiments are done to test the utility and reliability of the presented method. 350 testing samples are selected for each monitoring experiment. The monitoring experiments of spot process data have verified that the presented method can be used in the real producing process. The fault can be detected and classified timely and accurately with suitable parameters. In this paper, a new method of fault detection and classification is presented. Compared with the prior work, the method makes the best of the few expert experiences and a large amount of unlabeled process data, a semi-supervised learning model based on graph regularization is built, and the optimization function of convex programming is constructed by constraining the graph regularity and the fitness of prediction label. The monitoring data is projected to the low dimensional with the regression function, and the state label matrix of monitoring data can be acquired. This method can effectively detect fault and correctly classify the faults into certain types in the process monitoring. This is a very promising method of a monitoring industry process, and the feasibility and validity are verified by the monitoring experiment with process data of both TE simulation process and grinding-classification industry process. The authors declare that there is no conflict of interests regarding the publication of this article. This work was supported by the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at