The effect of additives on the dissolution of gold colloids (20nm) by copper(II) in ammoniacal thiosulphate media has been investigated by measuring the residual gold and Cu(II) concentrations in solution using UV–visible spectrophotometry, and the redox/mixed potentials (EH or Emix) using platinum and gold electrodes immersed in solution. Results show a beneficial effect of increasing free NH3 on gold dissolution caused by an increase in pH from 8.9 to 11 which enhances residual Cu(II) and EH. The beneficial effect of additives follows the descending order: AgNO3
                     >NaCl>Na2SO4
                     >no additives~Na2CO3
                     >NaNO3
                     >Pb(NO3)2
                     >Na2S4O6
                     ~Na2S3O6
                     >Na2SO3. The two reagents AgNO3 and NaCl do not affect the residual Cu(II) concentration, EH or Emix but enhance gold dissolution (~100% in 1–2h) due to the involvement of Ag(I) and Cl− in the anodic reaction of gold. Both Na2SO4 and Na2CO3 have beneficial effects on residual Cu(II) which enhance EH and retard the reaction with thiosulphate due to ion-association and stabilisation of Cu(NH3)
                        x
                     
                     2+. Thus, the gold dissolution is slow and steady with Na2CO3 (95% in 5h). Despite the faster initial gold dissolution in the presence of Na2S3O6 due to high EH and Emix, gold dissolution reaches a plateau (~85% after 2h). The presence of Na2S4O6 causes lower EH and Emix, lower residual Cu(II); and gold dissolution reaches a plateau (~85% after 3h), indicating surface blockage. Strong interaction between Cu(II) and Na2SO3 is evident from very low residual Cu(II), low EH and Emix, causing low gold dissolution reaching a plateau (~20%) after 6h.Thiosulphate leaching of gold by Cu(II) in ammoniacal thiosulphate has attracted the interest of many researchers since the late seventies ( Gold colloids, due to their smaller particle size, dissolve much faster than massive gold. Moreover, the concentration of residual colloidal gold can be measured using UV–visible spectrophotometry. Thus, the use of gold colloids provides a convenient and rapid method to monitor cyanide concentration during gold cyanidation and to test the effect of additives and other variables on gold leaching kinetics in cyanide or thiosulphate solutions ( The present study considers the rate data and the extent of dissolution of gold colloids by copper(II) in ammoniacal thiosulphate solutions under nitrogen over a period of 3–6 All reagents were of analytical grade and Millipore water was used throughout the experiments. The gold colloids were prepared using standard methods ( The oxidation of gold colloids in the presence of copper(II) and the reduction of copper(II) by thiosulphate were carried out in two 100  Unlike NaNO A further comparison of the effect of NaNO Equilibrium constants for the formation of mixed Cu(II)–NH  Platinum electrode potentials Gold electrode potentials For example, the measured values of E The increase in pH from 9.3 to 11 at 298 The increase in concentration of Na The curves for the variation of residual Cu(II) concentration or gold dissolution shown in Although NaCl has no significant effect on residual Cu(II) concentration in Like NaNO  The addition of Na The results in Ions such as SO The change in the Cu(II) complex from Cu(II)(NH Residual Cu(II), E The beneficial effect of increasing pH on colloidal gold dissolution in the present study is a result of the increase in concentration of free NH Financial assistance and support from the