To describe the particle transport (including classification) along the main coordinate in a mill and the transition from one fraction to another (grinding), a two-dimensional Markov chain model is proposed. It allows fast calculation of all parameters of continuous grinding process in a mill for a steadystate regime as well as for a transient period. The model employs matrices of grinding and classification that are normally used for description of these processes. The model is based on standard manipulations with matrices that can be done easily using modern computer codes.The objective of the present study is to develop a convenient mathematical tool for computational analysis of a process of continuous grinding accompanied by stochastic motion of particles in a grinding chamber. Since the process of grinding is also a stochastic process, we have a superposition of two stochastic processes that should be described. One convenient tool for this purpose that is at disposal is the theory of Markov chains. A Markov process is a process for which, if the present is given, the future and the past are independent of each other. Sometimes they say that a Markov process “does not keep the memory on its past”, or characterise it as a process without aftereffect. In terms of differential equations it means that the equations must contain derivatives with respect to time not higher than of the first order. The theory of Markov processes was successfully applied to modelling classification and grinding ( A Markov chain is an important and simple example of a Markov process. It considers the sample space of a problem (the set of all possible outcomes of a random process) to be finite. A Markov chain model becomes particularly simple when it deals with presentation of time as a discrete value. In this case all the description is reduced to the matrix of transition probabilities, and matrix algebra becomes the basic tool for modelling a process. Development of computer tools for manipulation matrices (like MATLAB, for example) has caused a new wave of interest to Markov chain models. For example, these models were successfully used for calculating residence time distribution of particles within different mills, and calculating on its basis other parameters of grinding ( At the present study, we are going to describe two simultaneous processes: travel of a particle over the space of a grinding chamber and its transitions from one size fraction into another. In order to build a simple model, let us suppose that a particle flow through a grinding chamber can be described by a one-dimensional model with a principal coordinate The This or that state can be occupied by a particle with a probability. A state matrix can describe the set of the probabilities for all possible outcomes The objective of a model with continuous time is to predict the state matrix at a moment of time A change of the state matrix after a transition takes place due to transitions of particles from one cell to another. Arrows in A particle in a cell can get a transition with a certain probability that is called the transition probability. The set of all these transition probabilities forms the matrix of transition probabilities The matrix In order to describe transformation of the state matrix After that, the transformation of the state vector can be described by the following formula: It is obvious that transition probabilities are fraction size dependent. However, the most important problem is whether they are If the matrix of transition probabilities is state dependent, only Eq. If the number of particles is very large, the probability of a state can be interpreted as a relative mass of particles occupying the state, i.e., belonging to the spatial section and to the size fraction. If we observe the evolution of the unit mass portion of particles injected into a mill and initially distributed as The evolution of instantly injected mass portion of a material (a tracer) is an unsteady-state process. It is obvious that asymptotically all states will be empty excepting the absorbing ones. The distribution of the portion over the absorbing cells also gives the fraction size distribution in the ground material. A more interesting case is the case of continuous feed to a mill. Let us suppose that the unit mass portion of the material is being injected into the mill with the distribution over the cells given by the identical state matrix With Thus, if the matrix In order to reduce the matrix Then let us suppose that there is no particle flow along the mill that gives us independent grinding in every spatial section. In this case axial transitions are forbidden, and only transverse transitions are allowed. The matrix of grinding All the matrices In this case the total matrix of transition probabilities If Now let us examine these matrices separately. The matrix Let us build the matrix of transition probabilities for this case on the basis of the partial differential equation of 1D diffusion with convection that was effectively used for modelling classification: Actually Eq. The set As far as every element of the matrix Physically this limitation means that during a transition the out-of-the-cell particle flows must not remove more material than the cell contains. At In the simplest linear case when the matrix If axial transitions are forbidden (all It is obvious that for the problem in question the matrix is to be restored experimentally, or obtained on the basis of a theoretical model for conditions of the batch-grinding test. The matrix However, using Eq. (23) allows to correspond the grinding time Δ If a non-linear model of grinding, in which elements of Examples below were calculated for constant matrices The objective of the numerical experiments is not to explain real features of grinding under these or those conditions but to demonstrate abilities of the model.  In particular, the hold-up for the process in   The difference in process parameters for these two cases is rather big. At first, there is the obvious difference in the fraction size distributions in the ground material. Then, despite of the fact that total hold-ups are almost equal (20 and 22, respectively), the hold-up distributions over spatial sections are very different. These distributions are shown in When dealing directly with Eq. Let us examine a simple case of state dependent transition probabilities. As it was shown in The approach described above does not bring anything new in understanding physics of grinding and classification. It suggests a convenient mathematical tool for manipulating the models, which already exist, and also shows some of directions of the processes investigation. One of the main features of the approach is that it gives the universal algorithm for modelling different processes in the field, and allows to use both the models with distributed parameters and with localised ones.