The development of new environmental friendly concretes such as rubberized concrete is being promoted due to the environmental problems created by the waste tire rubber. Every year millions of tires are discarded, thrown away or buried all over the world, representing a very serious threat to the ecology. In this study, we analyse the potential of waste tire rubber particles as a partial substitute for fine aggregates in normal strength and high strength cement concrete and the resistance to abrasion has been measured. Statistical Analysis was carried out to strengthen the results obtained from experiments. The results show that the use of tire rubber particles can improve the abrasion resistance of concrete, and this can ensure its applications in pavements, floors and concrete highways, or in places where there are abrasive forces between surfaces and moving objects.Disposal of waste tire rubber has become a major environmental issue in all parts of the world. Every year millions of tires are discarded, thrown away or buried all over the world, representing a very serious threat to the ecology. It is estimated that every year almost 1000 Stockpiled tires also present many, health, environmental and economic risks through air, water and soil pollution. Tire burning causes serious fire hazards, increases the temperature of the area, and the poisonous smoke is very dangerous for humans, animals and plants. One of the possible solutions for the use of waste tire rubber is to incorporate into cement based materials, to replace some of the natural aggregates Many studies were conducted on rubberized concrete in which waste tire rubber was substituted for aggregates or cement. Reduction in compressive strength limits their applicability in structural buildings. Proper studies were not noticed on the abrasion resistance of rubberized concrete. The abrasion resistance of concrete may be defined as its ability to resist being worn away by rubbing. The concrete which is more resistant to abrasion can be applied in pavements, floors and concrete highways, in hydraulic structures such as tunnels and dam spillways, or in other surfaces upon which abrasive forces are applied between surfaces and moving objects during service Zhang and Li Gesoglu et al. To the best of knowledge, the comparison of abrasion resistance for normal strength rubberized concrete (with three water-cement ratios) and high strength rubberized concrete and its modelling is reported for the first time. Ordinary Portland cement of grade 43, conforming to IS: 8112-1989 was used. River sand confirming to zone II as per IS: 383-1970 used as fine aggregates. Crushed stone were used as coarse aggregates with specific gravity-2.63. Tire rubber was grinded into three sizes (powder form of 30 mesh: −600 The abrasion test (resistance to wear) was performed according to IS: 1237-1980 on 28 For comparing the results of the model and measured values, JMP software was used and numerical analysis was carried further to validate the results obtained. The software uses least square method to check the predicted models. In this type of analysis every possible means of combinations are tried i.e. between parameters (A, B, C, AB, AC, CB, ABC) and polynomial to degree two i.e. (A, B, C, A2, B2, C2) and combinations of both. M is the constant depending on the mixture with M1  Deterioration of concrete can take place due to abrasion caused by various exposures (rubbing, skidding or sliding of the object) on the surface of concrete. The water-cement ratio does not prove to have much influence on the abrasion resistance of rubberized concrete specimens. The specimens exhibited more resistance to abrasion when the water-cement ratio was higher. All the concrete specimens with crumb rubber showed better resistance to abrasion when compared to the control mix. The results obtained in this study can be compared with the observations made by Sukontasukkul and Chaikaew Observing the surfaces of crumb rubber and river sand from The weak bonding between the cement paste and the crumb rubber (as observed in the SEM images) has not affected the abrasion resistance on the rubberized concrete, as it affected the compressive strength. When compared to the control concrete without rubber, the Rubberized concrete is more resistant to abrasion. The statistical analysis reveals that the amount of rubber has a negative linear effect of the depth. i.e. it have a linear positive effect on the resistance against abrasion. So it can be applied in pavements, floors and concrete highways, in hydraulic structures such as tunnels and dam spillways, or in other surfaces upon which the abrasive forces are applied between surfaces and moving objects during service.