Several hydrometallurgical and pyrometallurgical processes, or a combination of both, have been developed for the removal of zinc from blast furnace sludge (BFS). In the present work, the properties of BFS were utilized to effectively remove zinc by microwave heating. A combined process entailing particle size separation followed by microwave processing was proposed.
                  The dielectric properties of BFS are exceptional owing to its high content of carbon and iron oxides, which are classified as excellent microwave absorbers. Analysis of the effects of temperature on the dielectric properties of BFS showed that its dielectric constant (ɛ′) and loss factor (ɛ″) increased in the temperature range 400–800 °C due to carbon gasification (CO/CO2 gas). This indicated that microwave heating of BFS was most effective in the temperature range 400–800 °C, beyond which heating decelerated due to the removal of carbon from the sample.
                  Based on elemental distribution, BFS can be divided into two parts: one with zinc content of about 0.108 wt.% (coarse fraction with particle size greater than 63 µm), and the other with higher zinc content, of about 1.02 wt.% (fine fraction with particle size less than 63 µm). The microwave tests indicated that zinc content in the fine fraction of the BFS decreased from 1.02 wt.% to <0.13 wt.% (86.24% zinc removal rate) upon microwave processing for 10 min at 800 °C. This level of zinc content is acceptable for the material to be recycled i.e., reused in the blast furnace.Blast furnace sludge (BFS) is a byproduct of pig iron production and is generated during the purification of the flue gases emitted by the blast furnace ( Hydrometallurgical leaching of zinc from BFS has been carried out using both acidic and alkaline solutions such as sulfuric acid ( The Waelz process is the leading pyrometallurgical method for recovery of zinc ( The use of microwaves, a form of electromagnetic radiation, as a heat source in material processing applications has become increasingly frequent over the past three decades ( Aiming to avoid the disadvantages of pyrometallurgical and hydrometallurgical processes, this study investigated the properties of BFS and their implications in zinc removal. A combined process using particle size separation followed by microwave processing was proposed. In this study, the effect of temperature on the dielectric constant (ɛ′) and loss factor (ɛ″) of the BFS at frequencies of 1064 MHz and 2423 MHz was measured. The distribution, concentration, and mode of occurrence of iron, zinc, and carbon in the different size fractions of the BFS were examined. The effect of temperature on the rate of zinc removal from BFS by microwave heating was studied. A sample of BFS from SSAB Europe Oy, Raahe, Finland, was used in this study. Subsamples used for the analysis were dried at 75 °C. The results for the mineralogical and chemical analyses of the BFS are shown in The chemical composition of the BFS was determined using a Bruker AXS S4 Pioneer X-ray fluorescence (XRF) spectrometer. The XRF spectrometer was equipped with an Rh-tube with a maximum power of 4 kW. The zinc content of the experimental residues was measured using atomic absorption spectroscopy (ASS). A Perkin Elmer AAnalyst 400 flame atomic absorption spectrometer with S10 autosampler was used. Zinc was inserted into HNO The mineralogical composition was measured using X-ray diffraction (XRD). The measurements were taken using a Rigaku diffractometer (D/Max 2200, Rigaku, Japan) with CuKa radiation and a nickel filter operated at a voltage of 35 kV and anode current of 20 mA. The measurement range is from 4° to 90° 2 θ using a step size of 0.02° 2 θ and step time of 1 s. The micromorphology of the BFS was studied and microanalyses of its particles were conducted using a field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM) attached to an energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) unit for chemical analysis. The SEM (XL30ESEM-TMP, Philips, Holland) was operated at 20 kV in low vacuum. The particle diameters were determined by a laser diffraction and scattering method using a Beckman Coulter LS 13 The thermal behavior of the BFS was studied using thermogravimetry-differential scanning calorimetry (TG-DSC) and mass spectrometry (MS). The tests were performed using a Netzsch STA 409 PC Luxx simultaneous thermal analyzer under air and nitrogen atmosphere. Approximately 30.84 mg of the sample was placed in a platinum crucible on a pan of the microbalance and subjected to a heating rate of 20 °C min A single-mode microwave tube furnace was used in the experiments. The power source of the microwave furnace was a magnetron with a frequency of 2.45 GHz and power of 1.1 kW. The diagram of the microwave experimental set-up is shown in A thermocouple was used to measure the temperature. The thermocouple provides feedback to the control panel, which controls the power supply to the magnetron, thus regulating the temperature of the sample during microwave heating. The experiments were carried out at 750 °C, 800 °C, and 850 °C. The samples were placed in a microwave-transparent alumina crucible. Nitrogen was pumped into the microwave cavity at a rate of 0.2 L min The residue in the crucible after each experiment was cooled to room temperature in the microwave oven. It was then investigated through chemical analysis to determine the rate of zinc removal. The zinc removal rate (R) was calculated according to the following equation ( The dielectric properties of the BFS were measured using an open-ended coaxial probe at frequencies of 2423 MHz and 1064 MHz. The effects of temperature on the dielectric constant (ɛ′) and dielectric loss factor (ɛ″) of the BFS were measured in the temperature range 25–1100 °C. A schematic diagram of the dielectric measurement system is shown in Sieving was carried out using a series of ASTM sieves of the following sizes: 20, 32, 45, 63, 90, 125, and 250 µm. Ultrasound was employed to prevent agglomeration of particles during sieving. The results of the sieving analysis are listed in The interaction of a material with a microwave field is determined by its dielectric properties or dielectric permittivity ( The dielectric constant (ɛ′) and loss factor (ɛ″) of the BFS at room temperature were 8.96 and 3.13, respectively. The ratio of the loss factor (ɛ″) to the dielectric constant (ɛ′) is known as the loss tangent (tan δ The influence of temperature on the dielectric constant (ɛ′) and loss factor (ɛ″) of the BFS at frequencies of 1064 MHz and 2423 MHz is shown in The TG-DSC curves of the BFS ( At 524 °C, carbon is ignited and CO At about 660 °C, CO formation takes place according to equation The weaker peak at 760 °C is likely associated with the liming of calcium carbonate (CaCO A comparison of the DSC and TG curves of the BFS with its loss factor (ɛ″) is shown in The dielectric constant (ɛ′) and loss factor (ɛ″) of the BFS after heating were 7.83 and 2.01, respectively. These values are lower than those of the as-received BFS, and this reflects the removal of coke from the sample. The microwave heating profile of the BFS with time at 1100 W of microwave power is shown in The results of the sieving are listed in The carbon and sulfur content of the different size fractions of the BFS are listed in The distribution of iron and zinc is shown in The low concentration of zinc in the bulk BFS sample made it difficult to detect the zinc-bearing phases of the sample. Therefore, the different size fractions of the BFS were analyzed using SEM and EDS to detect the zinc-bearing phases. In the fine fraction (<20 μm), no particles with a composition consistent with zincite or franklinite were detected. However, particles rich in iron and zinc (Spectrum7, 38.66 wt.% iron and 7.26 wt.% zinc) were detected in the points analyzed ( In summary, based on the particle size and elemental distributions, the BFS can be divided into two main parts ( The coarse fraction, particle size >63 µm, with zinc content of about 0.108 wt.%. This part is dominated by coke (55.20 wt.% carbon, 16.19 wt.% iron, and 0.108 wt.% zinc). Due to its high coke content and acceptable level of zinc, this fraction is a potential raw material for reuse in the iron industry. The fine fraction, particle size <63 µm, with zinc content of about 1.02 wt.%. This part mainly comprises iron with higher zinc content (52.71 wt.% iron; 12.05 wt.% carbon, and 1.02 wt.% zinc). This was the fraction used in subsequent experiments for zinc removal using microwave treatment. The TG-DSC curves of the fine fraction, particle size <63 µm, in nitrogen atmosphere are shown in The DSC curve shows several endothermic peaks from 700 °C to 1100 °C. The first endothermic peak was observed at 710 °C; this peak is attributed to the liming of carbonates that resulted in an additional mass loss of 3.32% ( Carbon monoxide is produced by the reaction of carbon with oxygen from the iron oxide in contact with the coke. The inert atmosphere prevents the sludge from being oxidized. The weight loss during reduction with CO is due to the removal of oxygen from Fe The effect of temperature on the rate of zinc removal from the BFS was investigated at 750 °C, 800 °C, and 850 °C, and microwave power of 1100 W. The effects of the microwave heating temperature on the removal rate of zinc are shown in  The temperature of 800 °C was sufficiently high to reduce hematite to magnetite, and for the volatilization of zinc ( The morphological changes of the BFS after microwave processing at 800 °C and 850 °C are presented in  The aim of this study was to exploit the physical, mineralogical, and dielectric properties of BFS to find an effective method for zinc removal. The following conclusions can be drawn: Blast furnace sludge (BFS) consists mainly of hematite (Fe The dielectric constant (ɛ′) and loss factor (ɛ“) of the BFS increased in the temperature range 400–800 °C due to carbon gasification (CO/CO Based on elemental distribution, the BFS is divided into two parts: Low zinc content part (0.108 wt.% zinc). This part represents the coarse fraction of the BFS with particle size greater than 63 µm, and is dominated by coke, calcium, and silicon. High zinc content part (1.02 wt.% zinc). This part represents the fine fraction of the BFS with particle size less than 63 µm, and is dominated by iron with higher zinc content. Zinc removal was carried out in two stages: sieving of the BFS at 63 µm followed by microwave processing of the fraction below 63 µm. The main results are as follows: The zinc content was reduced from 1.02 wt.% to 0.13 wt.%, (86.24% zinc removal rate), after microwave processing for 10 min at 800 °C. Increasing the microwave processing temperature beyond 850 °C resulted in over-reduction of magnetite to metallic iron. The authors are grateful for the financial support of