Glass fibre-reinforced plastics (GFRP), nowadays commonly used in the construction, transportation and automobile sectors, have been considered inherently difficult to recycle due to both the cross-linked nature of thermoset resins, which cannot be remoulded, and the complex composition of the composite itself, which includes glass fibres, polymer matrix and different types of inorganic fillers. Hence, to date, most of the thermoset based GFRP waste is being incinerated or landfilled leading to negative environmental impacts and additional costs to producers and suppliers. With an increasing awareness of environmental matters and the subsequent desire to save resources, recycling would convert an expensive waste disposal into a profitable reusable material. In this study, the effect of the incorporation of mechanically recycled GFRP pultrusion wastes on flexural and compressive behaviour of polyester polymer mortars (PM) was assessed. For this purpose, different contents of GFRP recyclates (0%, 4%, 8% and 12%, w/w), with distinct size grades (coarse fibrous mixture and fine powdered mixture), were incorporated into polyester PM as sand aggregates and filler replacements. The effect of the incorporation of a silane coupling agent was also assessed. Experimental results revealed that GFRP waste filled polymer mortars show improved mechanical behaviour over unmodified polyester based mortars, thus indicating the feasibility of GFRP waste reuse as raw material in concrete-polymer composites.Worldwide volume production and consumption of fibre reinforced polymers (FRP) have increased in the last decades in several fields, mostly in the construction, automobile and aeronautic sectors ( Taking into account the actual and impending framework on waste management legislation (e.g., EU 1999/31/EC; EU 2000/53/EC; EU 2000/76/EC; EU 2006/12/EC), as well as the predicted increase of landfill taxes and limited capacity, landfill and incineration will no longer be acceptable solutions. In Portugal, the average landfill tipping fee in 2010 was about 26 € per tonne ( Under this scope, this study is aimed at developing a new waste management solution for GFRP (glass fibre reinforced polymer) waste recyclates in order to meet the main criteria for cost-effectiveness. For this purpose, different contents and size grades of mechanically recycled GFRP waste were incorporated into polyester polymer mortars (PM) as sand aggregates and filler replacements. Added value of the recycling solution was assessed by means of flexural and compressive load carrying capacities of GFRP admixed mortars with regard to unmodified PMs. The planning of experiments and data treatment were accomplished by means of full factorial design and through appropriate statistical tools based on analyses of variance, which over the last years have shown to be powerful tools in the optimization processes of mixtures, mix designs and processing parameters ( In Section “Literature review on end-use applications for GFRP waste recyclates”, a review of the state of the art on end-use applications for mechanically recycled GFRP wastes is given and endorses the present experimental work described in Sections “Experimental programme”, “Results”, “Discussion” and “Conclusions”. At present, there are basically three main recycling methods for FRP thermostable materials: (a) incineration, with partial energy recovery due to the heat generated during organic part combustion; (b) thermal and/or chemical recycling, such as solvolysis, pyrolysis and similar thermal decomposition processes, with partial recovering of reinforcing fibres; and (c) mechanical recycling, involving breaking-down of the composite by shredding, milling, comminution or other similar mechanical processes, with size reduction to fibrous and/or powdered products that can be incorporated either as reinforcement or filler into new composite materials. A complete review of current recycling technologies for thermoset composites can be found in Incineration of FRP scrap with energy recovery is listed as recycling method in some literature, but this feature is still up for debate. Incineration does recover part of the energy of the scrap materials whereas landfilling does not; however, air pollution resulting from incineration is a drawback of this method. On the other hand, the fibre and filler content of the materials still end up as landfilled waste, potentially becoming hazardous waste depending on chemical analysis of the ash ( Thermochemical recycling processes, with fibre recovering, have been proposed mostly for carbon and aramid FRP composites (CFRP and AFRP) due to the inherent economic value of reinforcement fibres; whereas for GFRP based products, mechanical recycling has been considered a more viable recycling method. This last method has several important advantages over the previous ones such as the absence of atmospheric pollution by gas emission, much simpler equipment is required as compared with ovens necessary for thermal recycling processes, and it does not require the use of chemical solvents with subsequent environmental impacts. Ensuring that feasible market outlets exist, mechanical recycling is so far considered the favoured recovering technique, at least for relative low cost and clean GFRP waste materials ( In the last years, several attempts have been made in order to overcome this issue by developing feasible end-use applications for the GFRP recyclates. Filler or reinforcement material for artificial wood ( Previous studies recently carried out by the present research group ( PC is a concrete-like material, also called resin concrete, in which a thermoset polymer, usually an unsaturated polyester or an epoxy resin, entirely replaces the cement paste binder. High strength to weight ratio, fast curing time, very low permeability, enhanced impact and damping behaviour and high resistance to chemical, weathering agents and frost attack are some of the enhanced properties of this class of materials over conventional cement based concretes ( Outcomes of the previous research on GFRP waste admixed PMs were very promising and demand for further research in this field, endorsing the present study. Compared to related end-use applications in cementitious based concrete materials, which have been investigated over the last decade and already reported in several studies (as mentioned before), the proposed solution overcomes some of the problems found, namely: (a) the possible incompatibilities arisen from alkalis-silica reaction (depending upon glass fibre nature); (b) the decrease in the mechanical properties due to high water-cement ratio required to achieve the desirable workability, and (c) the weak adhesion at recyclate-binder interface. Some of the common problems found in the design process of composite materials modified with recycled plastics arise from the lack of bond between the resin matrix and the recyclates ( GFRP waste material was obtained from the shredding of the leftovers resultant from the cutting and assembly processes of GFRP pultrusion profiles during building sites and it was supplied by Alto, Perfis Pultrudidos Lda., a pultrusion manufacturing company with headquarters in Maia (Portugal). Currently, these leftovers, as well as non-conform profiles and scrap resulting from pultrusion manufacturing process, are landfilled with an estimated cost for the company of 100 € per tonne, which includes landfill tax, transportation and chemical analyses to GFRP wastes. GFRP waste material was comprised essentially of an unsaturated polyester resin (Aropol Shredded GFRP waste was further processed by milling using a Cutting Mill laboratory unit (Retsch SM2000). Two size grades of milled GFRP waste were obtained using bottom sieves inside the grinding chamber with differently-sized meshes. Obtained recycled products, hereinafter designated by coarse (CW) and fine (FW) pultrusion waste, consist of a mix of powdered and fibrous particulate materials with different quantities of varying length of glass fibres as shown in GFRP recyclates were characterized in terms of the organic and inorganic fraction contents and particle size distribution. Burning tests carried out according to Particle size distribution of both types of recyclates, obtained by sieving and laser diffraction techniques ( Siliceous foundry sand (SP55, Sibelco Lda), with a rather uniform particle size, an average diameter of 245 Commercially available unsaturated polyester resin (Aropol An organofunctional silane chemical solution (Dow Corning The mix design of the reference PM formulation was in accordance with previous studies carried out by The resin to total aggregate (sand plus GFRP admixtures) weight ratio was kept constant at 1:4 in all formulations; therefore, the GFRP recyclates played the role of sand aggregate replacement. Resultant mix design formulations, presented in Prismatic PM specimens were tested in three-point bending up to failure at the loading rate of 1 Mechanical test results were statistically analyzed for each target response (flexural and compression strengths), using the Matlab 7.6.0 (R2008a) software. Analyses of variance were performed according to 2 Parametric analyses of variance (ANOVA) were considered in a first approach. However, the analyses of residues performed according to Shapiro–Wilk's and Levene's tests showed that the ANOVA's assumptions related to the normality and homoscedasticity were not met (  As shown in Basic descriptors are supported by the results of the nonparametric three-way ANOVA with ranks transformation presented in From the results provided by the ANOVA, it is clear that all the 3 factors have a significant influence on compressive strength response at the significance level of 5% ( Three-way ANOVA results also allowed the identification of the most influential factor on the compressive strength response as ‘waste content’, followed with minor relevance by ‘waste type’ and ‘silane content’. The respective percent contributions to the global variation (P), computed as the ratio of the pure sum of squares of the factor to the total sum of squares, as expressed by Eq. The 2-factor interactions ‘waste content Boxplots of In general, GFRP waste modified PMs demonstrated an improved flexural behaviour over reference trial formulations. The same trend was already been observed for compressive strength response. However, increases in flexural strength were not as outstanding as those that occurred for compressive strength, especially for the test series without silane addition. Also, in FWS test series, a larger decay on flexural strength (12%) was observed for FWS12 trial formulation over control formulation (FWS0). Different trends were also found for the effect of GFRP waste content on flexural strength response according to recyclate grade (CW or FW) and silane content addition. ANOVA outputs for flexural strength response, displayed in According to the nonparametric ANOVA test results the null hypothesis is rejected for all of the three main factors, thus indicating that all of them have a significant statistical influence on flexural strength. Among the three factors, ‘silane content’ is clearly the most influential parameter on flexural strength response, contributing with almost 75% to global variation, followed by ‘waste content’ with 7.5% influence, and finally ‘waste type’ with a modest contribution of 1.5% (percent contributions computed per Eq. Regarding the interaction effects, for a confidence level of 95%, no evidences were found that the 2-factor interactions have any significant influence on flexural strength response; however, the null hypothesis was not rejected for the 3-factor interaction ( In order to get a better understanding of the effects of material factors on the mechanical strengths of PMs, the response graphs of the main effects of each factor, as well as the interaction effects across them, are plotted in ‘GFRP waste content’ is the most influential factor on compressive strength response and the second most influential factor on flexural strength response of modified mortars, contributing with 46.8% and 7.5%, respectively, to global variation. As stressed by the response graphs plotted in In compression, loading capacity of PMs increases with increasing replacement amounts of sand aggregates by GFRP recyclates up to 8% in waste weight content. Overall average compressive strength increases of 8% and 14%, corresponding to replacement weight ratios of 4% and 8%, respectively, were observed with regard to waste-free PMs. The almost linear increase in compressive strength with GFRP waste content might be attributed to a more continuous particle size distribution of the mix sand/waste particles. The contribution of powder fraction of GFRP recyclates to filler amount of sand aggregates, which leads to an inferior void volume for dry-packed aggregate, had a relevant role in this feature. Generally, aggregate mixtures with the maximum bulk density lead to higher compressive strengths due to improved aggregate agglomeration. Above 8% in waste content, decreases in compressive strength occur for all trial formulations compared to PMs modified with less waste contents. Nevertheless, compressive strengths remain higher than those of waste-free formulations (with a single exception for FWS test series). This overall trend was mainly governed by CW and CWS test series (especially by this last one), in which increases in compressive strength with increasing waste content up to 8%, followed by decrease after this point, were very pronounced. In flexure, a different trend was found for the effect of ‘waste content’. As shown in As larger amounts of sand were replaced by GFRP waste throughout the test series (from 0% to 12%), the overall specific surface area of aggregates (sand plus recyclates) was progressively increased, while resin content was kept constant at 20% in weight in all formulations. The higher specific surface area of GFRP waste particles when compared to sand particles, especially in the case of FW admixture, which requires higher contents of binder matrix for a proper wetting and cohesive bonding, is for certain the main reason for the observed inflexion points in the trend of the behaviour of the materials (around 8% in waste content for compression and 4% for flexure). Poor workability and deficient wetting of overall aggregates in cementitious concrete materials with increasing contents of FRP recyclates was also reported by ‘GFRP waste type’ factor has a relatively significant effect on compressive strength and a minor influence on flexural strength response of modified PMs, contributing with 10.1% and 1.5% respectively, to global variation. As shown in the response graphs of On the other hand, CW recyclates present a wide range of fibre lengths varying between 25 The obtained results highlight the importance of sieving and sorting operations during and after the recycling process of the FRP wastes. Relevant properties of the recyclates that will affect the performance of the final composite are dictated by these key operations. This feature is also stressed in Finally, a last point must be stressed, since no real differences exist between the pairs of sets CW0/FW0 and CWS0/FWS0 (they share, in fact, the same replicates), the effect of ‘waste type’ on global variance of target responses (as well as the interaction effect of this factor with the other factors), may have somehow been concealed. As already expected, the incorporation of a silane coupling agent significantly improved the mechanical strength of PM formulations. The effect of the ‘silane content’ factor is especially remarkable with regard to flexural strength response, contributing with more than 74% to global variance ( With regard to the compressive strength response, a minor contribution of ‘silane content’ to the global variance was observed ( Despite the non-rejection of null hypothesis for ‘waste-type As already mentioned in Mix design, casting process and testing procedures, when multiple factors are involved the nonparametric Krushal–Wallis analysis may not be able to identify interaction effects. Though, at least for compressive strength response, it is clear from response graphs plotted in Experiments were performed in order to determine the effect of GFRP recyclates and silane coupling agent addition on mechanical behaviour of polyester PMs. For the trial formulations analyzed in this study and with basis on the obtained test results the following conclusions may be drawn: The partial replacement of sand aggregates by GFRP waste materials has an overall incremental effect on both flexural and compressive strengths of resultant PMs, regardless of the GFRP waste content, type and silane coupling agent addition. 4% and 8% in GFRP waste content constitute the turning points in the trend of the behaviour of mortar materials for flexural and compressive strength responses, respectively. PMs modified with coarse waste (CW) show improved mechanical behaviour over fine waste (FW) based PMs, either in flexural or in compression. The observed dissimilar behaviour of trial formulations, according to the mechanical strength response (flexural or compression) and the grade size of GFRP recyclates (CW or FW), can be attributed to intrinsic differences between the geometric characteristics and specific surface areas of FW and CW admixtures; whereas FW acts more like a filler extension for sand aggregates of modified mortars, CW acts mainly as reinforcing material. The incorporation of the silane coupling agent significantly improves the mechanical behaviour of PM formulations, especially with regard to flexural strength. The incremental effect of the silane coupling agent on the mechanical strength is more noticeable for CW admixed formulations than for trial formulations modified with finer recyclates, either in flexure or in compression. The best combination of factor's levels that maximize both flexural and compressive strengths of modified PMs is achieved for 8% (w/w) of sand replacement by coarse GFRP waste recyclates, and incorporation of 1% of active silane to resin binder. The findings of this study highlight a potential cost-effective end-use application for thermoset GFRP waste recyclates, thus opening a door to a new agenda for GFRP scrap materials, not as an expensive waste disposal but as a profitable reusable resource in the production of concrete-polymer based products. This work was supported by the ‘ADI, Agência de Inovação’ [PultrEficaz/5488/005/2010], and the ‘FEDER, Fundo Europeu de Desenvolvimento Regional’ [HybridPultrusion, QREN co-promoção 21557]. The technical support of ‘Alto-Perfis Pultrudidos Lda.’ process and the scientific editing of the manuscript by Dr. Antony Danko are gratefully acknowledged.