Slow cutting rate, tool wear and shallow depth of cuts are important practical issues observed with the commercially available chain saw machines. This paper is concerned with increasing the performance of current chain saw machines in terms of cutting rate and reduced tool wear, and investigates aspects of very shallow depth cutting, through changes in the original tool lacing of machines operating at various quarries. The cutting rate was observed to increase and wear on the leading tool was significantly reduced under similar cutting conditions when a partial modification was carried out to the manufacturers׳ original tool lacing. It was concluded that the tool lacing employed on current machines can be improved, with the power installed on current chain saw machines not being sufficient for the picks to benefit from deeper depth of cuts. It was further found that the basic principles of tool lacing fundamentals for conventional rock cutting machines are also valid for chain saws.Chain saws and diamond wire cutting are currently the common means of mechanical excavation for marbles and natural stones. Diamond wire cutting machines are easy to handle and cost effective. However, they require drill holes to guide the wire ropes for each cutting cycle, and they are also, to a certain extent, potentially hazardous due to rope breakage. Chain saws with their ability for continuous cutting in favourable conditions, and eliminating the need for drill holes, have now found increasing application in stone quarries, and have been increasingly employed worldwide. It is, however, difficult to state clearly that the excavation rate of chain saw machines is higher than that of diamond wire cutting systems, despite the above-mentioned advantages. In fact, a considerable number of quarry operators employing chain saw machines have stated that machine performance in terms of cutting rate is not completely satisfactory. This is one of the reasons that diamond wire cutting is still competitive with chain saw machines. Increasing the cutting rate of chain saw machines is, therefore, an important issue. An appreciable improvement in machine performance, particularly in cutting rate, would it is believed raise chain saw machines to be the preferred choice in natural stone quarrying. During field observations of chain saw machines of various types at natural stone quarries in Turkey, the maximum value of depth of cut taken by the tungsten carbide tipped tools arranged on chain saws was observed to be very small. This was around 0.6 It is also understood that all the chain saw machines found in practice, possess nearly the same characteristics in terms of design and operational features, and likewise they suffer from common problems, e.g. wear mostly develops on the leading tool in a cutting sequence. Along with the tool tip, wear was also observed on some tool holders, which implies the generation of forces imposed on the machine due to unnecessary rubbing on the stone surface and lack of sufficient clearances. Tungsten carbide tipped tools have been widely used as a main cutting tool for various rock and coal cutting machines such as roadheaders, drum shearers, continuous miners, jib cutters, trenchers and chain saw machines. The performance of these tools is influenced by a number of parameters related to tool and rock characteristics. Fundamental relationships for tool spacing, depth of cut, tool tip geometry and tool type have been well established previously through extensive laboratory rock cutting trials The arrangement of cutter tools on the cutting head or cutting drum of rock excavating machines, known as “tool lacing or cutting head/drum design”, is considered to be one of the very important aspects in rock cutting practice Based upon knowledge and experience gained in tool lacing, computer-aided design software was developed to provide optimum lacing design for rock and coal cutting machines employing tungsten carbide tools The depth of cut employed during linear cutting trials was 6 The concept and the method adopted in this computer programme were verified by field trials, and improved machine performance was obtained when applied to practical conditions Research on chain saw machines in published literature are not numerous, and most of the studies are, in general, focused on performance observations and measurements in various machine and stone conditions In the literature of chain saw machines, the author has, however, found no comprehensive study on tool lacing, which extensively investigated aspects of increasing cutting performance of current chain saw machines, and bringing a reduction in tool wear experienced. Furthermore, the issue of very shallow depths of cut currently found in practice with chain saw machines has also not been conclusively studied in detail. A number of practical trials have been conducted at marble and natural stone quarries embracing nearly all the chain saw machine types found in Turkey. This paper deals with aspects of tool lacing for chain saw machines, and explains how the cutting performance of these machines can be increased and the tool wear reduced. Furthermore, the issue of very shallow depth experienced by the current chain saw machines is also identified. The trials undertaken are described, and the results are presented and discussed. The design and operation of chain saw machines are similar to those of jib cutters employed for coal mining operations. Jib cutters employ tungsten carbide tools of conventional sizes as used on roadheaders, drum shearers, etc. With the chain saws the picks of different dimensions are necessarily used due to the small cutting width of the cutting arm that typically ranges from 38 to 42 Cutter tools on chain saw machines are arranged in sequences on a continuous chain that moves on the flat arm guide of the machine. The cutting direction of the tools on such continuous chain belt is perpendicular to the axis of arm rotation as being the same with the conventional rock cutting machines like all roadheaders, shearer drums, continuous miners and trenchers. Picks on a chain saw machine describe a cycloidal cutting path on the curved end section of the chain, whereas a linear cutting action is the case for remaining section of the cutting arm. The number of picks actively engaged in cycloidal cutting is small, compared to the rest of the picks, and therefore they are not considered during tool force calculations in this paper. The cutting position of tools on chain saws is similar to that of conventional rock cutting machines. The upright appearance of the tool holder base with a carbide tip at the top may, however, give an incorrect understanding that the axis of all picks on chain saw machines are always positioned vertically on each chain link ( Tool arrangements on chain saw machines is, to a certain extent, a scaled down version of that seen on drums of continuous miners, in which the cutting width is divided into two symmetrical sections. With chain saw machines the leading tool initiates the cutting and the tools behind follow it in a symmetrical manner towards the corner ( With most chain saw machines the cutter tools were seen to be laced in multi-tracking arrangements and no lacing in the form of single-tracking was observed. The leading pick is generally located in the middle of the cutting width, whilst the tools which follow it are alternatively arranged in a symmetrical manner towards both sides and appearing in the form of twins while reaching the end of the sequence. The symmetrical arrangement of this type is probably due to counter-balancing the adverse effects of lateral forces which tend to divert the chain from its course. Cutter tools with the exception of the leading tool in the centre are generally arranged in couples so that each of them has an equal duty. However, though rare, the leading pick whose tool axis is off the centre is also seen to be included within the first pair of tools ( The axis of the leading pick in the centre-line is always vertically positioned. On practical machines, generally the first pair(s) of picks immediately after the centre leading tool is commonly observed to have different tilt angle from those of the remaining tools which exhibit the same tilt angle of around 50–55°, including the corner cutting tools ( The primary aim of the in-situ trials described in this paper is to compare the trends of the parameters dominant in cutting efficiency, under equal operating, machine and stone conditions, rather than exploring the absolute values of variables for a specific method or for a specific set of conditions. Utmost care was, therefore, paid to conduct the trials in the same location where the stone characteristics are consistent throughout the cutting path. Sharp tools were always used for each trial. A stopwatch and a tape measure were used during cutting rate measurements. The total current and hydraulic pressures were monitored on a digital display and analogue pressure gauges located respectively on the machine control panel, while the current on the chain motor was measured separately with the help of quarry electricians through an ampere metre attached to the phases of the power supply line. The net current value was obtained by subtracting the value when machine is in idle from the total value. It is important to emphasize that any imperfections related to the precision of both the measurements and the instruments that might occur during the trials do not affect the scope of these investigations, since it is systematically the same for the all variables at a given experimental condition. Detailed physical and mechanical properties of the stones where the trials were conducted were avoided, as it was not one of the main objectives of these trials. However, the values of both uniaxial compressive strength tests and density which were previously carried out on cubic specimens of 70 The trials were carried out with chain saw machines having an arm length of 4.40 The position of each tool was examined through the breakout patterns produced for both lacings respectively. The above mentioned drawbacks arising from incorrect pick positions may be eliminated through a modification in the manufacturer׳s lacing to obtain increased cutting rate and reduced tool wear. In rock cutting machine practice, it is very convenient to modify the lacing pattern of tungsten carbide tipped tools for any machine where the tool holders can be directly welded on the cutting unit at any desired position, e.g. particularly with machines such as roadheaders, drum shearers, since the tool holders can be easily brought to any desired position and then welded on the head boss or drum barrel. This is not the case with chain saws, since the flat base of the tool holders should seat in an upright position on the flat mating surface at the top of the chain link and then fastened by bolts, regardless of the tool position. For this reason, each tool holder has to be remanufactured with greater precision according to the new values of the design parameters, through costly precision casting or very sensitive CNC-machining procedures. It was not possible during the trials to change the entire lacing pattern particularly in relation to tool spacing and tilt angles, as the manufacturer׳s tool holders were already produced with fixed tool positions. It was decided to combine a group of specific tool holders selected from the manufacturer׳s two different cutting sequences in an effort to form a new tool lacing (hereinafter will be called the combined lacing). Only a few tool holders from a given sequence were chosen, and they were, then, combined with the other sequence as to their tilt angles and tool spacing. The first two pairs of picks in the 13 tool sequence were added next to the leading tool in the 10 pick sequence to obtain a 14 tool sequence. Among these two pairs of picks, the first pair immediately after the leading tool allowed a far more suitable spacing and tilt angle than the second pair, while poor elevations were observed with both pairs. The elevation of each tool holder, then, had to be modified by placing shims of different thickness ranging from 0.20 The manufacturer׳s original lacing and the combined lacing designed by the author were, then, put into trials under near-identical cutting conditions. Firstly the manufacturer׳s original lacing was tested, and the combined lacing then followed it in the same place with the same operating conditions. It should also be noted that two tool holders from the whole chain could not be attached to the chain links, due to broken bolts; hence the machine had to work without two tool holders. The machine operators at this quarry usually tend to operate the machine at a traverse/cart speed of 1.5 With the original lacing, the first four tools showed wear after a 0.60 These trials were carried out with another manufacturer׳s chain saw machine with an arm depth of 3.30 A complete rearrangement of the cutter tools was necessary for this machine as the manufacturer׳s lacing pattern was considered capable of improvement. It was not possible to remanufacture the tool holders during these trials and there was no opportunity to combine tools at different cutting positions, as only one set of cutting sequence was available for this machine. A very simple modification in the elevation of each tool holder was, however, found to be the only possible method for the purpose of this trial. The essential parameters such as tool spacing tilt angle etc. remained unchanged. A number of shims with different thicknesses ranging from 0.25 The chain with modified tool holder elevations was put on trial to compare the manufacturer׳s original lacing to the slightly modified lacing, during the production operations under the same conditions. The traverse/cart speeds of the machine and wear development both on the picks and tool holders were continuously monitored and recorded. No meaningful difference was found between the cutting speeds as expected at normal operating conditions, whereas considerable reduction in wear was observed. With the original lacing, the tip of the leading tool started to wear immediately after about 1 A number of practical trials were conducted using a chain saw machine with a 4.40 The following equation which is generally employed for conventional roadheaders and drum shearers also yields the same value: The depth of cut can be increased by changing the parameters involved in the Eqs. During these trials, both total current and hydraulic pressure especially on the chain motor emerged to be generally above the normal operating values of the machine, excluding Case 6. Chain stalling occurring at irregular intervals was observed with all settings but Case 1. It is to note that the cart speed, though it was set at normal quarry values, dropped drastically well below the setting level by itself for Cases 3 and 6. Furthermore, the most meaningful depth of cuts was obtained with Case 5 where the doubled cutting sequence combined with increased cart speed, at the expense of severe chain stalling. Trials of this type were also carried out on travertine with 3.3 and 4.4 The in-situ trials demonstrated that a modification in the manufacturer׳s tool-lacing design resulted in improvements in machine performance, tool wear and reduced tool holder damage. A comparison of manufacturer׳s lacings to that of author׳s lacing on dynamic and kinematic bases may provide a better understanding in explaining this improvement.  The groove deepening cutting was thought to be the major factor for poor performance of manufacturer׳s lacings, along with irregularities related to both tool elevations and tilt angles. The values of tool spacing adopted for the current chain saw machines are too wide to cause an efficient interaction between neighbouring grooves, due to very shallow depth of cuts. The tool spacing, therefore, has to be significantly reduced to attain the optimum value of spacing to depth ratio, so that the cutting mode can be switched from groove deepening to efficient rib (relief) cutting mode. With the authors combined lacing design, the rib cutting was achieved only for the first three tools in a sequence, as seen in the breakout patterns at 1.11 The results of these trials further indicated that the fundamentals of mechanics and design principles related to the lacing of tungsten carbide tipped tools for transverse motion machines such as roadheaders, drum shearers, continuous miners, trenchers, etc. are also valid for chain saw machines. It is very important to note that the significant difference in cutting performance of these two lacings was obtained at increased cart speeds only, while no meaningful difference was observed at normal operating speeds adopted by the quarry. This situation further supports the idea that the shallow depths with the current chain saw machines should be avoided in an effort to benefit from the advantages of deeper cutting conditions, provided that an improved tool lacing is employed. Groove deepening was observed to be the dominant cutting mode with the lacing pattern adopted for these machines. The main effect of modification in tool elevations resulted in an appreciable reduction in wear of the leading tool which was mostly affected by groove deepening. The groove deepening effects heavily imposed on the leading tool seems to be reduced with the modified lacing if breakout pattern presented in A further form of multi tracking arrangement where only the first three picks are repeated twice in a given sequence as in Prevention of wear on tool-holders was carried out by examining the position of each holder body viewed on breakout patterns with respect to the degree of contact with uncut stone surface. Tool holder wear, though reduced significantly, could not be fully eliminated, due to the small ridges prominent in the vicinity of the tool tip observed with certain tool holders. The small thickness of the cutting arm which is usually kept as thin as possible (≤42 It is important to note that the increased depths of cut presented in this section for a given condition are the maximum depths that the machine can attain within its available capacity. Even with these maximum depths the value of spacing to depth ( Case 1 represents the normal operating condition for the machines, and the 0.51 It will also be useful to investigate how the chain saw machines will perform if cutting rate is increased above the current operating value. A rational comparison of Cases 1–4 on a theoretical basis may provide a better understanding in this regard. These chain saw machines are assumed to have sufficient power and structural rigidity so that it can easily achieve a higher areal cutting rate of 11 The level of tool forces and the resulting dynamic parameters calculated respectively for comparing Cases 1–4 at the same cart speeds are presented in The analysis also demonstrates that better cutting efficiency can be obtained if the length of cutting sequence is doubled. The reduction noted in torque and specific energy as in the theoretical analysis may be evaluated further in accordance with those of Case 2 and Case 5 in The theoretical 45% reduction in the specific energy can, of course, not be expected to occur in such practical conditions, owing to the lack of available machine power which is unable to generate high pick cutting forces, as evident from severe chain stalling. It is, however, important to emphasize that it will still be difficult to obtain such a reduction in theoretical specific energy even if the machine has adequate power and structure, due to limitations arising from the manufacturers׳ poorly designed tool lacing arrangement. The magnitudes of tool forces should ideally be as low as possible for an efficient cutting, since they form a substantial portion of the torque, power and machine reaction forces. Lower pick forces are likely to be generated from a tool having optimum tool tip geometry and laced correctly for a given operating condition. The practical trials described in It is also interesting to note that lateral forces have not been mentioned in the literature for chain saw machines, although being one of the important parameters considered in rock cutting practice. The lateral force is defined as the horizontal component of the normal force acting sideways on a tilted pick, as shown in In consideration of the results of this investigation, the following conclusions can be drawn as follows: With a modification in the cutting position of certain tools in a manufacturer׳s original tool lacing, the cutting rate for the same conditions was increased and the wear on the leading tool was minimised. This indicates that the tool lacing pattern adopted for current chain saw machines can be upgraded. Improvements both in machine performance and tool wear through only a partial modification imply that overall performance of commercially available chain saw machines can be further increased, if the modification covers all picks in the entire chain. Cutter tools on commercially available chain saw machines currently operate at very shallow depths of cut which are very low when considering coal shearers and roadheaders. This is one of the reasons for rapid tool wear, along with the incorrect tool lacing. The shallow depths with the current chain saw machines should be avoided to benefit from deeper cutting conditions. This was, however, found not to be possible with the current chain saw machines due to their insufficient installed power. The machine power together with machine weight, therefore need to be increased to allow more efficient excavation. When operating at higher depth of cuts, the effects of lateral force should be taken into account during tool lacing design. This is an aspect not mentioned in the literature. The results of the trials indicated that the fundamental principles of tool lacing employed for conventional rock and coal cutting machines are also basically the same for chain saw machines. The author thanks Messrs M. Serter, A. Okutan, N. Ergun and N. Demirkol of Basaranlar Marble and Travertine Company; Mr. Y. Berberoglu of Tekmar Marble Company and the staff of the all marble and travertine quarries visited, for their kind help, support and cooperation throughout this research study. The views expressed here in this paper are those of the author, not necessarily those of the companies mentioned.