The nature and basic kinetics of the hydrothermal reactions of bornite, covellite and pyrite with copper sulfate solutions were investigated, as a previous study on the behavior of the bulk Chilean copper concentrates. The reaction of bornite produced digenite at <160 °C and djurleite above this temperature. The reaction products formed a continuous, non porous layer. The rates were of zero order with respect [Cu2+](aq), and the activation energy was ∼100 kJ/mol. Covellite was transformed to digenite at <200 °C and to chalcocite (Q and M) at >200 °C. The reaction was characterized for an irregular nucleation and growth of the products, which were non-protective. The order with respect the [Cu2+](aq) was 0.6 and the activation energy ∼110 kJ/mol. The pyrite reaction was significant at >200 °C and extensive at 240 °C. It produced a mixture of digenite/chalcocite-Q, with small amounts of djurleite. The transformation has a high Philling–Betworth ratio (∼1.6), causing the break of the product layers. The reaction order and the activation energy were also 0.6 and ∼110 kJ/mol, respectively. The rate of the bornite reaction should be controlled by solid-state ionic diffusion, whereas for covellite and pyrite the rates should be limited by electrochemical processes. Towards the hydrothermal transformation, the reactivity of the main phases present in Chuquicamata-type concentrates was: bornite > chalcopyrite > covellite > sphalerite > pyrite.Studies on the hydrothermal enrichment of chalcopyrite concentrates were begun by The present raise in copper demand and price will imply the production and subsequent treatment of very impure concentrates. Thus, a significant increase of environmental problems can be expected in the copper pyrometallurgy. The previous purification of concentrates can reduce the processing of wastes containing hazardous heavy metals in the copper refineries and the hydrothermal treatment can be an alternative which combines both enrichment and purification. On the other hand, chalcopyrite is not the major phase in the main Chilean concentrates, such as the Chuquicamata-type concentrates ( The hydrothermal enrichment of chalcopyrite in the range 125–200 °C occurs essentially as:  The behavior of sphalerite was studied by The formation of digenite was predominant at < The objectives of this paper are the study of the nature and basic kinetics of the hydrothermal reactions of bornite, covellite and pyrite up to 240 °C. The results of the hydrothermal purification and enrichment of Chuquicamata-type copper concentrates will be given in the part II of this research. High purity mineral specimens were used in this study: bornite crystals from Dzhezkazgan (Jezkazgan Oblast, Kazakhstan), lamellar covellite from Butte (Montana, USA) and pyrite crystals from Navajún (La Rioja, Spain). The samples were characterized by reflected-light microscopy, scanning electron microscopy coupled by energy dispersive analysis (SEM/EDS), X-ray powder diffractometry (XRD) and electron microprobe (EMPA). No other sulfide components were detected in significant amounts in each sample. The EMPA results ( The samples for autoclave experiments were obtained from the ground crystals by wet sieving. The bulk compositions of the 25–40 and < Experiments were performed in a PARR-4563 reactor described in a previous paper ( The nature of the reactions was studied by treating 0.2 g samples (25–40 µm) with 100 cm Stoichiometry experiments were performed with < Kinetic experiments were also performed in the same way as previously described for large excess Cu Where For covellite, the fraction reacted was computed from copper balance in the solids as: Where: [   For pyrite, the fraction reacted was computed from Fe balance (Eq. Where: [     From the XRD results, the expected stoichiometry for the transformation of bornite into digenite and djurleite can be written as: Stoichiometric experiments were carried out at 190 °C to correlate the mole of Cu  where   On the other hand, the activation energies of bornite and chalcopyrite are significantly lower than that in sphalerite (147 kJ/mol,    The overall process was of the Eq. Transformation of digenite into djurleite – at high temperature and high solid conversion – initiates at the digenite/water interface, where the djurleite grows towards the interior of the digenite particle ( The hydrothermal transformation of covellite was different that those observed in bornite, chalcopyrite and sphalerite. The reaction occurs through irregular nucleation at certain points of the surface, also progressing irregularly toward the interior of the particle (  From the above results, the expected stoichiometry for the transformation of covellite into digenite and chalcocite (Q or M, for simplicity Cu Experiments carried out at 190 °C to correlate the mole of Cu  Where      The Cu The overall cathodic process should be therefore of the following type, and the overall process, the written in Eq. Where The rate of covellite conversion can be related from the rate of the cathodic process as: This was in approximate agreement with the experimental reaction order of the aqueous copper concentration (0.6). At ≥ This transformation was also strongly anisotropic ( Pyrite can be transformed into copper rich sulfides (mainly digenite and chalcocite) but only at significant rates at ≥  Stoichiometric experiments were carried out at 225 °C to correlate the mole of pyrite reacted with the mole of Cu However, at high copper concentrations (10 g/L) trace of hematite (Fe     From the results of this research and its comparison with previous studies, the reactivity of the major phases in Chilean, Codelco-type copper concentrates should be: bornite > chalcopyrite > covellite > sphalerite > pyrite.    Thus, the overall cathodic process could be of the type: Combining Eqs.  The hydrothermal reaction of bornite with copper sulfate solutions at pH 1.1–1.4 produces mainly digenite (Cu The reaction of bornite occurs through a compact digenite layer. Final particles retain the size and shape of the original bornite. Bornite reaction rates follow a solid layer diffusion control, being insensitive to the [Cu The hydrothermal reaction of covellite with copper sulfate solutions at pH 1.1–1.4 produces only digenite (Cu The covellite reaction occurs by irregular nucleation of the digenite and zonal growth. No continuous layer is formed until near the end of the transformation. In spite of the preceding, the digenite particles retain the same shape and size of the original covellite particles, since the Pilling–Betworth ratio is near unity. The reaction rates for covellite follow a chemical kinetic control. The effect of [Cu The reaction of the pyrite with the copper sulfate solutions at pH 1.1–1.4 at 180–240 °C, produces digenite (Cu The reaction of pyrite occurred with relatively uniform growth of the copper sulfide layer. However, the surface layer was porous, producing fractures in tension zones, because of the high Pilling–Betworth ratios (1.56–1.61). The reaction of pyrite shows chemical control kinetics. The reaction order with respect the [Cu The order of reactivity, determined for pure, individual phases, was as follows: bornite > calcopyrite > covellite > sphalerite > pyrite The reaction of the pyrite is significant only at ≥ The authors wish to thank the “Universidad Católica del Norte (Chile)” for the financial support of this research in the framework of a Doctorate Program in collaboration with the Barcelona University (Spain). The support of the “Serveis Científico-Tècnics de la Universitat de Barcelona” and Mrs. E. Vilalta in the characterization studies is also gratefully acknowledged.