Rotational malalignment during femoral nailing is common despite having various intraoperative assessment methods. The cortical step sign and diameter difference sign (CSSDDS) is commonly used because of convenience, yet it lack proper scientific scrutiny and is thought to be error prone.
                  Using a software algorithm, cross-sectional dimensions were obtained from CT scans of 22 intact adult femurs at the proximal, mid and distal diaphysis. With multiple simulated scenarios the sensitivity of CSSDDS was comprehensively determined at all possible C-arm positions.
                  At rotation, cortical width changed most significantly around the thick linea aspera and femoral diameter changed most significantly at the sagittal plane. At 15 degrees of rotation and with the linea aspera in view, CSSDDS thresholds of 0.3mm, 0.6mm and 1mm had sensitivities of 98.8%, 93.1% and 73.8%. With the linea aspera masked behind the femur and out of view, the sensitivities significantly deteriorated to 96.4%, 77.1% and 44.1% respectively.
                  CSSDDS is sufficiently sensitive only when strict rules are followed. It is imperative that the operator position the image intensifier in lateral view under proper magnification so that steps of less than 0.6mm around the linea aspera may be appreciated.Malrotation can easily be overlooked during intramedullary (IM) nailing of femur shaft fractures. Studies have recognized an alarming incidence of 22–43% for malrotations of more than 10° The cortical step sign and diameter difference sign (CSSDDS) are commonly used to control rotational alignment during IM nailing because of convenience. It is mentioned in the AO Principles for Fracture Management The aim of our study was to experimentally determine the optimal C-arm position, threshold values and sensitivity of CSSDDS in picking up rotational malalignment in the femur diaphysis using anatomical data and a simulated model. Radiological data was retrospectively collected from a consecutive patient group who received CT scans of the thigh for acute soft tissue infections. All patients had no bony pathology or fractures. The average age was 54 (15–86). There were 10 males and 9 females. Three patients had bilateral femurs included. From 22 femurs, three axial CT slices were collected at the mid diaphysis, 4 We used a software edge detection algorithm (Adobe Master Effects CS5) to circumferentially outline the inner and outer cortical surfaces. Both the cortical thickness (CT) and femoral diameter (FD) were computed per degree of rotation, in other words having 360 measurements along the whole circumference. Rotational positions were standardized by taking the linea aspera as the mid-posterior anatomical references so that variations in patient positioning were standardized. In the first step, the inner and outer cortical outlines were used to calculate an average femur cross-section for descriptive analysis. In the second step, the changes in CT and FD for each femur cross-section was calculated by subtracting the initial value from the final value for specific rotational differences, simulating a CSSDDS mismatch. A large number of comprehensive scenarios were created, with all femoral cross-sections simulated to receive from 1 to 45 degrees of malrotation. For CT, results were mapped into twelve sectors using clock positions on a femur cross-section for easy understanding, with 3, 6, 9 and 12 o’clock position representing the lateral, posterior, medial and anterior cortices respectively. For FD, results were represented according to the axis, measured starting from sagittal axis in 30° steps, with 90° representing the coronal/medio-lateral diameter and 180° representing the sagittal/anteroposterior diameter. Using a linear regression model, the amount of CT and FD mismatch in mm per degree of rotation was determined ( In the final step, the overall sensitivity for CSSDDS was determined from the mathematical model. All simulated data were then reanalyzed against a range of preset threshold values to obtain the true positive (CSSDDS larger than threshold) and false negative values (CSSDDS smaller than threshold). The data was then used to calculate the sensitivity of CSSDDS for all given scenarios. Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS Statistics Software (IBM Corporation, NY, USA). Mean values were presented with 95% confidence intervals. With 360 inner and outer cortical measuring points taken from 55 segments, 79,200 measurement points were obtained. In the mathematically reconstructed average femur, the cortical width was significantly thicker posteriorly (8.2 Using a linear regression model, changes in CT and FD occurred most remarkably around the linea aspera. Corresponding to this, the slope coefficients for CT for the 5th and 6th o’clock sectors were 0.053 Scenario analysis was performed from previous data. To simulate an actual fluoroscopic image, the corresponding thickness differences of two cortices and the diameter difference were analyzed together so that the maximum step mismatch is determined. The sensitivity of detecting At 15° rotation and when the linea aspera is visualized, the predicted sensitivity using a threshold value of 1 Supplementary Table S1 related to this article can be found, in the online version, at  This is the first study to utilize computational measurements of anatomical data for assessing femoral rotation. From our findings, CSSDDS can be quite sensitive when particular attention is paid to the details. The diameter differences sign (DDS) had a larger absolute difference then cortical step sign (CSS) for a same amount of rotation. We identified one study by Langer et al. By using a different design, the current study comprehensively considered views other than the AP radiograph also specifying sensitivity. Here, sensitivity reflects on the test's important ability in picking up outliers with malrotation. On the other hand, the specificity reflects on its ability to confirm the true negatives with correct rotation, which is less important. From the results, a CSSDDS mismatch due to malrotation is effectively appreciated around the linea aspera where the cortex is thickest and at the sagittal plate where the ovoid or “inverted water drop shaped” femoral diameter is widest. Before assessing rotation with CSSDDS, the C-arm should be positioned for a lateral view or a view slightly oblique to it. Most importantly, the femur or the C-arm should also be gently rotated so that the transitional zone of the linea aspera can be confirmed. CSSDDS may approximate at positions of significant rotational mismatch especially in AP images where the linea aspera is completely masked, creating false negatives. Again, this problem can be effectively avoided by real-time screening or by taking at least two images different planes where the linea aspera is visible. Environmental settings in the operation room can affect image interpretation. Although minor interpreter variations exists With the above assumptions we expect a 98.8% sensitivity in picking up rotational changes of over 15° under highly optimal conditions using a step threshold of 0.3 It must be noted that a number of other intraoperative techniques exists for assessing femoral rotation apart from clinical examination. Closed methods include contralateral fluoroscopic matching of the trochanter profiles, patella and fibula positions Femoral anteversion assessment using CT scanograms is the gold standard in assessing rotation It seems that none of the above methods mentioned are genuinely risk free. Surgeons should be familiar and use them in combination. In practice, we routinely warn patients to expect a minor degree of malrotation when obtaining informed consent. When stability allows, it is advisable to leave at least one distal interlocking hole empty There are a few sources of bias and errors in this study. We have omitted human interpretation in CSSDDS since our simulated model  CSSDDS is sufficiently sensitive only when strict rules are followed. The image intensifier is best placed in the lateral view under proper magnification. Steps of more than 0.6 Frankie Leung is the speaker for DePuy Synthes and has received research support from DePuy Synthes. Tak-Wing Lau has received research support from DePuy Synthes. The other authors declare no conflicts of interest.