AgI nanoparticles were prepared by solution-based routes using water-soluble anionic or cationic polyelectrolytes as capping agents. Depending on the polyelectrolytes, AgI nanoparticles with well-defined morphology, size, and phase compositions were obtained: the use of poly(sodium 4-styrenesulfonate) (PSS) resulted in AgI nano-rods of β-AgI in wurtzite structure (2H); with poly(acrylic acid sodium salt) (PAS) truncated-tetrahedron shaped γ-AgI nanoparticles (nanotetrahedra) in zinc-blende structure (3C) were obtained; by employing poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride) (PDADMAC) plate-like AgI nanoparticles (nano-plates) consisting of unusual polytype phases of AgI (7H and 9R) were formed. Macroscopically unstable γ-AgI and 7H and 9R phases could be stabilized in the form of nanocrystalline powders. They transform reversibly into the high temperature α-AgI phase and exhibit unusually high ionic conductivity and substantially smaller transformation enthalpy values compared to the macroscopic β-AgI.Solution-phase synthesis (or colloidal synthesis) of monodisperse nanometer-scale crystals or nanocrystals by ‘capping’ the particles with functionalized long-chain organic molecules (or surfactants) enables understanding and exploiting novel finite-size effects on electronic, magnetic, optical, catalytic properties for a variety of metals and semiconductors (see e.g. Refs. Polymers such as block copolymers AgI nanocrystals were prepared from the reagents AgNO Stir 10 ml of 0.1 M AgNO Stir 10 ml of 0.2 M AgNO Stir 10 ml of PDADMAC into 150 ml 0.033 M KI in ethanol and then stir 50 ml of 0.1 M AgNO All procedures were performed at room temperature. The mixtures were vigorously stirred for 1 h and left to rest for 3 to 7 days. The precipitates were collected by centrifugation, repeatedly washed with double-distilled water and then dried at 50 °C for 1 day. A JEOL 6300F scanning electron microscope (SEM) was used to investigate the morphologies of AgI nanoparticles. X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) patterns were obtained using a PHILIPS PW3710 with filtered Cu Kα radiation. Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) was carried out on a SETARAM DSC 121 under Ar atmosphere in the temperature range of 25 °C   The AgI nano-rod sample induced by PSS behaves very similarly to normal microcrystalline β-AgI specimen from commercial powders (Sigma-Aldrich); the conductivity of nano-rods is slightly higher than that of microcrystalline β-AgI specimen. The small hysteresis of nano-rods (of ∼ The AgI sample consisting of nano-tetrahedra derived from PAS exhibits a significantly higher conductivity than microcrystalline AgI specimen or nano-rods (by two orders of magnitude at room temperature) with a substantially reduced activation energy (0.3 vs. 0.52 eV). The cooling transition occurred at 135 °C and a clear hysteresis by 12 °C was observed with respect to the heating transition near 147 °C. The phase transition was consistently observed in DSC, The properties of the AgI nano-plates directed by PDADMAC are even more extraordinary. The conductivity is extremely enhanced (by four orders of magnitude) when compared to the normal microcrystalline specimen and the activation energy, 0.25 eV, is even lower than 0.3 eV of nano-tetrahedra. A huge hysteresis of 50 °C in phase transition was observed consistently in conductivity (  It must be emphasized that conductivity and calorimetry behavior as well as the XRD patterns shown in In addition to the occurrence of the relatively exotic 7H and 9R modifications, the stability of the γ-AgI nanocrystals is noteworthy. The γ-AgI phase is generally considered to be a metastable phase. While grinding and compressing, or quenching of AgI samples can easily produce the γ-AgI phase (mainly based on XRD pattern), it transforms to β-AgI around 90–100 °C Macrocrystalline γ-AgI and 7H- and 9R-phase are not thermodynamically stable phases. Single crystals of these phases of macroscopic size have not been prepared and are not expected to be prepared. These phases are stable in nanocrystals throughout the martensitic transformation to/from the high temperature α modification. The specific surface chemistry caused by the capping agents and the characteristic morphology of the particles, both invariant for the temperature range investigated in this study, are supposed to account for the ‘memory effect’ and the stability of the respective nanoparticle types. In the case of 7H- and 9R-phases, adsorbed Cl We suggest the unusually high conductivity values as well as the characteristic phase transition behavior observed in nano-tetrahedra and nano-plates to represent ‘intrinsic’ properties of γ-, 7H- and 9R-phase of AgI, albeit the modifications are stabilized by ‘surface’ effects. While the crystal structure of γ-AgI has the obvious advantage of offering three-dimensional transport pathways with alternating tetrahedra and octahedra over that of β-AgI exhibiting a similar transport pathway only along basal planes A much higher degree of disorder in the case of nano-plates is then consistently represented in the transformation enthalpy of 3.8 kJ mol These arguments presuppose that the differences in the transformation enthalpies are (as the conductivities) not dominated by surface layers, as appears a reasonable assumption in view of the particle sizes. (For the nano-plates (300 nm in diameter and 50 nm in thickness) and the nano-tetrahedra (ca. 100 nm), the volume fractions of the surface AgI layers are only 2% and 6%, respectively.) The detailed role of the surface chemistry in the formation and stabilization of nanoparticles with different shapes and structures should be further clarified. Moreover, since surface-stabilized, phase-pure γ-AgI and 7H/9R-AgI powders are now available, in-depth structure analysis of the cation disorder in these phases should be possible. Using different water-soluble anionic or cationic polyelectrolytes as capping agents we prepared by a solution-based method three types of monodisperse AgI nanoparticles with well-defined shapes and phase compositions: β-AgI nano-rods, γ-AgI nanotetrahedra, and (7H, 9R) polytype AgI nano-plates. The macroscopically unstable γ-, 7H- and 9R-AgI phases were found to be stable throughout the martensitic transformation to/from the high temperature α-phase. Size, morphology, and surface chemistry stabilize these crystal modifications of AgI in the nanoparticles. A high disorder in the cation lattice in γ-, 7H- and 9R-AgI phases is held responsible for the extreme high conductivity, which is also reflected in the substantially decreased heat of transformation to α-phase. The authors thank G. Götz, U. Klock, A. Fuchs, and U. Traub for technical supports.