Neuro-cytotoxicity of iron oxide nanoparticles (NPs) need to be considered. In this paper, magnetic Fe3O4 NPs are synthesized via a bio-mineralization process using silk fibroin (SF) as template. The prepared NPs with SF (SF-NPs) have more uniform grain size, better stability in weakly alkaline solution and higher saturation magnetization (about 82emu/g) than pure NPs. After exposure to different concentration of SF-NPs (6.25−100μg/mL), the reactive oxygen species generation in PC12 cells reduced compared with pure NPs. 1–5d treatment with SF-NPs did not destroy cell membrane and cyto-skeleton, and could improve the neurites extension in a dose-dependent manner at lower concentration (6.25−50μg/mL), because SF peptide coating could delay the release of iron ions and the increase of surface crystal defects of NPs. Intact mitochondria in a neurite indicate the extension activity of neurites of cells treated with SF-NPs. Their high magnetic property and good neural-cytocompatibility provide the possibility of SF-NPs to be used as the contrast agents in brain MRI or the carrier of neural therapeutic drugs.With the development of nanotechnology, magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs) have been widely applied in biomedical field Since MNPs have been widely used in the clinic medicine, how to decrease the toxicity of MNPs became more urgent. According to the previous studies, the major toxicological investigation was about the redox activity of MNPs Modification of hydrophilic molecules is usually used to improve the cytocompatibility of NPs. Silk fibroin (SF) from  1.988 The shapes and crystalline structures of two kinds of NPs were characterized by Transmission electron microscopy (TEM, JEOL JEM-100CX, Japan) and high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM, JEOL-2000, 200 The PC12 cells were obtained from Shanghai institute of biochemistry and biology. It was derived from a transplantable rat pheochromocytoma. PC12 cells were cultured in high-glucose Dulbecco's modiﬁed Eagles medium (DMEM) (Gibco), containing 10% horse serum (Gibco), 5% fetal bovine serum (Hyclone), 100 PC12 cells were planted into 96 well plate, which were coated by 0.012 After cultured for 1, 3 and 5 days, the PC12 cells in 96 well plates were observed with an inverted microscopy (IX71, Olympus, Japan) at a magniﬁcation of 40×, and micrograph were taken with charge-coupled device. Micrographs of 15 random areas were taken to analyze the number of PC12 cells bearing neurites and the length of neurites per cell with Image Pro Plus 6.0. TEM observation was used to analyze the internalization of NPs by PC12 cells. Cells were planted into petri-dish (10 PC12 cells were planted into 24 wells as described in Section To investigate the influence of the culture medium or cell sap on NPs, SF-NPs or pure NPs were dispersed in phosphate buffered solution (PBS) (pH 7.2, which is the pH value of culture medium). After 1, 3 and 5 days, supernatants were collected and analyzed with inductive coupled plasma-optical emission spectrometer (ICP-OES, SPECTRO ARCOS, Germany) to determine the concentration of iron ion into the solution released by SF-NPs or pure NPs.  The results of XPS spectra (Fig. S4) indicate that SF peptides are coated on NPs, leading to higher electronegativity and higher binding energy. The results of infrared and Roman of the as-prepared NPs further confirm that there are SF peptides on/in the mineralized NPs (Fig. S5). When NPs are dispersed in PBS (pH 7.2), Zeta potentials of SF-NPs and pure NPs are −50  The images of PC12 cells treated with SF-NPs or pure NPs with different concentrations for 1, 3 and 5 days (Fig. S7 and S8) reveal that, the longer neurites appear in the cells group treated with the lower concentration of SF-NPs (6.25 The statistical results of neurites length extended from PC12 cells are shown in It was reported that anionic NPs had a high afﬁnity for the cell membrane due to electrostatic interactions  When NPs were soaked in PBS, iron ions would release from the materials, as the result shown in Cytotoxicity of MNPs may result from two aspects: First, NPs can enter into the cell through the membrane by endocytosis. Some researches show that after cells endocytosed numerous NPs, their membrane and organelles could be damaged Based on our above results and the previous reports In our work, Fe This work has been supported by Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 