In this paper, the electro-winning of copper from synthetic copper sulphate solutions and the pregnant leach solution (PLS) derived from the leaching of e-waste was investigated in an attempt to reduce energy consumption by using a polyoxometallate (POM), ammonium metatungstate hydrate (AMTH) as a novel additive. Effect of addition of AMTH on the current efficiency, rate of copper deposition, deposit quality and morphology was studied. The current efficiency was determined to be 7% lower in the electro-winning of copper from the pregnant leach solution than that from the synthetic solution (84% vs 91%) presumably due to the presence of impurities (e.g. Fe) in the former. The addition of AMTH (50–100–200mg/L) into the synthetic electrolyte solution was found to increase the current efficiency (by 3–8%) as well as the rate of copper deposition at the current densities tested (150–250–300A/m2). Effect of AMTH on the surface morphology of copper deposit was also examined. Despite its beneficial effect on the current efficiency and rate of copper deposition, the deposit morphology tends to deteriorate (i.e. rough/dendritic texture) with increasing the concentration of AMTH in both PLS and synthetic copper sulphate solution. It can be inferred from the findings that AMTH can be used as an additive for reducing power consumption in electro-winning of copper from sulphate solutions.In view of the rapid depletion of natural resources and ever increasing environmental concern for the management of wastes, secondary resources such as waste of electrical and electronic equipments (WEEE or Pyrometallurgical processing has been a traditional technology for recovery of metals (Cu and precious metals, in particular) from WEEE. However, in recent years, hydrometallurgical processes for the treatment of WEEE have received significant attention owing to their relatively low capital cost, no hazardous gas/dust product, potential for high metal recoveries and suitability for small scale applications ( A two-stage leaching process based on oxidative sulphuric acid leaching of base metals (Cu in particular) followed by leaching of precious metals is often suggested for the treatment of WEEE ( High energy consumption coupled with adverse environmental impact of electro-winning processes is a challenging issue in the electrometallurgical industry ( Polyoxometallates (POMs) with a general formula of X POMs are used to mediate various oxidation and reduction processes including photochemical oxidation/degradation of organic pollutants with simultaneous reduction of metal ions ( The current study was developed to exploit the electro-catalytic properties of POMs for improving the electrolysis of copper from sulphate solutions. Effect of addition of ammonium metatungstate hydrate, AMTH, ((NH A 400-ml Pyrex beaker was used as the electro-wining cell in the present work. The cathodes with dimensions of 18 The synthetic electrolyte solution was prepared from reagent grade copper sulphate (CuSO The electro-winning experiments in duplicate were carried out from 250-ml synthetic or PLS solutions for 20 The deposition rate of copper was determined using Eq. Current efficiency in the electro-winning process was determined by measuring the weight gain of cathode (W is the theoretical and actual mass, respectively, of copper deposited (g). molar mass of copper (63.5 electrolysis time (seconds, s). number of electrons. Faraday's constant (96,500 coulomb). current (A). Current density (CD) was calculated as the amount of electrical current that passes from unit area of cathode (A/m Concentration of copper from solutions with high copper levels (i.e. 20–50 Surface roughness of cathodes was also determined by Mahr surf PS1device, which measures Ra (arithmetic mean surface roughness) and Rz (mean peak-to-valley height, Japanese Industrial Standard (JIS)) based on the five highest peaks and lowest valleys over the entire sampling length, in micrometer (μm) units. Cathode quality was also evaluated by determining copper grade after deposition. This involved weighing the cathode before and after dissolution of deposit in HNO An electrowinning experiment with a synthetic leach solution (30 The addition of 50  The effect of addition of AMTH (100   The current efficiency was limited to 84% in the electro-winning of copper from the pregnant leach solution compared with 91% in the synthetic solution presumably due to the presence of impurities (e.g. Fe) in the former ( The influence of addition of AMTH on the morphology and surface roughness of deposited copper was investigated using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and Mahr Surf device. The surface roughness of cathodes as represented by Ra (arithmetic mean roughness) and Rz (mean peak-to-valley height) values is illustrated in In this study, the beneficial effect of ammonium metatungstate hydrate (AMTH) as additive on electro-winning of copper was demonstrated. At all the current densities tested (150, 250 and 300 The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of The