Distal radius fracture management in elderly patients remains without consensus regarding the appropriate treatment or anticipated outcome. Multiple treatment methods, such as pins and plaster, external fixation, K-wires, bone cement and open reduction, and internal fixation with plates have been compared with higher rates of infection being observed with external fixation and K-wire stabilization. Stratification into low and high demand groups may improve the management of distal radius fractures in elderly patients. In sedentary people with low demands, functional outcomes are good despite the presence of deformity. Patients with higher demands may benefit from locking volar plate fracture stabilization. This method may be particularly suitable for the elderly that take longer to heal a fracture, are more susceptible to pin tract infection, and demonstrate earlier tendon irritation leading to rupture.Elderly patients represent one of the fastest growing population segments whose longer life expectancy and more active lifestyles have mandated increased attention directed toward their fracture management. Within this population it is frequently not the infirmed but healthy and mobile individuals that sustain these injuries to the distal radius. These fractures are, moreover, the most common upper extremity fracture in individuals aged 65 years and older, with 15% of Caucasian women fracturing their distal radius after age 50. Low bone mineral density may predispose patients to fracture following low energy trauma. Distal radius fracture instability is demonstrated by a 50% risk for secondary displacement after closed reduction and splinting, with the likelihood of displacement increasing with age. Although multiple studies have shown that radiographic parameters are not essential for determining self-reported disability, efforts to improve radiographic fracture appearance and to prevent displacement after reduction have been extensively reported. Fracture reduction followed by pinning and cast immobilization in a manner that incorporates the pins into the plaster represents a cost-effective and simple modality to improve fracture fixation. Acceptable radiographic outcomes have been shown in most patients albeit with complex regional pain syndrome identified in some. Multiple pinning techniques have been advocated. When comparing Kapandji to oblique radio–ulnar pinning, functional and radiographic results were found to be improved in those patients treated with Kapandji methods. Complications were consistent with any pinning technique, namely nerve irritation and wire migration. The results among elderly patients treated with external fixation with or without K-wire augmentation have been reviewed. A prospective study treating patients with external fixation and cancellous grafting highlighted not only the good radiographic and functional results at 3 years but the major draw back of external fixation, namely a 46% complication rate that included transient algodystrophies, pin-track infections, and 1 pin failure. Elderly patients often develop a large bone void after fracture reduction that may benefit from bone grafting with either autograft, allograft, or a bone substitute. Bone cement is an inorganic composite that mimics the mineral phase of bone and gradually remodels through osteoclastic resorption and new bone formation. The ability of bone cement to improve fracture management will receive attention in this journal. ORIF may benefit the elderly patient who is more active and places greater functional demands on their upper extremity. In this group radiographic appearance, such as articular step off and radial shortening play a significant role in determining functional outcome. Volar plate fixation was compared with closed reduction and K-wire fixation with functional return to activities of daily living being earlier in the plate fixation group at 4 weeks compared with the K-wire group at 8 weeks. Volar fixed-angle plates maintain fracture reduction in patients with a mean age of 78 years as shown in a study that compared locking and nonlocking plates. Reduction in 40% of patients was lost after 3 months in the conventional group, whereas only 4.6% in the fixed angle group, resulting in the authors advocating fixed-angle fixation with its early wrist motion resumption. Another study demonstrated excellent results with 1 complication of complex regional pain syndrome. Volar plating and locking screw fixation are favored by these authors for the management of distal radius fractures in elderly patients. The concerns with dorsal Pi-plates (Synthes, Oberndorf, Switzerland) were highlighted in a retrospective study where, despite 91% being satisfied, 73% had their plate removed 4-6 months after the index procedure. The complication rate of 14% was composed of a tendon rupture caused by a retained plate and 6 dorsal radial sensory nerve irritations ( In highly comminuted fractures a 3.5 mm plate can be used to span the comminuted segment. The plate is fixed to the third metacarpal and the radial shaft. It is particularly advantageous when additional carpal fractures are identified or when an elbow dislocation occurs in the same extremity. Providing rigid fixation in a soft tissue sparing manner may prove beneficial to the patient. Placement of 3 screws proximal and distal to the fracture has been shown to provide a superior mechanical construct. One disadvantage of this procedure is that it requires plate removal ( One may surmise that as patients age they tend to place fewer demands on their upper extremities and are, therefore, in lesser need of full restoration of their preinjury anatomy. Although activities will eventually decrease with advancing age, today's elderly patients are increasingly remaining more active. Additionally, medications are being used to minimize bone loss and maximize bony integrity. The goal of any treatment should be to restore an upper extremity that enjoys both acceptable mobility and durability. An important initial determination must be the patient's physiological age and level of functioning. If they are low demand and sedentary, nonoperative management with avoidance of finger stiffness is appropriate. The realization that outcomes are quite good in lower functioning patients makes cost-effective, nonoperative management worthwhile. It must be understood that ultimate fracture deformity is to be expected as gradual settling regardless of initial appearance will likely occur. When deciding among operative choices, the complication rate among different methods is noteworthy. Fewer complications have been identified in patients treated with ORIF than external fixation, K-wire fixation, or a combination of both. In particular, the risk of pin track infections is eliminated through the use of open reduction and internal fracture fixation. In high functioning patients operative intervention may be considered preferably through a volar approach using locking screw technology. For patients that fall between lower and higher functioning, a decision based on surgeon philosophy, skill set, and patient expectations can be made.