Lithium fluoride nanopowders have been prepared by high-energy milling using a planetary ball-mill. The influence of dispersion agents, milling time, ball-size and ball-to-powder ratio on the properties of the material has been investigated by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and N2-physisorption measurements (BET). It was observed that the agglomeration of the nanoparticles depends on the size of the milling balls as well as on the ball-to-powder ratio. By using a dispersion agent, the agglomeration could be reduced and a lower primary particle size was obtained. The crystallite size was reduced to a value of 20nm and the primary particle size to 34nm when LiF was milled with a mixture of 10 and 20mm tungsten carbide balls in n-pentane. The LiF nanopowders were used to synthesize Co/LiF/C nanocomposites which were tested as cathode materials for lithium-ion-batteries. With decreasing size of LiF an increase of the capacity of the cathodes from 68 to 165mAh/g in the first discharge was observed.Lithium fluoride is widely used as an optical material for thermoluminescent dosimeters Various bottom-up synthesis methods have been explored to synthesize LiF nanoparticles. The reported methods include precipitation from solution An effective method to produce nanopowders of a wide range of materials on laboratory- and industrial scale is high-energy ball-milling In the present investigation we synthesized LiF nanoparticles using a planetary ball-mill and the influence of milling time, ball-to-powder ratio and dispersion agent on the properties of the LiF-nanopowders has been systematically studied. Furthermore the influence of the crystallite size of LiF on the capacity of Co/LiF/C nanocomposite electrodes for lithium-ion batteries is discussed. Prior to ball-milling, LiF (Alfa Aesar, 99.99%) was dried at 150 Nitrogen-physisorption measurements were conducted using a Micromeritics ASAP 2020 analyzer system at 77 The equation is valid for particles with spherical or cubic geometry and monodisperse size distribution (see Appendix A). Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was performed using a Zeiss LEO 1530 microscope at 10 Powder X-ray diffraction patterns (XRD) were recorded on a Bruker-AXS D8-Advance powder diffractometer equipped with a LynxEye silicon strip detector in reflection geometry using Cu K The specimen related broadening B The lower limit of crystallite size d Here λ is the X-ray wavelength, θ the scattering angle and K the Scherrer constant which was assumed to have a value of 1. The contributions of size and microstrain effects to the peak broadening were separated using the Williamson–Hall relation for Cauchy-broadened size and strain effects The microstrain ε The WPPF method, implemented with FullProf To investigate how the comminution of LiF is influenced by utilization of different dispersion agents, 3 samples were prepared by milling LiF with a B/P-ratio of 77 for 20  The size of well separated primary particles has been determined from the SEM pictures and found to be approximately log-normal distributed (   The lower limit of the size of crystallites d In The data points in the WH-plots of the milled LiF samples show a significant deviation from a linear relation. It was observed that the values of B Whole pattern profile fitting (WPPF) analysis of the XRD patterns was performed using TCH functions. Thereby the effect of anisotropic crystallite geometries on the peak broadening was modeled. Fig. S2 shows the refined diffractogram of LiF which was milled in n-pentane under assumption of an isotropic and an anisotropic crystallite shape, respectively. With an isotropic crystallite shape, a value of d The average crystallite size of LiF milled in n-pentane which was calculated by the WPPF-method is 27 As microstrain has been observed in all ball-milled LiF samples and the best fit of the XRD-patterns was achieved by the anisotropic size WPPF model, this method was used for the determination of crystallite size and microstrain for all other LiF samples. The crystallite sizes d The effects of dispersion agents can be a better dissipation of heat which is generated by the impact of the milling balls, separation of fragments after breakage and lowering of the fracture strength of particles by a reduction of their surface energy The influence of the ball-to-powder ratio (B/P-ratio) was investigated by milling LiF with a mixture of 10 and 20 In the powder X-ray diffraction patterns ( By WPPF analysis it was observed that d The influence of the B/P-ratio on d The influence of milling time was investigated by milling LiF with a mixture of 10 and 20 The crystallite sizes and microstrains which were calculated by WPPF from the XRD patterns are shown in In the SEM picture of LiF milled for 2  The values of d The influence of ball-size was investigated by milling LiF with a B/P-ratio of 77 in n-pentane. The lowest crystallite and particle sizes are observed when the mixture of 10 and 20 The values of d Co/LiF/C nanocomposites were prepared by pyrolysis of cobaltocene mixed with LiF which was milled dry or in n-pentane for 2–80 In The reduction of the crystallite size by wet milling with WC balls instead of dry milling with Si LiF nanopowders were prepared by high-energy milling in a planetary ball-mill and the influence of the process parameters milling time, B/P-ratio and ball size on the crystallite size and microstrain of the material was discussed. The analysis of XRD patterns by the Williamson–Hall method shows that during ball-milling the size of LiF crystallites is reduced to the nanoscale and significant amounts of microstrain are introduced into the crystal lattice due to plastic deformation. Anisotropic, The use of n-pentane or 2-propanol as dispersion agents led not only to a stronger reduction of crystallite and particle size after 20 Increasing the ball-to-powder ratio from 16 to 154 for 10 After 20 An increase of microstrain was observed with increasing milling time. The microstrain reached a value of 0.32% after 10 The reduction of the crystallite size of LiF led to an increase of the electrochemical activity of Co/LiF/C nanocomposites which were synthesized using ball-milled LiF. By performing ball-milling in n-pentane with WC balls instead of dry milling with Si Financial support by the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at