Vermicomposting is a suitable technology for processing different wastes, to produce a valuable end product (vermicompost). However, the pathogenic load of the waste must be greatly reduced in order to prevent risks to human health. Although Eisenia andrei may reduce the levels of several pathogens, the feasibility of vermicomposting, with regard to pathogen reduction, has not been tested on an industrial scale. This work studied whether vermicomposting in a continuous feeding vermireactor, is able to reduce the pathogenic load of cow manure. The effect of E. andrei on pathogens depended on the type of pathogen; thus, levels of Clostridium, total coliforms and Enterobacteria were not modified, but levels of faecal enterococci, faecal coliforms and Escherichia coli were reduced to acceptable levels. Pathogens could have maintained their levels in continuous feeding vermireactors, as fresh layers of manure are added to the top, which allows the vertical spread of pathogens through leaching.The increasing rate at which organic residues are generated has become a problem that requires strategies for disposal and/or management. Vermicomposting, i.e. the processing of organic residues by earthworms, has proved to be a suitable technique because of its low cost and the large amounts of organic wastes that can be processed. It has been shown that sewage sludge, brewery waste, paper waste, urban residues and animal waste may be managed by vermicomposting to produce vermicomposts of different quality (reviewed in One of the main problems associated to the vermicomposting process is the presence of human pathogens, the levels of which will restrict use of vermicompost as an organic fertilizer or its disposal by landfill. Unlike composting, vermicomposting is a mesophilic process (<35 Fresh cow manure was obtained from a farm near the University of Vigo, NW Spain. The manure was homogenized, stored in sealed plastic containers and maintained at 5 The system used was a rectangular metal pilot-scale (4 New layers of manure are continually processed in the vermireactor, so that at sampling the vermireactor consisted of a 25 Microbial activity was assessed by measuring the rate of CO Microbial community structure was assessed by phospholipid fatty acid (PLFA) analysis. Briefly, the total lipidic extract was obtained from 200 Microbial pathogens were determined according to standard protocols. Briefly, Data were analyzed with mixed models (function lme in the nlme library, At sampling earthworm numbers ( Overall, microbial biomass decreased significantly with depth of layer ( Earthworms promoted a significant decrease in three of the six pathogens analyzed. Thus, faecal enterococci decreased significantly from upper layers (which showed levels similar to fresh manure: 8.4 Finally, pathogen reduction was sufficient to fulfil the EPA requirements, at least for This is the first comprehensive study up to date describing pathogen reduction during vermicomposting on an industrial scale. This research was financially supported by the Spanish Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovación CTM2009-08477. Manuel Aira is financially supported by Parga Pondal research grant from the Xunta de Galicia. María Gómez Brandón is financially supported by a postdoctoral research grant from Fundación Alfonso Martín Escudero. The authors also acknowledge Christine Francis her highly valuable help in language editing.