Natural waters contain a wide variety of impurities (both dissolved and suspended) that mainly are contributed by the weathering of rocks and soils. But in inhabited areas, contributions from human activities are important. These impurities are first discharged as dissolved ions or particulates. The latter are normally: (1) inorganics, (2) organics, or (3) organisms (living or dead). These particles scatter light and adsorb materials from solution, and if they are microorganisms or viruses, they may be pathogenic. Obviously, their presence in drinking water is undesirable. Removal processes include sedimentation (including centrifugation), flotation (dispersed or dissolved air), or filtration (deep bed or membrane units). The author ends his first chapter with the following statement: Chapter 2 deals with particle size and related properties including particle size distributions, particle transport, light scattering and turbidity, and particle size measurement. Chapter 3 covers surface charge which plays a major role in colloid stability and interaction between particles. The most common reason for particles in an aqueous solution to acquire a charge is that its surface has chemical groups that can ionize in water and leave a residual charge on the surface. Surface charge is important because it plays a major role in colloidal stability. Colloid interactions and colloid stability is the title of Chapter 4. The interactions discussed here are both attractive and repulsive. They are important because they control particle sizes. The remaining chapters (5–7) are entitled: Aggregation kinetics, Coagulation and flocculation, and Separation methods. Discussed in the first of these chapters, in addition to the kinetics of particle aggregation, are the forms of aggregates and aggregate strength, all of which are of considerable fundamental and practical importance. Chapter 6, Coagulation and flocculation, discusses the mode of action of some common additives on coagulation and flocculation. Chapter 7, Separation methods, gives an overview of some important solid–liquid separation processes and the principles on which they are based. The theory pertinent to the science underlying particle processes is well presented by Gregory. However, the numerous equations are not worked out, i.e., no numerical examples are given. The references, although pertinent to the material discussed, seem limited in number with more of them referring to books in the field than to single research papers. I note this only because it is different; it is not to be construed as a criticism.