Tungsten carbide crystal is trigonal rather than hexagonal as is often assumed. The dependence of the room temperature hardness on the geometry of indentation is discussed in terms of its orientation in the crystal systems, and the temperature dependence of hardness is discussed on the assumption that slip in the basal plane has a very high Peierls stress. Unexpected dominance of a
                     +
                     c dislocations in the deformation process is discussed.The crystal structure of WC may conveniently be discussed in terms of The tungsten atoms form a simple hexagonal lattice; the carbon atoms lie at ( Firstly, the crystal habit is one of platelets which are not hexagonal but form truncated equilateral triangles. Thus Lee  There is evidence  The Knoop indenter has an elongated parallelogram cross-section, and measures essentially the stress required to cause slip on planes which meet the surface of the sample along lines which are roughly parallel to the long direction of the indenter. In the case of polycrystals this orientation dependence is absent; for indentations on the (0 The temperature dependences of the various indentation geometries are quite different. The single-crystal hardnesses all fall by a factor of order 2 as the temperature increases from room temperature to about 400 Of the single crystal faces, (0 The predominant slip system is slip in the direction We first discuss the orientation dependencies of the single crystals in terms of these observations. The basal plane is the hardest to indent because its symmetry causes several slip systems on intersecting planes to be activated simultaneously. This leads to rapid work hardening by the dislocation forest mechanism. Indentations on a prism plane have a lower symmetry. The orientation in which the long axis of the indenter lies parallel to the The temperature dependence of the flow stresses is normal, since slip is a thermally activated process. The same set of We interpret the observations on polycrystals as follows. In these hard crystals, the dislocations which carry the plastic deformation are not those of low energy, but those of high mobility, i.e. of low Peierls stress. At finite temperatures the Peierls barrier is overcome by the thermal activation of double kinks. The energy of a double kink is of the order of the product of the Peierls energy per unit length of dislocation and of the Burgers vector. In a crystal such as WC, the different Burgers vectors do not differ greatly; the Peierls energies do. Thus the thermal activation energy, which is a measure of the temperature dependence of the flow stress, is much greater for basal slip than for prismatic slip. At room temperature, basal slip, which is necessary for cohesion under hydrostatic pressure, requires very high stresses, and so polycrystals are harder than any surface of a single crystal. At high temperatures the critical resolved shear stress for slip on the basal plane has fallen by a much larger factor than that for slip on prismatic planes, and so the hardness of polycrystals falls more rapidly than that of single crystals. The question remains, why is the operative slip vector on the prism plane A first aim of the present work is to confirm this identification of the preferred slip system. The second aim is to understand why the second slip system also with Burgers vector Slip on the basal plane has never been observed, though Greenwood et al., have postulated it, and Lewis and Porter A polycrystal cannot cohere under an arbitrary deformation by prismatic slip alone, and cleavage is often observed. A third aim of the projected investigation is a theoretical analysis of slip on the basal plane. Here, it may not be adequate to consider a linear section of the A qualitative discussion is possible Consider the central carbon atom marked by a square in