Kinetics of adsorption of benzoate and salicylate onto the natural hematite surfaces have been carried out at pH 5 and at a fixed ionic strength (I
                     =1×10−4
                     moldm−3). The state of equilibrium was attained at 144 and 70h for benzoate and salicylate, respectively. Adsorption behaviour of benzoate and salicylate onto the natural hematite was studied over a wide range of pH at a fixed I
                     =5×10−4
                     moldm−3 NaCl and at different temperatures. The adsorption isotherms for both the adsorbates were Langmuir type up to pH 8. The Γ
                     max for benzoate is ≈2.7–13.7 times more than that of salicylate depending on the pH of the suspension. Unlike benzoate, salicylate is not only adsorbed at one surface site but also covers around three or more surface sites of hematite surface. The rate constant for adsorption, K
                     1 for salicylate onto the natural hematite is greater than that of benzoate and increases with the increase in temperature and ≈4 times greater at a fixed temperature. The activation energy for the adsorption of salicylate onto the natural hematite is 2.9 times more than that of benzoate on the same adsorbent resulting in lower Γ
                     max.In the mineral processing industries the use of ionic or non-ionic polymers, surfactant and polyelectrolytes is an essential proposition to liberate and separate minerals from the ore It is reported that α-Fe A good amount of work related to adsorption of small organic acids of different polydispersity and functionality Natural hematite was washed several times with distilled water, dried and finally activated at ≈700 Differential thermal analysis (DTA) and thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) (SDT 2960, TA Corporation, USA), X-ray diffraction (XRD) (X’pert Pro, Philips, The Netherlands) and Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) (model-2000, Perkin-Elmer, USA) Spectra of activated natural hematite were recorded. The zeta potential of adsorbent at different pH and ionic strengths was measured using Zetasizer-3000HS (Malvern Instruments, UK). The pH of the suspension of the adsorbent at a fixed ionic strength was initially adjusted at ≈3.0 and the zeta potential was measured with increasing pH of the suspension by adding dilute sodium hydroxide with a multipurpose titrator (DTS 5900, Malvern, UK). The zeta potential was measured at 25 Kinetics of adsorption of benzoate and salicylate separately onto the natural hematite (0.5 Adsorption of benzoate and salicylate onto the natural hematite was carried out at room temperature in a screw-capped glass tube. A suspension of 15 The thermogram (DTA and TGA) of the natural hematite sample shows that there is a small change in the weight (≈0.25%) at around 500 The zeta potential of the natural hematite as a function of pH at different ionic strengths is depicted in The changes in adsorption density with time for benzoate and salicylate on natural hematite for pH 5 and The kinetics of adsorption of benzoate and salicylate on the natural hematite were affected differently by temperature. Benzoate adsorption did not change significantly with temperature from 27 to 40 The kinetic parameter, The kinetic parameters for adsorption of small anions as used in the present system, onto hematite are not available in the literature. However, the rate constant for adsorption, Adsorption density of benzoate and salicylate onto natural hematite surfaces at The Langmuir adsorption isotherm equation of the following form was used to estimate the adsorption coefficient, The variation of The activation energy for adsorption, The present study highlights the following points: The time for the state of equilibrium for the natural hematite–benzoate system is ≈2 times more than that of natural hematite–salicylate system. The rate constant for adsorption of salicylate at the natural hematite–water interface is ≈4 times greater than that of benzoate at a fixed temperature. The adsorption isotherms for both the systems are Langmuir type up to ≈pH 8. The adsorption density of benzoate at the saturation point onto the natural hematite is around 2.7–13.7 times more than that of salicylate up to pH 7. The activation energy for adsorption of salicylate at the natural hematite–water interface is higher in comparison to benzoate. The lower value of The authors are grateful to the Department of Science and Technology, New Delhi, for the grant-in-aid. The authors are also thankful to the Director, Regional Research Laboratory, Jorhat, for the facilities and interest in the work. The authors are also grateful to the anonymous reviewers for the suggestions for revision.