Charcot arthropathy is a very difficult condition to treat secondary to the severe deformity involved combined with medical comorbidities associated with this condition. The use of very rigid fixation distinct from that used in patients with routine arthritic conditions is required. Arthrodesis, not open reduction and internal fixation, is required.Although classifying the Charcot arthropathic process as acute, subacute, or chronic is helpful from a practical standpoint, the definitions of these stages have no value because treatment will depend on the clinical severity of the deformity and the presence of bone fragmentation and periosteal new bone formation. New bone formation is apparent a month or so after onset of the acute process, often associated with marked osteopenia and bone fragmentation. Surgery at this stage may be more complicated even if the deformity is amenable to open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF). Once the process reaches the chronic phase, the midfoot is typically stable and is unlikely to deform further. However, bone prominence is often present on the plantar aspect of the midfoot, which may lead to ulceration or infection. In this context, “chronic” implies Occasionally, if the first metatarsal, cuneiform, or navicular dislocates medially, the forefoot abducts and the bone prominence is directly medial. This type of deformity is easier to treat with an ostectomy than those in which bone prominences are on the lateral or plantar midfoot. However, this ostectomy can only be performed when the midfoot is completely stable and quite rigid; otherwise, removing the bone will worsen the deformity. The lateral rocker-bottom deformity occurs when the navicular and cuneiforms dislocate dorsally (naviculocuneiform or talonavicular dislocation with fourth to fifth tarsometatarsal dislocation), leading to a shortening of the medial column and a laterally based prominent rocker-bottom deformity with the apex at the cuboid. The rationale for operative treatment is to decrease the deformity, thereby minimizing the likelihood of complications, including infection and need for amputation, which otherwise may be imminent. Certainly, surgical reduction of acute dislocation makes sense, especially in patients with acute frank dislocation of the midfoot, who clearly will benefit from this more urgent operative treatment. By contrast, in patients with chronic but stable neuropathic deformity of the midfoot, use of appropriate shoes, orthoses, and braces can often restore adequate function, so the indication for surgery is more specific: deformity that cannot be controlled by nonsurgical means, associated with recurrent ulceration and infection. The key is to balance the surgical risks with the risk of ulceration for the patient with a persistent deformity ( Patients can experience pain from the deformity, and although neuropathy may be thought of as being complete and not associated with any sensation, some patients experience deep, aching discomfort. Accordingly, it is appropriate to indicate surgical reconstruction in such cases. Chronic deformity, recurrent ulceration, pain, and an unbraceable deformity are reasonable indications for reconstruction, but only if treatment-approach orthotics and prosthetics have failed to produce improvement or are unrealistic to begin with ( During the acute phase, some absolute indications for surgery exist, including medial dislocation of the cuneiform or navicular, which will lead to skin necrosis ( The key to operative treatment, however, is to take careful note of the quality of the bone. From a practical standpoint, knowing the onset of the injury is difficult, because many patients are unaware of the initial event anyway. It is preferable to use the appearance of the bone as an indicator of both the onset of the neuropathic injury and also the possibility for surgery. Performing surgery on the midfoot when the bones are crumbling as a result of osteopenia is difficult, if not frustrating, and complicated. Therefore we are more inclined to correct a subluxation or dislocation than multiple fractures around the midfoot. The traditional methods of reduction and fixation of these injuries do not work well here because they are associated with recurrence of deformity. In the setting of Charcot, arthrodesis is required following reduction in all cases, as approaching these patients as one would approach trauma with an ORIF will predictably fail. In the chronic stage, a complete transverse tarsal joint dislocation with dorsal dislocation of the cuneiform commonly leads to a floppy, unstable forefoot. This deformity results because the forefoot is placed into dorsiflexion by the pull of the tibialis anterior tendon while the Achilles tendon forces the hindfoot into equinus. The combination of these deformities results in a foot that is ineffective at both heel strike and toe-off, and the midfoot is at risk for ulceration. A second deformity that frequently requires surgery in the chronic phase is the midfoot rocker-bottom deformity that is associated with supination of the forefoot. This deformity results from the heel cord pulling the foot into equinus and subsequent weight bearing on the lateral aspect of the foot. Ulcers may develop as a result of rubbing of anatomic bony prominences, or those produced during weight bearing in unstable joints, against shoes or other points of contact. If ulcers are intractable, ostectomy should be considered to resect the bone prominence. This procedure works well in such instances, provided that there is no associated instability of the adjacent joints. In general, ostectomy is effective for midfoot Charcot, and is not indicated for hindfoot Charcot as those are inherently unstable ( Technically, the ostectomy is not difficult to perform, and the only issue is to try to minimize postoperative soft tissue problems. Rarely, we approach the ostectomy through the open ulcer. Usually, the skin has healed over the ulcer from a total contact cast program, and the incision is made off the weight-bearing surface of the foot, either medially or laterally. Large skin flaps are preserved, and full-thickness dissection using a broad periosteal elevator should be performed to reach the prominence. We use a combination of an oscillating saw, osteotomes, and a rongeur to create a contoured surface of the plantar weight-bearing foot amenable to ambulation (  We prefer to leave large segments of the subchondral bone of the midfoot bones intact. If bone quality is sufficient, the medial column length can be maintained with bridge plating from the talus to the cuneiforms or first metatarsal ( Neuropathic fracture, dislocation, or fracture-dislocation of the midfoot results in loss of medial column length secondary to comminution of an intercalary segment. Caution is indicated, because any further shortening of the medial column would cause a lateral “rocker,” or adduction, of the midfoot with the apex at the calcaneocuboid joint. We use a burr to remove selected portions of the articular surface, rather than a chisel or an osteotome, because the ligamentous support is friable and tenuous, and with less than delicate handling, bone may literally fall out ( Primary arthrodesis of these acute midfoot dislocations must be performed, with the joint surfaces denuded using a burr applied to subchondral bone. If a talonavicular-cuneiform arthrodesis is performed, do not shorten the medial column. It may be preferable to include the calcaneocuboid joint in the arthrodesis, to avoid a lateral rocker-bottom deformity created by slight shortening of the medial column. If hindfoot valgus and forefoot abduction are associated with the acute midfoot Charcot arthropathy, a triple arthrodesis should be performed using lag screw fixation, but because of bone loss, plates are often necessary. If the navicular is fragmented and unable to be maintained as a part of the fusion mass, a naviculectomy with subsequent talocuneiform arthrodesis with similar surgical principles should be performed. To minimize the effect of the equinus contracture that is always present, we routinely perform a lengthening of the Achilles tendon. An external fixator is used to secure and maintain reduction only when an ulcer cannot be healed before arthrodesis, and we do not routinely use an external fixation construct when the soft tissue is healed without ulceration. Occasionally, the internal fixation obtained is poor, and maintenance of the result is understandably of concern in a noncompliant patient. In such cases, we occasionally add an external fixator consisting of half-rings applied to the midfoot ( An alternative fixation technique is to use large cannulated screws, which are inserted through the metatarsals. The screws (which are occasionally referred to as beams) can be introduced from the forefoot proximally or the hindfoot distally. This depends on the segments of the foot that are unstable and which are accessible for percutaneous insertion. A common pattern of the use of these long screws is from the talus posteriorly headed anteriorly into the midfoot or metatarsals. Entering the first metatarsal requires triangulation and is generally not difficult, although this can certainly be a nuisance at times. Once the reduction is complete and the midfoot alignment is obtained, the guide pins are inserted antegrade through the metatarsal at the level of the tarsometatarsal joint from proximal to distal. The midfoot is reduced, the guide pins are then redirected proximally across the midfoot, and the screws are introduced through the metatarsal heads and buried in the metatarsal shaft ( Antegrade-inserted screws from the hindfoot through the midfoot into the forefoot are particularly useful for management of a combination of midfoot and hindfoot deformity, for which a midfoot fusion is performed in conjunction with the hindfoot correction. If the midfoot is dislocated, then the entire dislocation can be reduced using screws inserted from the back of the talus into the forefoot. In A similar problem is depicted in If beaming screws are not used for fixation, then the two primary options are the use of a medially based plate or plantar plate. Medial column fixation is familiar for most surgeons, however, does require a rigid and thick plate that can complicate wound closure and may result in soft tissue prominence. A superior option, although more technically demanding, is the use of a plantar-based plate. Plantar Charcot plates are commercially available. Alternatively, a standard 3.5-mm dynamic compression plate can be used, although this may offer fewer screw options proximally given the linear nature of the plate. The surgical dissection requires complete release of the abductor hallucis and placement of the plate superficial to the anterior tibial tendon. Although injury to the anterior tibialis is theoretically possible from compression from the plate, this is not a frequently reported clinical concern. The benefits of the plantar plate outweigh the risks given the superior soft tissue profile and the mechanical advantage of tension-sided placement. This procedure is particularly useful for stabilization with the medial column of the midfoot ( Dressings and sutures are removed 2 to 4 weeks after the operation. After appropriate healing of incisions has been confirmed, a non–weight-bearing, below-the-knee plaster or fiberglass cast is applied. This support is maintained with frequent cast changes for at least 2 but often 4 months. Thereafter a weight-bearing cast is applied and maintained until bridging trabeculation is observed at the surgical site. On average, 6 to 12 months of casting is required for union of arthrodesis of the midfoot. Once healing is evident, it is advisable to use a polypropylene ankle-foot orthosis for up to 1 year, which will lessen the effects of direct pressure and shear stresses encountered in normal weight bearing on the abnormal midfoot. There are circumstances where one is really reluctant to operate on patients with diabetic neuropathic deformity. These include patients who are very noncompliant, those who cannot comply with the postoperative recovery protocol, and those for whom the risk of surgery is very high. The latter patients include those with a high hemoglobin A1C (HbA1C) and those who have poor and unreconstructible peripheral vascular disease ( We find that once we have a solid screw in the first metatarsal with the midfoot reduced, it is easier to introduce the remaining required screws percutaneously from multiple directions. Despite the magnitude of the deformity presented in In contrast with the Charcot midfoot deformity, with collapse of the hindfoot and ankle, the resultant deformity often necessitates surgery. A number of fixation options are available, and decision making in such instances depends to some extent on the magnitude and type of deformity and the individual surgeon's preference. Clearly, in the presence of sepsis, external fixation is ideal. We have found, however, that even in the presence of ulceration of the fibula, such as with a severe varus deformity of the ankle, the arthrodesis can be performed with internal fixation. For example, in the presence of the severe varus ankle, if the fibula is exposed or infected, or both, it is excised completely as part of the procedure, followed by internal fixation. In such cases, we routinely mix antibiotic powder with the cancellous bone graft. Factors that indicate the need for an external fixator in management of the infection and correction of deformity include the degree of the infection and a concern for the presence of osteomyelitis. Regardless of the type of deformity and the type of external fixator used, we prefer to close all the wounds before application of the external fixator. It is easier to close the incision before application of the frame, and closing gives a better sense of where the cross pins will be, because we prefer not to have pins going through the incision. Clearly, in the presence of infection, this part of the incision will not be closed. For example, in the presence of a severe varus deformity with exposed fibula, an incision is made over the distal fibula to perform the cheilectomy for the tibiocalcaneal arthrodesis. The incision that is extended proximally and distally is closed, but the original open wound is left open. However, use of an external fixator is obviously necessary in the presence of sepsis, and at the opposite end and in the absence of severe deformity, cannulated screw fixation is most versatile. It is worth noting that the goal of treatment of a Charcot hindfoot deformity is to obtain stability and the ability to wear a shoe without risk for ulceration. Arthrodesis is a worthwhile goal, but the lack of arthrodesis does not imply failure of treatment if the foot is stable. Cannulated screw fixation is simple and allows significant deformities to be addressed. We have used a blade plate frequently to treat ankle and associated hindfoot deformities in the past with success ( With gross instability involving the ankle or subtalar joint, use of a blade plate, rigid locking plates, or intramedullary rod is preferable. In the 1990s we used a blade plate for most of these procedures, because control of rotation was not possible with an intramedullary rod ( The older intramedullary fixation systems did not have adequate rotational control of the limb, and supplemental screws were always required. If severe erosion was present in the calcaneus, as is frequently the case with neuropathic deformity, then it is difficult, if not impossible, to maintain control of rotation ( The indication for surgery in this patient group is far easier to define. Almost all patients are treated initially with a brace of some sort to maintain the alignment of the foot under the tibia; however, almost universally, these deformities will require realignment and arthrodesis given the inherent instability of the deformity. When excessive pressure is noted or ulceration occurs despite adequacy of bracing, surgery is indicated. In these cases, the patient is placed in a total contact cast until resolution of swelling and healing of the ulceration, while surgery is planned. Surgery is deferred until there is no evidence of clinically active infection and until swelling has decreased. The patient's diabetic control should be optimized and vitamin D level assessed and treated. If the limb is swollen, a regimen of diuretic agents (under the supervision of their primary physician) and bed rest with limb elevation can be used. In patients with documented osteomyelitis, treatment should be initiated with debridement, followed by culture-specific intravenous antibiotics and local wound care. Although the infection cannot always be eradicated in these patients, drainage or surrounding erythema at the time of reconstructive surgery should be minimal. If there is severe soft tissue loss, a free flap may be required at the time of reconstruction.  A curvilinear incision is made over the distal 10 cm of the fibula and is extended distally toward the sinus tarsi. Whenever possible, existing incisions should be used. A full-thickness skin flap is developed without regard for the sural and superficial peroneal nerves in the patient with neuropathy. Nerves and even the peroneal tendons are cut to prevent excessive skin retraction and dissection. The distal 10 cm of the fibula is resected after an oblique osteotomy with an oscillating saw. If the deformity is not associated with ulcer or infection, the fibula is harvested for bone graft using an acetabular reamer. The remnants and fragments of the talus are excised. Specifically, the fragmented body of the talus is always removed, although the head of the talus may be protected and preserved provided that it is adequately vascularized and not involved with a medial dislocation of the talonavicular joint or infection. The articular surface of the distal tibia is prepared by making a flat cut with an oscillating saw, and a flexible chisel is used to debride the articular cartilage on the dorsal surface of the calcaneus. Great care is taken to establish precise alignment of the foot under the leg. Be careful not to internally rotate the foot under the leg. After the deformity is reduced, it is stabilized initially with 2-mm guide pins. We try not to incorporate the talonavicular joint into the tibiotalocalcaneal or tibiocalcaneal arthrodesis. Whenever possible in the setting of neuroarthropathy, limited motion is preferable, and this applies to the talonavicular joint and to a tibiocalcaneal arthrodesis. With use of a lateral plate, it is placed on the lateral calcaneal subchondral bone. Care is taken to position the hindfoot in neutral, because the calcaneus tends to displace into slight valgus as compression is applied to the plate proximally. Allograft or autograft bone, or a combination thereof, is used; the choice is determined by the amount of bone harvested from the fibula and the size of the defect to be filled. The bone graft is then mixed with 400 mg of tobramycin and 500 mg of vancomycin powder as well as a concentrate of the aspirate from the iliac crest. The antibiotic–bone graft mixture is firmly packed between the bone surfaces anteriorly, in addition to the posterior aspect of the tibia and calcaneus, to facilitate an extraarticular and an intraarticular arthrodesis. The back of the tibia is debrided by raising a thick osteoperiosteal flap that extends down onto the dorsal surface of the calcaneus posteriorly. Graft is packed here as well. The wound is closed in layers using 2-0 absorbable sutures, and 3-0 nylon sutures are used for the skin incision. Any tension on the skin edges encountered during closure may be caused by the change in shape of the hindfoot or to the added subcutaneous bulk of the plate, and the peroneal tendons may need to be removed. The recent literature on the use of vancomycin powder when performing surgery in diabetics with the associated decrease in deep wound infections have changed our practice. All patients with Charcot, regardless of an open wound or not, receive vancomycin powder that is placed within the wound immediately before closure.