Block and Panel Caving are based on the action of gravity for ore breakage and transport, so that material reaches the drawpoint through gravity flow. The study of caved rock flow is of vital importance for defining the design, planning, ore recovery and consequently the profitability of a mining project. This study experimentally investigates the influence of moisture content and fine material on the draw-zone and hang-up frequency. Laboratory experiments were carried out on a physical model (scale 1:75) using a Load Haul Dump system (LHD). The results show that the dimensions, the diameter, and the height of the draw-zone depend on three variables: moisture content, particle size, and accumulated extraction mass. For the case of tests with moisture, the increase in diameter reaches a maximum value and becomes almost constant. The ratio of the flow zone width was found to be in the range of 2.7–3 times the drawpoint width, which is within the range of current block cave design guidelines. Additionally, with moisture contents over 6%, “non-flow” conditions occur due to formation of a cohesive arch. Results of our study were compared with data from the Esmeralda mine where the effects of cohesive arch formation associated with fine material and moisture content were also observed.Block caving is a mining method that can achieve high extraction rates and low operational costs. Empirical guidelines have been proposed to define drawpoint spacing. To improve the understanding of gravity flow behavior and verify data or theories, much research has been performed using physical models, numerical models, and full-scale trials. Using physical modeling, many efforts have recently concentrated on understanding the flow of coarse caved rock using gravel as the model media. Research using physical modeling to understand the flow of fine material to date is rather limited. Most researchers have used sand as the model media under dry conditions. In this work, we studied the flow behavior of fine fragmented rock through controlled experiments. We defined fine caved rock as material that has experienced a secondary fragmentation such that it consists of a heterogeneous mixture of blocks and fines rocks, where these latter are present in a higher percentage. For this purpose, we first conducted an analysis of similitude to define the boundary and initial conditions for the experiments. We then built an experimental setup and carried out trials under unconfined conditions to evaluate the influence of moisture content on the extraction zone and hang-up frequency. Finally, we compared the experimental results to available mine data. The concept of similarity considers two systems: the prototype and the model. To characterize tested fine caved rock, samples were obtained from drawpoints located at the Esmeralda Sector at El Teniente mine. The material is considered by the mine personnel as fine material and corresponds to drawpoints with a high percentage of extraction. The shear strength characteristics of the tested material were determined by shear tests. The applied normal forces ranged from 49.0 to 441.3 kPa. The above test does not consider low-stress conditions. Previous unconfined compression tests were conducted for the same media for a range of relative densities as shown in The shear strength parameters, therefore, depend on the confinement. For low confinement, the cohesion would be between 0.4 and 0.8 kPa with a friction angle of 35°. For high confinement, the cohesion would be 21.1 kPa with a friction angle of 16°. The gravity flow in block caving mainly involves the forces of gravity, friction, and cohesion. Electrostatic forces are another source of cohesion. These forces exist in all material, independent of its chemical nature.  After defining the model media, we designed and built the physical model. The laboratory scale selected was 1:75. The main advantage of a smaller scale compared with full-scale is the low cost and reduced work time. A smaller scale also offers a good view of the physical phenomenon. Moreover, recent studies indicate that satisfactory results can be obtained using a scale factor 1:100 and 1:200.  The dimensions of the drawbell were 9.33 cm high and 19.5 cm long (7.0 m and 14.60 m scaled). The dimension of the drawpoint drift was 6 × 6 cm (4.5 ×4.5 m scaled). The extraction system considered a scaled load haul dump (LHD) bucket with a volume of 2.5 × 10 As noted previously, the drawpoint ( The literature indicates that if the ratio between the drawpoint width and largest block size is greater than 5, the flow will be almost certain. With a value in a range from 3 to 5, the flow will be uncertain, and finally with a ratio lower than 3 almost certainly there will be no flow. With gravity flow, it is important to define the column height as this defines the geometry of the extraction zone and the vertical loads acting at the production level. In cohesive granular materials, vertical stresses, This formula is an extension of the previous formula of Janssen and takes into account any tendency for fines to adhere to ore pass walls, as well as the friction of mud. In order to establish the vertical loads during flow at the mine, the mechanical parameters shown in In the case of the physical model, we applied Eq. To determine the extraction zone geometry, 768 painted numbered markers were positioned inside the model and recovered at the drawpoint. Each marker had a code and a unique location (coordinates During the experiments, when approximately 20% of the total mass was drawn, it was observed that the flow reached the surface. In this case, the model was refilled with the extracted material to prevent subsidence and to maintain the column height constant and consequently, the vertical strength of the system. Additionally, it was observed that during the extraction, no flow conditions and hang-ups occurred. The events were noted that occurred in a series of consecutive steps: (a) full drawbell or flow condition, (b) start of hang-up or void at the drawbell, and (c) no flow condition as shown in In order to achieve the research objectives, ten experiments were conducted (see This section shows the results of the effect of moisture content on the geometry of the draw-zone for extraction from one versus two draw points. In addition, the frequency of hang-ups found in each experiment is quantified. The geometry of the flow-zone as a function of mass is obtained by interpolating the location of the recovered markers. In the case of an isolated draw (experiments 1, 3, 5, 7 and 9), the geometry of the flow-zone was characterized in terms of its height and width (see  Five replicas were carried out with a moisture content of 4% to calculate the experimental error. The relative error for the diameter reached 9.67%, while that of the height reached 6.69%. To determine the difference in geometry and hang-up frequency between drawing from one versus two extraction points, we carried out experiments with the same moisture intervals as in the isolated case. In the following analysis for experiments 2, 4, 6, and 8 when the moisture content varies from 0% to 6%, the results show that the increase of draw-zone height occurs for all tests, even for experiment 8 that considers 6% moisture content (see To quantify the interference during the flow, The results also show a statistically significant difference between drawing from one or two drawpoints: drawing from two drawpoints increases the amount of draw between hang-ups. In terms of the hang-up mechanism in the case of dry material, as expected there were events due to the presence of large fragments relative to the size of the drawpoint, fragments with a size equal to or greater than To compare the results with the available literature on flow of fine caved rock, we compared our experimental data with the data available in the literature. In the case of an isolated draw-zone for fine caved rock, Laubscher proposed an expected diameter 6–6.5 m for drawpoint width of 2 and 3 m respectively, when within the flow, the fragment size is lower than 0.3 m. As noted, the flow-zone (scaled) from the experiments is larger than that expected using Laubscher methodology. However, the dimensionless flow width number ( As a way of observing the ore recovery of fine fragmented rock in a modern LHD layout, To evaluate the impact at mine scale, it is necessary to scale the data to ton/hang-up as follows: The results are summarized in Using a database of the Esmeralda Mine, we analyzed the hang-up values for extraction points associated with characteristics: fine material (fragment size < 25 cm) and moisture content (0–7%). The analyses show an average of hang-ups of 1.2 ± 2.08 hang-ups/1000 t and present the following frequency distribution (see  In response to a paucity of literature on the flow of fine fragmented rock and moisture content, experiments were carried out on a physical model to investigate the influence of these variables. The results confirmed that moisture content affects the geometry of flow-zones and hang-ups caused by cohesive arches. In this context, the experimental data indicated that the diameter increased with a different rate of growth depending on moisture content. We found that with wet samples the diameter of the drawzones tended to stabilize over time, while the drawzone diameter with dry samples (0–2% moisture content) continued to increase with the mass drawn. Through this study we were also able to identify that the diameter of the draw-zones is 2.7–3 times the drawpoint width for fine fragmented rock in comparison to what is being used for design guidelines; for this reason, in modern LHD drawpoint spacing, ore recovery is expected to be low. The mass drawn between hangs-ups shows a dependency on moisture content and number of drawpoints. The higher the moisture content, the less mass can be drawn between events. Drawing from two drawpoints allows for drawing more between events than when drawing in isolated conditions. The results obtained through small, scaled physical modeling have been useful to understand the mechanisms of granular material for block caving purposes. However, there is still work to be done to clarify the role of height of the draw-zone and the effect of a large number of drawpoints, which would require building a larger physical model. There is also a need to conduct full-scale trials on fine fragmented rock using smart markers such as those carried out for coarse caved rock. The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of the Block Caving Laboratory, the Advanced Mining Technology Center of the University of Chile and Codelco El Teniente in providing useful data for hang up analysis. Also, we would like to thank the scholarship PIENSACOBRE with their sponsors: To determine the influence of capillary forces ( In With these equations, the expression corresponding to the capillary forces is: