Interaction of coal cleat and matrix plays an important role in determining the dynamic change of coal pore structure and its permeability. Majority of the experimental studies on the cleat-matrix interaction are carried out by measuring the correlation between coal permeability and pore pressure. Under this condition, it is commonly believed that the cleat pressure is equalized with the matrix pressure, in which the permeability is available only for gas flow/adsorption reaching equilibrium state. In this study, the coal cleat-matrix interaction is to uncover during helium unsteady flow from the cleat network to matrix blocks. This objective is achieved by measuring local deformation of coal sample and its permeability under a constant volume boundary. The results show that the incremental of coal strain firstly increases from 184με for 2.0MPa to 440με for 4.5MPa, resulting from the opening of the fractures and the compression of the matrix blocks, and then recovers to 105με for 2.0MPa and 222με for 4.5MPa, due to expansion of the coal matrix. Such a transition of the coal deformation reveals that the gas injection process generates a dynamically imbalance pressure between the cleat and matrix, and then gas diffusion around the vicinity of the cleat causes non-uniform expansion of the coal matrix. Recovery ratio of 0.5 for the matrix strain was observed, quantifying the contribution of matrix expansion to the cleat aperture. Through comparing the measured permeability data with two predicted permeability by the constant-volume model and the matchstick model, it is found that the variation of coal permeability is controlled not only by the change of cleat aperture, but also affected by the matrix expansion process. This work offers a new direct observation into the dynamics of gas mass transfer from the cleat to the matrix and a new understanding of coal permeability evolution in response of the transition. It sheds light on the development of new permeability model that incorporate the fracture-matrix interaction.Understanding of coal deformation induced by gas extraction is critical for better planning coal bed methane (CBM) production and minimizing coal-gas outburst risks for underground coal extraction. Coal has a typical dual porosity structure: coal cleats are the primary pathway of fluid flow and determine coal reservoir permeability, and coal matrix blocks serve as gas storage site, where gas is stored in various-sized pores ( Numerous experimental efforts have been conducted to investigate evolution of coal permeability with pore pressure. At the case of constant confining pressure, gas permeability is observed to decrease resulting from adsorption swelling in low pore pressure range, and then recover due to predominance of effective stress ( In fact, pore fluids migration in the coal matrix requires significant amount of time to get equilibrium state ( Although some dual-porosity models have taken account of impact of the matrix pressure on the coal permeability ( In our previous work ( A coal block collected from a longwall mining face located at the Juye coal field of eastern China formed in In order to obtain the pore distribution of the coal sample, the NanoVoxel-2000 X-ray machine was used to scan a 3 To assist the illustration, the coal cleat system is conceptualized as a single fracture. Gas transport between cleat and matrix is driven by pressure gradient of both, during which the bulk volume of matrix will deform due to the change of pore pressure in the matrix. Under the stress-controlled boundary condition, when the absorbing gas is injected, coal matrix swells. The matrix swelling strain contributes in two aspects: some contributes to the expansion of the bulk volume of the whole coal, the remaining contributes to the reduction of cleat aperture ( In this study, all external boundaries of the coal sample are fixed, which ensures the overall size of the coal sample to be kept unchanged. Because of the geometrical symmetry of the cylindrical coal sample shown in The location will in turn alter coal cleat aperture and reduce coal permeability, which can be described based on the matchstick model as ( In this study, the measured local strain change Substituting Eq. Then, the permeability ratio becomes The schematic of the experimental setup is shown in The load cell is a Hassler-type core holder, in which the lateral surface of the cylindrical sample is subject to confining pressure by the syringe pump, and two ends of the sample are fully constrained by two end-lugs. A strain gauge was attached to the middle of the coal sample along the axis direction of the coal sample. The coal sample was confined by a rubber sleeve. A chain-type extensometer was installed around the rubber sleeve in order to measure the circumference change of the sample (see The first step was to inject gas into the coal sample. Firstly, 7 The second step was to use the pulse decay method ( The evolutions of the coal axial strain with time under four different injection pressures are shown in At the first stage (the beginning of helium injection), the coal strains were observed to rapidly increase with the increase in gas pressure of the upstream vessel. This phenomenon has been numerically modeled ( At the later stage, the gas in the cleat system was driven into the surrounding matrix blocks by the imbalance pressure, during which the matrix pressure increased gradually. This process will in turn expand the previously compressed matrix block and narrow the width of the fracture. During this stage, the coal strains were observed to peak off and then remained unchanged. In fact, duration of the first stage As shown in  In fact, the presented recovery ratio can be considered as the maximum contribution of the matrix deformation to the cleat aperture due to the increasing matrix pressure. Some permeability models ( The coal permeability was not measured until the strain change reached a steady state. For the prediction of coal permeability under the constant volume boundary condition, To validate this model, the injection pressure was substituted into the solid compression term of Ma's model (i.e. Eq. As mentioned in This work experimentally investigated an imbalance-pressure-induced interaction of the coal fracture-matrix by measuring the transition process of coal deformation and its permeability at equilibrium state. A constant volume boundary was applied to the coal sample, in which case the measured strain of the coal sample was allowed to represent the change of cleat aperture, opposite to the change of coal matrix size. The following two key findings were drawn: At the beginning of helium injection, the coal strain increases rapidly resulting from the compression of the matrix blocks. As the gas diffuses into the matrix blocks, the coal strain recovers due to the expansion of the matrix. Our results show that the recovery strain of matrix is approximately half of the compression strain under different injection pressure conditions. This strain ratio of 0.5 probably quantifies the greatest contribution of matrix strain to the cleat strain. Comparison of the experimental permeability data with the two predicted results using the constant volume model and the matchsticks model respectively shows that the permeability ratio predicted by the constant volume model is greater than the measured permeability ratio. Our results verified that the measured pore pressure in laboratory is usually higher than mean value of pore pressure in the coal sample. This is because a large of number of closed/interconnected pores may result in non-uniform distribution of pore pressure in the coal sample. In addition, the span of the permeability ratios by the matchsticks model can enclose the measure permeability ratios. This may reveal that the evolution of the coal permeability to helium is controlled by the interaction of coal cleat-matrix. The coal permeability, at the initial stage of helium injection, is greater than that in equilibrium state as a result of diffusion-induced matrix expansion. It is noted that this experimental work was carried out using non-sorptive gas, the impact of gas adsorption-induced swelling deformation on the interaction was not considered. It is hoped that this work can stimulate more efforts and interests from others to resolve this very challenging issue. Future work such as the evaluation of the pore pressure in the matrix and adsorption parameters with the injection of sorptive gas is strongly recommended. We thank Dr. Licai Zheng and Dr. Dong Liu, from SANYING Precision Instruments Co., Ltd., for their supports on X-ray scanning and data analysis. This work was partially supported by the 