The aim of this study was to investigate the bioenergy potential of red macroalgae GF by evaluating its biofuel physicochemical characteristics, and conducting a kinetic study and thermodynamic analysis of pyrolysis for the first time. The thermal decomposition study was performed at low heating rates (5, 10, 20 and 30 °C min−1) under N2 atmosphere. The thermal behavior of GF pyrolysis indicated the presence of three different decomposition stages, which are associated with different components in its structure and consequently influence the kinetic and thermodynamic parameters. The kinetic triplet obtained for GF provided a suitable description of experimental thermal behavior. The thermodynamic parameters demonstrated that GF is as a new promising feedstock for bioenergy and presented a similar potential to well-known bioenergy feedstock.Macroalgae (or seaweed) is a promising source of bioenergy feedstock due to its abundant availability in countries with extensive coastlines, such as Brazil. The chemical characteristics of algae (such as the amount of lipids, carbohydrates, proteins and others nutrients) are highly dependent on the seaweed species and the habitat conditions ( Pyrolysis is a clean endothermic process and is based on the thermal decomposition of organic materials in the absence of oxygen, air or any other oxidizing agent ( The use of the red macroalgae The aim of this study is to investigate the bioenergy potential of the red macroalgae The red macroalgae GF was acquired from the Plant Cell Biology Laboratory, Department of Cell Biology, Embryology and Genetics of the Federal University at Santa Catarina (LABCEV, UFSC) The proximate analysis (moisture, volatile matter, fixed carbon and ash content) was performed following the method proposed by The thermal decomposition study of GF was performed with a thermogravimetric analyzer made by TA Instruments, model TGA-Q50 (New Castle, United States). The sample was submitted to a temperature increase from room temperature to 900 °C at four different low heating rates (5, 10, 20 and 30 °C min Thermal decomposition kinetics is based on a heterogeneous conversion process (solid to gas) with temperature or time change, which follows the fundamental rate equation ( The estimation of The compensation effect was used to obtain the frequency factor values using Eq. The master plot is a method used to determinate the reaction model of a kinetic reaction from previous knowledge of From the kinetic triplet previously estimated ( In Eq. Based on the activation energy (isoconversional methods) and frequency factor (compensation effect), the thermodynamic parameters can be estimated by using the theoretical equations derived from the activated complex theory (Eyring Theory) ( The proximate analysis of GF showed a content of moisture (8.53%), volatile matter (60.64%), fixed carbon (9.53%) and ash (29.83%). These values are similar to those reported for others macroalgae ( The ultimate analysis shows acceptable content of carbon (32.72%), hydrogen (3.68%), nitrogen (1.86%), sulfur (1.32%) and oxygen (30.62%). Unlike the constituents of lignocellulosic biomasses (cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin), macroalgae are chemically composed of lipids, carbohydrates, proteins and other nutrients, and thus have different carbon, hydrogen and oxygen contents. This different composition provides low carbon, hydrogen and oxygen content and higher nitrogen and sulfur content in macroalgae than in lignocellulosic biomasses ( The substantial ash, nitrogen and sulfur content may cause practical difficulties from the use of GF as an alternative bioenergy feedstock, however, these can be compensated by the fact that GF has faster growth, high photosynthetic efficiency and no land requirement. These attributes reveal that this macroalga can be a suitable green feedstock for co-firing to produce electricity or bioenergy. In addition, the detection of optimal temperature for thermochemical conversion, preliminary pre-treatment or use of effective additives can be an alternative way to avoid the slagging problems at combustion process ( Physicochemical characteristic showed the possibility of using GF as an attractive bioenergy feedstock. In addition, the non-land and non-fresh water requirement for production, absence of market value and high photosynthetic efficiency reflect in an environmentally and economically friendly scenario for bioenergy exploration. The thermogravimetric (TG) and differential thermogravimetric (DTG) curves at heating rates of 5, 10, 20 and 30 °C min The first and second stages are an active pyrolysis zone (130–600 °C), where a weight loss of 36–41% was observed. The overlapping peaks indicate the complexity of the decomposition reaction. This active pyrolysis zone corresponds to the decomposition of different bio-polymer fractions ( An increase of heating rate can lead to the overlapping of decomposition steps, becomes the identification of each stage transition more complex. Thus, the different behavior of weight loss can occur and is directly proportional to the heating rate increase ( The activation energy of GF was evaluated by multi-step mechanism decomposition, which was based on the three main stages at the temperature range shown in    The overlapping between the experimental ( Based on the kinetic parameter data estimated by the isoconversional method, the compensation effect, the master plot, and Eq.  Thermodynamic parameters ( The biofuel characteristics were evaluated, and a thermal analysis performed to evaluate the bioenergy potential of GF macroalgae. Results of this study suggest viable applicability of GF in thermal systems when compared with other bioenergy feedstocks. The kinetic triplet provides an equation that exhibits suitable applicability for predicting the decomposition behavior of GF. The knowledge of physicochemical characteristics, the kinetic triplet and thermodynamic parameters for GF pyrolysis can be helpful for control, optimization and industrial thermochemical processes development. Thus, the pyrolysis of macroalgae biomass is a clean, cost-efficient and eco-friendly process, which may allow its large-scale processing to obtain bioenergy. We are grateful for the financial support to this research from the