In the present study the effect of process (homogenization speed) and formulation (polymer-alginate-concentration, surfactant concentration, drug amount, perfluorohexane volume fraction and co-surfactant inclusion) variables on particle size, entrapment efficiency, and drug release kinetics of doxorubicin-loaded alginate stabilized perfluorohexane nanodroplets were evaluated.
                  Particle size and doxorubicin entrapment efficiency were highly affected by formulation and process variables. Increase in homogenization speed resulted in significant decrease in particle size and increase in entrapment efficiency. Polymer concentration and perfluorohexane amount both had similar effect on particle size. Particle size increased by an increase in the amount of both. Entrapment efficiency increased by increasing polymer concentration. In case of surfactant concentration and drug amount, particle size and entrapment efficiency had optimum values and an increase in concentration of both of them behind a certain limit resulted in increase in particle size and decrease in doxorubicin entrapment.
                  In vitro release profile of doxorubicin was an apparently biphasic release process and 7%–13% of drug released after 24h incubation in PBS, pH=7.4, depending on the nanodroplets composition but ultrasound exposure for 10min resulted in triggered release of 85.95% of doxorubicin from optimal formulation (formulation E1 with 39.2nm diameter size and 92.2% entrapment efficiency).In the last decades, nanomedicine has been focused on the combination of various functionalities -e.g. therapeutic, imaging, and targeting function- in one molecular construct. These constructs may be macromolecules or nanoparticles. The family of important nanoparticles in biomedicine includes polymeric micelles, liposomes, hollow particles, nanoemulsions and nanodroplets. Controlled drug delivery in combination with ultrasound has been extensively studied in the last decade Liquid perfluorocarbon (PFC) nanodroplets are a new generation of ultrasound (US) contrast agents which combine the advantage of small size and ultrasound-aided release and imaging Nanodroplets comprise a liquid-filled core and stabilizing shell of lipid, polymer and/or protein. Alginate was chosen for the stabilizing shell due to its favorable properties, including biocompatibility, low toxicity, relatively low cost and ease of gelation. Alginate carriers have been used for variety of biological agents such as drugs, genes, and antigens to protect them during the transit in the human body There are several methods for synthesis of alginate particle such as gelation with calcium ions and other divalent cations Three important parameters that should be considered for preparing drug carries are the size of particles, drug entrapment efficiency and kinetic of drug release. The aim of the present study was to formulate doxorubicin loaded alginate stabilized PFH nanodroplets and evaluate the effects of formulation variables and process variables on particle size and entrapment efficiency of nanodroplets. Doxorubicin release kinetics, were also studied, for best samples selected from optimized formulations based on particle size to testify the potential application of these nanodroplets. Doxorubicin Hydrochloride (2 Doxorubicin-loaded nanodroplets were obtained via nano-emulsion process. Briefly, perfluorohexane (PFH), doxorubicin and Tween 20 (surfactant) were homogenized in distilled deionized water for 2 The physicochemical properties of nanoparticles (e.g., particle size, entrapment efficiency and drug release kinetics) are affected by various process and formulation variables. To optimize the formulation of nanoparticles regarding size, drug entrapment and release kinetic, one process variable (homogenization speed) and different formulation variables (i.e., the amount of polymer, surfactant, drug, PFH and inclusion of a co-surfactant) were evaluated ( All experiments were conducted in triplicate. The average size distribution and polydispersity index of nanodroplets were determined by DLS using a Zeta-sizer 3000HS (Malvern Instruments, Malvern, UK). The analysis was performed at a scattering angle of 90° after the nanodroplet solution diluted adequately (1:1) with double-distilled water. The morphology of drug-loaded nanodroplets was observed using a transmission electron microscope (H-7650; Hitachi, Tokyo, Japan) operating at an acceleration voltage of 80 To determine the entrapment efficiency, drug-loaded nanodroplets were separated from the solution by centrifuging (centrifuges 5424 R, Eppendorf, Canada) at 11000 Drug entrapment efficiency (EE) was calculated using the following equation: The release of doxorubicin from doxorubicin-loaded PFH/alginate nanodroplets was evaluated using phosphate buffer (pH 7.4) at 37 The accumulated release was calculated utilizing the following equation: To determine the influence of ultrasound on the release of doxorubicin from nanodroplets, the nanodroplet solution was poured into a custom-made chamber with a latex cover and incubated in the bath of the 28 Ultrasound imaging was performed using a 12-MHz linear transducer (Acuson Sequoia 512, Siemens, Mountain View, CA). The particle size, entrapment efficiency, and cumulative amount of drug released from doxorubicin-loaded PFH/alginate nanodroplets prepared using various process and formulation variables are summarized in In homogenization process, the magnitude of shear stress is inversely related to the droplet size of the emulsion Higher homogenization speed (24,000 As homogenization speed increases, the size of emulsion globules decreases which consequently, leads to the formation of smaller nanoparticles. In fact, at higher speed of homogenization, more energy is released in the process that leads to a rapid dispersion of emulsifier phase which results in the formation of nanoparticles of small size and monomodal distribution. Also, the entrapment efficiency increased from 71.6% to 98.4% when the homogenization speed increased from 17,000/10,000 The cumulative amount of drug released from nanoparticles obtained at higher homogenization speed was higher than that of larger nanoparticles. The difference in the release profiles can be attributed to the difference in the particle size of the nanoparticles ( It was expected to drug mainly entrap between the polymer chains and increased amount of polymer result in entrapment of a greater extent of drug. Also the amount of polymer has a great impact on nanoparticle size. Hence, alginate solution (1.5%w/v) was added to the system in three different amount of 200, 300 and 400 The mean particle size of formulations prepared using 0.1, 0.15 and 0.2%w/v (formulations B1–B3) of alginate was 39.2 The cumulative amount of drug released during 24 Increasing the amount of polymer, while keeping the volume of other components constant, results in an increase in the viscosity of the organic phase, which leads to increase in the viscous forces resisting droplet breakdown and formation of bigger oil droplets, resulting in increased particle size Similarly the increase in the amount of polymer increases the diffusional resistance to drug molecules from organic phase to the aqueous phase resulting in entrapping more drug in the polymer chains. In fact, the length of diffusional pathways into the aqueous phase increases by the increase in particle size which results in reducing the drug loss through diffusion and increasing the drug content Finally, the decrease in cumulative amount of released drug from nanoparticles could be due to the increased particle size and thus smaller surface area at higher polymer concentration. Also, increase in particle size hinders the diffusion of drug molecules out of nanoparticle which reduces the cumulative amount of drug release The presence of surfactant at the aqueous/organic phase interface has a direct effect on the formation of stable PFH nanodroplets during the emulsification process. Since, the concentration of surfactant may affect the droplet size and drug entrapment, four different concentration of Tween 20 as surfactant at 0.1–0.4 Based on primarily investigation, Tween 20 was selected and used as surfactant. The obtained results showed that surfactant concentration has a strong effect on the size of nanodroplets. At 0.1% Tween 20 concentration (formulation C1), the emulsion formed was not stable and phase separation occurred after a few hours of emulsification resulting in the formation of polymer aggregates. Increasing Tween 20 concentration from 0.10% to 0.2% (formulation C2) and 0.3% (formulation C3) resulted in particle sizes of 102.4 The emulsification and stabilization of the globules are two crucial factors in the emulsion based methods. The amount of surfactant plays an important role, because it can avoid the coalescence of the emulsion globules. The adsorption of surfactant molecules on the surface of droplets results in the lowering of the free energy at the interface between two phases and resisting coalescence of the droplets As nanodroplet size decreases, its surface area increases and thus more surfactant is needed to stabilize the emulsion nanodroplets. Unstable emulsion may form as a result of less amount of surfactant, implying that 0.1% Tween 20 may not be sufficient to stabilize the emulsion nanodroplets, leading to phase separation after a few hours. The entrapment efficiency increased from 87.2% to 92.2% and then decreased to 85.4% when the surfactant concentration increased from 0.2% (formulation C2) to 0.30% (formulation C3) and further to 0.4% (formulation C4). The results indicated that entrapment efficiency decreases with increasing surfactant concentration behind a certain limit. With an increase in surfactant concentration in the external aqueous phase, doxorubicin may diffuse out from the nanodroplets and solubilize as micelles in the aqueous phase. As more drug molecules solubilize in the external aqueous phase, the amount of surfactant available at the aqueous/organic phase interface decreases and thus agglomeration of nanodroplets may take place. The cumulative amount of drug released after 24 The surfactant concentration at 0.1% level resulted in an unstable emulsion, and hence formulation C1 was not characterized for drug release. To achieve maximum drug entrapment, different amount of drug, ranging from 400 The entrapment efficiency exhibited an increase and then a decrease (from 88.2% to 92.2% and then 85.6) with increasing the amount of drug in the formulation from 400 to 500 and then 600 The cumulative amount of drug released at 24 Since PFH serves as the template core, it is expected that the amount of PFH affects the nanoparticle size and maybe the drug entrapment efficiency. The emulsion with 10% v/v PFH (formulation E2) had larger average size (102.3 In general, larger droplets are expected for the emulsions containing higher oil phase content – here, PFH serves as the oil phase – at fixed surfactant concentration. In fact, with increase in PFH volume fraction, there is not enough surfactant to cover each droplet surface area, so coalescence will occur, producing bigger droplets (reducing surface area), until the each droplet area is totally covered by surfactants. The entrapment efficiency did not change essentially as PFH volume fraction increased. The cumulative amount of drug released at 24 The size of nanoparticle has an important effect on the rate of drug release. Using a co-surfactant in the emulsion system may lead to the formation of smaller droplets by reducing the surface tension and subsequently might affect the drug release. Therefore, upon understanding the effects of various process and formulation variables on the doxorubicin-loaded alginate/PFH nanoparticles, formulation B2 was selected for further experiments to study the effect of inclusion of a co-surfactant. Three different non-ionic surfactants, namely, Span 60, Poloxamer 188 and lecithin were investigated as the co-surfactant coupled with 0.3% Tween 20 (formulation B2) at three different concentrations (data not shown). Only two of them, namely, Span 60 and Poloxamer 188, reduced the particle size less than that of obtained from Tween 20 alone (i.e., 51.8 When Span 60 was used as co-surfactant with Tween 20, the particle size decreased from 51.8 The hydrophobic part of Span 60 may have aligned on the oil/water interface along with Tween 20 to cover the PFH nanodroplets more efficiently and thus reducing the interfacial tension between the oil and water phase and resulting in lower particle size. But, with further increase in the Span 60 concentration, the interaction between the hydrophilic chains of one particle with hydrophilic chains of the other particle may have resulted in agglomeration at higher concentrations Poloxamer 188 had a similar effect on the particle size. An increase in Poloxamer 188 concentration resulted in an initial decrease in particle size followed by an increase in particle size with further increase in it’s concentration. Here also, the alignment of the hydrophobic propylene chain of Poloxamer 188 on the oil/water interface along with Tween 20 covers the PFH nanodroplets more efficiently and thus reduces the interfacial tension between the oil and water phase which results in lower particle size. The use of the non-ionic surfactant, Poloxamer 188, as a co-emulsifier during the emulsification process, resulting in smaller particle size and narrower size distribution has been reported before The entrapment efficiency decreased with an increase in Span 60 concentration at a fixed concentration of Tween 20 ( The entrapment efficiency did not change essentially as Poloxamer 188 used as co-surfactant. The hydrophobic propylene chain of Poloxamer 188 may have aligned on the oil/water interface along with Tween 20 to cover the oil nanodroplets more efficiently, resulting in more stabilized oil nanodroplets The in vitro drug release of formulations with co-surfactant are presented in The cumulative amount of drug released at 24 Adding Poloxamer 188, a tri-block polymer of polypropylene oxide and polyethylene oxide, as the co-surfactant to the emulsion system retarded the release of the drug from nanoparticles (formulations G1 and G3). The cumulative amount of drug released from formulations G2 and G3 with 0.15% and 0.3% of Poloxamer 188 at 24 The drug release was independent of the amount of Poloxamer 188 used. Hydrolytic degradation of alginate leads to the formation of acidic oligomers and monomers which results in an acidic microenvironment which facilitate the degradation process and thus more drug is released. Poloxamer 188 neutralizes the acidity generated during the alginate degradation which can retard its degradation and result in slower drug release from nanoparticles. It can also control the release of drug form polymer matrix by preventing unwanted interactions between the drug and the polymer In controlled drug delivery, it is preferable if no or a little amount of drug is released from nanocarriers into the circulation before reaching the target tissue. As it was observed, the doxorubicin release from PFH/alginate nanodroplets in natural pH during 24 The cumulative amount of doxorubicin released from the nanodroplets (formulation E1) within 10 The results of this investigation indicated that nanodroplets main characteristics such as particle size, entrapment efficiency, and in vitro drug release kinetics, are highly affected by the process and formulation variables and desired characteristics could be achieved by effectively altering these variables. Additionally, inclusion of a co-surfactant can help to achieve smaller nanodroplets and control the doxorubicin release kinetics from nanodroplets.