Polyethylene oxide (PEO) was tested to flocculate and depress fine quartz particles in the batch flotation of artificial mixtures of chalcopyrite–quartz as well as a commercial Au–Cu sulphide ore sample. The aggregation/dispersion behaviors of quartz, chalcopyrite and their mixtures in the presence of PEO with and without potassium amyl xanthate (KAX) were studied by photometric dispersion analysis (PDA), scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and zeta potential measurements. Batch flotation results indicated that the addition of low dosages of PEO improved value mineral recovery and concentrate grade during the flotation of both the artificial mixtures of chalcopyrite–quartz and the Au–Cu sulphide ore sample. Aggregation/dispersion test results revealed that the PEO caused non-selective flocculation of quartz and chalcopyrite, forming large hetero-aggregates. However, the addition of KAX caused the chalcopyrite particles to break away from the hetero-aggregates, leading to separate homo-aggregates of quartz and chalcopyrite. The flotation of the fine chalcopyrite and the depression of the fine quartz were thus both improved.Flotation separation of fine and ultrafine mineral particles is a major challenge faced by the mineral processing industry today. The fine and ultrafine particles cause two problems both of which lower separation efficiency. One problem is the loss of value hydrophobic mineral particles due to the inefficient collection of the particles by gas bubbles, resulting in low value recovery (the recovery problem), and the other is the deterioration in concentrate grade caused by mechanical and hydraulic entrainment of hydrophilic gangue particles (the entrainment problem). Research effort over the past several decades has been focused on understanding the flotation behaviors of fine and ultrafine particles and developing processes to improve their recovery, and much less research has been focused on reducing the entrainment of the fine and ultrafine gangue minerals. A lack of effective methods to reduce fine gangue particle entrainment may be one of the reasons for the scarcity of commercial application of new techniques to improve fine particle recovery, although many such techniques have been proposed (see, for example, the summaries by Studies reported in the literature (e.g., In this paper, we report results of a study to extend the particle size-enlargement concept to bench mechanical flotation of artificial mixtures of chalcopyrite and quartz, as well as a commercial Au–Cu ore sample. Polyethylene oxide (PEO) was chosen to flocculate quartz particles because it has shown a high affinity towards quartz ( A quartz single mineral sample was obtained from Iron Ore Company of Canada. X-ray fluorescence (XRF) analysis indicated that it contains 99.9% SiO A commercial Au–Cu sulphide ore sample was taken from one of the member mining companies of COREM, Quebec, Canada, from the SAG mill discharge point. The sample has a prevailing particle size of about 1 Two polyethylene oxide (PEO) reagents, with molecular weights of 1 Other common chemical reagents used in the experiment, such as sodium hydroxide and hydrochloric acid, etc., were purchased from Fisher Scientific. They were used directly without further purification. Batch flotation tests on quartz single mineral and synthetic mixtures of chalcopyrite and quartz were conducted in COREM labs, using a Denver laboratory flotation machine in a 1.25-L cell. Prior to flotation, 100 Batch flotation tests on the Au–Cu sulphide ore sample were conducted in a laboratory Wemco flotation machine with a 2-L flotation cell at the University of Alberta. Prior to flotation, 1 The degree of flocculation or dispersion of mineral suspension was measured by a Photometric Dispersion Analyzer (PDA 2000) manufactured by Rank Brothers Inc. Photometric dispersion analysis is a sensitive technique developed to monitor the aggregation state of particle suspensions by Its principle has been described in detail by In each test, certain amount of minerals (−20  Zeta potential measurement was performed using a ZetaPALS zeta potential analyzer manufactured by Brookhaven Instruments. All solutions and reagents were prepared with stock solutions of 10 For each zeta potential measurement, 10 A JEOL 6301F SEM scanning electron microscope (SEM) coupled with an energy dispersive X-ray spectrometer (EDS) was used to examine the quartz–chalcopyrite flocs. This machine is equipped with a PGT (Princeton Gamma-Tech) IMIX digital imaging system, a solid state silicon backscattered electron detector and a liquid nitrogen cooled silicon (lithium) detector for energy dispersive X-ray analysis. Since all the constituent elements in chalcopyrite (Cu, Fe and S) have higher atomic mass than those in quartz (Si and O), chalcopyrite particles can scatter more electrons and hence appear much brighter than quartz particles in SEM images, especially back-scattered electron images. EDS also showed that the brighter spots are mostly comprised of Cu, Fe and S, indicating that they are CuFeS To prepare a SEM sample, chalcopyrite and quartz were mixed in 250-mL beakers into a 10% solid suspension, at a ratio of 10% chalcopyrite and 90% quartz. The suspension was agitated using a magnetic stirrer and the pH was adjusted to 9. Two parallel tests were conducted: one with only PEO addition, and the other with KAX addition 3 Batch flotation tests were first carried out using pure quartz. The quartz particles were ground to 80% passing 20 When the PEO flocs of quartz form, they could potentially trap sulphide mineral particles and affect their flotation. In fact, one of the primary concerns with the use of high molecular weight polymer depressants in froth flotation is that the flocs can trap value minerals and lower their recovery. That is why most of the polymeric depressants used in froth flotation are low molecular weight polymers, typically up to a few thousand grams per mole. In order to examine if the possible PEO flocs of quartz would trap sulphide mineral particles, batch flotation tests were performed on synthetic quartz–chalcopyrite mineral mixtures, which were ground together to 80% passing 20 PEO was then tested as a selective depressant in the flotation of a commercial Au–Cu sulphide ore sample in which quartz was the major gangue mineral. This ore sample was ground to 90% passing 75 The batch flotation results show that the addition of PEO can reduce quartz entrainment and improve concentrate grade in chalcopyrite and sulphide ore flotation. In order to confirm that the lowering of quartz entrainment is due to the bridging flocculation by PEO, a series of photometric dispersion analyzer (PDA) measurements were performed. The first set of PDA measurements was carried out on suspensions of chalcopyrite and quartz mixtures (50 As can be seen from  For the case where only PEO was added, the slope in the initial dropping segment was found to be −0.49 min The above PDA measurement results reveal that PEO caused unselective hetero-aggregation of the quartz and chalcopyrite particles. The flocs were not strong and tend to break as a result of magnetic stirring and peristaltic pumping. The addition of KAX accelerated the breakage of these hetero-aggregates, especially when KAX was added ahead of PEO. To examine the roles that KAX plays in the quartz–chalcopyrite mixture system, its effect on quartz and chalcopyrite single mineral flocculation was studied. The test procedures were the same as above except that only quartz or chalcopyrite was used in each test. However, as can be seen from  When KAX was added 3 When KAX was added first, followed by PEO 3 The foregoing description of the PDA test results seem to point to the same trend, that the addition of KAX promotes the formation of breakage-resistant chalcopyrite–KAX flocs, and breaks chalcopyrite–PEO flocs. However, the addition of KAX does not affect quartz nor the quartz–PEO flocs. Therefore, it seems that in the hetero-aggregates of quartz and chalcopyrite formed by the addition of PEO, the chalcopyrite particles are the “weak spots” once KAX was added. The xanthate anions are known to adsorb on the chalcopyrite particles through chemical and/or electrochemical reactions ( This hypothesis seems to be borne out by the results shown in To understand the observed batch flotation and PDA flocculation/dispersion test results, it is envisaged that the following may be what happened during the flotation process: when PEO was added to the quartz–chalcopyrite mixture, it flocculated both minerals together to form hetero-aggregates. With continuous stirring, especially in a batch mechanical flotation cell, some of the flocs were broken. When KAX was added after PEO addition, it adsorbed on chalcopyrite surfaces and partially or completely (depending on KAX dosages) replaced the PEO, which further weakens the hetero-aggregates. As a result, chalcopyrite particles disassociated from the hetero-aggregates, causing further breakup of the flocs. This postulate is consistent with the two generally accepted flocs breakage mechanisms, i.e., large-scale fragmentation, and surface erosion (  In fact, the zeta potential measurement results reveal the different competitive adsorption behaviors of PEO and KAX on the mineral surface. As can be seen from It is realized that the hydrodynamic conditions in a batch mechanical flotation machine are different from a suspension that undergoes magnetic-bar stirring and peristaltic pumping. Whether the same aggregation and dispersion behavior of the quartz–chalcopyrite mixtures with the addition of PEO and xanthate as observed in the PDA tests occurred in the batch mechanical flotation machine is yet to be verified, especially in view of the “fragile” nature of the PEO flocs. However, the improved flotation results as shown by the grade–recovery relationship after the addition of PEO serve as an indication that similar aggregation or dispersion behavior may have happened in the mechanical flotation machine. In fact, our tests using a 3-L baffled container agitated at several hundred rpm showed similar aggregation behavior of xanthate and PEO on quartz and galena. In this context, it is important to note that Polyethylene oxides (PEO), with molecular weights of 1 This project is supported by the