Nanocrystalline nickel (8–28nm) deposits were produced by direct and pulse current electrodeposition. The microhardness and microstrains in the deposits were estimated. Tribological testing indicated that the coefficient of friction (COF) for nanocrystalline nickel was almost half that of polycrystalline nickel. An important and interesting result is that extremely low COF of 0.16 can be obtained with nanocrystalline Ni coatings.Nanocrystalline materials are of great industrial importance due to their improved properties especially chemical and mechanical properties. These materials are used as bulk as well as coatings to engineering substrates. Electrodeposition technique is an useful method for producing nanocrystalline coatings In the present study, nanocrystalline nickel on a copper substrate was produced using direct and pulsed current electrodeposition in a Watt’s bath. Saccharine was added to bath to reduce grain size. Although some studies had been undertaken to develop and evaluate the properties of nanocrystalline coatings Nanocrystalline nickel was electrodeposited using Watt’s bath (NiSO All the deposition experiments were duplicated and good reproducibility was obtained. The coating thickness was estimated from the weight of Ni electrodeposit, as microstructural studies indicated uniform deposition. The Vickers microhardness of the deposits was measured using 1 The coating thickness, grain sizes, mean diagonal length of the microhardness indentation, microhardness and coefficient of friction of the nickel deposits have been listed in Microhardness of the samples have been listed in The coefficient of friction was determined as a function of number of cycles. In this regard, it is also illuminating to note the microstrains estimated from the XRD data. The results of microstrain calculations, based on The tribological and microhardness of nanocrystalline nickel synthesized by direct and pulsed current electrodeposition has been addressed. The higher hardness exhibited by these deposit is the prime reason behind for their lower value of COF in fretting experiment. The observation of smooth polished coating surface was indicative of the lower COF. RB would like to acknowledge the equipment grant (potentiostat) from Alexander von Humboldt foundation.