Bioelectrochemical systems like microbial fuel cells (MFCs) are quaint systems known to metamorphose the chemical energy of organic matter into electrical energy using catalytic activity of microorganisms. A novel continuous Auto Circulating Bio-Electrochemical Reactor (AutoCirBER) was developed to fulfil the gap of ‘simple, inexpensive and compact design’ that can continuously treat larger amount of organic wastewater at shorter residence time and without consuming external energy for liquid mixing. AutoCirBER eliminated the need for external agitation for liquid-mixing and therefore, energy requirements. AutoCirBER was operated in continuous-mode and hydraulic retention time was optimized. The reactor underwent performance check-up viz. COD removal, net power output, columbic efficiency, sludge generation and an attributional life cycle assessment (LCA) was also conducted. AutoCirBER was sustainable to run in continuous-mode and showed more than 90.4% of COD removal, and 59.55 W.h net annual energy recovery. Experimental LCA of AutoCirBER also displays its environmental feasibility in longer run.Presently, the energy crisis and environmental pollution are two major global challenges. According to the For realistic applications of MFCs, like in wastewater treatment the scalability of MFCs is pre-requisite ( Domestic wastewater (DW) from primary effluent collection tank of Anand Engineering College, Agra, India’s sewage treatment plant was used in the present study. Wastewater was subjected to physicochemical analysis. These parameters include pH, total dissolved solids (TDS), total suspended solids (TSS), volatile suspended solids (VSS), color, odour, chemical oxygen demand (COD), and biological oxygen demand (BOD). The sample was allowed to settle for 24 h at 4 °C under anaerobic conditions to separate solid particulate matter. Wastewater sample was kept in the refrigerator at 4 °C, when not in use. The characteristics of the wastewaters were as: pH, 7.9; COD (mg/l), 2051; BOD (mg/l), 1692; TSS (mg/l) 2785; VSS concentration (mg/l), 1274; TDS (mg/l) 13132.1; odour, foul; colour, brownish. The results showed that DW could be utilized as anolyte in AutoCirBER due to its high COD value. The plain wastewater, without any chemical alteration was used as the anolyte for the experiments. Experiments were conducted at room temperature (32–35 °C). The design of AutoCirBER is shown in Increasing the electrode surface area is one of the key considerations for MFC scale up. If other parameters of MFC remain constant, the current and power are directly proportional to the surface area of the electrode ( The material and configuration of the anode are the key parameters in an MFC, as it decides the growth of the microbial consortium involved in the electrochemical bio-reactions ( With this purpose, a packed bed arrangement of activated carbon coated stones was developed. Activated carbon has a high specific surface, good biocompatibility, and moderate electrical conductivity, which makes it a good choice for attachment of microorganisms ( Results confirmed (data not shown) that these innovative activated carbon coated stones satisfied the electrical requirements and supported bacterial biofilm development. This strategy offers a cost-effective and easy protocol for the development of good anodic packing for bacterial growth and development. This strategy also reduces the biofouling and shows lower electrical resistance for the direct recovery of electrons by bacterial metabolic reactions. The cathode structure is the most crucial aspect of any MFC design due to its triple faced interface, oxygen, protons, and current. The cathodic reaction has been identified as one of the main limiting factors in increasing performance in MFCs ( One of the major challenges for MFCs scale-up is the high cost and low mechanical strength of the separator materials ( The AutoCirBER was operated under 500 Ω external resistance during operation to measure closed circuit voltage (V) and current (I). The power output ( Polarization curve as a function of potential, current density and power density was measured at variable resistances (10 Ω to 1000 Ω) to assess the performance of AutoCirBER under test operating conditions. The experiments were conducted using a series of resistor (10 Ω to 1000 Ω) to evaluate the maximum attainable current output of AutoCirBER under the optimized 1500 mg/L COD concentration. Internal resistance of the AutoCirBER was measured from the slope of the line from plot of voltage versus current. Columbic efficiency ( Critical issues of all bioreactor concepts involve mass transfer problems. In MFC, its impact might be higher than expected because it affects mass transfer losses (substrate flux ( The AutoCirBER offers various specific features including reduction in HRT, which increased its efficiency compared to the conventional MFC of the same size, elimination of choking and clogging, short-circuit of feed, increase in liquid loading rate, and increase in VSS, COD and BOD reduction rate. Scaling up of AutoCirBER to operate with a range of waste volumes, from small (housing communities, coastal communities, micro industries, etc.) to high (e.g., large industries and municipal wastewater) is possible. Furthermore, AutoCirBER is a suitable design for a wide variety of organic wastewaters, where continuous mixing of wastewater facilitates by liquid motion. Due to this liquid motion, entire reactor content mixes and increases the overall treatment process. Therefore design offers energy-efficiency, since gravity feeding and serpentine flow is used instead of pumping of wastewater. In addition, system requires minimal maintenance and is efficient for long term continuous operation. COD was measured according to standard methods ( Life Cycle Assessment of the AutoCirBER and its operational performance was conducted according to International Standards Organizations (ISO) standard. The study relies on primary data that were generated during the study. Ecoinvent 3.0 database was used for background processes (for example, the environmental impact of electricity generation and consumption). The LCA was done using SimaPro 8.3 software. An attributional life cycle assessment (aLCA) was conducted to assess greenhouse gas (GHG) emission and other environmental footprints of the developed reactor. Processes involved in the development of the reactor and its operation were included in the analysis. The developed pilot-scale reactor can treat 8.4 L of domestic wastewater per day, and therefore the functional unit is taken as 8.4 L (0.0084 m The system boundary comprised all the materials and energy inputs and outputs for the reactor construction and operation phase. The end-of-life cycle phases, such as demolition and dismantling of the system, were not considered. The sub-systems within the system boundary are design and construction of sub-assemblies (reactor jacket, anode tank, and cathode plates) of the reactor and treatment of domestic wastewater using the reactor. AutoCirBER was run in batch mode for 30 days with different chemical loads of DW, to identify optimized performance ( The AutoCirBER has packed bed configuration of linked anodes, which is expected to sustain better mass transfer from anolyte to anode. However, anode-to-anolyte contact time plays a major role, especially in continuous systems. In order to optimize performance in continuous mode, AutoCirBER was run in continuous mode at different HRTs (2, 4, 6, 8 and 10 h). The power output of AutoCirBER at HRT 2 h was 1.92 mW, which increased somewhat at HRT 4 h (2.83 mW). The lesser power yield during low HRT may be due to the insufficient anolyte-to-microbe contact time and redox reactions, therefore electrons and protons supplied over the time. High HRT in the anode, by comparison, enables higher contact time, which helps the anode to obtain the electrons from substrate degradation and thus generate more sustainable power output (  AutoCirBER recorded a fair reduction in organic load present in the wastewater ( The CE was calculated based on the COD reduction. The CE in AutoCirBER showed increasing trend with increased HRT and was highest at HRT of 6 h (34.69%). The higher CEs in AutoCirBER were expected since AutoCirBER had packed bed anode arrangement, which facilitated higher biofilm growth and therefore higher substrate conversion. Although for AutoCirBER, oxygen crossover from separator was not measured during process run, the higher CEs shows that less COD was lost to oxygen crossover. At the point when the HRT approached longer periods, residual COD was oxidized by non-electrochemical microbes of biofilm, which leads to significant decrement in CE (23.18 at 10 h HRT). AutoCirBER was run with DW at varied HRT. Improvement in AutoCirBER performance was noticed with increment in HRT till 6 h HRT. Average maximum voltage of 825 mV with an average current output of 8.24 mA was recorded at 6 h HRT (maximum power output of 6.80 mW). Further increment in HRT reduced the power output and system attained only 2.27 mW at 10 h HRT. Similarly, power out was increased with increasing organic load till 1500 mg/L (6.43 mW) and further reduced with increasing organic load. However, overall AutoCirBER performed efficiently and attain 1.92 mW even at its minimum performance ( Energy data of AutoCirBER are shown in Sludge generation in waste treatment system is a major maintenance issue. The sludge yield in AutoCirBER was remarkably lower (0.092 kgVSS/kgCOD lowest and 0.243 kgVSS/kgCOD highest) than yields for aerobic systems (0.54 kgVSS/kgCOD) ( AutoCirBER performed efficiently with wide range of chemical load and operation time (i.e. HRT). Performance may vary with varied constructional materials like anode, cathode, separator and operating conditions like HRT, temperature, pH, chemical load, but this architectural approach clearly showed potential in treating wastewater and generating power. The removal of COD includes only one mechanism which only involves microbial activity, whereas wastewater-to-bioelectricity generation is a multi-stage phenomenon. All these steps are restricted by specific and independent factors, namely: wastewater mixing, transferring electron, proton transfer, cathode reduction and so on, and thus efficiency loss at every step will lead to low efficiency yields. In design of AutoCirBER, each and every aspect was considered carefully. Net energy output of the AutoCirBER is positive and in longer run this system could be able to compensate its cost. Moreover, Columbic efficiency and COD removal results indicate that AutoCirBER treated wastewater efficiently along with minimal sludge production. Less sludge generation will minimize post operational expenses and maintenance cost of the reactor. Inventory analysis enlists all the materials and energy flows (input/output) in a system. In SimaPro, the inventory stage is further divided into three main sub-stages: processes, product stages, and waste types. All the inputs (material/fuel/electricity) from nature or technosphere and outputs (product and its by-product) and environmental impacts (emission to air, soil, water; social, economic issues) are included in the system. Since it is not possible to primarily collect all the information related to environmental impact (viewed as system output) of material/energy inputs into a system, therefore standard environmental database such as Ecoinvent was used along with primary data. The product stages define the assemblies (sub-compartment of the system) and the life cycle of the system. The product stage also deals with how to handle waste, materials reuse/recycle, and dismantling of the system. The waste type is the stage to define the anticipated waste types and their quantity. Therefore, the inventory stage is arguably the most important phase in LCA. Care has been taken as omission or double counting of input/output, which may lead to under-or-over estimation of outcomes. The environmental impact of material and energy flow within the system can be assessed using different impact assessment methods such as IMPACT 2000+, ReCipe 2016, CML. The choice of a particular impact assessment method broadly depends upon the purpose of the study. The impact assessment phase consists of various stages like classification, characterization (mandatory as per ISO protocol), also normalization, weighting and single score (optional but commonly used in LCA literature). The impact assessment can be as mid-point and end-point impact assessment. The mid-point impact deals with the assessment of the environmental consequences of a product before reaching end-point ( In this study, IMPACT 2002 + impact assessment method is used for LCA of the developed wastewater treatment reactor ( Interpretation is the final stage of LCA, where results obtained from the impact assessment stage are interpreted, and recommendation is made. Mid-point and end-point impacts of reactor construction and operation phases are presented in  Impact category-wise end-point environmental impacts (damage assessment) of various phases of wastewater treatment using the AutoCirBER are presented through The impact on human health is expressed in disability-adjusted life year or DALY unit. It represents an indicator of the year of healthy life lost. This damage category is the sum of the midpoint categories of respiratory effects, ionizing radiation, human toxicity, photochemical oxidation, and ozone layer depletion. This damage category is dominated by respiratory effects due to inorganic matter emitted into the air ( Within the construction phase, the cathode plate is responsible for the maximum impact of human health, followed by the anode tank, reactor jacket, and wastewater treatment ( The ecosystem quality damage category is the sum of the midpoint categories aquatic ecotoxicity, terrestrial ecotoxicity, “terrestrial acid/nutr, land occupation, aquatic acidification, aquatic eutrophication, and water turbine. The impact on the ecosystem is expressed in PDF * m In the case of ecosystem quality also, the cathode plate is responsible for maximum impact followed by the anode tank, reactor jacket, and wastewater treatment ( The damage category climate change (in kg CO Impact on climate change is the highest from the construction of the reactor jacket, followed by the anode tank, cathode plate, and wastewater treatment ( Impact on resources use (expressed in megajoule, MJ primary energy), which is the sum of the mid-point categories, non-renewable energy use, and mineral extraction is the highest from the construction of the reactor jacket, followed by anode tank, wastewater treatment and the cathode plate ( The single score is another way to represent the weighted LCA interpretation results. It put all weighted results in the same unit, which can be presented as a single score. It facilitates to compare the environmental impact of different products or scenarios ( The percentage contribution to overall environmental impacts (mid-point) by the construction and operation phase of the AutoCirBER is presented in The present AutoCirBER system has water treatment capacity of 8.4 L. The life cycle GHGs emission from wastewater treatment is 33 CO The environmental impact of the system is greatly influenced by the amount of material and energy input in the construction phase, wastewater treatment capacity and efficiency of the system, and operational lifetime. The emissions and environmental impacts in the construction phase of the AutoCirBER can be treated as a AutoCirBER design represents a bioelectrochemical reactor, which has adaptability for long-term continuous scaled-up operation. Reactor showed satisfactory performance in initial laboratory check-up, and experimental LCA displays its environmental feasibility in the longer run. One of the most important challenges in deploying AutoCirBER for real-world application is to find a balance between treatment efficiency, electricity production, and capital costs, which requires multidimensional study, including cost-benefit analysis, change in liquid volume due to absorption on anodes in anode tank and evaporation in cathode chamber, fluid dynamic analysis, etc. Some of the work is in progress and will be reported in the future. AS Mathuriya designed and developed the AutoCirBER and performed the experiments, P Gware helped in data analysis during AutoCirBER operation, M Hiloidhari performed the LCA, A Singh helped in visualization and review and D Pant helped in writing, review and editing. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work is supported by Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: