Microbubbles play an important role in the adhesion between particle and bubble. In this paper, the bridging action of microbubbles on the adhesion between particle and bubble was studied at different pre-wetting times in the sodium oleate system. Many microbubbles formed on coal surface when the coal particles wetted by water. The coal-microbubble flocs were formed through the bridging action of microbubbles. The coal-microbubble flocs attached to the floating bubble increased the adhesion efficiency between bubble and particle because the process of coal-bubble adhesion was converted to the process of coal flocs-bubble adhesion. When the pre-wetting time increased, the number of microbubbles on coal surface decreased, resulting in the decrease of coal-microbubble flocs, which finally reduced the froth product yield of flotation. Additionally, an evaluation index (particle carrying index, PCI) was proposed to assess particle-bubble collection efficiency and the PCI values were positively correlated with the yield of froth products.Flotation of low-rank coal is an important task for the mineral processing researchers in the world [ Besides, it is found that if the oxygen-bearing functional groups were introduced into the collector to combine with the oxygen- bearing functional groups on the coal surface, the flotation effect of difficult floated coal can be enhanced [ In this study, the influence of pre-wetting time on the microbubbles generation and bridging action in coal-microbubble flocs at different pre-wetting times were compared in the sodium oleate system through the particle-bubble attachment tests and flotation tests. We attempted to observe the bridging action of microbubbles on the adhesion between bubble and coal particles, propose an evaluation method for the adhesion between bubble and coal particles, and obtain the influence mechanism of pre-wetting process on flotation performance of low-rank coal. This study has guiding significance for the froth flotation of coal slime produced during dry coal preparation. The low-rank coal sample were collected from the Shanbula mine, Inner Mongolia, China. Lump coal sample with <1.25 g/cm In the process of flotation mechanism analyses, scholars proposed many methods to evaluate the adhesion between bubble and hydrophobic particle. These methods such as induction time [ Because ultrafine particles were difficult to settle in water and had a negative impact on the turbidity of water, 74–250 μm coal particles were selected for testing in this work. The structure of particle-bubble attachment observation system is shown in the A novel and simple method was defined by the ratio of shadow area of particles/flocs to that of bubble as shown in Flotation tests were operated in a 0.5 L flotation cell using Mill-Q water. Sodium oleate as collector and frother. The sodium oleate dosage was fixed at 120 mg/L based on the previous study [  In order to study the effect of microbubble bridging action on coal flotation, the flotation tests of coal particles were carried out. The results as shown in In order to analyze the relationship between PCI and flotation results, the value of PCI and the yield of flotation froth products was linearly fitted, and the fitting results were shown in The microbubble had a positive effect on the flotation of low-rank coal. When the pre-wetting time was short, the microbubbles in the pores of the coal surface began to generate, and the coal particles were easily bridged by microbubbles to form flocs. The coal-microbubble flocs carried by large bubble effectively increased the carrying ability of large bubble to coal particles in the flotation system, and finally strengthened the flotation of coal. When pre-wetting time prolonged, the coal-microbubble flocs most disappeared, and single particles adhered to the pendant bubble. The coal pores were wetted by water, the hydrophobic area decreased, and the adhesion efficiency with bubbles decreases as the wetting time increased. This research has an important significance for the froth flotation of the coal slime produced during dry coal preparation and the fundamental study of how the microbubble can affect the adhesion between particle and bubble. PCI was an effective method to evaluate the adhesion efficiency of bubbles to particles. The higher the PCI value, the higher the flotation concentrate yield, the easier the adhesion between particles and bubbles. PCI was simple and its values were consistent with the flotation results. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This research was supported by the Future Scientists Program of