In powder metallurgy engineering, the master sintering curve (MSC) is crucial for estimating the mechanical properties of sintered products and optimizing sintering process parameters. A rapid evaluation method, that is, a domain-adversarial neural network, is established in the field of sintering to transfer learning from Al2O3 to SiC, concerning the effect of the heating rate on the sintering densification, in which one material (e.g. SiC) lacks an MSC and the material (e.g. Al2O3) has an overabundance of MSCs. In the unsupervised mode, we can roughly predict the densification evolution of SiC based on the MSC data of Al2O3. In the semi-supervised mode, prediction accuracy gradually increases with the increase of Al2O3 data and approaches a certain upper limit. Compared with the traditional sintering density prediction models, the proposed approach can provide an effective and rapid solution to the problem of data scarcity in the sintering field.In the field of sintering, the acquisition of the master sintering curve (MSC) is crucial in powder metallurgy engineering to predict the densification behavior of sintered materials is for estimating the mechanical properties of the sintered products and optimizing the sintering process parameters. Sintering is a complicated dynamic process that is affected by numerous factors, including material parameters, process parameters, and different types and proportions of additives. Moreover, describing the evolution of densification during the sintering process is a huge challenge. For example, compared with traditional hot-press sintering, electric current assisted sintering (ECAS) has the advantage of shorter sintering time, higher densification rate, and lower sintering temperature. A large amount of experimental data has been accumulated in the long-term preliminary studies on widely used materials, such as Al In the traditional powder metallurgy industry, the MSC can be used to predict the densification behavior of materials (e.g. Mo, Ni, SiC, Al2O3, and HfB2–20SiC) with a temperature-time history [ The two aforementioned prediction methods are limited by several constraints despite achieving satisfactory prediction results. Firstly, the MSC is suitable only for densification prediction under specific initial conditions (Including powder preparation process, particle size, impurity content and green compaction process, etc. [ For feature transfer, we introduced transfer learning [ Pan and Yang [ In summary, transfer learning can effectively solve the applicability limits of the MSC to specific conditions and the data shortage problem of traditional machine learning. To establish a general densification prediction model, a domain-adversarial neural network (DANN) [ The purpose of this study is to provide a rapid method for predicting the sintering density of SiC (the target domain) based on the MSC of the existing Al Powder metallurgy (PM) is one of the most commonly used methods for preparing composite materials [ To make the PM research to understand better, we briefly explain the related terms in Johnson et al. [ The relation between density Under the condition that the initial powder has the same physicochemical properties, MSC can effectively predict the sintering behavior and densification results of the powder and has been successfully applied to the traditional no-pressure sintering of ZrO The time includes heating time and holding time and the time increase of the sintering process. We take the complete time history as one of the input features of the transfer learning model. The temperature includes the initial sintering temperature, the final sintering temperature and the temperature change of the sintering process. The temperature and time can be linked by the heating rate, so we take the complete temperature history and heating rate as the input features of the transfer learning model. Initial conditions include powder preparation process, particle size, impurity content and green compaction process, etc. These variables can be fixed as constants after the sintering preparation is completed, and the contribution of these initial conditions to MSC is to make MSC specific. Those initial condition constants have a role that differentiates MSC, which is consistent with the role of the domain discriminator in our material transfer learning model (distinguishing the source domain from the target domain). So for the sake of simplicity, we unified those initial condition constants into the domain variables. Transfer learning consists of two basic concepts [ In our work, the MSC of Al Hidden features extracted by the feature extractor can help the label predictor predict labels as accurately as possible while confusing the domain discriminator such that it cannot distinguish the domain of the input features based on these extracted features. For this purpose, a two-part loss function L is used for representation. Afterward, an optimal algorithm (e.g. gradient descent) is used to reduce the loss to approximate the optimal model parameters. For the target task loss By substituting Equations The process of minimizing The Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) [ According to the process flow, the powder metallurgy generally includes three steps, that is, powder mixing, green compaction, and sintering. Numerous related variables are involved in the three steps, which increase unpredictability for the final sintering densification process. Possible related variables involved in each step are shown in The MSC of α-Al  The validation of source domain data mainly considers whether the data is complete and whether the main data characteristics (such as heating rate, axial pressure, etc.) are consistent with the target domain. The integrity of the data means that the source and target domains must have the same sintering process (such as preheating, heating, heat preservation). Moreover, the main characteristics reflected in the source and target data should be consistent, such as changes in heating rate (or axial pressure).  The influencing factors in the sintering process under specific process conditions are reflected in the MSC. Moreover, the core of transfer learning involves finding the domain-invariant representation between the source and the target domains. Accordingly, all the other different parameters are unified into the domain property variable All the input features include time, temperature, and heating rate (in Two aspects of the model implementation details are extended. The first aspect involves the model structure. A deep and wide learning architecture [ We alternately use batches of 64 samples from each domain to train the model. Meanwhile, to obtain a satisfactory domain discriminator and to avoid its influence on the main task at the beginning of training, we set the coefficient λ of the gradient inversion layer as a function that varies with the number of training steps. We take advantage of the unsupervised pattern and use only the input feature The figure demonstrates the performance of the DANN on the heating rate. Predictive performance is satisfactory under 100K/min, and the prediction effect under the other heating rates is poor. When the semi-supervised mode is adopted, a small amount of target domain densification parameter data is added on an unsupervised basis. To observe the impact of the target domain data on the transfer learning performance, we divide the experiment into two groups: one in which one SiC data is added and the other in which two SiC data are added. The results are shown in  The results indicate that the transfer learning method, that is, the DANN, can be applied to the field of sintering to aid in the rapid prediction of the MSC. Specifically, it can effectively transfer the influence of a single variable (e.g. heating rate) among materials that satisfy the conditions of similar materials or similar sintering mechanisms. The richer the source domain data, the stronger their generalization ability. The proposed method provides a new perspective on sintering densification prediction for materials under the condition of insufficient sintering data. Besides, the method can make a quick judgment on the evolution of the MSC in the sintering process, especially for certain difficult-to-sinter materials (e.g. SiC). Compared with traditional machine learning methods, the proposed method can overcome the problem of data shortage to a certain extent, which has considerable significance to practical engineering applications. The proposed method also provides a means for extracting shared sintering mechanisms, which are the domain-invariant representations, for theoretical research. However, only the case of a single-source domain versus a single-target domain is focused on rather than a multi-source domain versus a single-target domain. Notwithstanding its limitations, this study suggests the feasibility of transfer learning in the prediction of sintering densification, and that the joint training of multiple models may solve this limitation and can further improve the generalization ability of the model. Transfer learning provides a novel solution to sintered density prediction of materials that satisfy the conditions of similar material or similar sintering mechanisms, especially those that are difficult to prepare. For unsupervised transfer learning, the average error is 0.13, whereas, for semi-supervised transfer learning, the average error is 0.02. Transfer learning can be used as a rapid sintering density prediction method. Compared with previous research, the number of samples required for the trained DANN model is much smaller than that needed for training a sufficiently general machine learning model. Moreover, only the relevant characteristics of the target task need to be considered. These differences remarkably reduce the difficulty of collecting data. Furthermore, to a certain degree, reliable predictions for new materials can be made based only on historical information alone. Domain-invariant representation extracted by the DANN provides a novel solution in the study of shared sintering mechanisms. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This research is funded by the