Introduction
                  The purpose of this investigation was to review the preliminary results and patients outcome following treatment with an anatomically preshaped LCP in patients with comminuted fractures of the proximal ulna. We hypothesized that this fixation system provides equal or superior results in fracture care when compared with other available plating devices, but results in better patient's comfort due to its low-profile design.
               
                  Patients and methods
                  Between 2007 and 2009, 15 patients with comminuted fractures of the proximal ulna including three posterior Monteggia fractures were managed with the preshaped LCP olecranon plate. The patients were invited for clinical examination at a mean duration of 16 months, retrospectively. Validated patient-oriented assessment scores involving the Mayo Elbow Performance Index (MEPI) and the shortened Disability of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand (Quick-DASH) score, postoperative range of motion, objective muscle-strengths testing and patient's satisfaction were evaluated. All patients had follow-up radiographs.
               
                  Results
                  Fourteen patients were available for evaluation. The mean arc of elbow motion was 129°. The mean MEPI was 97 with good results in two patients and excellent results in 12 patients. The mean Quick-DASH was 13. Thirteen of fourteen patients documented satisfaction with their elbow outcome. There was one patient with symptomatic hardware and one patient complained about deficit of motion. In four patients the hardware was removed including two patients with elective removal. Fourteen fractures healed with ulnohumeral congruity after a mean time to union of 11 weeks. One fracture non-union occurred without mechanical failure or loss of reduction.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Anatomically preshaped LCP olecranon plating is an effective fixation method for comminuted fractures of the proximal ulna allowing reliable stability for early elbow motion. The functional results are comparable with formerly described plating systems. A low rate of symptomatic hardware removal suggests better patient's compatibility.Regarding forearm injuries in adults, complex fractures of the proximal ulna with severe comminution have become more frequent in the recent years. However, these fractures still remain a treatment challenge for trauma surgeons. To allow early functional mobilisation and to prevent stiffness of the elbow joint, the fracture fixation has to provide secure stability. As alternative fixation device to treat comminuted fractures of the olecranon or the proximal ulna, the AO group recommends the 3.5-mm LCP olecranon plate (Synthes, Umkirch, Germany). To our knowledge, the use of an anatomically preshaped LCP for the proximal ulna has not been reported previously. The purpose of the present investigation is to report our experiences with the anatomically preshaped 3.5-mm LCP olecranon plate in 15 patients with different types of comminuted proximal ulnar fractures. We believe that clinical results will be equal or superior to other olecranon plating systems. Due to its anatomically preformed low profile, we suppose there is an advantage for the patient's comfort. In a retrospective data analysis of all patients treated operatively in our department, 87 patients with acute fractures of the proximal ulna were identified between 2007 and 2009. Due to comminution and displacement and/or involvement of the coronoid process, 51 patients were managed with posterior plating, of whom 15 were managed with the preshaped 3.5-mm LCP olecranon plate. There were six men and nine women with an average age of 55 years (range, 28–83 years) at the time of surgery ( According to the AO classification ( The mechanism of injury was a fall from a standing height for eight patients, a bicycle accident for four patients, and a ski accident for one patient. In two cases, the injury was the result of a high-energy trauma from a traffic accident-associated polytrauma. Both patients had an injury of ipsilateral upper extremity, including one concomitant fracture of the distal humerus and one associated fracture of the distal radius. All patients were operated upon by both senior authors highly experienced in AO principles and techniques of internal fixation. Under tourniquet control, the posterior approach to the elbow was performed in all cases, using a midline skin incision with a radial curve to avoid placing the incision directly over the olecranon process and to protect the ulnar nerve. The patients, who presented with open fractures, were initially treated by external fixation and received careful soft tissue and skeletal debridement. For intra-articular olecranon fractures, the articular surface is inspected closely and impacted fragments are elevated to realign the level of joint surface. Subsequently, the reduction is secured with bone clamps and K-wires and controlled under biplanar fluoroscopic imaging for correct articular congruity. In the first step, the insertion of the triceps tendon has to be incised longitudinally for optimal positioning of the implant to the proximal part of the olecranon. Second, the implant is gently fixed to the ulna shaft using the combi-hole in compression mode (drilled eccentrically for a 3.5-mm monocortical non-locking screw). The positioned LCP olecranon plate has to be controlled in full elbow extension to avoid impingement of the olecranon fossa. No bending of the plate should be performed to not deform the threaded locking head holes. Then, a 3.5-mm cortical non-locking screw is placed from the proximal part of the plate below the subchondral articular surface directed towards the base of the coronoid process and tightened bicortically ( In our patients, additional cortical screws or K-wires were used for interfragmentary fixation in seven cases ( For extra-articular fractures of the proximal ulna, the olecranon is fixed In our patients, the concomitant radial head fractures were treated with internal fixation using two or three 2.0-mm cortical screws via an extended posterior approach as described by Boyd. For postoperative management, the elbow was immobilised in a posterior splint in 90° elbow flexion. Passive and active (gravity-assisted) exercises out of splint were started under the physiotherapist's supervision 2 days after surgery. For Monteggia fracture dislocations, the elbow was stabilised with a mobile, hinged brace (EpicoROM, Fa. Medi, Bayreuth, Germany) for 4 weeks. Depending on the completion of fracture healing on radiographs, active motion was approved 6 weeks postoperatively. At a minimum follow-up time of 6 months, patients were invited to return for clinical evaluation. Our institutional ethics committee approved the protocol of investigation. Personal interviews and physical examinations were carried out by an independent investigator not involved in the patients’ initial management. The range of motion of the elbow, the forearm rotation and the stability of the elbow were assessed. Patients rated the functional outcome by using the Mayo Elbow Performance Index (MEPI), Preoperative, postoperative and follow-up radiographs were reviewed retrospectively. Antero-posterior and lateral radiographs were evaluated for fracture healing, failure of the implant and loss of reduction by both treating surgeons. A total of 14 patients returned after an average follow-up of 16 months (range, 8–29 months). One patient could not be evaluated because of bad general conditions (patient 3, At the time of evaluation, the arc of flexion was from an average extension deficit of 12° (range, 0–35°) to an average flexion of 141° (range, 130–150°). The arc of forearm rotation was from an average supination of 87° (range, 75–90°) to an average pronation of 84° (range, 70–90°). None of the patients had any varus–valgus or posterolateral rotatory instability. The mean MEPI score was 97 (range, 85–100), with 100 presenting the best score. According to this system, the results were good for two patients and excellent for 12 patients. The mean In four patients, hardware removal was performed at a mean time of 15 months (range, 13–17 months) after surgery. One patient with a concomitant, distal intra-articular humerus fracture, initially treated with external fixation (patient 8, The mean maximal extension strength in 90° elbow flexion for the operated elbow was 45.8 (N) (range, 19.4–77.6 (N)), compared with 53.6 (N) (range, 19.8–124.6 (N)) for the uninjured side. This difference (14%) represented a significance with Follow-up radiographs were available for all patients. A total of 14 fractures healed in correct alignment with the ulnohumeral joint concentrically reduced after a mean time of 11 weeks (range, 7–20 weeks). In one patient (patient 10, The aim of the present study was to illustrate our first clinical results for patients with comminuted fractures of the proximal ulna treated by the anatomically preshaped 3.5-mm LCP olecranon plate. Anatomically preformed implants have already shown promising results in distal humeral fracture management. Our findings are comparable with those reported in the current literature for contoured olecranon plating. In 2007, Anderson et al. Recently, Buijze and Kloen For comminuted Monteggia and transolecranon fracture dislocations, buttressing with a plate is recommended. The present study has some weaknesses, including a small number of patients with a subsequent decrease of power, its retrospective design and the short duration of follow-up. It is obvious to us that a reliable comparison of our findings with other plating results published previously is possible not before a mean follow-up duration of at least 2 years. Further studies with increased sample size and longer follow-up are needed to validate significant advantages compared with other available plating systems. Nevertheless, the preliminary good or excellent functional results, the high union rate and the low incidence of hardware-related complications have encouraged us to continue using the implant evaluated in this study. Comminuted fractures of the proximal ulna functionally affect both the elbow and the forearm. Fracture morphology and primary elbow instability are the most important prognostic factors for elbow function. All results were obtained independently. The authors certify that they have not signed any agreement with a commercial interest related to this study and have not received benefits in any form.