Recent studies have reported improved biogas and methane yield from marine biomass when the particle size is mechanically reduced and the specific surface area available to enzymes is increased prior to anaerobic incubation. Although the advantage of reducing the particle size has been identified, an ideal particle size that would offer greater yield with a positive energy balance has not been identified for such substrate to date. As particle size reduction by mechanical means is often highly demanding in energy, this paper attempts to fill this gap for macroalgal biomass by identifying the particle size distribution allowing the highest biogas and methane yields obtained in a previous work. The study estimated that when about 80% of the particles are sized below 1.6 mm2, a biogas and methane yield improvement of up to 52% and 53% respectively can be achieved. The results are discussed in relation to the biogas yield, related methane content and potential inhibitory phenomena occurred during the fermentation.Biomass research and developments have been presented in many papers and editorials This work constitutes a continuation of a previous project  The biomass particle size described in the literature for macroalgae The maximum frontal surface and distribution of the pulp's particles produced by treating the biomass with the Hollander beater are unique to this specific machine. It was decided to use the superficial surface area in mm Since the particles will be inspected with a camera, the treated solution samples need to be diluted in order to obtain an acceptable distance between particles. Most samples required a 2:1 dilution with tap water, for more concentrated samples however the dilution was further increased to 6:1. A summary of the dilutions used in this research with respect to the other settings can be seen in The samples are divided into four 100 mL batches before they are inspected. Each batch is then poured into a glass tray with a white base where the particles are coaxed apart as much as possible. Various images of the resulting particle spread are then taken, making sure the entire tray is captured. Pictures of the samples were taken using a Canon Powershot G9 camera at high resolution and from the same distance with the aid of a tripod. The camera's specifications and settings are regulated as follows: digital zoom = 1; compression = superfine; F-stop = 3.5; exposure time = 1/600 s; ISO speed = ISO-100; white balance = manual; flash = none; focal length = 22 mm; max aperture = 3.625. The pictures were then processed using the image processing software ImageJ, which converts each of them into a binary image for easier characterization, as can be seen in Pulp's drainability constitutes a very useful tool to associate pulped biomass with eventual digestate's dewaterability issues that arise when scaling up the process in industrial facilities The procedure that is followed for the Schopper-Riegler method is the ISO 5267-1:1999 (E) The particle frontal surface distribution and the pulp drainability of the feedstock resulting from the Hollander beater pretreatment are reported and discussed in relation to the biogas and methane yield. The operational parameters, the resulting biogas yields and its methane content percentages are reported in  The total solids concentration in every sample can be considered to be the same as in Refs. As mentioned in the literature In general, it is proposed that a blend of large and small particles may in fact be the ideal substrate for high biogas yields. The smaller particles would enable an initial rapid rate of hydrolysis, which in turn would build up the levels of nutrients suitable for methanogenic bacteria to begin producing biogas. Once these smaller particles are consumed however, the larger particles would provide a reduced surface area, and therefore regulate the subsequent levels of hydrolysis in such a way that all the reactions involved in the digestion are stable and balanced. These requirements seem to be fulfilled by sample G0T10 which allows the highest yields of biogas and methane production. In this sample it was found that the smallest particle size range percentages are very similar (about 20% each), and more than 80% of G0T10's macroalgal particles have a specific surface area below the ideal particle size of 1–2 mm identified by Shell for lignocelluloses In the fertilizer upgrading process, the digestate needs to be drained of water to reduce its net weight and thus improve the logistics of applying the fertilizer to agricultural land. Drainability is an extremely important property that facilitates the separation of liquid digestate from its most solid parts and thus reduces the costs of the fertilizer upgrading step Anaerobic digestion in general has also been found to be beneficial at enhancing the drainability performance of the digestate, particularly when using thermophilic ranges During the course of this study, the following findings were made: The gap size setting of the beater and beating time have a significant effect on the nature of the particles produced by the beater. The beater produces large, irregularly shaped particles at wider gap sizes and shorter beating times, and small particles at narrower gap sizes with longer beating times. The highest biogas yields involved particles which were smaller and greater in number. These samples also had a particle surface distribution which was more uniform, namely 80% below 1.6 mm Low yields were obtained from material, in which the particles were less in number and relatively large. This is probably due to there being a reduced surface area available for enzymatic degradation. It was found that a narrower gap size (MG = 0) and a longer beating time should be used when pre-treating seaweed biomass with the Hollander beater, but at the same time excessive beating times lead to a reduced biogas yield, as do short beating times with wider gap sizes. The reason is not yet clear and cannot be attributed to an excessive accumulation of VFAs. This aspect should be further investigated via analysis of free ammonia (FA), sulfide and VFAs concentration across the whole AD period. The smaller the gap MG used for the macroalgae's comminution, the lower is the drainability of the pulp. A high SR value of 88 characterizes the ideal macroalgal pulp for maximized biogas and methane production. Reduced dewaterability of the substrate can affect the cost of digestate upgrading to soil fertilizer, and must be taken into consideration when scaling up the pretreatment process. This research was supported by the