The carbothermic reduction behavior of original ilmenite and pre-oxidized ilmenite concentrates were investigated by a non-isothermal method using a thermogravimetry facility. The reaction degree was calculated using the tail gas composition and the Starink method to analyze the activation energy of the reduction. The results demonstrated that trends of different reaction degree curves are similar under the same conditions. The average activation energy of the pre-oxidized ilmenite concentrate was less than that of the original form by approximately 25%, and the starting reduction temperature was lower by 67K than that of the original ilmenite concentrate. However, the reduction time of the pre-oxidized ilmenite concentrate was longer than that of the original ilmenite concentrate for the same reaction degree; therefore, a slow reduction rate for the oxidization sample was observed. X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and energy dispersion spectroscopy (EDS) were used to characterize the phase and micro-morphology of the two raw materials and compare the reduction products.Ilmenite concentrate, derived from the ilmenite mineral or titanium magnetite mineral, is a very common raw material in titanium pigment production ( Several researchers have observed that pre-oxidation of ilmenite is beneficial to the reduction. The reduction studies of pre-oxidized ilmenite and original ilmenite concentrate can be divided into gas and coal based reduction. For gas (H In this paper, the carbothermic reduction behavior of original and pre-oxidized ilmenite concentrates, such as activation energies, gas product analysis, micro-morphology of the products and phase composition, were compared systematically by a non-isothermal method. The original ilmenite concentrate powder was obtained from the Panzhihua Steel Company. The pre-oxidized ilmenite concentrate powder was obtained by oxidizing the original ilmenite concentrate at 1472 The original and pre-oxidized ilmenite concentrates were both mixed homogenously with the graphite powder (99.99%). In order to ensure that the sample reacted completely, the molar ratio of C to O (Fe  The weight loss includes two components, namely, the removal of O atoms and C atoms reacted during the carbothermic reduction. The relationship between weight loss of the sample and CO/CO where where The conversion degree indicates the reduction degree defined as follows:   In accordance with the non-isothermal kinetic theory, the reaction activation energy can be calculated by the Starink method ( Fitting of the relationship of ln( The primary chemical reactions for carbothermic reduction of both pre-oxidized ilmenite and original ilmenite concentrates are divided into three parts. The primary reactions are shown as follows: Solid–solid interaction: Gaseous reduction: Boudouard reaction: The Ellingham diagram of the oxide is shown in The CO–CO  Compared with the activation energy of both carbon gasification in the Boudouard reaction and the iron oxide reduction by the graphite reductant, the activation energy in this study is reasonable ( The effect of pre-oxidation on the reduction of ilmenite with carbon was thermodynamically and kinetically investigated in this paper. The primary conclusions were drawn as follows: Compared with original ilmenite concentrate and pre-oxidized ilmenite concentrate, the main phase of FeTiO Both the carbothermic reduction of original ilmenite and pre-oxidized ilmenite concentrates were divided into three stages. Compared with original ilmenite concentrate, the reduction activation energy of the pre-oxidized sample decreased by approximately 25% and the starting reduction temperature decreased by approximately 67 The pre-oxidized ilmenite concentrate needed a longer reduction time and higher reductant (graphite) consumption, resulting in a slower average reduction rate. Therefore, the pre-oxidized process of the ilmenite requires a lower activation energy, but it does not improve the average carbothermic reduction rate. This work was supported by the