The propagation of anode slimes generated in laboratory-scale electro-refining cells is analyzed by means of Markov process theory, where experimental kinetic data are interpreted as a temporal evolution of cluster probabilities. The probability distributions complement graphs depicting area fractions occupied by slime versus time, and offer an alternative view of slime propagation, vis-à-vis more traditional visualization-based analyses.During the last decade, various techniques of image processing based on laser-illumination (e.g. The purpose of the current communication is to provide a probabilistic interpretation of slime propagation kinetics in terms of the Markov process theory. Firstly, a cumulative distribution function is assigned to each kinetic model on the basis of experimental propagation data, then appropriate tenets of probability theory are employed. This exercise aims to offer a wider horizon for hydrometallurgical processes, in general, and an alternative view for slime propagation in particular. The The limiting value of The cumulative distribution function is approximated on the basis of the fractional area occupied by the slime in an illuminated cell section as The approach presented here deals with an experimental study of the kinetics of anode slime formation and propagation in a 90 The fundamental tools for analysis are assembled in They represent the following mechanisms ( In this analysis, a cluster is defined as an agglomeration of an arbitrary number of slime particles imbedded in the electrolyte solution such that the limiting probability of Although the volume fraction of electrolyte-free slime particles is unknown, its range can be assumed to be between 25 and 50%. From atomic radii data (e.g. In addition to the single cluster probability expressed by Eq. The principal effect of The probability that, at a given time, the number of clusters will be between two specific values To illustrate the numerical interpretation of To the author's knowledge, there exists no direct means, based on fundamental mechanistic principles, of predicting a-priori anode slime propagation patterns. Similarly, no deterministic ‘first principles’-based theory can indicate the effect of the anode reaction(s) and slime composition on the evolution of slime distributions in a cell, at least not in a quantitatively reliable manner. Visualization techniques provide limited experimental information on the shape, compactness and depth of slimes, depending on pixel-field resolution, and the degree of sophistication of computer-based image processing. None of these methods is amenable to commercial-scale practice, as on-line tools for monitoring slime propagation in industrial refining cells. The principal advantage of the Markov-scheme employed here lies in a direct and straightforward linking of the distribution function The foregoing presentation represents one specific probabilistic approach to the analysis of hydrometallurgical processes and operations. The development of its potential would also be a demonstration of certain benefits which cross-fertilization of different disciplines could contribute to the understanding of technological phenomena. This work was performed using facilities provided by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) and the University of Waterloo. Material in this section follows closely a concise earlier and lucid treatment by A physical system is defined to consist of If the system is in state A simple illustration is the classical Poisson distribution where