The small world of lithium is booming due to the emergence of electric vehicles. The development of sustainable and economic processes to recover lithium from primary and secondary resources is essential to face up the expected global demand of lithium. Electrodialysis seems to be an interesting alternative among the different technologies available to produce lithium from brines, ores and spent lithium-ion batteries via hydrometallurgical route. However, electrodialysis is presently mainly used at industrial scale in water treatment. This paper gives an overview of recent advances in the development of electrodialysis technology, which could be an asset for the next generations of processes involved in lithium production.Lithium is widely used for many industrial applications, including more especially lithium-ion batteries (44% of the global production in 2013), ceramics and glasses (12% of the global production in 2013), greases (11% of the global production in 2013) and other applications such as metallurgy, pharmaceutical industry, primary aluminium production, etc., which represented 33% of the global production in 2013 ( During the last decades, lithium has been mainly extracted from brines located in Bolivia, Argentina, Chile, and at a less extent from China and USA ( Lithium brine recovery is a long process that involves drilling in order to access the underground salar brine deposits, brine pumping to the surface and brine distribution to ponds where solar evaporation are implemented for 10–20 months. During the solar evaporation stage, magnesium and potassium chloride salts precipitate before lithium precipitation. In some cases, reverse osmosis is used to concentrate the lithium brine in order to speed up the evaporation process. Lithium salt is recovered and washed with water in order to remove impurities. Refining process is afterward implemented in order to produce high-grade salts for lithium-ion battery production (LiOH, Li Lithium extraction from ores involves pyrometallurgical or hydrometallurgical stages ( Presently, the implementation of membrane processes in lithium production flowsheets is very limited whereas this technology could reduce significantly the operating costs by decreasing advantageously the number of stages providing that membrane cost and membrane selectivity would be appropriate. Reverse osmosis is the most used membrane process in brine treatment, and it could be implemented in lithium extraction from lithium ores since it is an efficient way to concentrate lithium before lithium carbonate precipitation providing that membrane fouling issues would be fixed ( Although, electrodialysis is mainly used for water desalination, this technology could be easily implemented in hydrometallurgical processes for the recovery of lithium from brine or geothermal fluids as well as in processes for the recovery of lithium from leach solution of spodumene concentrate ( This paper addresses a thorough review of recent advances about the use of electrodialysis in processes for the recovery of lithium from primary resources (brines, seawater, geothermal fluids, lithium ores) and secondary resources (spent lithium-ion batteries). It highlights advantages and disadvantages of this technology as well as recent progresses required for stimulating the integration of this technology in hydrometallurgical processes for the production of high-grade lithium salts. Electrodialysis (ED) is a membrane process that allows ion separation under the influence of an electrical potential difference ( The ED efficiency is assayed by calculating the recovery efficiency of the targeted ion i (R(i) in %), the current efficiency of the electrodialyser (η(i) in %), the Specific Energy Consumption of the electrodializer (SEC), the Separation Coefficient between lithium and another species X (SC Although membranes are at the center of several technologies including diffusion dialysis, electrodialysis and electrolysis, there is lack of information about their chemical structure, likely because of confidentiality. More information concerns the physical properties of these membranes. Membrane processes are implemented in various industries including salt production, demineralization in food industries, industrial wastewater reclamation, desalination (tap wapter), acid recovery, substitutional reaction and extractive metallurgy at a lesser extent. The following parts of this paper are focused on the use of these membranes for the selective recovery of lithium from seawater, brine, geothermal fluids, ores and spent lithium-ion batteries. Several authors demonstrated that electrodialysis could be used to extract lithium from aqueous solution even at low lithium concentration levels. The main challenges in lithium extraction by electrodialysis consist in developing efficient process allowing to recover lithium very selectively towards monovalent cations and divalent cations present in seawater, brine and geothermal fluids. This challenge is especially important since lithium is usually at low concentration whereas the other ions are present in solution at high concentration (especially in the case of seawater in which lithium concentation is around few tens mg/L). Such a separation can be achieved providing that high selective membrane are implemented in the electrodialyser. Commercial membranes like the anionic exchange membrane AR204SXR412 (homogenous polystyrene/Divinyl benzene copolymer) and the cationic exchange membrane CR67-MK111 (Homogenous polystyrene/Divinyl benzene) provided by Arak Petrochemical Complex Company (Iran) were used by Parsa et al. ( More sophisticated membranes were also designed at the laboratory scale in order to enhance electrodialyser performances for lithium production. In a recent patent, ( Likely, the use of other sophisticated membranes based on the use of commercial membranes impregnated with apropriate ionic liquids were also investigated to extract lithium from seawater and from an aqueous solution containing sodium and divalent cations such as calcium and magnesium (  Electrodialysis were also used for the recovery of lithium from brines of various compositions ( Bipolar membrane is another technology which could find advantageous application in the recovery of lithium, and more particularly in boron-lithium separation. This technology is a special type of layered ion exchange membrane that consists of two polymer layers carrying fixed charges. One of this polymer layers is only permeable to anions while the other one allows only cation transport. No ion transport can occur from one side to the other side. A typical characteristic of bipolar membranes is the disproportionation reaction of water molecules in the hydrophilic junction, which are split into hydroxide ions and protons when an electric potential is applied to the bipolar membranes ( Bunani et al. used bipolar membranes in electrodialysis system to investigate lithium‑boron separation in order to produce high-grade lithium hydroxide salt ( Jiang et al. developed a global flowsheet involving electrodialysis operations with bipolar membranes as well as cationic and anionic exchange membranes (JCM-II-05 and JAM-II-05 membranes, Beijing Tingrum Membrane Technology Development Company Ltd., China) in order to treat brines after removing magnesium and calcium by precipitation with Na Another interesting electrodialysis system involving bipolar membranes was developed by Hwang et al. in order to produce lithium hydroxide from brine ( The resulting lithium ions moved across the cationic exchange membrane and reacted with OH  Less papers were published about the use of electrodialysis technologies for lithium extraction from ores than from brine. Paper reported the use of FKS-PET-130/FAS-PET-130 (FuMA-Tech GmbH, Germany), CJMC/CJMA (Hefei ChemJoy Polymer Materials Company, Japan) and Neosepta AMX/CMX for the treatment of synthetic solutions containing 6 wt% Li The same authors developed another flowsheet to produce lithium carbonate from zinnwaldite concentrate containing 3 wt% Li  Only few papers concern the use of electrodialysis in lithium-ion batteries recycling. Song and Zhao described a method combining precipitation and electrodialysis in order produce lithium carbonate ( Firstly, the solution was purified by adding NaOH in order to quantitatively precipitate metal at pH 12, except lithium that remained in solution. Secondly, sodium phosphate, seed crystal and polyacrylamide flocculant were added in the purified solution in order to precipitate lithium phosphate (precipitation yield = 93%). Afterwards, lithium phosphate was dissolved in sulphuric acid and used as feed solution in electrodialysis in order to concentrate lithium. For this goal, an electrodialysis cell containing only one cation exchange membrane (Nafion 117 composed of a perfluorocarbon polymer grafted with SO Lizuka et al. ( The best operating conditions to separate lithium and cobalt at a recovery rate of 99% for each metal were: applied voltage = 20 V, flowrate = 0.375 L.min Afifah et al. (  Electrodialysis is a simple process, and efficient method to separate and recover lithium from various resources while allowing to reduce chemical reagent consumption and reducing the global environmental impact of lithium salt production. This technology was used to concentrate Li This work was supported by the