Background
                  Stable fixation promotes union in the common femoral neck fractures, but high non-union rates due to fixation failure remain with traditional fixations. To enhance stability, a plate interlocking pins, but without further fixation to femur has been developed. To our knowledge, no comparison to other conventional fixation methods has been performed. We tested the hypothesis that the novel implant biomechanically leads to a more stable femoral neck fixation.
               
                  Methods
                  Fifty synthetic femurs with a cervical wedge osteotomy were allocated to intervention with three hook-pins interlocked in a plate (Hansson Pinloc® System) or standard fixations with a two-hole Dynamic Hip Screw® plate with an anti-rotational screw, three cannulated screws (ASNIS® III) or two screws (Olmed® or Cannulated Hip Screws®). Quasi-static non-destructive torsion around the neck, anteroposterior bending and vertical compression were tested to detect stiffness. The specimen's deformation was evaluated after cyclic compression simulating weight-bearing. Local deformation of implant channels was measured. Fixation failure was defined by fissure formation.
               
                  Findings
                  Compared to the conventional implants all together, the interlocked pins enhanced mean stiffness 130% in torsion and 33% in bending (P < 0.001), while compressive stability was increased by a reduced deformation of 62% in average of the global test specimen and 95% decreased local implant channel deformation after cycling (P < 0.001). In comparisons with each of the standard fixations the interlocking pins revealed no signs of adverse effects.
               
                  Interpretation
                  The novel femoral neck interlocking plate allowed dynamic compression and improved multi-directional stability compared to the traditional fixations.The ever-present challenge of patients with intracapsular femoral neck fractures justifies an intensified development of treatment strategies ( Locking plates show a potential in reducing non-union and revision rates by internal fixation ( Accordingly, the novel Hansson Pinloc® System (Pinloc) ( The aim of the present study was to investigate biomechanically whether the new implant improves medial and lateral stabilisation without the expense of adverse effects when compared to other relevant femoral neck fixations in undisplaced or anatomically reduced fractures. Our hypothesis was that the new device would increase the stability of the bone-implant construct. Fifty left synthetic femurs (model #3406, large, Fourth Generation Composite Bone, Sawbones, Pacific Research Laboratories, Vashon, WA, USA) were predrilled with drill bits corresponding with the implant's diameter with following anatomical reduction or undisplaced fixation. To ensure a standardised positioning of implants in each group and between groups, a drilling jig was used. Parallel implant positioning corresponding with optimal clinical use was guaranteed by the jig, with identical angle, length and distances between screws/pins. With standardised dimensions according to the femoral neck, the drill jig was used to achieve the recommended top-down triangular implant configuration with multiple implants ( Up to three channels were drilled with an isosceles triangular configuration of 14.5 mm centre-to-centre distance between the distal and proximal channels and 12.0 mm between the proximal ones. For configurations with two implant channels the anterior channel was omitted. With one main channel this was standardised at the centre of the triangle in the femoral head and drilled 110 mm ending subcortically. A supplementary minor channel of 105 mm length was drilled in parallel proximally. Similarly, the depth of the other channels was 105 mm proximally and 115 mm distally with corresponding implant length. The multiple channels were drilled 125° to the femoral shaft in parallel with the neck. The single major channel at 135° corresponded with the angle of the sliding hip screw device. The mid-cervical neck was cut in an osteotomy jig with a hack-saw perpendicularly to the multiple channels, 53 mm from the head surface in their extensions. This created an osteotomy 55° to the horizontal, i.e. midway between a type 2 (30°–50°) and a Pauwels type 3 fracture ( Five different fixation methods were applied with 10 specimens in each group ( The proximal femurs of 15 cm length were press-fitted into a steel tube mounted in a testing machine (MiniBionix 858 MTS Systems, Eden Prairie, MN, USA). The load cell exhibited respective axial and torsional characteristics (capacity, 10 kN and 100 Nm; resolution, 1 N and 0.005 Nm; Displacement, 1 μm and 0.1°; accuracy < 0.5%). The load and displacement by the piston were recorded by a computer. Introductory quasi-static testing was performed ( Cyclic compression followed with a number of cycles often considered to simulate the steps until fracture consolidation ( The mean slope of the linear load-deformation curves from the quasi-static loadings defined the initial torsional, bending and compressive fixation stiffness ( Descriptive statistics were calculated, average values expressed as arithmetic means, and dispersion as standard deviations or confidence intervals. The presence of failure pattern was described as proportions, as well as the evaluation of unconventional versus the merged conventional methods, based on the fact that no clear difference exists between conventional implants clinically with the fracture pattern in our study ( Mean stiffness, deformations and proportions of initial failure for the implants and their comparisons are presented in The interlocking pin device enhanced mean torsional stiffness by 130% with a mean difference (95% CI) of 774 Nmm/° (575 Nmm/° to 973 Nmm/°) and 33% in bending with a mean difference 64 N/mm (27 N/mm to 101 N/mm) compared to the conventional methods altogether ( In comparison between all fixation methods ( In comparisons between the conventional implants, DHS + ARS and ASNIS showed a higher mean torsional stiffness ( The Pearson product-moment correlation analysis between the outcomes is presented in Compared to the established methods altogether (A vs B–E), Pinloc improved torsional, bending and compressive stability. In compression the impact was most evident by enhanced dynamic stability without adverse effects in fatigue testing. This indicates the presence of an increased multidirectional stability with retained intermediate dynamic compression. In pairwise comparisons to each of the other fixations, improvements are explained by Pinloc outperforming the advantageous lateral hold by fixed angle fixations and medial hold by multiple screws. Compared to cannulated screws (A vs C, D, E), multi-directional fixation stability was significantly increased in most parameters. The exceptions were only a trend towards Pinloc compared to Olmed in bending and compressive stiffness and to ASNIS in compressive stiffness and failure frequency. These findings agree well with increased medial fixation and lateral enforcement by interlocking compared to individual implants ( In-between conventional implants, the torsional and compressive stability with the fixed angle device were increased in most comparisons to no-plate devices (B vs C, D, E). Cannulated screws were also unable to prevent fatigue failure of calcar which is indicative of a reduced lateral purchase. A less stable CHS fixation followed damage of the lateral entry holes by the screw with a prominent larger thread than shaft diameter. These findings reflected the insufficient lateral hold by cannulated screws ( Acting as a fixed angle device with sufficient lateral hold, and with improved medial hold by interlocked multiple femoral head fixation, Pinloc preserved the benefits and reduced the drawbacks by the conventional fixations. This explains the increased fixation stability according to our hypothesis. Several treatment strategies have been developed to improve the results after internal fixation of femoral neck fractures. Comparisons to one or more traditional fixations have been made experimentally by mechanical testing with novel fixation strategies and further development of the traditional ones. Besides improved stability by locking plates preventing fracture site motion ( To our knowledge, the current investigation of interlocking pins is the first to demonstrate increased multidirectional stability without adverse effects by a modern treatment concept in multiple comparisons, identifying global biomechanical effects. One should be careful not to draw too firm conclusions on clinical relevance about the behaviour ex vivo in general. However, supportive information from biomechanical studies plays an important role to provide the short-term patient safety requirements when introducing implants ( Regarding long-term safety declarations in need of bone healing, increased fixation stability may improve healing conditions, as suggested with other modern fixation strategies ( Several limitations are noted. The numerous conventional implants in our study represent an advantage, but other modern fixations should be included in future research. However, the novel implant exceeded most positive features of multiple screws and the sliding hip screw device; the key concepts of locking plate technology. In our study, the standardised composite bone models facilitated the findings of relative differences between multiple implants and are an acceptable test medium when comparing several implants ( Unstable Pauwels type 3 fractures ( Testing of intact specimens validated the use of the 4th generation synthetic femurs ( With the standardised material and dimensions of test models in our study, the load-deformation curves by each implant correspond with global stress-strain curves, while local measurements are needed for assessments of local stress distribution. However, the load distribution has been reported as not being influenced by the corresponding interlocking of three screws during compression and torque ( Our study design was motivated by the recommended more systematic evaluations ( The plate with interlocking of pins demonstrated improved multi-directional stability in synthetic bone compared to frequently used femoral neck fixations. These experimental findings are considered safe and beneficial, but are not coincident with preliminary clinical results, and more clinical results are needed. This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not for profit sector. All authors declare no conflict of interest. The authors want to thank Swemac Innovation AB for supplying implants and synthetic bones without any further participation in the study. We extend our thanks to statistician Are Hugo Pripp and photographer Øystein Horgmo at the University of Oslo, whom are appreciated for their contributions.