A model accommodating multi-scale pores containing kerogen within an inorganic matrix is used to explore the complex multi-mechanistic transport mechanisms of shale gas reservoirs. These include the complex evolution of pressure, diffusion and flow within both kerogen and inorganic components and their interaction with effective stresses. A general poromechanical model is proposed considering desorption and molecular diffusion in the kerogen, viscous flow in the inorganic matrix and fracture system, and composite deformation of the triple porosity assemblage. The model is verified by history matching against field data for gas production rate. The simulation results indicate that the pattern of gas flow is sequential during gas depletion – pressure first declines in the fracture, followed by the inorganic phase and then in the kerogen. The evolution of permeability is pressure dependent and the evolution of pressure is closely related to the intrinsic gas diffusion coefficient in the kerogen, inorganic matrix intrinsic permeability and fracture intrinsic permeability. A series of sensitivity analyses are completed to define key parameters affecting gas production. The study shows that dominant influence of the fracture network in acting as the main permeable conduit. The intrinsic permeability and porosity of the fracture have a positive correlation with gas production, while fracture spacing has a negative correlation to gas production. Kerogen also plays a critical role in gas production for shale reservoirs with higher total organic carbon. The enhancement of inorganic matrix permeability and gas diffusion coefficient in kerogen could efficiently guarantee a long-term gas production with a higher rate.Unconventional gas resources such as shale gas and coalbed methane show significant potential to offset declining conventional natural gas production. Modeling is an important way to reveal gas storage and transport mechanisms in such unconventional reservoirs. Previous single/dual porosity models ( The existence of nanopores in shale reservoirs has been verified by ultra-high pressure mercury injection ( In addition, the organic nanopores in kerogen have a relatively large internal surface area covered by a monolayer of methane molecules (approximately 2.8 × 10 The different types of gas flow and storage behaviors in the kerogen and the inorganic matrix prompt the conceptual triple porosity model shown in We develop a triple porosity that accommodates transport from a kerogen pocket into pores within an inorganic matrix, and from here into fractures. The mechanical and transport constitutive models are developed for this triple porosity system and combined into conservation equations for momentum and mass to define the field equations. There are several assumptions applied to this triple porosity model. The shale reservoir is a fractured porous medium containing kerogen, inorganic matter and fractures. Each medium is isotropic, homogeneous and linear elastic. All strains is infinitesimal and the system is isothermal. Gas sorption follows Langmuir isothermal behavior. A single gas phase is (methane) is considered with assumed constant viscosity. Gas adsorption occurs only in the kerogen pockets, i.e., the kerogen contains gas in both free phase and adsorbed phase, while gas in the inorganic matrix and the fracture system occurs merely in the free phase. The equilibrium equation for a fractured porous medium can be expressed as According to the effective stress law for multi-porous media ( Considering adsorption, the constitutive relation for the linear elastic deformed shale becomes Solving Eqs. Taking the three types of media (fractured solid media, porous inorganic matrix and porous kerogen matrix) into consideration, separately, there exist three skeletal stresses that control the deformation of each media. The skeletal stresses are shown in Considering the kerogen matrix, inorganic matrix and fractured solid system as separate linearly elastic media, the constitutive equation for each medium can be generally expressed as For compression positive, the mean compressive stress is For an isotropic medium, the total linear strain for the shale REV can be expressed as The total volumetric strain for a REV is From Eq. The evolution of porosity for the inorganic matrix system may be described as (see “ The cubic relationship between porosity and permeability of the porous medium is given by Substituting Eq. According to Eq. Using a similar analytical method for porosity evolution in the porous inorganic system (discussed in the For the fracture system, the porosity can be defined as a function of the fracture spacing Considering the initial volumetric strain to be zero, integrating Eq. Solving Eqs. According to the isothermal Langmuir relation, gas desorbs from the kerogen surface to the pore space and is then carried by the pressure drop. As desorption continues, the gas concentration gradient between the bulk kerogen and the surface of the kerogen pocket drives gas diffusion in the solid kerogen. According to Fick's law and mass conservation, The gas exchange rate The shape factor Since the pore sizes in the kerogen are of the order of nanometers, Knudsen diffusion should be considered in the porous kerogen system. The flow in a long straight pore can be described by the Knudsen diffusion coefficient ( From Eq. According to the state equation of an ideal gas Combining Eqs. Substituting the partial derivative of These components host viscous flow, driven by pressure gradient. Gas flow in the inorganic system and fracture network follows Darcy's law and the mass conservation law The mass of gas The gas exchange rate Ignoring gravity effects, the gas velocity vector in the inorganic system and the fracture network can be described by Darcy's law. Substituting Eqs. Substituting the partial derivative of From Eq. The coupled governing equations shown in The model of Boundary and initial conditions are required to solve the coupled interactions between deformation, diffusion and flow for the triple porosity model. Displacements are rollered on the left side and base. The top boundary is loaded by vertical crustal stress To ensure the reliability and validity of the triple porosity model, validation is completed through history matching of field data. Gas production rate predictions between model and field data are explored for Barnett shale ( Field data of gas production rate for a horizontal well ( History matching of field data from the Barnett shale is presented in To better understand the gas flow sequence and gas transport mechanism in shale reservoirs during the gas depletion process, the pressure evolution in the kerogen matrix, inorganic matrix and fracture system at the position (100 m, 100 m) ∼140 m away from the production well is conducted in this section.   The evolution of pressure for the two cases of  From Fracture permeability decreases with a decrease in fracture pressure shown in Boundary effects can influence the pressure and permeability distribution within the reservoir as shown on a diagonal section through the well ( A useful facility of modeling is the ability to examine the sensitivity of the production rate to reservoir properties – which may be valuable for production well design and management. In this work, a sensitivity analysis of parameters affecting shale gas production rate and cumulative gas production is completed. This includes the respective roles of the intrinsic permeability of the fractures, the intrinsic permeability of the inorganic matrix, the diffusion coefficient of CH As shown in Also apparent from The role that the intrinsic permeability of the inorganic matrix plays in gas production is explored in this section. As is shown in Organic carbon in the form of kerogen is the remnants of ancient life preserved in shale reservoirs. By definition, total organic content (TOC) is proportional to the weight fraction of kerogen in the shale reservoir as Gas diffusion within the kerogen contributes significantly to total gas production by continuously supplying gas from the kerogen surface to the pore spaces ( As is shown in A multi-scale gas transport model, including molecular diffusion and viscous flow, and a general triple porosity model considering kerogen, inorganic matrix rock and a fracture system, is developed to represent hydrocarbon recovery from shale. The model is verified against field data of gas production rate. The model couples gas flow within the kerogen, inorganic matrix and fracture system with the deformation of shale, based on the principle of effective stress applied to triple-porosity media. The porosity and permeability model is based on the theory of poroelasticity, and as such is applicable to the full range of mechanical boundary conditions, from invariant total stress to restrained displacement. Using the proposed triple porosity model, evolution of pressure and permeability in triple media is analyzed and some important factors affecting shale gas production explored. The main observations and conclusions are summarized below. The pattern of gas flow is sequential during gas depletion. Fracture pressure first declines, followed by a decline in the inorganic phase and then in the kerogen. The evolution of pressure is closely related with the intrinsic gas diffusion coefficient in the kerogen and the intrinsic permeabilities of the inorganic matrix and fracture – and these in turn are also controlled by the evolution of pore pressures. The contribution of the intrinsic permeability of the fracture to gas production is significant since it is the dominant permeable channel in the shale reservoir. Appropriate fracturing treatments can enhance fracture permeability, thus enhancing total shale gas production. This is true only to a certain level, as beyond a point, further fracturing treatment cannot efficiently enhance shale gas production due to the intrinsic low matrix permeability and extremely low gas diffusion coefficient in the kerogen. The permeability of the inorganic matrix and the gas diffusion coefficient in the kerogen are the two key rate-limiting factors that potentially guarantee long-term gas production with an improved rate. The inorganic matrix provides a large area of permeable channels for flow, while kerogen provides a large amount of adsorbed gas and dramatic diffusive gas flow due to extremely large surface area of the kerogen. Shale reservoirs with higher inorganic matrix permeability and gas diffusion coefficient in the kerogen can notably enhance gas production. The effect of gas diffusion coefficient in the kerogen on gas production is more apparent for shale reservoirs with higher total organic content. The fracture intrinsic porosity has a positive correlation to gas production, while fracture spacing has a negative correlation to gas production. This work was supported by the Assuming that the total volume There is no gas sorption effect in inorganic matrix system, and the volumetric variation of the porous medium satisfies the Betti-Maxwell reciprocal theorem,   The change in porosity is defined as If the change in porosity of inorganic system is small, we obtain Due to the fractal characteristics of the porous medium, we assume that Considering that the initial volumetric stain is zero, integrating Eq. Combining Eq.  Component of the total stress tensor [Pa] Component of the body force [Pa m Component of the effective stress for the fractured porous shale [Pa] The Kronecker delta Pressure [Pa] The effective stress coefficients for kerogen, inorganic matrix and fracture system Bulk modulus [MPa] Young's modulus [MPa] Shear modulus [MPa] Poisson's ratio Lame constant [MPa] Displacement [m] Sorption-induced strain Langmuir volumetric strain Langmuir pressure [Pa] Langmuir volume [m Component of the effective stress tensor in each system [Pa] Component of the strain tensor Mean compressive stress [Pa] Volumetric strain Total linear strain Width of the kerogen block and inorganic block, respectively [m] Equivalent fracture aperture [m] Fracture spacing ( Parameter defined by the elastic properties and the size of REV [m MPa Parameters defined by the elastic properties and the size of REV [MPa Porosity Permeability [m Gas mass content [kg m Molecular diffusion coefficient [m Modified diffusion coefficient of CH4 in kerogen [m Tortuosity of the kerogen matrix Gas exchange rate [kg m Mass source due to external injection or extraction [kg m Gas density, density of shale, density of kerogen [kg m Gas molecular weight [kg mol Gas density at standard condition [kg m Diffusive time [s] Shape factor [m Darcy velocity vector [m s Gas viscosity [Pa s] Transfer coefficient between the kerogen matrix and the inorganic matrix [s Transfer coefficient between the inorganic matrix and fracture [s Overburden stress, horizontal crustal stress [Pa] Overburden stress gradient [Pa m Depth of shale reservoir [m] Lateral stress ratio Well pressure [Pa] Horizontal well length [m] Initial reservoir pressure [Pa] Reservoir temperature [K] Universal gas constant [J K Total organic content Kerogen correction factor Total volume [m Volume of pore space [m Combined volume of the solid phase and isolated pores [m Increment of a variable Bulk modulus for the pore volumetric strain [MPa] Bulk modulus of grains [MPa]  Indices running from 1 to 3 Initial value of the variable Kerogen system Inorganic matrix Fracture system