A nondestructive eddy current technique is used to evaluate tempered martensite embrittlement in 4340 AISI steels after quench and tempering in the range 240–550°C. A relation between the responses of the magnetic induction (normalized impedance of the coil) and destructive Charpy impact test results has been established. The study shows that the eddy current method could be used to separate brittle parts due to the microstructure changes.In all heat treatment processes, there should be a balance between the properties of strength and ductility. In the tempering process, accurate control of time and temperature is critical to produce optimized microstructure and mechanical properties in the parts. It has been well recognized that ultrahigh strength alloy steels exhibit embrittlement when they are tempered in the temperature range 300–400 From a practical point of view, determining and separating brittle samples in mass production of heat treated parts can be a key factor in quality inspection of the components. The traditional and widely accepted method for determining TME is performing the Charpy impact test. The destructive method is a standardized high strain-rate test which determines the amount of energy absorbed by a material during the fracture. It can, also, act as a tool to study temperature-dependent brittle–ductile transition. Disadvantages of this method are as follows: 1—scattering data, 2—time consuming preparation of the standard samples, 3—extensive dependence of the result on the v-notch preparation, and, 4—can only be used on a small fraction of samples in quality inspection process. In the recent years, considering the advantages of non-destructive methods in quality control, several researches have been focused on nondestructive evaluation of microstructure of materials as a substitution for destructive methods. The new application of eddy current (EC) technique results in saving time and energy as well as providing 100% quality inspection in mass production lines There have been many researches to evaluate the microstructural changes using the EC nondestructive method. For instance, pearlite percentage of plain carbon steels and ductile cast irons The present research is conducted on six specimens of AISI 4340 alloy steel, the chemical composition of which is given in Considering inherent data scattering regarding the Charpy impact test, three samples were prepared for each specified tempering treatment. The impact tests were conducted according to ASTM A370 and the average values for each of these three samples were considered as destructive results to compare with nondestructive ones. The hardness of the quenched and tempered steels was also measured on Rockwell Hardness C scale (HRC). All the destructive results have been presented in Scanning electron microscopy images of fracture surfaces for specimens tempered at 240 Finally, the EC tests were performed on the cylindrical samples (25 As It is well known that the response of EC signals is affected by microstructure and chemical composition of the sample. Indeed, any microstructure changes, due to the application of different heat treatment cycles, have a direct effect on electromagnetic properties of steel samples such as magnetic permeability, magnetic hysteresis curve parameters and magnetic Barkhausen noise To present EC responses, impedance plane and movement of impedance point location, which are well theoretically established, have been used in many researches As the results of impact test indicate, the 4340 steel exhibits minimum fracture energy in the tempering temperatures of 340 and 380 TME is thought to be resulted from the combined effects of cementite precipitation on prior-austenite grain boundaries or interlath boundaries and the segregation of impurities at prior-austenite grain boundaries. A major cause for TME associated with cleavage fracture is the transformation of retained austenite at martensite lath boundaries to form coarse carbides Besides, carbide precipitation in grain boundaries causes an increase in the resistance. Therefore, lower As a result, according to Eq.  The EC signals could be employed efficiently for determination of micro-structural properties of high strength 4340 tempered steel. Normalized impedance changes as a function of tempering temperature and drops for samples with TME. The results of EC nondestructive method to distinguish the brittle samples represent a comparable accuracy to the destructive Charpy impact test.