In order to increase the biocompatibility and bioactivity of chitosan, hydroxyapatite had been in situ combined into chitosan scaffolds. The bioactivity of the composite scaffolds was studied by examining the apatite formed on the scaffolds by incubating in simulated body fluid and the activity of preosteoblasts cultured on them. The apatite layer was assessed using scanning electronic microscope (SEM), X-ray diffraction (XRD), Fourier-Transformed Infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) and weight measurement. Composite analysis showed that after incubation in simulated body fluid on both of the scaffolds carbonate hydroxyapatite was formed. With increasing nano-hydroxyapatite content in the composite, the quantity of the apatite formed on the scaffolds increased. Compared with pure chitosan, the composite with nano-hydroxyapatite could form apatite more readily during the biomimetic process, which suggests that the composite possessed better mineralization activity. Furthermore, preosteoblast cells cultured on the apatite-coated scaffolds showed different behavior. On the apatite-coated composite scaffolds cells presented better proliferation than on apatite-coated chitosan scaffolds. In addition, alkaline phosphatase activities of cells cultured on the scaffolds in conditioned medium were assessed. The cells on composite scaffolds showed a higher alkaline phosphatase activity which suggested a higher differentiation level. The results indicated that the addition of nano-hydroxyapatite improved the bioactivity of chitosan/nano-hydroxyapatite composite scaffolds. On the other hand, that is to say composition of substrates could affect the apatite formation on them, and pre-loaded hydroxyapatite can enhance the apatite-coating. It will also be significant in preparation of apatite-coating polymer scaffolds for bone tissue engineering.Chitosan is one of the most widely-used natural polymers in tissue engineering research. It can be obtained by partially deacetylating of chitin which can be extracted from crustacean. It is a polysaccharide composed of glucosamine and For the increase of bioactivity and mechanical property, some composites of polymer and bioactive ceramics has been developed for bone tissue engineering The process of apatite formation on the bioactive materials in living body could be reproduced in simulated body fluid (SBF), which means that In addition, apatite-coating is another method to prepare a surface-active scaffold for bone tissue engineering. It is quick and easy, hence it causes much attention In this study, the bioactivity of chitosan/nano-HA and chitosan scaffolds was examined in an Chitosan was obtained from Haisheng Co. (Qingdao, China). The degree of deacetylation was estimated to be 93.5% using the Porous chitosan/nano-HA composite scaffolds were made as previously described SBF containing nearly five times the inorganic ion concentration of human blood plasma was prepared by dissolving NaCl, NaHCO Disc-like chitosan/nano-HA composite scaffolds specimens with a 14 The mass change of the samples before and after incubation in 5 After incubation in 5 To investigate the components of the apatite layer, the samples were analyzed using an X-ray powder diffractometer (D8 Advance, Bruker, Germany) with monochromatic Cu Kα radiation. A PerkinElmer system 2000 FTIR spectrometer (PerkinElmer, Norwalk, CT) was used for FTIR analysis. The spectra were collected over the range of 4000–400 MC 3T3-E1 cells were cultured in α-MEM (Gibco, Grand Island, NY) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) (National HyClone (Lanzhou) Bio-Engineering Co., China), 100 Acridine orange (AO) was used to stain the cells on the apatite-coated scaffolds. AO is a cationic fluorescent dye that interacts with DNA by intercalation or electrostatic attraction A modified MTT (3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide) assay was applied to quantitatively assess the number of viable cells attached and grown on the scaffolds Scaffolds with cells were cultured in condition medium consisting of 90% α-MEM containing a 50 For the reason of mechanical properties, the HA content of the scaffolds in this study was controlled in the range of 0–14%. The higher HA content in the scaffold, the less elastic property was found (data are not published). The dry weight of the scaffolds was measured before and after the incubation and the percentage of weight increase was calculated as follows: percentage of weight increase, weight of sample after incubation in 5 weight of sample before incubation in 5 The weight increase of the composite scaffolds after incubation in 5 The morphology of chitosan and composite scaffolds with 12% of nano-HA before and after incubation in SBF was evaluated using SEM. On both the two kinds of scaffolds which were incubated in SBF, apatite was formed. The size of the apatite particles formed on the chitosan scaffolds was larger than that of the particles on the composite scaffolds. Nevertheless, the amount of apatite formed on the chitosan scaffolds was less than that of apatite on the composite scaffold. This result is also supported by the results of the weight increase testing. On the composite scaffolds the apatite particles were denser, as shown in SBF is a metastable calcium phosphate solution supersaturated with respect to apatite. It is reported that the barrier for homogeneous nucleation of apatite is too high and a stimulus is required to induce the heterogeneous nucleation of apatite from the SBF. On the chitosan/nano-HA composite scaffolds there were many nano-HA particles which could act as nucleation sites. As a result, apatite could be formed more efficiently on the composite scaffolds than on the chitosan scaffolds. Therefore, in the same interval of time, more apatite was deposited on the composite than on the chitosan alone. With a limited amount of inorganic ions in the local mineralization microenvironment, the more nuclei that were formed, the less amount of minerals that could be aggregated on each nucleus. Consequently each particle formed on the composite scaffold was smaller than on the chitosan scaffold ( The composition of the apatite layer on the two kinds of scaffolds was analyzed with XRD and FTIR. Composite scaffold with 12% nano-HA was selected as a representative sample of the composite. The XRD patterns of the two kinds of scaffolds after incubation in 5 Impacts of apatite layer formed on the two kinds of scaffolds on cell viability were investigated. The difference of substrate scaffolds caused difference of apatite coating on quantity and topology, and further affected the cell growth and proliferation. In this study, the compatibility between bone-forming cells and the chitosan/nano-HA composite scaffolds was evaluated with MC 3T3-E1, a preosteoblast cell line derived from newborn mouse calvaria. The cell morphology was observed with CLSM after staining the cells with AO ( ALP activity is one of the characteristic parameter of osteoblast cells differentiation. ALP activities of cells cultured in un-conditioned or conditioned medium were examined respectively. After cultured in conditioned medium, the ALP activities of cells on composite scaffolds increased significantly compared with cultured in un-conditioned medium. And the ALP activity of cells on composite scaffolds was much higher than that of cells on chitosan scaffolds after cultured in conditioned medium. The ALP activity assessment indicated that cells on the composite scaffolds showed higher differentiation level than chitosan scaffolds ( An accelerated process of biomineralization with concentrated SBF was used in the assessment of bioactivity of biomaterials and studying the influences of substrate composition on apatite coating which was used in preparation of biomimetic materials. The chitosan/nano-HA composite scaffolds showed better biomineral activity than chitosan scaffolds. In the composite scaffolds, nano-HA particles provided nuclei in the mineralization process. As a result more apatite formed on the composite scaffolds than on the chitosan scaffolds. The addition of nano-HA influenced the composition of the apatite layer. The results also suggested that nano-HA could enhance the coating of apatite layer on biomaterials, which could be used to produce apatite-polymer composite scaffolds. Furthermore, it was shown that the structure of the apatite layer also influenced the viability and differentiation of preosteoblast cells. The apatite formation and cells viability reflected the properties of the substrate: the chitosan/nano-HA composite showed a higher bioactivity for bone tissue engineering. The existence of nano-HA particles could increase the amount of apatite coating and influence the topography, and further increase the proliferation and differentiation of cells. It could be concluded that the addition of nano-HA to chitosan scaffold improved its bone bioactivity, which could develop the use of chitosan in bone tissue engineering. This research was supported by the National Basic Research Program (also called “973” Project) of China (No. 2005CB623905) and the Tsinghua-Yue-Yuen Medical Science Fund. The authors also acknowledge the support provided by the professors in the Analysis Center Tsinghua University and all the colleagues in our laboratory.