Lepidolite is a valuable mineral resources of lithium, rubidium and cesium. However, most researches only focused on the lithium extraction without recovery of rubidium and cesium, and most of these processes involved energy-intensive high-temperature roasting and/or mechanical activation. In this study, simultaneous extractions of lithium, rubidium and cesium from a lepidolite concentrate were conducted through a low-temperature sulfuric acid baking and water leaching route. The influence of the extraction process parameters were systematically investigated. An optimized baking and leaching condition was determined as follows: H2SO4 concentration 85 wt%, baking temperature 200 °C, acid-to-concentrate mass ratio 1.7:1, baking time 4 h, 88% concentrate particles <74 μm, and water leaching temperature 85 °C. Under the optimal condition, the maximum extractions of Li, Rb and Cs reached 97.1%, 96.0% and 95.1%, respectively. Besides, the chemical formula of the lepidolite mineral in the concentrate was determined as KLi1.6Al2.2Si3.2O10FOH via AMICS characterization. During the baking process, the lepidolite reacted with hot sulfuric acid to generate water-soluble but acid-insoluble sulfates, KAl(SO4)2, Al(SO4)OH·5H2O and Li2SO4, while the rubidium and cesium might be converted to RbAl(SO4)2 and CsAl(SO4)2 existing in the form of isomorphism in KAl(SO4)2.Since the late 1990s, salt lake brines have replaced the hard-rock lithium ores and become the main raw material for lithium compounds production worldwide. However, Li-bearing hard-rock ores such as spodumene, lepidolite and petalite, have regained market share recently, because the demand for lithium is increasing with the widespread application of the rechargeable lithium ion batteries ( Nowadays, much effort has been devoted to developing processes for extracting lithium from lepidolite. Due to the very stable aluminosilicate structure of lepidolite, the lithium is usually extracted by either high temperature roasting with additives or concentrated acid digestion. Unlike spodumene, pretreatment of lepidolite via decrepitation is unnecessary in most routes and one-step roasting of lepidolite with additives at high temperatures is preferred ( As a summary, almost all the methods mentioned above involved energy-intensive high temperature roasting or/and mechanical activation. Comparatively, the concentrated sulfuric acid baking or digestion remains one of the most promising processes for minerals decomposition because of its relatively low reaction temperature and high extraction efficiencies of metals ( Besides, due to rubidium and cesium are present in isomorphous substitutions with potassium in lepidolite, lepidolite may contain up to 3.5% Rb A lepidolite concentrate from Jiangxi Province, China, was used in this study. The concentrate was ground and the fraction with about 50 wt% particles below 74 μm was used in all experiments of this study unless otherwise stated. The chemical composition of the concentrate is listed in The sufuric acid baking experiments were performed in an electric thermostatic drying oven. In each test, 20.00 g of the lepidolite concentrate with desired particle size distribution was put in a 250 mL glass beaker. Then a certain amount of sulfuric acid with desired concentration was added and they thoroughly mixed. The loaded beaker was weighed, and transferred to an electric thermostatic drying oven, which had been preheated to desired temperature. After baked for a certain period of time, the beaker was taken out, cooled down to room temperature and weighed. The baked product was dry and easily friable in some cases, and still wet in other cases. If dry, the baked product was ground using a mortar and pestle, and then leached in 60 mL water. If wet, the baked product was leached directly with 60 mL water free of any grounding. The leaching experiments were conducted in a 250 mL glass beaker covered with plastic film under stirring at desired temperature, which was controlled by a water bath for 60 min. After leaching, the slurry was filtered, and the solid residue was rinsed three times with 20 mL deionized water each time and dried at 110 °C in an oven to constant mass. The dried residues were then grounded to <74 μm, characterized and analyzed by XRD and chemical analysis. The contents of lithium, rubidium and cesium in the leaching solutions and residues were analyzed by atomic absorption spectrometry (AAS). The silicon contents in the leaching solutions and residues were determined by colorimetric method. The fluorine contents were measured by fluorine ion selective electrode. ICP-OES was employed to determine the content of other metal elements. Automated mineralogy technique such as mineral liberation analysis (MLA), quantitative evaluation of minerals by scanning electronic microscopy (QEMSCAN), advanced mineral identification and characterization system (AMICS) and TIMA, is widely used in ore characterization ( XRD analysis was performed using a Rigaku D/Max−1200 X − ray diffractometer employing agraphite-filtered Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.5406 Å), operated at 40 kV and 40 mA with the scanning rate of 5° /min from 3°to 65°.  The element content and its distribution in minerals of the lepidolite concentrate measured and calculated by AMICS analysis are presented in As is well known, lepidolite has the empirical formula of K(Li,Al) The effect of sulfuric acid concentration on the extractions of Li, Rb and Cs from the lepidolite concentrate was investigated using seven mass concentration levels, i.e. 50%, 60%, 75%, 80%, 85%, 90% and 98%. The results shown in On the other hand, it was noted that both the extractions of Rb and Cs were almost much less than that of Li. In order to figure out the reason, the concentrate baked with 85% H The effect of water leaching temperature on the extractions of Li, Rb and Cs from the lepidolite concentrate was examined using seven temperature levels, i.e. 20 °C, 40 °C, 60 °C, 70 °C, 80 °C, 85 °C and 90 °C. The results shown in The XRD patterns of the water-leaching residue at different temperatures are shown in The effect of baking temperature on the extractions of Li, Rb and Cs is shown in   The effect of particle size of the lepidolite concentrate on the extractions of Li, Rb and Cs is shown in Based on the results above, an optimized baking and leaching condition was determined as follows: H The baking reaction between lepidolite and hot concentrated sulfuric acid occurred at the surface of lepidolite particles. According to An energy-efficient route for simultaneous extraction of lithium, rubidium and cesium from a lepidolite concentrate via concentrated sulfuric acid baking followed by water leaching was systematically investigated in this study. The lepidolite concentrate was characterized by automated mineralogical technique AMICS. It consisted of 58.43% lepidolite, 22.49% albite, 17.43% quartz, 1.54% topaz, 0.09% apatite and 0.01% amblygonite. The specific chemical formula for the lepidolite mineral in the concentrate was determined as KLi The extraction process parameters were systematically examined. An optimized baking and leaching condition was determined as follows: H The authors are grateful for the funds from