Objective
                  To analyze the short-term results from treating unstable intertrochanteric fractures with Dynamic Hip Screws (DHS), using a minimally invasive route, focusing on the functional aspects and complication and mortality rates of the method.
               
                  Methods
                  This was a prospective longitudinal study on 140 patients who underwent fixation of transtrochanteric fractures with the DHS system with a lateral minimally invasive access in the hip, between January and December 2013. The patients were evaluated pre and postoperatively (after six months of follow-up) by means of the Parker and Palmer mobility score. Women comprised 65.7% of the sample, and 54.3% of the fractures were on the right side. The patients’ mean age was 80 years, ranging from 60 to 93 years.
               
                  Results
                  We observed an overall decrease in the mobility score and an increase in the degree of dependence over the short term. However, we encountered only two deaths in the study sample and there were no cases of infection or nonunion.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Despite the efficacy of the treatment with DHS, with high rates of fracture consolidation and a low mortality rate, we noted that the patients still showed significant functional limitation at the follow-up six months after the operation.Proximal fractures of the femur, among which transtrochanteric fractures can be highlighted, are a public health problem that especially affects the elderly population. They have a large social and economic impact. The incidence of these fractures has been increasing as the population becomes increasingly elderly, thanks to improvements in living conditions and greater attention to preventive medicine. These patients present chronic degenerative diseases with incapacities and deficiencies. They make use of medications that cause somnolence, balance problems and altered muscle tone, and they give rise to low blood pressure. Together, these are responsible for an increased risk of falls and this, along with varying degrees of osteoporosis, favor this type of injury. Hip fractures account for 30% of hospital admissions in the United States The ideal treatment is surgical and the fixation technique needs to be reproducible and non-aggressive, and to have a low complication rate and good functional results. In 1941 Jewet and Eugene However, this implant was often found to fail, due to uncontrolled collapse of the fracture and consequent cut-out. This led some authors such as Freitas et al., Shortly after this, cephalomedullary nails emerged as a means for treating these fractures. This type of fixation gained many adherents because of the low degree of aggressiveness in implanting them, the shorter duration of the operation and hospital stay, and the consequent lower degree of morbidity in relation to traditional osteosynthesis methods that used extramedullary tutors, which required large-sized accesses for their installation. The aim of this study was to prove the efficiency of the DHS system for fixation of unstable fractures, with anatomical or valgus reduction, by means of a minimally invasive surgical access, and to evaluate the consolidation rate and functional recovery among the patients. A non-randomized open prospective longitudinal study was conducted among patients with transtrochanteric fractures who were admitted to and treated at a referral hospital for orthopedic trauma cases in a state capital in Brazil, between January and December 2013. In this study, 140 patients were evaluated, of whom 65.7% were women ( The right side was affected in 54.3% of the cases and nine patients (6.4%) were affected bilaterally. All of these cases had already received treatment in other services ( Among the patients evaluated, 242 underlying pathological conditions were diagnosed. Among these, systemic arterial hypertension was the most frequent condition (45.0%) ( According to the mobility score of Parker and Palmer, Young patients, patients presenting pathological fractures due to neoplastic diseases, those with stable transtrochanteric fractures and those with unstable fractures with an inverted fracture line were excluded. In this last case, the preferred option for osteosynthesis was a cephalomedullary nail. The Tronzo classification These patients were evaluated before the operation using the mobility score of Parker and Palmer, The patients were followed up as outpatients and full weight-bearing was allowed four weeks after the operation on average. Six months after the operation, the patients underwent a new evaluation using the mobility score of Parker and Palmer. Descriptive analysis was performed on the data and comparisons between the mean scores before and after the operation were made using Student's All of the 140 patients operated presented fracture consolidation by the sixth month after the operation. The series presented here did not show uncontrolled collapse or cut-out in any of the cases. There were no immediate intraoperative complications, and no need for any blood transfusion was documented before the patients were released from the hospital. Two deaths were observed: one due to complications relating to delirium and the other due to pneumonia, which both occurred during the first postoperative week. Transtrochanteric fractures are typical of patients with vulnerable health The demographic data show that women and individuals of mean age 80 years were the groups with greater prevalence of these fractures in our sample. Studies published previously also showed that women and individuals of advanced age presented fractures of the proximal femur more frequently, because of their association with osteoporosis. The treatment for transtrochanteric fractures has evolved over the last 50 years, especially with regard to the synthesis method. Sliding screws now constitute one of the methods most used for treating the majority of transtrochanteric fractures. However, these patients’ functional recovery was poor. The mobility score of Parker and Palmer The incidence of complications when this system is used correctly is around 5%. The mortality rate tends to be high, ranging from 12% to 41% over the first six months after the operation. Use of DHS as the fixation method for transtrochanteric fractures, with a minimally invasive access, presented a high consolidation rate and low morbidity and mortality, along with a very low complication rate. However, we noted that even with the success of the treatment used, rehabilitation is difficult and precarious among these patients. The patients usually evolve with functional limitations and a significant degree of dependence, as seen in the follow-up six months after the operation. The authors declare no conflicts of interest.