Flotation separation of scheelite from calcite remains a challenge because of the presence of Ca active sites on both mineral surfaces and of their similar physicochemical characteristics. In this study, the effect of Zn2+ and its addition sequence on flotation separation of scheelite from calcite was investigated via micro-flotation experiments, zeta potential measurements, solution chemistry calculations, and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) tests. The Zn-water glass (a mixture of Zn2+ and water glass) exhibits a better selective depression effect on calcite than the water glass alone but is much less sensitive to scheelite flotation. However, when Zn2+ is added prior to the water glass, both scheelite and calcite are significantly depressed. The superior selective depression effect of Zn-water glass arises from the selective adsorption of the Zn-silicate polymer and Si(OH)4 on the calcite surface, while the significant non-selective depression effect of Zn2+ added prior to the water glass is due to the adsorption of the hydrophilic Zn species on both scheelite and calcite surfaces.Tungsten is an important metal with broad industrial applications [ Depressants are typically added to depress the floatability of gangue minerals during the scheelite flotation process. Studies regarding the application of a considerable number of depressants, including dextran sulfate [ Zn Pure scheelite and calcite samples were collected from Jiangxi Province, China. The massive scheelite and calcite samples were initially crushed using a hammer, washed with deionized water, and subsequently dried at a temperature of <50 °C. Afterward, the high purity crystals were hand-picked and ground in a ceramic ball mill. Subsequently, the ground products were sieved and classified to collect the 38−74 μm fractions for micro-flotation experiments, XRD, and XPS tests. The −38 μm fractions were further ground to −5 μm for the zeta potential measurements. Analytical grade sodium oleate (NaOL, C To analyze the phase composition of the scheelite and calcite samples, XRD tests were performed using a Philips X’Pert PRO diffractometer (Panalytical, Netherlands) equipped with Cu-Kα radiation (λ = 0.1542 nm). The voltage and current of the XRD tests were 40 kV and 40 mA, respectively. The scanning rate was set at 2° (2θ)/min within the range between 10° and 70°. The XRD results of the scheelite and calcite samples are presented in The micro-flotation experiments were performed in an XFGC flotation machine with a 40 mL plexiglass flotation cell at an impeller speed of 1600 rpm. First, 2 g of pure mineral sample particles and 35 mL of deionized water were added to the plexiglass flotation cell. Then the micro-flotation experiments were performed as outlined in the flowsheet shown in The zeta potentials of scheelite and calcite with and without reagents were measured using a zeta potential analyzer (Malvern Zetasizer Nano ZS90, UK) equipped with a rectangular electrophoresis cell. The measured suspensions were prepared by adding 0.05 g of −5 μm mineral particles to 35 mL of the potassium chloride (KCl, 10 Herein, the solution chemistry calculations of Zn Sodium silicate is an alkaline salt that undergoes severe hydrolysis in aqueous solution. The reactions are as follows [ The XPS tests were conducted using a ThermoFisher, ESCALAB 250 XI (Thermo Scientific Co., USA) instrument equipped with an Al, Kα source. For the XPS tests, the scheelite and calcite samples were conditioned with water glass or Zn-water glass. After conditioning, the samples were washed three times with deionized water at the same pH used in the flotation tests. The samples were subsequently filtered and dried for testing.   To enhance the depression effect of water glass on calcite, zinc sulfate (ZnSO   The flotation results presented in   Based on the flotation results presented in To study the adsorption mechanism of different reagents on scheelite and calcite, zeta potentials were measured as a function of the solution pH value, and the results are shown in  To further examine the mechanism of adsorption, the solution chemistries of Zn According to Eqs. When Zn XPS is an important surface-sensitive technique that is widely used in mineral processing to analyze the binding energy and atomic contents on mineral surfaces [  To further examine the enhanced depression mechanism, the narrow spectra of Ca2p, O1s, Si2p, and Zn2p on the calcite surface treated with water glass or Zn-water glass were analyzed via peak fitting and separation. As shown in  As shown in  Based on the experimental results and analysis, the mechanisms of Zn The underlying mechanisms and the effect of Zn Wei Yao and Maolin Li designed the experiment. Wei Yao performed the experiment and wrote the manuscript. Maolin Li and Ming Zhang reviewed and edited the manuscript. Rui Cui involved in the discussion of the results. Jia Shi and Jiangfeng Ning involved in the preparation of the experiment. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The author would like to thank the