The aluminium electrolytic plants generate PAH and fluoride contaminated wastes which are usually classified as hazardous material. These residues are generally disposed in secure landfill sites. A flotation cell process was previously developed to remove PAH from these aluminium industry wastes. The tests were done on composite samples made of particle size fractions under 50mm. The efficiency of the flotation cell process was demonstrated but the high quantity of concentrate produced (14.0%) during the air injection period, because of the solid entrainment, raised the treatment cost.
                  The aim of this study was to reduce the entrainment of fine particles in order to obtain an efficient and economic technology. The process initially developed was modified: the smallest particle size fraction (<0.5mm) of the composite sample was treated in a flotation column, whereas the other particle size fractions (0.5–50mm) were treated in a flotation cell. The separated treatment allowed to reduce the entrainment during the air injection period of the flotation cell step from 14.0% to 10.1%. The optimum total solids of the pulp and cocamidopropylhydroxysultaine (CAS) concentration were 3.33% and 0.50% (ww−1) for the flotation column, and 15% and 0.25% (ww−1) for the flotation cell. This combined flotation process minimized the total entrainment which allowed a 23.6% abatement of the concentrate quantity initially produced, and reduced the PAH concentrations of the wastes under the authorized limit of 1000mgkg−1.benzo(b waste before treatment cocamidopropylhydroxysultaine concentrate of the flotation column concentrate of the flotation cell critical micelle concentration new composite sample initial composite sample polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons polychloride biphenyl refuse of the flotation column refuse of the flotation cell total solids United States Environmental Protection Agency The aluminium electrolytic plant wastes are classified into three categories: atmospheric emissions, liquid effluents and solids. The atmospheric pollutants are particles, sulphur dioxide (SO A Söderberg aluminium smelter produces several hazardous wastes with different sizes during the anodes production, the electrolysis step and the aluminium casting. These residues are equipments of primary aluminium production (crucibles, electrolytic cells residues, horizontal and vertical Söderberg studs, anodic pastes, sheets), starting materials (carbon, alumina, pitch), finished products (aluminium) and cleaning wastes (ventilator and scavenger cleaning residues). PAH are ones of the pollutants encountered in such residues due to the Söderberg technology PAH are the results of incomplete organic matter combustion In the aluminium industry, PAH are produced during the transformation of alumina in aluminium in the electrolytic horizontal or vertical Söderberg stud cells In order to characterize and study the hazardous aluminium wastes, Bongo et al. The treatments of the PAH contaminated soil are based on degradation or removal methods. The degradation can be biological Surfactants have both a hydrophilic head and a hydrophobic tail The flotation is a hydrometallurgical technique used for the treatment of inorganic (metals) or hydrophobic organic contaminated (PAH, PCB and hydrocarbons) soils and sediments A flotation process using 0.25% (w The purpose of this study was to determine the feasibility and the efficiency of a separated treatment for fine particles in flotation column while the coarse particles are treated in flotation cell. The particle size fractions, the conditioning, the TS of the pulp and the surfactant concentration were the parameters experimented for the tests in the flotation column. The efficiency of the treatment was based on the PAH removal and the entrainment rates. The parameters were selected in order to maximize the collision between the particles and the air bubbles, to avoid the sedimentation, to obtain a high quality of the foam and to minimize the solids entrainment. The aluminium hazardous wastes were sampled in a Söderberg aluminium production plant located in Québec (Canada). They were randomly selected with a shovel on a 1 Aluminium hazardous wastes were first characterized according to the procedure described by Bongo et al. The surfactant used in this study was the cocamidopropylhydroxysultaine, usually named CAS. It's a zwitterionic surfactant which properties are shown in The flotation column used measures 135 Flotation was also performed in a Wemco mechanically agitated cell with a 2 A flotation process is controlled by different parameters ( The effect of the particle size fraction of the waste on the flotation process was studied using 50 The study of the effect of TS concentration was carried out using 25, 50 and 100 A mass of 150 PAH were extracted from solid phase according to the USEPA method No. 3540C PAH in samples were measured with a gas chromatograph coupled with a mass spectrometer (apparatus PerkinElmer, model Clarus 500). 16 PAH were checked. The initial composite sample Ec The new scheme of treatment had an impact on the matrix contents. Indeed, the composite Ec treated in the flotation cell presented a lower total PAH concentration (2126 A granulometric laser assay (Fritsch 22 analysette, 016–1160 The flotation column treatment was then operated on two particle size fractions (<0.25 and <0.5 The process efficiency with the <0.5 A flotation column process on a pulp at 1.25% of TS and with CAS concentration at 0.25%, 0.50% or 1.0% (w The PAH concentrations of the refuse reached values under the norm when the flotation was done on a pulp at 1.67% of TS and with 0.75% or 1.0% (w A pulp at 1.25% of TS did not contained enough particles so the collision probability between particles and air bubbles was too low for PAH removal. The CAS concentration increase affected the entrainment and not the removal rates. A pulp at 1.67% of TS seemed to increase the collision probabilities between particles and air bubbles because the removal rates were higher in comparison with a pulp at 1.25% of TS. However, the CAS concentration increase was responsible of a higher entrainment. A pulp at 3.33% TS allowed the reduction of the entrainment as it seems that with this pulp density the equilibrium between electrostatic and gravitational forces favours sedimentation of the mineral part and attachment of PAH to air bubbles. A pulp at 6.67% of TS was above the optimal value because a great fall in efficiency was observed. The numerous particles in the pulp provoke sedimentation. After the flotation column process, the PAH were distributed between the concentrate and the refuse ( The flotation columns are not mechanically agitated at industrial scale. The mixing was omitted in order to check if the potential of the process was dependent or not on the agitation system. The tests were run with the parameters previously selected. The chrysene and BJK removal rates reached each 43% and the entrainment was at 12.4%. These results confirmed that the mechanical agitation was not necessary in the column. The aeration was sufficient to maintain the pulp mixing. The absence of the mechanical agitation allows decreasing the operation cost of the process. The efficiency of the flotation cell process was tested in order to check the effect of the <0.5 The PAH distribution between the concentrate and the refuse depended on the CAS concentration ( The separated treatment of the smallest particle size fraction (<0.5 The flotation process initially developed by Bongo et al. The flotation was the first step of the whole process developed for the decontamination of the PAH and fluoride contaminated hazardous wastes. The second step will consist on the fluoride removal and/or stabilization. This has already been tested but the impact of the modification applied at the flotation scheme has to be evaluated. The next stage of the research will be the experimentation of the whole process including the recirculation of the effluents produced. Sincere thanks are extended to the National Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada and Gazon Savard Inc. for their financial contribution to this study.