An innovative method for sorbent replacement in the looping of a generic solid sorbent for post-combustion carbon capture and sequestration (CCS) is introduced. First, the standard replacement method is revisited with some original results presented. A new strategy is then modeled, aimed at selectively replacing the material as it degrades. This method exploits the density difference, after adsorption, between relatively fresh, CO2-laden sorbent and relatively degraded material, with small residual adsorption capacity. The model is then applied to values of degradation rate within the experimental range available in scientific literature for silica-supported amines (SSA). The selective removal strategy ideally allows a saving of 37% of the sorbent with respect to the standard, undifferentiated replacement considered in first place, while keeping the same adsorptive capacity of the system.Novel solid sorbents offer advantages over more established liquid amines for application in next generation carbon dioxide capture plants. In particular, their small thermal mass is expected to produce a more energy efficient capture process, while other physical and chemical properties result in a lower toxicity ( Minimizing the fresh sorbent requirement for next generation CCS plants is therefore vital to make the technology economically viable. The only replacement method considered so far ( This study investigates a modified strategy in which the sorbent is sorted by density after removal in order to return to the loop the still-active particles, therefore minimizing the unnecessarily replaced material. Replacement occurs after the sorption stage, when the fresher material has a higher density thanks to its higher affinity for carbon dioxide. In principle, this allows only material below a chosen density threshold, corresponding to a particular capacity threshold, to be removed. A mathematical model is developed, to investigate the key characteristics of the replacement process. Replacement rate reduction is computed as function of key sorbent properties and number of The present work has been carried out in support of a program focused on the development of a novel silica supported amine (SSA) adsorbent for CO The replacement rate depends on the sorbent rate of loss of adsorption capacity (degradation) per When a continuous looping is reported (in A looping system for CO The system starts with a batch of fresh sorbent. After the first cycle, a fraction The average age of the circulating material is calculated by means of introducing the weighted distribution of ages Replaced sorbent The difference in the mass of sorbent particles before and after adsorption reaches ∼14% in some studies ( Gas–solid fluidized beds are of interest as potential Density/gravity dry separation methods are subject to intense R&D efforts, driven by the need for burning cleaner coal to reduce pollution (e.g. Many studies report separation of particles with diameter down to half millimeter (see references in  The density range 2 Aside from the separation technique it is necessary to estimate the outcome of mistakenly categorizing a particle of density As a simple measure of the effectiveness of a coarse separation, a set of 101 pairs of CO Fines may form in the capture plant due to particles crumbling; this occurs almost only in the first few cycles. On the other hand, smaller particles tend to agglomerate as The amount of make-up sorbent needed in a loop with a The The fraction removed after In order to derive a general expression for the replacement, the following procedure is formulated for an arbitrary number of The case The { Eqs. Adsorption capacity can be related to the number of endured adsorption/desorption cycles (“age”) using the experimental results cited in The distribution of ages in the system is known (Eq. In the selective case, too, the average capacity can be expressed starting from average age (Eq. To compare the sorbent requirement of the selective method against the standard one, we ask for the asymptotic value of the average capacity for large The ratio Having set the replacement rates In a real power plant the initial capacity oscillations need to be damped, in order to suppress/smooth out the few first, very low relative minima (indicating insufficient capture). This could be accomplished for example by starting with a prescribed distribution of ages rather than with a batch of fresh sorbent. Starting capture operations with a distribution of ages approximating the one shown in The parameters On the other hand, increasing the threshold in  Selective actual replacement rate ( Mathematically proving the convergence of the series defined by Eqs. The selective replacement strategy simulated as reported in A key challenge for many types of post-combustion CCS plants is to maintain the effectiveness of the carbon-dioxide capturing sorbent as the plant operates over the long term. With the current interest in solid sorbents, identifying strategies to maintain plant performance is an important topic, that has not been thoroughly covered in the literature. Most work to date has investigated schemes whereby a constant fraction of the sorbent material is replaced from the plant each time it iterates through the absorption/desorption cycles. As the sorbent particles are well mixed, this approach has the disadvantage that both recently added, relatively-fresh particles will be replaced as well as much older, degraded material. Building on the work of The novel strategy is initially similar to the previously analyzed standard replacement method: a constant fraction of sorbent is removed from the plant with each cycle of the absorption/desorption loop. The innovation proposed here is that the removed particles are subsequently sorted by density. The reduced capture capacity of the older particles means that, after the adsorption stage, they will have a lower density than the fresher material. As it has been demonstrated that the adsorption process has no impact on particle volume, grading by density is therefore equivalent to grading by capture capacity, and hence particle age. The older fraction of the separated sorbent can then be replaced with fresh material, and the newer fraction returned to the plant, thereby minimizing the need for new sorbent. Results indicate that, under optimal separation, there would be a 37% make-up flow reduction compared to the strategy without density separation. This figure depends on the separation efficiency. Whether the The device to accomplish density separation could be an adaptation/evolution of Air Dense Medium Fluidized Beds. ADMFBs use fines in addition to air as the fluidizing medium, which is therefore characterized by a tunable density, to be fixed to the separation threshold: this allows buoyancy-driven separation like in liquids. Separation can be aided by vibration, magnetization, and by a narrow distribution of particles’ size. ADMFBs, currently subjects of active development, need to be envisioned as part of a CCS looping system to model and implement the necessary updates to their functioning modes. The increase of sorbent adsorption capacity will also improve separation. Regardless to replacement strategy, industrial implementation of solid sorbents CO The authors are thankful to Prof. Z. Xiao Guo, University College London, and to Profs. Colin Snape and Hao Liu, University of Nottingham, for useful suggestions and discussions. This work was supported by