This study compared fixation of simple mandibular angle fractures with a single miniplate either placed from a combined transbuccal and intra-oral approach, or intra-orally alone. 140 consecutive patients were randomly allocated to the two treatment groups. Complications were noted and compared. An email questionnaire to all the participating surgeons examined their personal preferences between the two methods.
                  20% of plates needed to be removed during the 3 month study period in the combined transbuccal/intra-oral group compared with 36% in the intra-oral alone group (p
                     ≤0.05). For the small number of cases (5) that required additional fixation, there was no significant difference between the groups. The combined transbuccal/intra-oral procedure was safer and more effective than the standard intra-oral technique in terms of complications requiring further surgery.
                  The surgeons expressed a strong preference (11/12) for fixation using the combined transbuccal/oral approach. The principal reasons given were ease of use, minimal requirement to bend the plate and facilitation of placement of the plate in the neutral mid-point area of the mandible.The mandibular angle is the most frequent site of mandibular fracture and also has the highest rate of complications. To minimize complications and achieve immediate active function, anatomical reduction of the fracture is required together with functionally stable fixation Intra-oral open reduction with internal fixation of non-comminuted and non-complicated fractures using a single miniplate adapted to the external oblique ridge was described by C Two methods have been recommended as having the lowest complication rates. In the first, a single miniplate placed orally along the external oblique ridge was used Most clinicians now use the single miniplate technique when treating mandibular angle fractures in a load sharing situation and reserve reconstruction plates for complex, comminuted, atrophic edentulous, pathological or infected mandibular fractures where increased rigidity (load bearing) is required The increased use and availability of good quality and easy to use transbuccal instrumentation has raised the question as to whether fractures of the mandibular angle might not be better and more easily fixed from this approach The aim of this study was to compare outcomes following fixation of mandibular angle fractures with a combined transbuccal and intra-oral technique in which a single miniplate is fixed to the lateral aspect of the mandible, with the standard intra-oral technique in which a single miniplate is fixed to the anterior aspect of the mandibular external oblique ridge ( A randomised controlled trial was carried out to compare the outcomes of the two groups. The responses to an email questionnaire sent to all surgeons who participated in the study were analysed. All patients presenting to the Maxillofacial Unit at Morriston Hospital with mandibular angle fractures requiring open reduction and fixation and who were 16 years of age or older were considered for inclusion in the study. Patients in whom it was not possible to establish an occlusion with their own natural teeth or who had comminuted fractures or frank infection were excluded from the study. Informed consent was obtained before randomisation and those who could not give informed consent were excluded. Randomisation was accomplished by consecutive sealed envelopes containing allocation to one of the two study groups. 162 patients gave consent and 140 were deemed eligible. The two techniques were the same in all respects apart from the placement of the miniplates. Patients received the same antibiotic regime and were all treated under general anaesthetic. Temporary intermaxillary fixation (IMF) was established with either IMF screws, arch-bars or eyelet wires. Third molars in the line of fracture were left in situ where possible and only removed if independently mobile, partially erupted with a history of pericoronitis in the previous 3 months, fractured, or associated with any pathology such as caries. Fixation was with a 4-hole centrally-spaced mandibular miniplate (Synthes The primary aim of surgery was uncomplicated bony union across the fracture without deformity or malocclusion and without the need for another intervention. The primary negative outcome was a complication following surgery that required a further intervention. The following outcomes were recorded at 1 week, 1 month and 3 months following surgery: wound breakdown/dehiscence/presence of granulation tissue at wound site; presence of infection with sinus and pus; plate exposure; dry socket (if third molar removed); malocclusion; inter-incisal mouth opening; quality of external scar in the intervention group (self-reported patient opinion); facial nerve weakness; and need and reason for findings and surgery at plate removal The operative time taken for the surgery was recorded as commencing with the intra-oral incision and ending with completion of wound closure. This excluded the time to place IMF or treat other fractures. Patients who did not attend clinic review appointments were followed-up with phone calls and questionnaires to them and their general practitioner. Data were stored and analysed using the Statistical Package for Social Scientists (SPSS). Descriptive statistics are presented with the χ After the study had been completed, but before any analysis of results, a questionnaire was circulated by email to all the surgeons who participated to discover personal preferences for the two techniques. The surgeons were asked ‘What technique did you prefer to use – combined transbuccal and intra-oral or intra-oral alone?’ and ‘Why did you prefer this technique?’ Ethical approval for the study was granted by the Iechyd Morgannwg Local Research Ethics Committee, No. 2000.001. Of the 162 patients who consented to the study, 22 patients were excluded for the reasons given in It was therefore decided to retain the cases within the procedure groups in which they were treated even though the numbers in the groups were a little unbalanced. There was a higher incidence of wound dehiscence ( At the third review, 21% of the intra-oral group had wound dehiscence and/or granulation tissue as did 9% of the transbuccal group ( Plate exposure ( Fewer plates ( Time of surgery (i.e. incision to wound closure) was similar ( Of the 14 surgeons approached, 12 replies were received, 11 of which stated a preference for the combined transbuccal and intra-oral approach ( Despite some randomisation difficulty, the intervention and control groups in this study were reasonably matched appearing to indicate that no selection of patients to procedure took place. An efficacy analysis has been carried out for this paper but in order to understand the true effects of the treatment in practice, the more pragmatic ‘intention to treat analysis’ should be used in any future study. In this study, outcomes were largely limited to clinical sequelae of the two procedures. At the start of this study, both techniques were used in the authors’ unit. There was no clear published evidence to indicate which method was the best. The complication rate in this study was higher than expected but with the exception of 5 cases did not delay fracture union. The minor complications were managed by plate removal under local anaesthesia without admission to hospital. The results of this study compare well with Ellis's review of studies from his unit where up to 32% of patients with angle fractures required further interventions to treat complications This study demonstrated that the combined transbuccal/oral procedure was, on the basis of the principal outcome measure (plate removal and infection requiring further surgery), safer and more effective than the standard intra-oral technique. It was overwhelmingly preferred by the surgeons who carried out both procedures. This study was supported by grant no. 02-G56 from the AO Research Fund of the AO Foundation, Dübendorf, Switzerland, to whom we are indebted. The authors also wish to acknowledge the support and participation in this study of their registrars during this period: Doug Kennedy, Prue Baxter, Daljit Dhariwal, Richard Parkin, Jerry Farrier and Steve Key; as well as their staff grades: J Chandrasekhar and Joseph Catania.