In this communication, we report carbon nano-onions (CNOs) derived from natural oil as metal-free sensors for efficient nitrite determination. The pristine CNOs showed remarkable nitrite oxidation capability with a linear detection range of 1 μM–90 μM (R2 = 0.998), the sensitivity of 214.29 μA mM−1 cm−2 and detection limit as low as 0.75 μM. The performance of this material exceed many well studied materials used as active materials for nitrite sensor.Nitrite are widely used as food preservatives and corrosion inhibitors [ The unmodified pristine CNOs are used as potential electroactive material for novel metal-free amperometric electrochemical determination of nitrite. The inherent defect and functional groups in the as-prepared metal free CNO induce excellent catalytic activity towards nitrite detection. The sensitivity to nitrite detection of this material is compared with materials such as metalloporphyrin-graphene, gold graphene nanocomposite, chemically reduced graphene oxide and hemoglobin modified gold nanoparticles based nitrite sensor and hence can be an economical alternative material for this application [ A simplified flame synthesis method was used to prepare CNOs nanoparticles from the natural oil. In a typical experiment 25 mL of castor oil was taken in a small glass beaker with a spout. A cotton wick soaked in the castor oil was placed on the spout of the beaker. The wick was then ignited and a conical flask filled with cold water was placed above the beaker. The product, CNO, in the form of black powder was deposited on the cold bottom surface of conical flask and used without any further processing or purification [ The morphology and microstructure of CNOs were investigated using high resolution transmission electron microscope (HR-TEM) (TecnaiG2, F30). X-ray diffraction (XRD) were carried out using Philips X-Pert PRO x-ray diffractogram. Nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherms for BET measurement was performed using Micromeritics ASAP 2020 surface area analyzer. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) data was obtained using AXIS Supra (Kratos Analytical). Raman spectrum was collected using Witech alpha300 RAS spectrometer. A three electrode electrochemical cell was used at room temperature to perform electrochemical tests using an Autolab AUT86445 electrochemical working station. A CNO modified glassy carbon electrode (GCE) was used as a working electrode, Ag/AgCl (3 M KCl) as the reference electrode and a Pt wire served as the counter electrode. The modified GCE working electrode was prepared by drop casting 10 μL of CNO ink on polished GCE surface. TEM image in In the X-ray diffraction of pristine CNOs, Surface chemical composition of as prepared CNOs were determined by XPS analysis. In The electrocatalytic behavior of CNOs modified GCE (CNO/GCE) towards nitrite determination was investigated by performing cyclic voltammetry (CV) at various scan rates and concentrations and by chronoamperometry. The cyclic voltammograms at 50 mVs The electrocatalytic properties of CNOs towards nitrite oxidation is attributed to the presence of structural defects and surface oxygen functionalities, both acting as active sites for the analyte adsorption. In addition, high specific surface area enhances the adsorption, and the presence of higher sp2 carbon is responsible for faster charge transfer kinetics at the electrode/electrolyte interface and in the bulk of the catalyst layer. The concentration of sp2 carbon is 70.6% which help electron delocalization and fast electronic conductivity in CNO nanoparticles. The peak potential is more positive to the metal loaded active materials such as Ag-RGO, and the trend in the peak potential shift is similar to other carbon materials compared to their metal loaded composite [ CV performed at various scan rates (25 - 150 mVs The effect of change of concentration on the anodic peak current of GCE/CNO electrode is presented in Sensing performance of the pristine CNOs was measured by performing chronoamperometry test at 0.85 V as shown in Repeatability of the sensor was evaluated by performing repetitive potentiostatic cycles. The pristine CNOs based nitrite sensor has good repeatability with a relative standard deviation of 3.37%. These analytical parameters shows that pristine CNO surpasses the performance of metalloporphyrin-graphene, gold graphene nanocomposite, chemically reduced graphene oxide and hemoglobin modified gold nanoparticles based nitrite sensor [ The results demonstrate that the as-synthesized carbon nano-onions prepared from an economical organic precursor can be a valuable alternative active material for electrochemical determination of nitrite using a very simple and effective approach. Metal-free CNOs based sensor can detect nitrite in the range of 1  μM–90 μM (R There are no conflicts to declare. The authors acknowledge access to the experimental facilities at Centre for Research in Nanotechnology & Science (CRNTS) and IRCC, IIT Bombay.