The goal of this paper is to understand the friction and wear mechanism of monolithic SiAlON ceramics against important engineering materials. Unlubricated fretting tests were performed on monolithic sialon ceramics against sialon, alumina, steel and hardmetal. The wear experiments were carried out in a gross slip fretting regime with identical testing parameters (8 N, 200 μm, 10 Hz and 100,000 cycles) under ambient conditions of temperature (23–25°C) and humidity (50–52% RH). Microstructural characterization of the worn surfaces was performed, and the underlying wear mechanisms in the investigated fretting couples are elucidated. Tribochemical interaction, abrasion and spalling were observed to be the predominant wear mechanisms in most of the studied material combinations. Based on the friction and wear data, a relative ranking of the different wear couples was established. The lowest wear volume was measured for the sialon–hardmetal (WC–Co) combination, whereas the sialon–steel combination showed the highest wear volume.Several structural ceramics, owing to their high hardness and elastic modulus are widely used in tribological applications. Among the non-oxide ceramics, Silicon nitride based ceramics have been intensively investigated over last decades for several potential engineering applications because of their superior combination of properties Due to its importance in tribological applications, several studies were carried out to assess the potential of silicon nitride based ceramics as tribomaterial and wear maps of several engineering ceramics, including silicon nitride are now available in the literature Kalin et al. investigated the fretting wear of monolithic silicon nitride against steel under oil lubricated conditions and the obtained results were compared with that in unlubricated conditions Despite the tribological research carried out on silicon nitride based ceramics, as mentioned above, comparative data on the friction and wear behavior in fretting contact with different engineering-relevant materials under identical contact conditions are lacking. Therefore, due to the growing interest and new potential applications, this paper continues with the tribological study, in particular the fretting wear of commercial monolithic sialon ceramics against important engineering materials, such as sialon, alumina, steel and hardmetal. The fretting experiments were performed under identical testing conditions to assess the relative wear ranking of the different material combinations. The wear mechanisms are investigated and qualitative information on the wear and friction behavior is provided. The mechanical properties of the investigated materials, as obtained from the commercial suppliers are listed in The fretting experiments have been conducted on a computer controlled tribometer under ambient conditions of temperature (23–25 After the fretting tests, the worn surfaces are ultrasonically cleaned prior to the profilometry measurements. Detailed microstructural characterization of the as-worn and cleaned surfaces both on flat and ball were performed with a Reichert-Jung POLYVAR optical microscope (Nomarski contrast), and a scanning electron microscope (FEI, XL-30 FEG) equipped with an energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS) allowing compositional analysis. A Rodenstock laser profilometer (RM600X/Y-100) was used to evaluate the geometry and the wear volumes of the fretting wear tracks on the flat samples. The depth profiles were acquired along the fretting wear scar in the direction perpendicular to the sliding direction. A number of equally spaced depth profiles covering the whole wear pit were used to acquire the volumetric wear. The ball wear was calculated from the measured wear scar diameters (both in the sliding and in the transverse directions) according to the equation proposed by Klaffke The frictional behavior of the investigated fretting couples is illustrated in The measured volumetric wear data in the investigated tribocouples is plotted in From the volumetric ball wear data; it is evident that the ball wear loss was higher than the wear of the corresponding sialon flat, except for the sialon–hardmetal combination. The wear of the sialon ball is one order of magnitude higher than that of the flat in the self-mated sialon combination. The alumina ball wears less than the sialon ball, but the volumetric wear is of the same order of magnitude. The highest ball wear under the investigated conditions was observed for the steel ball, which is in accordance with the highest sialon flat wear in this particular material combination. In contrast, the lowest ball wear was measured for the hardmetal ball and the observed wear resistance of the hardmetal ball was remarkably higher than the counterbody wear in any other material combination. The wear of the WC–Co hardmetal ball is two orders of magnitude lower than the corresponding flat sialon counterbody. Detailed investigation of the wear data in Considering the total volumetric wear loss (ball+flat wear) of the tribosystems, it can be stated that the sialon–steel combination experienced the highest wear loss, whereas the sialon–hardmetal combination showed the lowest wear loss under the selected experimental conditions. The morphology of the worn surfaces in the self-mated sialon couple is presented in The morphology and composition analysis of the worn surfaces in the sialon–alumina couple are shown in The wear characteristics of the sialon–steel fretting couple are illustrated in The morphology of the worn surfaces in the sialon–hardmetal fretting couple is presented in Based on the tribological data and morphological investigations of the worn surfaces, the wear mechanisms for the different tribocouples can be summarized. Tribochemical wear, followed by mechanical wear in the form of abrasion or spalling, is found to be the typical wear behavior under the selected experimental conditions. It is well known that tribochemical reactions of ceramic materials are critically dependent on the combined effect of working conditions, environmental conditions, and material properties Self-mated materials in contact imply a high potential for adhesive wear. Indeed, a distinct oxidized transfer layer is observed to adhere in the tribocontact of the sialon–sialon combination. The adhesion of the tribolayers might also be the reason for the high COF ( For the sialon–alumina fretting couple, tribochemical oxidation followed by mutual material transfer and abrasion was observed. The oxidized layer on the sialon surface experienced delamination and abrasion by the much harder alumina countermaterial (see data in In the case of the sialon–steel couple, extensive tribochemical reactions are observed. This could be well predicted from the chemical instability of sialon against steel The limited tribochemical reaction of sialon in contact with hardmetal, as mentioned above, results in a lower wear loss of the sialon–hardmetal tribosystem. Besides the favorable thermal conductivity of WC–Co (see A relative ranking of the selected material combinations was made and compared with fretting wear data reported in the literature. The wear volume data, presented in It is clear from (a) The steady state COF in a sialon–hardmetal fretting couple was measured to be around 0.4 and is significantly lower than that in a self-mated sialon combination, which in turn was found to be slightly higher than that of the sialon–alumina and sialon–steel tribocouples. (b) The sialon–hardmetal combination shows the best volumetric fretting wear resistance, whereas the sialon–steel shows the highest volumetric wear loss under the selected experimental fretting conditions. In comparison to similar fretting studies reported in the literature, the self-mated sialon and sialon–hardmetal combinations investigated in this paper exhibit a relatively better wear resistance under unlubricated conditions. (c) Tribochemical wear followed by mechanical wear in the form of abrasion or spalling is found to be the predominant wear mechanism under the experimental conditions in the sialon–sialon, sialon–alumina and sialon–steel combinations. The formation of tribochemical layers, in particular by means of oxidation, is suggested to be the fretting wear controlling mechanism of sialon. The thermal conductivity of the counterbody material, which affects the asperity flash temperatures and consequently the extent of tribochemical interaction is found to be an important and indicative parameter with respect to the extent of tribochemical reactions at the fretting contacts. Due to the higher thermal conductivity of the WC–Co hardmetal and reduced friction of the sialon–hardmetal couple, the extent of tribochemical reactions as well as volumetric wear is very limited in the sialon–hardmetal tribocouple. This work was supported by the Brite–Euram programme of the Commission of the European Communities under project contract No. BRPR-CT96-0304. B. Basu would like to thank the Research Council of the Katholieke Universiteit Leuven in Belgium for a research fellowship.