Zeolite-A/chitosan hybrid composites with zeolite contents of 20–55wt.% were prepared by in situ transformation of silica/chitosan mixtures in a sodium aluminate alkaline solution through impregnation–gelation–hydrothermal synthesis. The products were characterized by X-ray diffraction, diffuse reflectance infrared Fourier transform spectroscopy, scanning electron microscopy, thermogravimetric analysis, and mercury penetration porosimetry. Their in vitro bioactivities were examined using as-synthesized and Ca2+-exchanged hybrid composites in simulated body fluid (SBF) for hydroxyapatite (HAP) growth. Their antimicrobial activities for Escherichia coli (E. coli) in trypticase soy broth (TSB) were evaluated using Ag+-exchanged hybrid composites. The zeolite-A/chitosan hybrid composites could be prepared as various shapes, including cylinders, plates and thin films. They possessed macropores with pore sizes ranging from 100 to 300μm and showed compressive mechanical strength as high as 3.2MPa when the zeolite content was 35wt.%. Fast growth on the Ca2+-exchanged hybrid composites was observed with the highest weight gain of 51.4% in 30days. The 35wt.% Ag+-exchanged hybrid composite showed the highest antimicrobial activity, which could reduce the 9×106
                     CFUmL−1 
                     E. coli concentration to zero within 4h of incubation time with the Ag+-exchanged hybrid composite amount of 0.4gL−1. The bioactivity and antimicrobial activity could be combined by ion-exchanging the composites first with Ca2+ and then with Ag+. These zeolite-A/chitosan hybrid composites have potential applications on tissue engineering and antimicrobial food packaging.Chitosan, as an abundant natural polysaccharide, has attracted much attention in the biomaterial area because of its biocompatibility, biodegradability and non-antigenicity The simplest technique is to disperse inorganic particles into a chitosan aqueous solution or dissolve chitosan into a suspension of particles. By this technique, numerous inorganic particle-filled chitosan composite scaffolds, including HAP The sol–gel technique is also used to incorporate inorganic SiO Recently, a new technique is developed to incorporate inorganic particles in the chitosan matrix by In this paper, we prepared zeolite-A/chitosan hybrid materials with different zeolite contents by the Zeolite-A/chitosan hybrid composites were prepared following the procedure developed for the preparation of zeolite-A/chitosan hybrid microspheres with modification First, a SBF was prepared by first dissolving 7.996 The antimicrobial effect of zeolite-A/chitosan hybrid composite was examined on X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the zeolite-A/chitosan hybrid composites were collected on a Rigaku SmartLab powder diffractometer using a Ni-filtered Cu·Kα radiation source at 40 The solution containing silica sol, chitosan and acetic acid can be quickly solidified with a NaOH solution. Thus the silica/chitosan hydrogel pellets, cylinders, slices and even films could be easily produced by using different shaped containers, which could consequently produce zeolite-A/chitosan hybrid composites with these morphologies, as shown in  To measure the exact zeolite contents in the hybrid composites, TG analyses were conducted on these composite samples and the pure chitosan scaffold in air. The TG curve of the pure chitosan scaffold ( The compressive strength of the zeolite-A/chitosan hybrid composites were measured and compared to the pure chitosan scaffold ( To evaluate the XRD characterizations were also conducted on these samples. Since most of the diffraction peaks of zeolite-A and HAP are overlapped, obvious evidence of HAP formation on the composites from XRD patterns could not be provided (Fig. S2 in Supplementary data). XPS analysis of a typical sample gave obvious phosphorous (P 2p) photoelectron signal (Fig. S3 in Supplementary data) To investigate the HAP mineralization process, we examined the 35 For potential bone repair materials in bone tissue engineering, the zeolite-A/chitosan hybrid composites have to endow antimicrobial activity to avoid the immunological infection after operation. To examine this activity, the as-synthesized composites, after ion exchanged with Ag It is quite important for the scaffold material to possess both the bioactivity and antimicrobial activity. The Ag Zeolite-A/chitosan hybrid composites with easily adjustable zeolite contents and shapes, high porosity and high mechanical strength were prepared. They possess macropores with pore sizes ranging from 100 to 300 We are grateful for the financial support from the  Supplementary data including 1) The XRD patterns of zeolite-A/chitosan hybrid composites with different zeolite content after calcination. 2) XRD patterns of Ca