Background
                  Shear forces at the bone-implant interface lead to a loss of reduction after locking plate fixation of proximal humeral fractures. The aim of the study was to analyze the roles of medial support screws and screw augmentation in failure loads and motion at the bone-implant interface after locking plate fixation of proximal humeral fractures.
               
                  Methods
                  Unstable 3-part fractures were simulated in 6 pairs of cadaveric humeri and were fixed with a DiPhos-H locking plate (Lima Corporate, Udine, Italy). An additional medial support screw was implanted in 1 humerus of every donor. The opposite humerus was stabilized with a medial support screw and additional bone cement augmentation of the 2 anteriorly directed head screws. Specimens were loaded in the varus bending position. Stiffness, failure loads, plate bending, and the motion at the bone-implant interface were evaluated using an optical motion capture system.
               
                  Results
                  The mean load to failure was 669 N (standard deviation [SD], 117 N) after fixation with medial support screws alone and 706 N (SD, 153 N) after additional head screw augmentation (P = .646). The initial stiffness was 453 N/mm (SD, 4.16 N/mm) and 461 N/mm (SD, 64.3 N/mm), respectively (P = .594). Plate bending did not differ between the 2 groups. However, motion at the bone-implant interface was significantly reduced after head screw augmentation (P < .05).
               
                  Conclusion
                  The addition of bone cement to augment anteriorly directed head screws does not increase stiffness and failure loads but reduces motion at the bone-implant interface. Thus, the risk of secondary dislocation of the head fragment may be reduced.Fractures of the proximal humerus are the third most common osteoporotic fracture in elderly patients. The aim of the present study was therefore to assess the effects of medial support screws and head screw augmentation with bone cement on the biomechanical properties of locking plate fixation of a 3-part proximal humeral fracture. We hypothesized that head screw augmentation with bone cement (1) would increase stiffness and failure loads while (2) reducing motion at the bone-implant interface compared with fixation with medial support screws alone. Six pairs of fresh-frozen human cadaveric specimens were used for this study. The mean age of the donors was 54 years (range, 49-73 years). Relevant pathologies and differences in BMD between the left and right humerus of every donor and were ruled out by quantitative computed tomography using a hydroxylapatite Phantom (QRM GmbH, Möhrendorf, Germany) before testing. Reduced BMD was found in all but 1 specimen, without significant differences between the right and left humeri ( A standardized 3-part fracture was created by performing a 10-mm gap osteotomy with an oscillating saw 10 mm below the anatomical neck of the humerus and a second osteotomy at the greater tuberosity. All fractures were fixed using an angular stable carbon fiber-reinforced polyetheretherketone (CFR-PEEK) DiPhos-H plate (Lima Corporate, Udine, Italy). Shaft fixation was performed with 1 bicortical cancellous screw and 2 bicortical locking screws. Locking screws were inserted in the 6 most proximal holes of each plate for fixation of the head fragment. An aiming device was used in all specimens to ensure similar screw position in all specimens. The maximum screw length was determined with the use of a measurement tool provided by the manufacturer. Under fluoroscopic control, an additional medial support screw was inserted into all of the specimens. In a randomized manner, the 2 anteriorly directed head screws in 1 humerus of every donor were augmented with 0.5 mL Traumacem V+ bone cement (Synthes, Oberdorf, Switzerland; A transverse osteotomy was then performed 110 mm below the end of each plate, and the humerus was fixed to a custom-made jig and embedded with polymethylmethacrylate to a depth of 8 cm. The specimens were mounted on the base plate of a biaxial servohydraulic testing machine (Instron model 8874; Instron, Pfungstadt, Germany) with a 25° lateral angulation according to a previously validated testing setup. The active infrared markers of the Optotrak-Certus optical motion capture system (Northern Digital Inc, Waterloo, ON, Canada) were attached to the proximal and distal parts of the plate using custom-made applicators and to the lesser tuberosity and the humeral shaft. A local coordinate system was set for each rigid body at the center of the marker plane. The relative motion between these markers was assessed, enabling a detailed analysis of motion at the bone-implant interface and at the fracture site. In addition, plate bending was measured. Relative movements were calculated using NDI Data View Software 1.00.03 (Northern Digital Inc). The complete test setup is shown in A cyclic sinusoidal loading protocol was applied at 1 Hz for 10,000 cycles with a continuous load increase of 0.035 N/cycle (maximum load of 400 N after 10,000 cycles). Closure of the fracture gap Breakage of the plate Dislocation of the head fragment (all assessed macroscopically) An increase in angular tilting (more than 0.5° within 100 load cycles at the lower load magnitude of 15 N as derived from data obtained using the optical motion capture system) The normal distribution of the test data was assessed with the Anderson-Darling test. Descriptive statistics were used to summarize the means and standard deviations (SDs) of the different parameters. Paired All specimens survived the cyclic loading protocol. The mean load to failure was 669 (SD, 117) N after fixation with medial support screws alone and 706 (SD, 153) N after additional head screw augmentation. This difference was not significant ( The initial stiffness was 453 (SD, 42.2) N/mm and 461 (SD, 64.3) N/mm, respectively. Again, no significant difference was observed ( Plate bending did not differ during any of the steps of the cyclic loading protocol ( The mode of failure was a closure of the fracture gap due to plate breakage in all but 1 specimen. However, failure loads of more than 650 N were higher than those loads that the proximal humerus has to withstand in the in vivo situation. In the remaining specimen, a fracture of the humeral shaft occurred just below the plate at a load of 654 N. The most important finding of this study is that the augmentation of the anteriorly directed head screws of the locking plate significantly reduced motion at the bone-implant interface ( The hypothesis that screw augmentation would also increase stiffness and failure load was not confirmed. These results are inconsistent with other studies investigating the effect of screw augmentation on the stability of locking plate fixation. One way to reduce peak load and motion at the bone-implant interface is to use less-rigid implants. PEEK plates, which are characterized by elasticity comparable to that of human cortical bone, could be an option. However, in an unpublished biomechanical study by our group comparing PEEK and titanium locking plates for the fixation of unstable proximal humerus fractures, PEEK plate fixation was associated with significantly lower failure loads than fixation with titanium plates. Thus, overly elastic fixation would also result in early failure and a secondary loss of reduction. A second way to reduce motion at the bone-implant interface is the augmentation of head screws with bone cement. Previous biomechanical studies have shown that failure loads after locking plate fixation of proximal humeral fractures increased after augmentation of head screws. Röderer et al The use of an optical motion capture system with markers attached to the plate and to the head fragment, as performed in this study, enables the direct measurement of relative motion at the bone-implant interface. Therefore, the effects of screw augmentation not only on failure loads and stiffness but also on the stability of the link between the plate and the humeral head could be defined. To our knowledge, the present study is the first to demonstrate that head screw augmentation significantly reduces motion at the bone-implant interface and may therefore prevent loss of reduction with subsequent varus deformity. This study has some limitations. First, the results of this biomechanical study cannot be directly transferred to the clinical situation. Neither the influence of the rotator cuff muscle and its force moments on fracture biomechanics nor fracture healing was incorporated into the biomechanical model. However, the biomechanical setup chosen for this study is comparable to the setups used and validated in other studies and therefore allows for the interpretation of the results against the background of results obtained from other biomechanical studies. Second, only PEEK plates were used for fracture fixation in this study. However, because this PEEK plate is also an angular stable locking plate, similar results would be expected for other locking plates with regard to motion at the bone-implant interface. With the addition of bone cement, the load-bearing area of the screws increases, which improves screw purchase in the humeral head. This principle does not directly depend on the material of the plate used for fixation. In this biomechanical study, the addition of bone cement to augment the anteriorly directed head screws of locking plates did not increase failure loads and stiffness but significantly reduced motion at the bone-implant interface. Thus, the risk of secondary loss of reduction with subsequent varus malalignment may be reduced. This work was supported by the fund “Innovative Medical Research” (grant SC 211305 to Benedikt Schliemann, MD, and Andre Weimann, MD) of the University of Münster Medical School and by the Association For Orthopaedic Research. Benedikt Schliemann, MD, had a research fellowship from the University of Münster Medical School. Lima Corporate provided implants and instruments used in this project. Neither funding source played a role in the study design, collection, analysis and interpretation of the data, or in the preparation and editing process of the manuscript. This manuscript was edited by the American Journal Experts service ( The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.