Aims
                  In this study, we investigated the effect of 8-prenylkaempferol (8-PK), a prenyl-flavonoid isolated from Sophora flavescens, on osteoblast differentiation and maturation.
               
                  Main methods
                  MC3T3-E1 cells were exposed to 8-PK and the cytotoxicity was assayed. Osteoblast differentiation and maturation were evaluated by analyzing alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity and cell mineralization, respectively. RT-PCR and Western blot were executed to determine the effects of 8-PK on osteoblast differentiation-related gene expression and signaling pathway.
               
                  Key findings
                  8-PK significantly promoted ALP activity, up-regulated mRNA expressions of osteocalcin, osteopontin, and type I collagen, and induced bone nodules formation. Induction of differentiation by 8-PK was associated with increased bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)-2 expression, and sequentially up-regulated the phosphorylations of Smad1/5/8 and p38, and increased the nuclear translocation of runt-related transcription factor 2 (Runx2). Addition of BMP-2 antagonist noggin blocked 8-PK and recombinant mouse BMP-2-induced ALP activity, reconfirming that BMP-2 production is required in 8-PK-mediated osteoblast differentiation. Noggin also abrogated 8-PK evoked phosphorylations of Smad1/5/8 and p38, suggesting that BMP-2 signaling is required for p38 activation in 8-PK-treated cells. Application of p38 inhibitor SB203580 repressed not only 8-PK-mediated activation of ALP, but also the nuclear translocation of Runx2 and bone nodules formation.
               
                  Significance
                  The present results suggested that BMP-2/p38/Runx2 pathways were involved in 8-PK-induced differentiation/maturation of MC3T3-E1 osteoblasts and firstly demonstrated that 8-PK might be a promising agent for inducing osteogenesis.Many plant-derived compounds, the so-called phytoestrogens, have the potential to counteract the deleterious effects of estrogen deficiency on bone. These include the flavonoids family comprising isoflavone and flavonol derivatives, such as genistein, quercetin and kaempferol, which have been reported to induce osteoblast differentiation ( Osteogenic differentiation of mesenchymal pluripotent cells is regulated by various soluble proteinous factors. Especially, bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) was originally identified as a molecule that promoted the differentiation of mesenchymal cells into an osteoblastic lineage, as suggested from its abilities not only to induce the expression of bone specific proteins ALP, type 1 collagen (Coll 1), osteopontin (OPN), and osteocalcin (OCN), but also to stimulate mineralization ( The present results showed that 8-PK markedly increased ALP activity and calcium nodules formation, although without notable effect on cell proliferation. We also clarified that 8-PK regulated osteoblast differentiation probably through induction of BMP-2 expression and subsequently triggered Smad1/5/8 and p38 phosphorylations, then forwarded mineralization process by modulating Coll 1, OPN and OCN expression through activation of Runx2 transcription. The murine calvaria-derived osteoblastic cell line MC3T3-E1 was maintained in an alpha modification of Eagle's minimum essential medium (α-MEM, Gibco BRL, Grand Island, NY 14072, USA) supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum (FCS, Gibco), 100 8-Prenylkaempferol (8-PK) was dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) at 0.1 ALP activity in the cells was measured by incubation in 0.1 Cells were incubated in the differentiation medium for 14 Effect of 8-PK on cell proliferation was measured by 2, 2,3-bis(2-methoxy-4-nitro-5-sulfophenyl)-2H-tetrazolium-5-carbox-anilide (XTT) assay (Roche Diagnostics GmbH, Mannheim, Germany). Briefly, cells cultured in minimal medium were seeded into 96-well culture plates (5 Expressions of OCN, OPN, type 1 collagen and BMP-2 mRNA were examined using RT-PCR, with the amplification of glyceraldehydes 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) as control. MC3T3-E1 cells were seeded in 35 Whole cell lysates, cytoplasmic and nuclear fractionates were prepared according to the previous report ( Statistical analysis was evaluated by Student's ALP activity is a phenotypic marker for the mature osteoblast. The effect of 8-PK and rmBMP-2 on the differentiation of pre-osteoblast was studied by determining ALP activity in the MC3T3-E1 cells ( Our preliminary study indicated mineralization by MC3T3-E1 cells occurred in a time-dependent manner and can be easily observed after 14 The effect of 8-PK on the terminal differentiation of osteoblasts was studied by determining the mRNA expression of type 1 collagen (Coll 1), OPN and OCN, respectively. Treatment of MC3T3-E1 cells with 8-PK increased the levels of Coll 1 in a concentration-dependent manner after 48 To further examine the role of BMP-2 in 8-PK-induced cell differentiation, osteoblasts were pretreated with a BMP-2 inhibitor noggin protein for 1 The phosphorylation of Smad1/5/8, which is usually triggered by the BMP-dependent oligomerization of BMP receptors type I (BMP-R1) and type II (BMP-R2) ( Ligation of BMP-2 to BMP receptor induces receptor heteromeric complexes and subsequently activates Smads or MAPKs by phosphorylation. During the bone differentiation of osteogenic cells, the MAPK signaling cascade is activated along with the expression of various osteomarkers ( To determine the role of BMP-2 on the activation of Smad1/5/8 and p38 in 8-PK treated osteoblasts, we tested the effect of noggin on the activation of Smad1/5/8 and p38 by 8-PK. Results showed that noggin pretreatment abrogated the activation of Smad1/5/8 and p38 induced by 8-PK ( As p38 activation was observed with 8-PK treated osteoblasts, we next assessed the role of p38 by using an inhibitor specific to p38. MC3T3-E1 cells were pretreated for 1  8-PK was recently reputed to exert estrogenic activity in rat uterus by binding to ER ( BMPs play an important role in the process of bone formation and remodeling. Several natural or chemical compounds have been reported to induce osteoblast differentiation by induction of BMPs and/or Smad signaling, such as osthole, fraxetin, and myricetin ( BMP-2 has been shown to activate not only Smad signaling but also to elicit p38 kinase pathway, which is involved in osteoblast differentiation ( The transcription factor Runx2 is a key master regulator of osteoblast differentiation, enhancing transcription of the genes for osteomarker proteins ( Recently, The authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest. This research was funded by the