Introduction
                  Supercutaneous (external) fixation with locking plate is utilized for fixation of long bone fractures. One retrospective study for open reduction and supercutaneous fixation of the calcaneus is reported. We prospectively evaluated the use of this method of fixation combined with percutaneous reduction.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  Between January 2014 and June 2015, 32 displaced calcaneus fractures in 30 patients were stabilized with percutaneous reduction and super-cutaneous fixation. They were 24 males and six females. The mean age was 37.9±5.7 years (21–55). All cases were closed. The time to surgery, complications, radiographic alignment, and time to radiographic union were recorded. Clinical results at the final follow-up were assessed by evaluating Bohler’s angles for the radiographic alignment, and the system of the American Orthopedic Foot and Ankle Society (AOFAS) for the functional outcome.
               
                  Results
                  According to the Sanders’ classification, two cases were type II, 17 cases were type III and 13 cases were type IV. The preoperative average Bohler’s angle was 10.57°±4.8. The postoperative X-ray films demonstrated that the average Bohler’s angle improved to 29.07°±5.9 (p<0.001). At the time of radiologic healing (about 3 months), the plates and screws were removed under general anesthesia. The average follow-up was 13.2 months (11–18). Four cases (type IV) showed mal-union and heel pain. According to (AOFAS) rating, the fine score was 87.1±17.1 points.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Super-cutaneous fixation with percutaneous reduction of calcaneal fracture is an effective method in type II and III and can be effective with type IV but with less favorable results.Calcaneal fractures represent 1–2% of all fractures of the skeleton, and 60% of all fractures of the foot with about 70% of these fractures of the intra-articular type. Moreover, the majority of these fractures occurs in the active working age The most effective treatment of displaced intra-articular calcaneal fractures is still a controversial issue However, operative treatment was supported by some long-term studies. In 2002, a prospective randomized controlled trail was published, that included the results of treating 309 patients with 371 calcaneal fractures with the average follow-up of three years (ranged from two to eight years). This study demonstrated that operative treatment has better results than non-operative treatment for women patients who were not receiving Workers’ Compensation, younger males with a higher Böhler angle, patients with a lighter workload, and those with simple displaced intra-articular calcaneal Another study demonstrated that better functional outcome was found with the patients of operative treatment, better Bohler's angle with articular surface restoration, and light labor The majority of surgeons uses a wide surgical exposure for open reduction and plate fixation, which provides the opportunity for anatomical rigid internal apposition of the fragments This wide surgical exposure with the subcutaneous location of the plate can lead to the appearance of purulent- necrotic complications of the skin wound. In this regard, the search continues for methods of minimally invasive surgery Super-cutaneous (external) fixation using the locking compression plate (LCP) is a minimally invasive method for fixation. A retrospective study reported good clinical results with a stable fixation construct and a low complication rate with the use of this technique. A limited lateral incision was used for reduction In this study, we prospectively evaluated the use of super-cutaneous plate fixation by LCP for calcaneal fractures combined with the principals of percutaneous reduction. A prospective study was conducted, after gaining the approval of the local ethics committee in accordance with the ethical standards of the 1964 Declaration of Helsinki as revised in 2000, for fixation of displaced intraarticular calcaneal fractures by percutaneous reduction and super-cutaneous locked plating. Between January 2014 and June 2015, 30 patients with 32 injured feet were included in the study. Informed consents were obtained from all patients before the operation. Detailed documentations were recorded, including; age, sex, mode of trauma, time from trauma to surgery, associated injury, and the radiographic type of the fracture according to Sanders’ classification. All patients had acute closed fractures. The exclusion criteria included fracture duration exceeding 3 weeks, open fractures or infection, medically unfit patients and pre-traumatic foot deformity. All patients were evaluated with standard lateral and axial plain x-ray of the calcaneus. Computed tomography (CT) in the sagittal, coronal, axial and 3D plane was performed ( The surgery was performed with the re-appearance of wrinkles after subsidence of the acute swelling on the lateral side of the foot (positive wrinkling test). Under spinal anesthesia; the patient is put in the lateral decubitus position on a standard radiolucent table. No tourniquet is used. With the C-arm fluoroscopy, a 4.0-mm Steinmann pin is inserted through a stab incision in the posteroinferior portion of the calcaneal tuberosity from a lateral to medial direction. Traction is applied manually along the axis of the tibia to correct the deformity; with pronation/supination of the foot in order to disimpact the fragments. A blunt tool (screw-driver) is lodged into the calcaneus under image control through a stab incision made in the plantar aspect of the foot through the posterior tuberosity fracture (opening the path with a drill can be used) to manipulate the inferior surface of the posterior facet. Multiple elevations of the whole surface are used in comminuted fractures (type VI). In cases with tongue fragments; these fragments were held by pointed clamps and fixed to the posterior tuberosity by k-wires converting them into one piece ( After attaining an adequate reduction, the intra-operative lateral and axial views are taken; the size and position of the locked plate are fitted to the calcaneus then the screws are passed through the whole width of the calcaneus to stop short of the medial cortex. The distribution and the number of the screws vary according to the type of fracture and the degree of comminution, with more comminution requiring more screws. The clearance between the plate and the skin was about 1–1.5 After complete locking of the screws, the provisional K-wires are removed. In some cases with type IV fractures, we leave the longitudinal K wires as a part of fixation in order to support the comminuted fragments that cannot be fixed adequately with the screws. Postoperative medications included intravenous 3rd generation cephalosporin was given for 48 After removal of the plate and screws, weight bearing was permitted. The lateral and axial radiographs of the heel were obtained postoperatively at 4, 8, and 12 weeks and at the last follow-up (at least 6 months). Final evaluations were both functional by the AOFAS rating system (points of 90 Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS software version 16 (IBM corp., NY, USA). The results were presented in the form of the range of the obtained values, mean, and standard deviation (±SD). The statistical significance of the changes in radiographic measures (Bohler’s angles) compared to the contralateral side was determined using paired Student’s Thirty patients were included in the study (24 males and six females) with the mean age was 37.9 Associated injuries were presented in five patients; two patients with spinal injuries (intact neurology), one case with contralateral closed pilon fracture, one case with contralateral closed patella, and one case with ipsilateral closed tibial plateau fracture. Surgery was performed at a mean of 6.2 The mean Bohler’s angle of the contralateral intact side was 30° The pre-operative difference of the Bohler’s angles between the intact and injured feet for every patient was recorded and the results for the whole series were analyzed. The The post-operative mean Bohler’s angle was 29° The mean follow-up was 13.2 Heel pain developed in ten cases (33.3%); mal-union in four cases (all were type IV), and superficial screw tract infection in six cases that healed after removal of the plate with cure of pain. Seven of these ten cases with heel pain were Sanders’ type IV and three cases were Sanders’ type III ( Kerkhoffs et al., were the first to coin the term They reported the use of the standard dynamic compression plate (DCP) as an external fixator outside the skin to treat tibial fractures. They placed nuts on the undersurface of the plate that turned the device into an angular stable construct. With the introduction of locked compression plate (LCP) they used it instead Thereafter, this principal was used by many surgeons to treat long bone fractures of either open or closed types When the locking plate and screws are used, the stability of the fracture is not achieved by friction between the undersurface of the plate and the bone as in compression plate, but by the rigid connection between the plate and the locking of the screw head, so, the whole components acting as one stable construct In case of calcaneal fractures, LCP plate can be used super-cutaneously i.e.; is not required to be placed under the skin of the heel and touch the bone The cumulative rate of wound complications following open reduction of calcaneal fractures reportedly approaches 25% of patients, with 21% of patients having further surgery in a cohort of 190 patients Many authors advocated minimally invasive fixation to minimize soft tissue problems in the treatment of calcaneal fractures Minimal dissection was found to result in less post-operative swelling, less peri-articular scarring and an improved range of movement than formal open reduction, despite the imperfect restoration of the joint surface Percutaneous reduction of displaced intra-articular calcaneal fractures was popularized by Tornetta who reported 46 patients with type IIB and IIC fractures treated with percutaneous fixation. He reported 85% excellent or good results, and concluded that for selected fracture types the method gives comparable or possibly better results than open fixation In a clinical trial by Zhang et al., intra-articular calcaneal fractures were managed with minimal open reduction performed through a limited lateral incision and then the plate was applied super-cutaneously. Long incisions were not needed with no incidence of lateral flap necrosis. They reported excellent to good results in 92% of cases In this study, we treated intra-articular displaced calcaneal fracture with the combined use of percutaneous reduction and super-cutaneous plating with LCP. The reduction was done via a closed technique assisted with plantar stab incision to lodge a blunt tool to manipulate the posterior facet then the plate was applied. The statistical analysis of the radiological outcome of the study using paired The statistical analysis of the functional outcome used the AOFAS scoring system, with excellent and good results accounted for 76.6%. Higher percentage of cases with excellent in the clinical trial by Zhang et al. was recorded. The average score by Zhang et al. (91 points) weakness of randomization and the short follow-up period. However, we tried a novel combination for the treatment of displaced calcaneal fractures by the use of percutaneous principals of reduction and the rigid fixation of the locked calcaneal plate with multiple points of anchorage to the comminuted bone. Long-term functional results need a further study. Supercutaneous locked plating as a method of fixation for displaced intra-articular calcaneus fractures is a multi-points of fixation that allows for a rigid construct to fix this bone. The combination of percutaneous reduction with this fixation technique avoids many complications of open reduction and internal tools of fixation with the possible soft tissue complications. Sanders’ type II and III calcaneal fractures give good results and but less favorable results for type IV fractures. Low complication rate (regarding the infection and wound problems) with an acceptable clinical outcome encourage the use of this method. The authors declare that there is no actual or potential conflict of interest in relation to this article.