In a previous study (Microchem. J. 59 (1998) 246–257) a systematic approach had been developed to optimize the experimental conditions applied during microwave-assisted mineralization of sewage-sludge samples. An innovative elaboration of data acquired by real-time monitoring of temperature and pressure inside a closed vessel heated by microwave radiation had been performed to determine thermodynamic and kinetic behavior of sample–HNO3 mixtures. The difference (Δpressure) between the pressure recorded during sample–HNO3 heating and the corresponding vapor pressure of the pure reagent had been calculated as a function of temperature. Only concentrated HNO3 had been chosen as a digesting reagent to reduce the complexity of the observations to a single power-absorbing component. In this work the performance of other digesting reagents prepared by mixing HNO3 with H2O2 was tested. Results obtained by examining Δpressure vs. temperature graphs were compared with treatment efficiencies determined by measuring total-organic-carbon variation as well as heavy-metal recovery in the digests.Heavy metals in environmental solid samples, like sewage sludge, compost and sediments, are often linked to an organic fraction. Therefore, their analysis in such materials requires the complete disaggregation of the organic matter and the simultaneous dissolution of the inorganic fraction. This transformation involves use of dry ashing or wet digestion procedures that may result in analyte loss, incomplete recoveries and/or sample contamination. Recently, sample preparation has been revolutionized by the introduction of a new technology based on the combined use of microwave radiation as a heat source and of closed pressurized vessels. The application of this alternative methodology has been producing a sensitive reduction of time required for sample digestion and a minimization of the risks resulting from contamination and volatile-element loss. Notwithstanding many applications of microwave-assisted dissolution have been developed, only a few researches Recently, some authors of the present article have proposed an innovative approach to overcome these problems In this study we have applied such a procedure to the analysis of the behavior of hydrogen peroxide in the presence of a sewage-sludge sample acidified with nitric acid. Acid digestions were accomplished by use of a Milestone MLS 1200 Mega microwave oven (Leutkirch, Germany) equipped with an aspiration module EM-45 and connected to a personal computer (166 MHz Pentium MMX main processor; 16 MB RAM) by means of an interface card. The microwave system was controlled with the version 2.5.4.0 of the Softwave MegaPC96 program developed by MLS GmbH (Leutkirch, Germany). The magnetron mounted in the microwave oven can operate at a frequency of 2450 MHz with power outputs of 250 or 1000 W. The 1000-W stage can be pulsed to deliver time-averaged power adjustable in the range 0–1000 W by means of 1-W increments. A six-position high-pressure rotor (MDR 1000/6/110) was introduced in the oven. The carousel contained five digestion vessels with pressure-release systems and a reference vessel for pressure and temperature control. All reactors consisted of Teflon TFM (tetrafluormethaxil) containers covered with PEEK (polyetheretherketone) protection shields. The reference vessel had an internal volume (76.2 ml) less than the other vessels (87.5–87.9 ml). The difference among the capacities of these reactors was eliminated by introducing a Teflon PTFE (polytetra-fluorethylene) cylindrical bar (1.5 cm o.d.×6.4–6.6 cm length) in each digestion vessel. Temperature measurements were made with a copper/constantane thermocouple (ATC 300 S) protected from the chemical corrosion by means of a Teflon PTFE cover and electromagnetically shielded. Pressure measurements were accomplished by connecting the reference vessel to an external solid state sensor (APC 55) through a PTFE tubing. Both sensors were electronically connected to an interface board controlled with the Softwave MegaPC96 program. The signals transmitted from the sensors during digestion tests and the actual microwave power were sampled every 2 s and saved in acquisition files. Visual Basic macros written for Microsoft Excel 97 spreadsheet were subsequently used to manipulate the data contained in all acquisition files. Graphite furnace analyses (GFAAS) of Cd, Co, Mo and V were performed by means of an Ati-Unicam Solaar 939 QZ spectrometer equipped with a Solaar GF 90 Zeeman electrothermal atomizer and a Solaar FS 90 Plus furnace autosampler. The entire system was controlled by an Unicam Analytical System software implemented in a Hewlett-Packard Vectra VL2 computer (66 MHz 80486 DX2 main processor; 16 MB RAM). A Perkin-Elmer 460 spectrometer with a nebulizer-flame system (FAAS) was available to determine Cu, Fe, Mn, Ni, Pb and Zn in the digests. The concentration of Sn was measured using a Perkin-Elmer 5000 spectrometer fit with an electrically heated quartz cell connected to a Perkin-Elmer MHS-20 hydride generator. Total organic carbon in liquid fractions and in solid residues was determined using a Shimadzu TOC 5000 analyzer with a SSM 5000 solid sample module and an ASI 5000 autosampler. Instrumental parameters for the atomic absorption spectrometers and for the TOC analyzer were adjusted as suggested by the manufacturers. The microwave equipment was tested at five partial power settings (100, 200, 400, 600 and 800 W) before the subsequent use The thermocouple response was compared with the readings of NIST-certified thermometers in the range 50–200°C and in absence of the electromagnetic field. To that end, eight different temperature values of a silicone-oil bath were acquired with the thermocouple and plotted against the corresponding actual values determined with the certified thermometers. The calibration of the sensor resulted linear over the whole range studied ( Fine calibration of the pressure transducer was periodically performed by recording the pressure and the temperature of ultra-pure water (15.0 ml in each vessel) during liquid cooling from 230°C to room temperature. The initial temperature of the water was reached by applying microwave energy at 800 W power for 5–6 min. The experimental data of the pressure acquired in the cooling step were plotted against the theoretical values  Ultra-pure water (18.2 MΩ cm resistivity) was obtained directly from Milli-Q Plus 185 (Millipore Corp.) water purification system. All chemicals used were analytical-reagent grade (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany). Concentrated nitric acid (65% minimum assay) was further purified by sub-boiling distillation. Hydrogen peroxide titer (30% minimum assay) was periodically verified by employing an iodometric procedure: free iodine liberated from KI by H Stock solutions (1000 mg element/l) for each determined element (Cd, Co, Cu, Fe, Mn, Mo, Ni, Pb, Sn, V and Zn) in the digests were prepared by diluting the contents of Titrisol ampoules (Merck) to 1 l with ultra-pure water. By combination and appropriate dilution of aliquots of these stock solutions three multielement standard solutions in HNO The TOC analyzer was calibrated with a suitable set of standard solutions containing potassium hydrogen phthalate and with weighted aliquots of glucose in powder. Sewage sludge utilized in this study was a certified reference material, SRM 144, issued by the Community Bureau of Reference (BCR). The material collected at the Ruhrverband Essen represents residential areas with very low industrial influence (mainly domestic origin). In order to study the combined effect of nitric acid and hydrogen peroxide on the reference material, 15.0 ml of seven different mixtures containing 0.0–6.0 ml of H Pressure vs. temperature profiles of reagent blanks were obtained by applying the procedure described above without introducing the reference material in each vessel. Conclusions drawn from the previous tests were verified by analyzing vessel contents resulting from the microwave treatment of aliquots (200 mg) of the certified sludge with the reagent mixtures (15.0 ml) taken into account in this research. All the sludge–reagent suspensions were heated (400-W power) up to 130 or 200°C and maintained at the final temperature for 10.00 or 15.00 min, respectively. Every treatment was replicated six times using a reference vessel and five digestion vessels. On completion of the digestion programs, the reactors were cooled to room temperature and uncapped. Their content was subdivided in the soluble and insoluble fractions by means of the centrifugation. The soluble fraction of each digest was made up to 50.0 ml with ultrapure water. The corresponding solid residue was transferred into a sample boat and then dried at 105°C to determine the insoluble-fraction weight. Total organic carbon (TOC) was determined for both liquid and solid fractions. Metal extraction efficiencies of concentrated nitric acid and of the most suitable H In the previous work  We tried to separate the oxidative action of H The first part of the diagram of The reliability of this result was verified by analyzing the digests coming from the microwave treatment of the reference material with HNO The conclusions drawn from the pressure and temperature study were also checked by analyzing solid residue and residual organic carbon in the digests after heating the reference material with reagent mixtures at 200°C for 15.00 min. This dwell time was chosen as described above by examining the temporal trends of the pressure measured at 200°C in reference vessels containing 200 mg of sludge and 15.0 ml of three different reagent mixtures ( All these results suggest that the insoluble organic fraction oxidized by H  Sewage-sludge samples treated with these two reagent mixtures were also analyzed to determine the concentration of 11 heavy metals. The results obtained up to this time encourage us to go deeper into the topic. The procedure based on the elaboration of pressure and temperature data will be applied to optimize different reagent mixtures (e.g. HNO