Quantum chemical calculations have been employed to understand the nature of interaction between xanthate and Cu—as part of an ore and Cu—as part of a slag. A semi-empirical parameterized model, (PM3) is used to study ethyl xanthate, propyl xanthate, iso-propyl xanthate, iso-butyl xanthate and amyl xanthate. The total interaction energy, E, is interpreted in terms of the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) energy of the individual collectors with copper ions. The electron density map along with the change in heat of formation, binding energy and dipole-moment, indicate that amyl-xanthate binds to surface of copper ions strongly in comparison to other xanthates. The numerical results obtained with potassium amyl xanthate also support the experimental data on recovery of copper values from a copper ore by flotation.Xanthates are the most commonly used collectors for the recovery of metal values from sulfide ores by froth flotation techniques ( Geometrical optimization of the structure of collectors has been studied to understand their interaction and selectivity at the mineral interface for a given flotation system. Quantum chemical calculations can also be used to study the structures of complex molecules. The PM3, based on a semi-empirical method has been used to predict the quantum calculation of organic molecular structure, formation of metal ligand coordinated complexes, reaction at the water air interface, etc. It is based on the atomic overlap integral approximations. There exist several other applications of quantum chemical calculation in literature. For example, the complex structure formed with zinc–ammonia–water molecules and structure of Zn (II) and Cu (II) acetate and organo chromium compounds have been predicted by ab initio and semi-empirical, PM3 methods ( It has been very well established in the flotation literature that different xanthate homologues and their structural analogues like dixanthogen, xanthic acid, etc., render selectivity with fresh surface of metal sulfides ( In practical situations, particularly with regard to the flotation, the structure–function relationship between the collector and the mineral surface must be known to predict the performance of any customized reagent. However, severe challenges are posed when the raw materials do not possess adequate liberation and are extremely fine or slimy in character. These aspects are difficult to factor into any theoretical framework. We make an attempt to understand the mechanism of collector adsorption on the mineral surface using quantum chemical calculations. As a first attempt, we have made quantum chemical calculations of some alkali xanthate by the semi-empirical model, PM3 in the presence of a copper ion to find out the most effective collector for a copper mineral system. The experimental studies have been carried out by floating a low grade copper ore as well as a slag with different types of xanthates to verify the results of quantum chemical calculations. The geometrical optimization for the copper–xanthate structures are deduced by employing the semi-empirical model PM3, number 3 with the convergence gradient <0.0001 (Hyperchem version 7.0, Hypercube Inc.). Various conformations of six different alkali-xanthates viz. ethyl, propyl, Alkali xanthates are known to have their own ionic character. The xanthates are also known to be strongly chemisorbed with the sulfide minerals and form covalent bonding with the divalent metal ions ( Geometrically optimized structures of six different alkali-xanthates as depicted in The total energy, the binding energy, the heat of formation and the dipole moment calculations are shown in The presence of other metals in copper containing mineral systems such as chalcopyrite (CuFeS Finally we consider a copper ore with different degree of association of pyrite. Here the choice of xanthate is not straightforward. While potassium amyl-xanthate is the most effective according to our calculation, it is seldom used in the industry. The main reason is that most mineral systems containing copper of commercial interest contain pyrite which needs to be separated from the copper bearing species. This discrimination cannot be achieved by potassium amyl-xanthate. In such cases sodium In order to verify the quantum chemical calculations, a few experiments were carried out by flotation with copper bearing materials using various xanthates viz. potassium ethyl xanthate, sodium The selectivity of xanthate on a mineral surface is dependent on the molecular nature of the surface. For this reason we decided to study two drastically different copper bearing samples, namely, a copper ore and a copper slag of a processing plant. These samples were adequately characterized to identify different phase association and liberation characteristic. It was found that the copper ore and the copper slag contained approximately 1.0% and 1.5% copper. X-ray diffraction analysis of the ore sample showed that it contained primarily chalcopyrite and quartz. The copper slag, on the other hand, contained varying amount of cuprite, covellite, pure copper, pyrrhotite, pyrite, bornite, chalcopyrite, and quartz ( A different approach based on geometrical optimization of molecular structures of xanthates by employing a semi-empirical model, PM3 has been utilized to understand the interaction between xanthates and copper ions. The electron density map and the overall energy calculations of various alkali-xanthates and their interaction with copper ions indicate that amyl-xanthate is most effective in comparison to ethyl-, propyl-, The authors are thankful to the Director, Institute of Minerals and Materials Technology, CSIR, Bhubaneswar for his kind permission to publish this paper. The work was undertaken as a part of the laboratory project head, other laboratory project (OLP-029).