Operative management of periprosthetic supracondylar femoral fractures in poor-quality bone presents a challenging task for the orthopaedic surgeon. We report our experience with the use of a semirigid carbon fiber–reinforced plate in the treatment of 5 patients, all of whom were elderly women with severe osteoporosis and highly restricted mobility. All 5 of the fractures were sustained after low-energy trauma at least 2 years after primary knee arthroplasty. Except for 1 patient who died of pulmonary embolism, all 4 surviving patients progressed uneventfully to fracture union with good mobility and no residual pain. The use of this method for the treatment of periprosthetic femoral fractures has not been reported previously, and we believe it provides a successful and technically undemanding solution to this difficult problem.Supracondylar fractures of the femur after total knee arthroplasty are relatively rare. A recently reported incidence is 1.8% of all primary and revision total knee arthroplasties Between June 1996 and June 1998, 5 patients with a supracondylar femoral fracture above a total knee arthroplasty were treated with a carbon fiber–reinforced plastic plate at our District General Hospital. The patients all were elderly women between 69 and 83 years old (mean age, 74.8 years old). Three patients had advanced rheumatoid arthritis with restricted mobility and multiple joint arthroplasties, including hip and knee prostheses on the same side as the fracture. All of the fractures were closed and occurred after relatively simple falls. Two different standard-length plates were used: 11 and 14 holes. The surgery was performed by 3 different surgeons. Exposure of the fracture was gained through a lateral approach by reflecting the vastus lateralis muscle anteriorly. Standard AO cortical screws were used in conjunction with the plate. None of the patients received a bone–graft at the time of surgery. Four patients were mobilized initially in a cast brace for an average of 15.3 weeks (range, 12–22 weeks) until sufficient callus formation was noted. In 1 patient, a plaster splint was used for 6 weeks. Four patients were reviewed clinically and radiologically at an average of 2.5 years postoperatively (range, 1.5–3.5 years); 1 patient had died 4 weeks after surgery of a pulmonary embolus. The clinical details of the patients were gathered from the hospital notes and from patient interview (Table 1). The surgery lasted a mean of 112 minutes (range, 100–130 minutes) and was described by the surgeons as being technically straightforward. Patient 1 was medically unwell before surgery with a high anesthetic risk. The surgeon performed a relatively quick All of the 4 surviving patients regained their independent preinjury mobility within an average time of 15.3 weeks (range, 12–22 weeks) and showed knee flexion of at least 80° on clinical examination with no extensor lag ( It generally is agreed that periprosthetic supracondylar femoral fractures are managed best operatively; however, there is no clear consensus as to the best method of fixation. A review article Carbon fiber plates were developed during the early 1970s. The plates are made by pressurized heat lamination of carbon fiber sheets preimpregnated with epoxy resin and placed in a mold in a predetermined order and orientation. The plates cannot be contoured at the time of surgery and are premolded to fit the lower femur (Fig. 9). The main theoretical advantages of these plates over conventional plates are related to the plates' mechanical properties: They have a higher resistance to fatigue than conventional metal plates and a lower elastic modulus The use of this plate in our small series has been successful. Despite the fact that all of the patients were elderly with marked osteoporosis and poor mobility, all 4 surviving patients progressed to full clinical and radiologic union and returned to their premorbid level of mobility. The surgery was straightforward, and there were no local complications. Although we accept that this is only a preliminary experience with a limited number of cases, we believe that the properties of the reinforced carbon fiber plates are such that it is a potentially important method of treatment for these difficult periprosthetic supracondylar femoral fractures, particularly in patients with significant osteoporosis.