Water is a scarce and critical resource for the mineral processing industries and the recycling of the water recovered from different unit operations is possibly the best way to ensure the continued operation of the plants throughout the year. Moreover, the reduction in the product moisture content reduces the cost of transportation and drastically reduces the handling problems. In the present work, the dewatering efficiency of the coarse coal (−13 + 0.5 mm) in a pilot-scale vibratory basket centrifuge was measured and enhanced using surfactants as the dewatering aids, followed by the optimization using statistical analysis. The experiments were conducted considering three variables, i.e. feed rate, feed moisture content and surfactant concentration, using a full factorial design of the experiments. Experimental results were analysed with the help of a statistical software package (Statistica). Regression equations were developed to show the effect of each parameter and their interactions on the residual moisture content. The statistical model developed for the dewatering of coarse coal, using the three variables, was tested and was found to predict the moisture content of product coal with an average error of 5%.Mineral beneficiation processes are usually water intensive, and the final products from these plants should be a dry concentrate to ensure maximum efficiency in terms of the cost of transportation. For any mineral, the handling becomes increasingly difficult if the moisture content is high. In the case of coal, whether it is used as fuel for power plants or for metallurgical purposes, the excess water reduces energy efficiency. Hence it is very important to reduce the moisture content to a minimum before transporting any mineral for further refinement or end use. Also, water is now becoming a scarce resource, and most the mineral beneficiation plants are now striving to be zero water discharge plants. For plants that have the coarse fraction as the major fraction of the throughput, even a small reduction in the moisture content can add to substantial recovery of water. The water recovered from the product side can be recycled as process water, reducing the fresh water dependency of mineral beneficiation plants. Coal is a heterogeneous material consisting of a hydrocarbon matrix with finely disseminated mineral matter. The dewatering characteristics of coal are largely affected by the surface properties such as hydrophobicity, specific surface area, surface roughness, internal moisture, adhering external moisture and pore size distribution [ In the current research work, the efficacy of surfactant-aided dewatering of coarse coal using a pilot-scale VBC is explored. The experiments were conducted as per a full factorial design. The effects of different operating parameters (feed rate, feed moisture content and surfactant dosage) on centrifuge performance are presented in terms of the total moisture content of the product coal. The significance of the main and the interaction effects are discussed using 3D surface plots. Dewatering is one of the major challenge for the mineral processing industries and most of the research on dewatering has focussed on the fine size fraction [ Dewatering performance of particles can be predicted using the Laplace-Young equation. Consider a filter cake having a series of capillaries of different radii from which water is removed during the process of vacuum or pressure filtration. The water can be removed only when the driving force, i.e. pressure drop/vacuum applied across the filter cake, exceeds the pressure of the water present inside the capillaries. For large capillaries, the capillary rise will continue until equilibrium is reached between the gravitational pull on the mass of the column of fluid and the force exerted by the surface tension. The pressure, r - Capillary radius,   The Laplace-Young equation illustrates that for a given driving force, the dewatering efficiency can be enhanced by reducing the surface tension, increasing the contact angle and increasing the capillary radius. The first two can be achieved by using surfactants and third one achieved by using flocculants. However, the flocs formed by the flocculants are unstable at high rotational speeds of a centrifuge. Hence surfactants were utilized in this research work to improve the dewatering efficiency. Surfactants are surface active compounds and are an integral part of the dewatering process in many beneficiation plants such as coal, alumina trihydride, iron oxide, quartz, copper, gypsum and peat [ The coal sample used in the present investigation was collected from West Bokaro coal preparation plant, India. The ash content of the head sample was 15.7%, with the top size of 13 mm and the results are shown in X-ray diffraction was used for the identification of the mineral phases present in the feed coal sample using a Philips X-ray diffractometer (PANalytical, X'pert). The XRD spectrum of coal, shown in Petrographic analysis is a microscopic technique used to determine the coal macerals and the rank of the coal. A Leica DM6000 M and a Leica DMRX reflected-light microscope were used to carry out these studies as per the procedure followed by the International Committee for Coal and Organic Petrology (ICCP 1998, 2001). Both microscopes were equipped with a photomultiplier detector, an integrated 546 nm interference filter and a fluorescence unit. The samples were studied under 200× and 500× magnifications. The rank of the coal samples was determined by measuring the vitrinite reflectance under oil on clean, scratch-free vitrinite grains and the mean value was calculated using 100 clean vitrinite grains of the sample. Petrographic analysis of the coal (−1 mm, as per the ICCP standard) sample is shown in Surface tension was determined using a dynamic contact angle tensiometer (DCAT) supplied by Dataphysics Instruments GmbH. The characteristics of surfactants used are shown in A centrifuge is a device that provides a mechanical acceleration field via centrifugal force [ The principle of centrifugation is shown in The centrifugal force, The acceleration due to centrifugal force (m/s The gravitational force, Relative centrifugal force, m - mass of the coal particles (kg) r - radius of circular path (m)  f - frequency (Hz or Cycles/s) N - Revolution per minute (RPM) g - acceleration of gravity (9.8 m/s RCF - Relative centrifugal force (G-force) The relative centrifugal force (RCF) and the details of the pilot scale centrifuge are shown in Statistical techniques have been used to predict the performance of mineral processing operations. The statistical design of experiments has several advantages over the classical method of treating one variable at a time. In this method, the experiments can be conducted in a pre-defined manner and can be analysed systematically to obtain the interaction effects along with the main effects [ In the current investigation, the pilot-scale dewatering experiments were carried out using a full factorial design of experiments (DOE), both in the presence and absence of surfactants. Three operating parameters (coal feed rate, feed moisture content and surfactant dosages) were considered to evaluate the dewatering efficiency of the VBC. The list of variables and their level matrix are presented in Three surfactants (non-ionic, cationic and anionic) were selected for the surface tension studies. The equilibrium surface tension values for the surfactant solutions are shown in A total of 27 dewatering experiments were carried out to establish the relation between the total moisture content and the independent parameters (coal feed rate, feed moisture content and reagent dosage). The full factorial design matrix with the corresponding total moisture contents are shown in Analysis of variance technique (ANOVA) was used to evaluate the significance of the developed regression equation. The sum of squares for the model can be determined as The model mean square is the average squared error for the observation data or the sum-of- squares divided by the number of observations. The F-test for the model indicates the level of significance of the model prediction. The F-value is the ratio of mean model sum of squares divided by the mean error sum of squares and is expressed as The F-value of the product moisture was 9.82 at confidence level higher than 95% for the model, indicating that the developed model is significant. The observed and the predicted values obtained using Eq. The relationship between the observed and predicted moisture values is shown in The residence time of coal particles in the VBC is determined by the feed rate. The effect of the feed rate on the output moisture content was investigated by varying the feed rate from 40 to 120 kg/min with an increment of 40 kg. The total moisture of the product coal decreased on increasing the feed rate till optimal loading in the centrifuge. In this condition, the coal particles had sufficient time for centrifugation and consequently the surface moisture was removed. A further rise in the feed rate led to reduction in the residence time for the particles and consequently, the total moisture content of the product coal increased. The significance of main and interaction effects on the total moisture (%) is shown in Feed moisture retention capacity of coal particles can be determined through characterization studies. The coal used is medium volatile bituminous coking coal since it has rank 1.1 and contains around 23% volatile matter. Medium volatile bituminous coal has the maximum hydrophobicity. Water does not spread spontaneously on the hydrophobic material. However, the presence of hydrophilic functional groups and mineral matter determines the retention capacity of water. The FTIR and XRD studies revealed that coal contain oxygen containing functional groups such as carboxyl and hydroxy functional groups and minerals such as quartz and hematite. The effect of feed moisture content on the output total moisture was investigated by varying the feed moisture content from 5 to 15% with an increment of 5%. Pareto analysis shows that both the linear and quadratic terms are statistically significant at 95% confidence level. From the regression analysis, it is observed that the linear and quadratic terms have positive coefficient indicating that the product moisture will increase with the feed moisture. These hydrophilic groups enhance the wetting of coal with increase in the feed moisture content. This could be due to the formation of hydrogen bonds with the carboxylic and hydroxy functional groups. Hence high G-force is required to remove excess feed moisture. The surface tension, capillary radii and contact angle of the system determine the magnitude of the capillary forces. If the applied forces such as vacuum, pressure, gravity, or centrifugal are larger than the capillary forces, water can be removed from the capillary channels by means of an air phase. The surfactants can reduce the interfacial surface tension at the liquid- air interface. This will lower the capillary rise, consequently reducing the moisture content in the capillaries. As per the Laplace-Young equation, the reduction in the surface tension reduces the required driving force for successful dewatering. Industrial centrifuges have a constant rpm and it is not possible to alter the G-force. Hence, employing a surfactant can reduce the total moisture of the product and also increase the throughput of the system without any serious capital investment. In the present investigation, dewatering experiments were carried out with and with-out surfactant. The surfactant concentration was varied from 0 to 100 ppm with an increment of 50 ppm. Regression analysis shows that the coefficients of the linear term and quadratic term have negative and positive values respectively. However, the coefficient of the linear term is higher than the quadratic term and the overall effect is negative. This indicates that the product moisture content will decrease with an increase in the surfactant concentration. The regression equation shows that the two interaction terms (feed rate×surfactant concentration and feed moisture content×surfactant concentration) have negative coefficients. This indicates that the total moisture content will decrease with an increase in the interaction terms. Pareto analysis shows that the interaction terms for the surfactant concentration with feed rate and feed moisture are statistically significant at the 95% confidence level. 3D response surface plots were used to explain the interactional effects of input parameters on the total moisture of the products and are shown in The product moisture content with the use of surfactant is less compared to the cases with-out surfactant for all the feed rates. Thus, it is clear that the surfactant enhances the dewatering rate in the centrifuge, which is likely due to the decrease in the surface tension with the use of the surfactant. The minimum moisture content (<3.3%) was observed at a higher level of surfactant concentration and lower level of feed rates. The interaction effect of feed moisture content and surfactant dosage on total moisture content is shown in In order to validate the developed statistical model within the range of the selected operating variables, random dewatering experiments were carried out. The experimental results are presented in The efficacy of a surfactant as a dewatering aid was explored for the dewatering of coarse coal (−13 to 0.5 mm) in a pilot-scale vibratory basket centrifuge. A full factorial design in combination with response surface methodology was used to model the dewatering performance of the centrifuge. The three process variables used in this study were feed moisture content, feed rate and surfactant concentration. It was observed that dewatering efficiency increased with the use of a surfactant in the centrifuge. A quadratic equation was developed for the product moisture content using Statistica software package. The predicted values obtained using the developed model were in good agreement with the observed values (R Authors are thankful to Dr. Sanjay Chandra, Chief R&D and SS, Tata Steel Ltd. for his support and valuable suggestions during this research work. The support and services provided by staff of