Three-dimensional (3D) finite element (FE) analyses are performed to identify the collapse mechanism of the Daikai station, which suffered major structural damage during the 1995 Kobe earthquake. To investigate the damage evolution in the reinforced concrete structure, concrete and steel rebars are modeled separately and assembled in a soil–tunnel model. Bilinear models are used for both the concrete and steel rebars, whereas a nonlinear hysteretic model is used for the soil. Simulation results illustrate that the 3D FE model is capable of accurately reproducing the structural collapse and surface settlement. The cracks are observed to form initially at the outer walls of the tunnels and subsequently in the center column. As the ground motion intensity increases, longitudinal and shear cracks form in the center column, inducing a significant loss of axial capacity and eventually leading to a structural collapse. Irrecoverable damage initiates in the center column under the combined shear force (V) and bending moment (M). Therefore, it is recommended to utilize the V-M failure surface to estimate the onset of structural damage. The damage evolution of the Daikai station is also correlated with the drift ratio of the center column. Additional analyses show that when the equivalent linear soil model is used, the calculated peak drift ratio is similar to that obtained using the nonlinear model. However, it results in unrealistic gapping at the tunnel–soil interface and lower surface settlement. The no-slip condition for the tunnel–soil contact interface produces a pronounced lower response of the tunnel and therefore should not be used in a damage analysis.Underground structures have been reported to be more resistant to seismic excitations compared with above-ground structures Several studies have been conducted to identify the possible causes for the collapse of the Daikai station through post-earthquake surveys. Iida et al. Two-dimensional (2D) analyses have been widely used to simulate the collapse of the Daikai station. Liu and Liu 2D numerical analyses have been conducted to simulate the shear-type failure that occurred in the center column. An et al. Recently, three-dimensional (3D) FE numerical analyses have been used to simulate the seismic response of the Daikai station. All the studies used the commercial FE code ABAQUS In this study, 3D FE analyses were performed to investigate the collapse mechanism of the Daikai station. A 3D nonlinear model was used to simulate the damage accumulation in the center column accurately, which cannot be adequately represented in a 2D analysis. The concrete and steel rebars were explicitly modeled and assembled. An erosion model was used for the concrete to allow simulating the spalling of damaged concrete. Based on the simulation results, indices for predicting the level of damage of the underground structure are determined. Furthermore, the effects of the soil model and the soil–tunnel contact interface are examined. The Daikai station was constructed in 1964 using the cut-and-cover tunneling method. There are two typical sections: the one-story main section and the two-story section with concourse, electric, and switching station rooms The 3D FE model of the tunnel and the site profile was developed with the commercial finite element software LS-DYNA The Winfrith concrete model (MAT 084/085) was used to simulate the concrete response in this study. The Winfrith concrete model is based on the four-parameter Ottosen plasticity model The kinematic hardening material model (MAT 003) was used to simulate the response of the steel rebars. This model has been widely used in seismic analyses It should be noted that simplified models were used both for the concrete and steel rebars. The stiffness and strength degradation of the steel rebars were not modeled. The pinching behavior of the concrete was also not simulated. The bilinear models are considered to be adequate for simulating the nonlinear hysteretic behavior of the reinforced concrete and modeling its interaction with the soil. However, future studies using more advanced models for concrete and steel rebars are warranted to closely investigate the influence of the constitutive model on the calculated seismic responses. The site profile is displayed in The numerical model of the tunnel and site profile is displayed in The hysteretic soil model (MAT 079) was used to simulate the nonlinear behavior of the soil. It is a nested yield surface model with a maximum of 10 yield surfaces. The model is composed of a series of parallel elastic-perfectly plastic materials to produce a nonlinear shear–stress response. The model has been widely used to perform seismic analyses The small-strain damping was modeled using the frequency-independent damping formulation. The small-strain damping ratios of the soil layers were also selected from the Darendeli The explicit time integration algorithm was used to perform the dynamic analyses. The widely used central difference numerical scheme and double-precision solver implemented in LS-DYNA were utilized. The incremental time step was automatically adjusted to ensure both numerical stability and accuracy. The initial time step and the total number of time steps were 6.13E−6s and 1,545,000, respectively. The model was meshed into 244,812 solid elements and 22,622 beam elements, consisting of a total of 299,279 nodes. For the nonlinear analysis, the computing time was approximately 80 h with a system configuration of core i7 (3.2 GHz processor speed) and 16 GB RAM. The Daikai subway station is located approximately 15 km from the epicenter of the Kobe earthquake. The recorded ground motion at Port Island was used as the input because (1) it is the closest recording to the Daikai station and (2) the site characteristics of Port Island and the Daikai station site are similar, as reported in Parra-Montesinos et al.   In In A large difference in the calculated drift ratios for the center column and the tunnel wall is observed, as shown in In this section, the influences of the (1) soil model and (2) soil–structure interface on the numerical results are evaluated. The results are compared with those of the baseline model presented in the previous section. The purpose of this section is to quantify the degree of influence of each component, and thereby provide guidelines for conducting damage analyses of underground box structures. The details are presented in the following section. The equivalent linear (EQL) approach is widely adopted to perform the dynamic simulation of tunnels The calculated drift ratio and internal forces at To evaluate the influence of the contact on the seismic analysis results, the no-slip condition, which is also described as a full-bond or tie condition, was used. The output is compared with that from the baseline model, which allows both gapping and slipping at the soil–tunnel interface, as shown in  A nonlinear 3D FE analysis was performed to identify the collapse mechanism of the Daikai station, which suffered major damage during the 1995 Kobe earthquake. A bilinear concrete model was used to model the accumulated damage and crack development. An elasto-plastic model was used for the steel rebars. Moreover, an erosion model was used along with the nonlinear concrete model to capture the degradation of the strength and stiffness of concrete with the accumulation of structural damage. A nonlinear constitutive model was used for the surrounding soil. Comparison with the observed damage reveals that the nonlinear FE model is capable of accurately reproducing the structural collapse using the site-specific soil profile and ground motion time histories recorded during the Kobe earthquake. The pattern of the damage evolution is closely monitored to investigate the collapse mechanism. It is shown that cracks begin to form initially at the outer walls of the tunnels and subsequently in the center column. As ground motion intensity increases, longitudinal and shear cracks form and propagate throughout the entire column, causing significant structural damage. An eventual loss of axial capacity of the column leads to large settlement of the roof slab and eventual collapse of the tunnel. It is highlighted that the structural collapse of the tunnel is closely associated with the damage of the center column. The axial load (P), shear force (V), and bending moment (M) demands in the center column were extracted from the numerical simulation. Nonlinear section analyses were also performed to develop failure surfaces under combined P, V, and M. It is revealed that major structural damage in the center column occurs under the combined V-M demands. The drift ratio, which is widely used to estimate the damage potential of building structures, was also extracted from the numerical simulation and correlated with the damage evolution. The center column damage initiates at a drift ratio of 0.80% and the erosion is produced at a ratio of 1.80%. It should be noted that these values are structure-specific and can only be used as proxies for the seismic damage prediction of the Daikai station. Future studies are warranted to derive allowable drift ratio limits of underground tunnels for routine application in the seismic design. Additional analyses were performed to investigate the influence of the soil model and the tunnel–soil interface. The results are compared with those of the baseline model to quantify their respective influences. The EQL soil model influences the calculated tunnel responses. The peak drift ratio and M are similar to those of the baseline model, whereas peak V is overpredicted. The calculated settlement at the surface is significantly lower than the recording and also that of the baseline model. When using the no-slip interface, the calculated drift ratio is significantly lower than that of the baseline model. The tunnel is also demonstrated not to collapse because of the no-slip interface not allowing gapping to form. Therefore, it is not recommended to use the no-slip interface in the damage analysis of cut-and-cover tunnels.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This research was supported by the Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the