The solvent extraction of iron and titanium from coal fly ash leach solution was investigated by the use of Design of Experiments. The effect of the factors: hydrogen ion concentration, Primene JMT concentration, aqueous to organic volume phase ratio and temperature on iron and titanium extraction were evaluated. A two level factorial design implemented by statistical software Design Expert
                        ®
                      6, determined the significant factors and any associated interactive effects amongst these factors.
                  Hydrogen ion concentration and the interaction between the aqueous to organic volume phase ratio with Primene JMT concentration had a significant effect on the extraction of iron while temperature did not. Hydrogen ion concentration and temperature did not have a significant effect on the extraction of titanium, while the interaction between Primene JMT concentration and the aqueous to organic volume phase ratio had a significant effect.
                  The maximum iron extraction achieved in the implemented design was 33.8% while 99% of titanium could be extracted from the coal fly ash leach solution. Extraction improvement tests showed that at a hydrogen ion concentration of 0.28M, 88% iron and 99% titanium extraction from coal-fly ash leach solution could be achieved.Operators of aluminium smelters in South Africa use imported alumina as feedstock in the production of high-grade aluminium. The use of locally produced alumina as feedstock to these smelters has the potential to reduce import dependency and provide a more easily accessible and cost competitive alumina feedstock. An alumina resource that has been identified in South Africa that can be exploited to produce this feedstock is coal fly ash (CFA). This ash is generated as a waste product from the burning of coal by power stations during the generation of electrical power. An analysis of the major constituents of the CFA produced by the Kendal Power Station is: 56 The majority of work done on the recovery of alumina from CFA has been through a process route that begins with the direct or indirect acid leaching of CFA to dissolve aluminium into solution followed by crystallisation or precipitation to produce alumina ( Recent studies by researchers in the authors' research group at the University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, have shown that a novel two-step leaching method which incorporates a combination of direct and indirect leaching by sulphuric acid has the potential of producing a leach solution with a higher aluminium content in solution compared to either direct or indirect leaching alone ( In their work The two resulting leach solutions, mixed together, therefore contain the total dissolved aluminium ( The current work is therefore an extension of this 2-step leaching process developed by the authors in the research group, with the aim being to identify and optimise process parameters for the purification of the produced coal fly ash leach liquor using solvent extraction (SX). Primary amines have been successfully used to remove iron from CFA leach solutions. These include: Primene JMT ( Design of Experiments (DOE), was used as a tool to simultaneously manipulate the following factors: temperature, extractant concentration, aqueous to organic phase ratio and hydrogen ion concentration with a view to determine if a high metal extraction could be obtained within a high hydrogen ion concentration range. The advantage of DOE is that it is very efficient at determining the effect of each of the factors with less experimental runs. In addition, DOE easily detects interactions amongst factors while also developing empirical models that show how a desired response (% metal extraction) varies with each of the factors. ( CFA from Kendal Power Station, South Africa, was used to generate the leach liquor used in the test work. The first step in the preparation of the two-step CFA leach solution was the direct leaching of the coal fly ash. 400 The analysis of hydrogen ion concentration was by pH measurement using a Metrohm model 827 laboratory meter that has a pH range between − The extractant was prepared on a volume basis (v/v) as shown in An extractant concentration of 5% on a volume basis indicates that of the total volume of the organic phase, 5% is the extractant and the remaining 95% is made up of the diluent Shellsol D70. A 15 A Design of Experiments methodology was employed to examine the extraction of iron and titanium from CFA leach solution by implementing a 2 level full factorial design. The selected experimental factors and their levels are presented in  The experiments were performed in random order as indicated in the first column of the table to even out any experimental error that can be caused by external noise factors. Design Expert Each experiment consisted of mixing the selected organic and aqueous phases in 250 After shaking for 15 The results of the full factorial experiments are shown in The extraction results were used to plot A statistical effects model generated by Design Expert The negative sign on the hydrogen ion concentration factor (C) indicates that to maximise iron extraction, this factor must be at a low level, this means a high pH maximises iron extraction. This finding agrees closely with work done by To check the adequacy of this model, Design Expert For the model (Eq.  Eq.  An inspection of the residual plot indicates that the residues are not normally distributed around the best-fit line; this is confirmed by the linear correlation coefficient of the best-fit line that was calculated to be 56%. Therefore, the developed model (Eq. Analysis of variance by Design Expert Design Expert After model reduction, refitting of the model by Design Expert For this model, the term with the highest power is D (A/O phase ratio), the term is negative and raised to the power of two. This means that the curve that describes titanium extraction has a maximum. The adequacy of this model was checked by Design Expert The goodness of fit of the studentised residuals on the best fit line was measured by the coefficient of determination R The main influence of a factor can only be interpreted individually if it does not interact with other factors. If there is evidence that it interacts with other factors then the interacting factors should be considered jointly ( The effect of temperature on iron extraction from the two-step CFA leach solution is illustrated in  However, all those experiments that were done at 70 The effect of hydrogen ion concentration on iron extraction from a two-step CFA leach solution is shown in A decrease in the hydrogen ion concentration from 10.47 This extraction increase is attributed to the decrease in the concentration of bisulphate and hydrogen ions. The source of bisulphate and hydrogen ions is the hydrolysis of sulphuric acid as reflected in the following two equations ( Infra-Red spectroscopy investigations by Therefore, high hydrogen ion concentrations result in less iron(III) existing in the extractable form as observed in Furthermore, as the bisulphate concentration increases, it is thought that there is competition between extractable Fe(OH)SO This competition results in the reduced effective concentration of the extractant leading to lower extraction of iron(III). The interaction between the A/O phase ratio and the extractant concentration is reflected in Generally, the higher extraction of iron at the increased extractant concentration is attributed to the increased availability of extractant to protonation since the protonated amine is responsible for iron extraction. The amount of iron extracted is more sensitive to an increase in solvent concentration at a lower A/O phase ratio of 1:1 compared to 3:1. The greater extraction at the lower A/O ratio is attributed to the presence of more extractant per unit mass of iron in solution. The effect of temperature on iron extraction from the two step CFA leach solution is illustrated in An increase in temperature from 25 The effect of hydrogen ion concentration on titanium extraction from the CFA leach solution is shown in  This is illustrated in  This shows that the A/O phase ratio is the more influential of the interacting factors, because a high titanium extraction could be obtained even at a low extractant concentration. One of the aims of this study was to establish whether it was possible to extract iron and titanium at high acid concentrations given that the two- step CFA leach liquor is generated at a hydrogen ion concentration of 10.47 In order to improve the extraction of iron it was therefore, necessary to adjust the experimental conditions. An evaluation of the effect of the factors showed that a high level of the extractant concentration (15%) and a low level of the A/O phase ratio (1:1) results in higher iron extraction. The effects model for the extraction of iron Eq. Temperature (70 In order to determine the number of extraction stages to purify the CFA leach solution, shaking tests at different A/O phase ratios were performed so as to construct extraction isotherms. All the shaking tests were done at 25 The McCabe Thiele diagram for iron extraction is shown in The McCabe Thiele diagram for titanium extraction is shown in From these two McCabe-Thiele diagrams, it can therefore be concluded that the theoretical number of stages that are required to purify the two-step CFA leach solutions is four. The conditions that allow for four theoretical stages are 1 The ability of the extractant to repeatedly remove iron and titanium from fresh CFA leach liquor was investigated by the process route shown in The first extraction involved contacting fresh CFA leach solution with fresh Primene JMT. Thereafter, fresh CFA leach solution was consecutively contacted with recycled Primene JMT three times. The experimental conditions were: 15% (v/v) Primene JMT concentration, A/O phase ratio of 1:1, hydrogen ion concentration of 1 The precipitate formed was a mixture of iron, titanium, and aluminium hydroxides. The organic phase was then recycled for another successive extraction with fresh solution. The use of 1 By using DOE, the significant factors affecting the extraction of iron and titanium from a two-step CFA leach solution were identified. In the implemented factorial design, all experimental work was done at high hydrogen ion concentration between 4.67 The authors would like to acknowledge Nalco, Cognis, Shell and Chemquest chemical companies for the supply of reagents used in this study and the