This paper presents for the first time the results of a life cycle assessment study for an intelligent energy management system. We considered material acquisition, manufacturing, transportation, assembly, operation and maintenance stages. The results show that the assembly phase had an environmental impact of 897 Eco-indicator 99 points that was mainly due to the monitoring subsystem (87.80%). When the analysis was extended to cover the use phase, the environmental impact ranged from 1963 (useful life of 5years) to 3029 Eco-indicator 99 points (useful life of 10years). The environmental impact of the use stage was found to represent 54–70% of the total, whereas the assembly stage represented 46–30%. The maintenance phase contributed to a very small extent to the total environmental impact (less than 0.5%). In any case, the impact on resources was the largest (about 51%), whereas the human health damage category amounted to approximately 35% and the ecosystem quality damage category represented about 14% of the total impact.Many approaches have been found related to life cycle assessment (LCA) within the scope of the broadly defined building industry. According to Ortiz et al. Thus, the main objective of this paper is to contribute to a better understanding of the whole range of environmental impacts related to the commissioning and usage of an intelligent energy management system. The following section describes the energy management system under study. Section The analysis focuses on an advanced energy management system developed under the auspices of the European research project entitled Sustainable Energy mAnageMent for Underground Stations (SEAM4US) The core subsystem remotely manages and supports the monitoring and control subsystems. Due to the strict security policies of public transport operators, the core subsystem cannot be cloud-based and must be located in the operator’s control centre. Therefore, a communication infrastructure is needed to integrate the SEAM4US energy management system within the existing operational procedures. The core subsystem is comprised of a centralized server and a backup hard drive disk, holding the central instance of the SEAM4US software. The monitoring subsystem creates almost real-time awareness of the station’s manageable subsystems. Ventilation control strategies require the monitoring of environmental data, such as surface temperature, relative humidity, air pressure, air speed, pollutants (CO The wireless environmental monitoring network captures ambient data for modelling validation and control feedback. It includes an extensive set of supported sensors (more than 100 The energy consumption monitoring subsystem is aimed at generating energy consumption baselines for the pilot station. It uses detailed energy consumption data from individual subsystems and gives real-time feedback on the energy management system performance. For fairly stable loads such as lighting systems or ventilation, a single smart meter measures multiple power lines. This solution enables the wireless transfer of measurement data (via ZigBee networks), but with reduced monitoring frequency. For highly variable loads such as escalators and elevators, a high performance solution measures few power lines at once, but with high frequency. In this case, measurement data is transferred through RS485 and Modbus/TCP protocols. The occupancy detection subsystem provides an estimation of the crowd density of the spaces in the station with less than 20% error. Unlike all other SEAM4US subsystems, the occupancy monitoring subsystem relies on closed-circuit television (CCTV) infrastructure that is already installed in the station. The use of 20 existing cameras greatly reduces the costs and deployment time, although greater effort is required to create reliable computer vision algorithms. The video processing algorithm and the SEAM4US software interfaces that enable communication with the backend systems are implemented in the CCTV device proxy software. This software runs in the CCTV gateway (desktop computer running Windows 7) at the pilot station and receives the video stream from a dedicated recorder. Algorithm results are sent to the SEAM4US server. The control subsystem is responsible for acting on the existing ventilation, lighting and vertical transportation subsystems to reduce the underground station’s energy consumption. At the same time, and according to the premises stated by the metro operator, passenger comfort must not be compromised, minimally invasive interventions must be prioritized and the current operator’s controllers’ tasks must not be modified by SEAM4US actions. This means that the energy management system must be transparent and seamlessly integrated with current operator policies. The ventilation control system is based on a model predictive control (MPC) approach that considers current building status, the short-term weather forecast, train transit, an occupancy prediction and the estimation of future building status The lighting subsystem is regulated taking into account the two main criteria stated by the metro operator: (1) not to diminish the passenger’s feeling of security and (2) to fulfil the minimum lighting levels required by current regulations. In light of the above, it was assumed that a good lighting level is required when there are only a few people in the station, whereas when the occupancy is higher, the minimum lighting level will be enough to perform the visual task. Thus, the lighting control system benefits from real-time crowd density data gathered by the occupancy monitoring subsystem and the user model. These data provide an empirically based prediction of the occupancy of a given space in the station in the near future. Commands are transferred to each lighting fixture through a digital addressable lighting interface (DALI) controller and corresponding compatible ballasts. The escalators’ speed is also modulated between the operational range of 0.2 and 0.5 This life cycle assessment study follows the methodology described in ISO 14040 Environmental management – life cycle assessment – principles and framework The goal of the study was to estimate the environmental impacts of commissioning and using an intelligent energy management system in an underground metro station ( The following subsections provide an overview of the assumptions made in each lifecycle stage. The types, quantities and unitary weights of the devices, elements and materials comprising the energy management system were identified according to their technical specifications, the estimated budget and corresponding bill of quantities for deployment in the pilot station, direct observations and expert consultation. All the identified devices and components were linked to respective datasets from Ecoinvent v2.0 All the electronic devices in the energy management system were assumed to be transported by sea covering a distance of 6,884 In accordance with current operating schedules of the Barcelona metro network, the SEAM4US energy management system is assumed to work 24 According to the results, the environmental impact related to the assembly phase of the intelligent energy management system amounted to 897.02 Eco-indicator 99 points. The energy management system mostly contributed to the resource damage (51.50%) and human health (29.88%) categories, followed by damage to ecosystem quality (18.62%). The main environmental impact was found to be fossil fuel depletion (35.21%). Respiratory effects caused by inorganic pollutants were in second position (17.03%), whereas mineral depletion was ranked third (16.29%). The impact of ecotoxicity accounted for 12.07% and carcinogenic substances represented 8.55% of the overall environmental impact. The rest of the environmental impact was attributed to climate change (4.14%), land use (4.09%), acidification/eutrophication (2.46%), radiation (0.11%), respiratory effects caused by organic pollutants (0.02%) and ozone layer depletion (0.02%) (  According to the impact assessment, the SEAM4US system results in an overall impact of 1963.10 Eco-indicator 99 points if the commissioning stage (including raw materials acquisition, manufacturing and transportation) and a 5-year usage phase (including operation and maintenance) are taken into account ( When the analysis was extended to cover a 10-year use phase, the environmental impact of the energy management system for underground stations was found to amount to 3029.18 Eco-indicator 99 points ( In both cases, the impact of the use phase was dominated by fossil fuels (49.45%), respiratory inorganics (29.70%) and climate change (6.54%) due to the system’s electricity consumption. Other minor impacts were acidification/eutrophication (4.11%), ecotoxicity (4.10%), carcinogens (2.55%), minerals (1.79%), land use (1.39%), radiation (0.37%) and respiratory organics (0.01%) ( Although a broad variety of LCA studies dealing with different ICT devices have been published, none of them focus on the environmental impact related to energy management systems. However, major power generation technologies have been covered by several studies and they conclude that fossil fuel based technologies can never compete with renewable technologies. According to Rashedi et al. According to the SEAM4US project Taking into account that 1 Eco-indicator 99 point represents one thousandth of the yearly environmental load of an average citizen in Europe Results revealed that the environmental impact was mostly caused by the usage phase of the SEAM4US energy management system (53.93% in a 5-year lifetime scenario and 69.90% in a 10-year life time scenario) mainly because the system is always on. If the efficiency of the system needs to be improved, the technological progress must focus on getting more energy efficient ICT devices and sensors. In this sense, the frequency of reading transmissions could be optimized. The environmental impact related to the usage phase of the SEAM4US energy management system would also be diminished by using environmentally friendly energy sources. Taking into account that the environmental impacts are expected to be increasingly related to raw material extraction and production, it is advisable to get smaller ICT devices and to use the system for as long as possible. The end-of-life phase was not considered within this study, mainly because of the uncertainty in the final disposal of information and communication technology (ICT) products. Related data is unobservable and reliable quantitative data on treated e-waste flows is not available. In addition, a significant number of electronic devices are processed informally at the end of life Modelling of information and communication technology products reveals numerous problems with data availability and quality. Furthermore, an insurmountable challenge in producing a rigorous LCA of an ICT product is the presence of hundreds of components inside any device with hundreds, and perhaps thousands, of contractors and sub-contractors responsible for different aspects of it Taking into account that obsolescence risks may go beyond the devices’ useful physical life span, the useful life of an energy management system is highly difficult to predict and this may involve a high variability of results. Moreover, it must be taken into account that the electricity mix can change during a system’s lifespan. Another aspect that is difficult to address in LCA studies on ICT products is spatial variation and local environmental uniqueness The results of this research provide for the first time an insight into the environmental impact caused by the commissioning and usage phases of an intelligent energy management system using the life cycle assessment methodology. System boundaries included manufacturing (including all the steps from material extraction up to the assembly of all the component devices), transport (from production sites to the assembly site and on to the pilot station), assembly, usage (considering two lifespan scenarios of 5 and 10 The environmental impact related to each kWh of primary energy saved by means of the intelligent energy management system ranges between 0.0039 and 0.0040 Eco-indicator 99 points, competing remarkably with renewable power generation sources. The assembly phase of the SEAM4US energy management system has an environmental impact of 897 Eco-indicator 99 points. The monitoring subsystem dominates the environmental impact (87.80%), followed by the control subsystem (9.18%) and the core subsystem (3.02%). The main environmental impacts related to the assembly phase of the energy management system are fossil fuel depletion (35.21%), respiratory effects caused by inorganic pollutants (17.03%), mineral depletion (16.29%) and ecotoxicity (12.07%). When considering the use phase, the environmental impact of the energy management system for underground stations ranges between 1963 Eco-indicator 99 points (useful life of 5 The use stage has a greater environmental impact than the assembly stage, ranging between 54% (useful life of 5 The maintenance phase contributes slightly to the total (0.37% in the 5-year scenario and 0.48% in the 10-year scenario). In this case, the impact is dominated by respiratory effects caused by inorganic pollutants (36.21%), fossil fuel extraction (33.86%) and mineral extraction (17.01%). Taking into account that direct environmental effects should not detract from the environmental benefits in terms of energy saving, this paper is useful for a range of stakeholders – including the electronics industry, building energy managers, building owners and policy makers – as it provides the grounds future environmental improvements. Considering the huge increase and expected future growth of intelligent energy management systems, manufacturers should be able to identify future optimization opportunities. For example and taking into account that the main environmental impacts arising from the intelligent energy management system were directly related to energy usage, priority areas of action include improving the energy efficiency of the system. The transition to environmentally friendly energy sources would also contribute to reducing the environmental impact of the SEAM4US system. It is also advisable to use the system for as long as possible to diminish the environmental impact of the assembly phase. This paper also sets the basis for environmental benchmarking among competing technologies. Further research is needed to analyse the environmental impact related to end of life. Improved LCI databases are needed, as data quality and availability is a serious challenge in life cycle assessment studies of ICT products. The study was supported by the EU FP7 programme (FP7-2011-NMP-ENV-ENERGY-ICT-EeB) through the SEAM4US project (Sustainable Energy Management for Underground Stations), contract no. 285408. The authors would like to express their gratitude to the other partners in the project for their collaboration with the life cycle inventory.