Little is known concerning the N mineralization or N immobilization of (vegetable) root residues in soil. The (bio)chemical composition of a range of vegetable root residues (large and fine roots of red cabbage, white cabbage, Brussels sprouts, savoy cabbage, and leek), and plant parts of two green manures (ryegrass and white mustard) was determined by standard chemical analysis (total C, total N, and C:N ratio) and by a modified Stevenson fractionation method (water-soluble, hemicellulose, cellulose, and lignin fraction). Fresh chopped crop residues, homogenously mixed with a sandy loam soil, were incubated during 4 months at constant temperature (21°C) and constant moisture content (14% w/w). The net N mineralization of each residue was determined by destructive sampling. All fine roots, except these of Brussels sprouts, showed a net N release throughout the incubation. All large roots showed a slight N immobilization at the start of the incubation, but at the end of the incubation a small net N release was observed, except for Brussels sprouts. The roots of Brussels sprouts immobilized N throughout the entire incubation. The leaves of the green manures released more N than both stems (only for white mustard) and roots. It was possible to fit a first-order kinetics model to 8 of the 14 N mineralization patterns: A
                     N(t)=A
                     N(1−exp(−kt)). For the six other residues where the first-order model could not be fitted, the amount of N mineralized at the end of the incubation was taken as an estimate of the A
                     N parameter. Both the mineralization parameters A
                     N and k were correlated to a large number of (bio)chemical parameters. The amount of mineralized N, A
                     N, was best correlated with the C:N ratio (R=−0.86), and the rate constant k was best correlated with the lignin:N ratio (R=−0.94). The predictive relationship between the N mineralization of vegetable root residues and green manures and their (bio)chemical composition has the advantage that is independent of the length of the incubation time. The critical C:N ratio, i.e. the break point between net N mineralization and net N immobilization (A
                     N=0) was found to be 36.6.Intensive field vegetable production in Flanders (Belgium) is often characterized by an excessive use of N fertilization, resulting in large mineral N residues in the soil and large amounts of crop residues rich in nitrogen at the harvest ( The nitrogen present in roots has often been ignored in the N economy of cropping systems, because they are thought to contain only small amounts of N (10–15% of the total plant N as determined in physical excavation studies) ( An important factor governing the N mineralization of crop residues is their (bio)chemical composition (e.g., N content, C:N ratio, water-soluble, hemicellulose, cellulose, lignin, and polyphenol content). Many studies have tried to relate the N mineralization of crop residues to their (bio)chemical composition, but most of this research dealt with the major agricultural crops, legumes, and green manures ( Most researchers established a static relationship between the (bio)chemical composition and the amount of N mineralized at the end of the incubation period. However, differences in incubation time lead to differences in amounts of net N mineralized, so that the length of the incubation also affects the relation with the (bio)chemical composition. Therefore, a dynamic relationship (considering incubation time) between the (bio)chemical composition and the N mineralization of crop residues is more valuable. The N mineralization of crop residues in function of time can be often described by a first-order kinetics model: The aim of this study was to develop a predictive dynamic relationship for the N mineralization of vegetable root residues and green manures under fixed environmental conditions by fitting a first-order kinetics model to the N mineralization patterns of the crop residues first and then relating their (bio)chemical composition to the model parameters. The crop residues chosen for this study were fresh vegetable root residues from red cabbage ( Samples of the plant material were dried at 55 The soil used in the incubations was the top layer (0–20 For the incubation, fresh soil (equivalent to 283 In total, 14 incubation treatments with crop residues and one control treatment (containing only soil) were handled. The sampling was destructive, by removing tubes in triplicate for each treatment at each sampling date. Samples were taken 1.4, 3.0, 5.1, 6.9, 9.9, 13.1, and 17.0 weeks after the start of the incubation. The soil was removed from the tubes and mineral N (NO The net N mineralization of the crop residues was calculated as the difference between the amounts of inorganic N released in the amended soil and those released in the unamended soil. At each sampling time, means and standard deviations (as percentage of total N) were calculated. The (bio)chemical compositions of the large and fine vegetable roots were compared with each other using a variance analysis (One-way ANOVA, SPSS). Fitting of a single first-order kinetics model to the net N mineralization was performed using non-linear regression (Levenberg–Marquardt algorithm) in SPSS. A correlation analysis of the (bio)chemical parameters with the first-order model parameters was done using a Pearson’s correlation matrix and a stepwise multiple linear regression. The 14 crop residues had a large variation in (bio)chemical composition ( In general, nitrification was very rapid and only trace amounts of ammonium were found during the incubation. In what follows, the net N mineralization is presented in terms of the sum of ammonium-N and nitrate-N. The net N mineralization or N immobilization curves of the vegetable root residues as a function of time are presented in The N mineralization of the green manures is given in The net N mineralization of the 14 crop residues at the end of the incubation (in % of total N) is summarized in We tried to fit a single first-order kinetics model to the net N mineralization patterns of the crop residues: To find correlations between the net N mineralization of crop residues and their (bio)chemical composition, the model parameters Substitution of the regression equations of the parameters Most research on roots has been limited to roots of cover crops, since those are considered as being a potential source of N for the following crop ( So far, the large and fine roots of the cabbages were considered separately. However, under field conditions, the N mineralization of all the roots together is of importance. The division of the roots in large and fine roots has been determined, and was on average 63% large roots and 37% fine roots for red cabbage, white cabbage, and savoy cabbage, and 75% large roots and 25% fine roots for Brussels sprouts (fresh weight basis). Since the large and fine roots had a different N content, the N content must also be considered when calculating the aggregate N mineralization. Therefore, the N mineralization of the fine and large roots was weighed by the fraction of total N they contained. The overall N mineralization of the complete roots is shown in A relationship between the (bio)chemical composition and the net N mineralization of crop residues is limited when it is established after a fixed time, since differences in incubation time affect the amount of N mineralized and thus the relationships with the (bio)chemical composition. Describing the N mineralization of crop residues by a simple mathematical model in function of time first (e.g., by a single first-order model), and then relating the model parameters with the (bio)chemical composition overcomes this problem. Mineralization patterns of crop residues with a low C:N ratio often follow the course of a single first-order model ( The N mineralization process is not only influenced by time, but also by environmental factors such as temperature, soil moisture content, and soil bulk density. It has to be noted that the predictive relationship found here, can only be used under the same experimental conditions as in this study. According to this study, the C:N ratio was the best predicting parameter for the potential amount of N that can mineralize from a crop residue ( In general, root residues showed a net N release after a period of 4 months, except the roots of Brussels sprouts (N immobilization). The large roots of cabbages released maximum 13% of their N and the N released from fine roots was between 20 and 25% of total N. The overall N mineralization (large+fine roots) of the cabbages was on average 15% of total N, which was lower than for the roots of other annual plants, like the leek roots (50% of total N) and the green manures roots (16 and 28% of total N).  The authors wish to express their thanks to the Belgian Ministry of Small Enterprises and Traders and Agriculture, Division Research and Development, for funding this research (project S-6059). We also thank M. Remue, V. Van De Vyvere, L. Bauwens, and T. Coddens for their skilful technical assistance.