Germany produces an annual wildflower biomass of up to 246 Gg, which could benefit renewable energies and biodiversity simultaneously. In addition to its positive ecological functions, wildflowers could be implemented for lignocellulosic bioethanol production. This study focused on enzymatic hydrolysis sugar yields of six wildflower mixtures (WM1-6) for subsequent bioethanol production. To identify sugar yield potentials in WMs in general, all substrates were pretreated with three different methods and hydrolyzed with six different enzymes. The pretreatment methods and applied enzymes showed highly variable efficiencies on WM hydrolysis with released sugar concentrations of 2.9–13.9 g L−1 and 2.3–15.0 g L−1, respectively. Statistical evaluation indicated no preferable pretreatment method or enzyme for WM utilization in general. In fact, the efficiency of pretreatment method and enzymatic hydrolysis was highly dependent on WM composition and needs to be optimized on substrate level. Subsequent experiments focused specifically on enzymatic hydrolysis sugar yields of WM4, showing the highest conversion potential. Pretreating WM4 with ammonia fiber expansion method and hydrolysis with overdosed enzyme loadings of 10 wt% dry solids resulted in high concentrations of glucose and pentose of up to 20.9 and 9.5 g L−1, respectively. This increased the conversion of WM4 to 103%. Overall, enzymatic hydrolysis of WM4 achieved similar (99%) total sugar yields compared to steam-exploded wheat straw, indicating similar bioethanol potentials. The study showed that certain WMs have the potential to substitute wheat straw for lignocellulosic bioethanol production and simultaneously benefit ecosystem services.Current bioethanol production is mainly based on starch and sugar-based feedstocks. These feedstocks are beneficial due to their high ethanol yield potentials. The environmental sustainability of starch- and sugar-based feedstocks has, however, been criticized [ In 2015, ecological focus areas (EFAs) were introduced as key element in the greening of the EU's common agricultural policy. EFAs should be established, in particular, Buffer strips and flower pastures are positively associated with a higher diversity of flora and fauna compared to cropland [ Despite their positive ecosystem functions, wildflowers have rarely been considered as biomass resource for renewable energy production [ Various other lignocellulosic materials have already been investigated as potential feedstocks for bioethanol production. This includes abundant agricultural residues like wheat straw, switchgrass, hard- or softwood [ Commonly applied pretreatment methods for wheat straw in bioethanol or biogas technology are cross-flow shredding (CS), steam explosion (SE) and ammonia fiber expansion (AFEX) [ This study aimed to identify the enzymatic hydrolysis sugar yield and the conversion potentials of defined WMs for subsequent fermentation to lignocellulosic bioethanol. Initially, we explored the effect of (i) three different pretreatment methods and (ii) six different cellulolytic enzymes on enzymatic hydrolysis sugar yields of six WMs. The objective was to identify beneficial enzymatic hydrolysis parameters for the utilization of WMs in general. Subsequently, this studies’ objective was to (iii) identify the WM substrate with the highest conversion potential and to (iv) determine its maximum enzymatic hydrolysis sugar yield potential. The conducted experiments considered six defined WM substrates, three pretreatment methods and subsequent enzymatic hydrolysis with six different enzymes ( Experiment E2 aimed to identify preferable enzymes for WM hydrolysis in general. In E2, the most beneficial pretreatment method, according to E1, was applied to all six WMs and enzymatically hydrolyzed with six different enzymes. To achieve comparable results, enzymatic hydrolysis was performed with equal enzyme loadings, based on pretested enzymatic activities. Beneficial enzymes were identified by comparison of mean values of the achieved enzymatic hydrolysis sugar yields. Experiment E3 was conducted to identify maximum enzymatic hydrolysis sugar yield potentials of one selected WM having the highest conversion potential. Therefore, the conversion of all WM samples to sugar was identified based on the results of E2. The WM with the highest conversion was subsequently pretreated with CS, SE and AFEX and enzymatically hydrolyzed with different enzyme loading of 1 wt% DS (EL1) and 10 wt% DS (EL10). The concentration of EL1 is in range of industrial pilot plants [ Additionally, the WM was compared to wheat straw as a reference substrate. AFEX pretreated wheat straw for EL10 could not be evaluated due to technical problems. All experiments were performed in triplicates. Six different WMs (WM1 - 6) were harvested from separate 10 m The substrates were characterized for DS, volatile solids (VS) and ash according to VDLUFA [ The pretreatment methods consisted of CS, SE and AFEX. To simulate CS in a laboratory scale, the individual substrates were processed with a mixer (Thermomix TM5, Vorwerk & Co. KG, France) equipped with blunt shearing (anti-clockwise rotation) and a cutting rotor (clockwise rotation). All substrates were processed frozen with a rotor speed of 6000 rpm (Thermomix speed level 8) by blunt shearing for 40 s and cutting for 30 s. Blunt shearing was induced to achieve similar comminution forces compared to cross-flow shredding. SE and AFEX were performed in a double-walled 20 L steam reactor (H & K GmbH Behälter und Edelstahltechnik, Kehl, Germany) equipped with a motorized anchor stirrer. Pretreatment conditions have been adapted from Fleischer [ Six different enzymes were used to perform enzymatic hydrolysis of the lignocellulosic biomass. The enzymes included enzyme 1 (Cellic CTec2, Novozymes, Denmark), enzyme 2 (Cellulase1, Biopract, Germany), enzyme 3 (Cellulase2, Biopract Germany), enzyme 4 (C1794, Merck, USA), enzyme 5 (C014, Merck, USA) and enzyme 6 (22178, Merck, USA). An enzyme assay was performed to achieve comparable enzyme activities, based on cellulose degradation. Cellulase activities were assayed in a reaction mixture containing 200 mg cellulose (S5504, Merck, USA), 1 mL citrate buffer (0.05 M, pH 5.0) and 0.5 mL of diluted enzyme solution (1%, diluted in citrate buffer). After 120 min incubation at 37 °C, the reducing sugar liberated in the reaction mixture was measured by dinitrosalicylic acid (DNS) method [ The enzymatic hydrolysis of the pretreated substrates was carried out in stainless steel reactors, mounted in a water bath, equipped with stirring paddles (esnatec, R8-monitoring, Germany). All experiments were initially set to 10 wt% with 20 g DS of substrate diluted in 180 g distilled water. After enzyme addition, the pH level was adjusted to 5.0 ± 0.05 with sulphuric acid (H In E1 the hydrolysis was performed with enzyme 1 applied in a concentration of 3 wt% in regard to the samples’ cellulose content. The enzyme loading was based on Schläfle et al. [ The conversion of lignocellulose to fermentable sugars during the enzymatic hydrolysis was analyzed for glucose, pentose (arabinose and xylose) and cellobiose in the liquid samples. Sugar analysis was performed by high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) using a Rezex RPM-Monosaccharide Pb+2 Ion exclusion column (∅ 7.8 × 300 mm; Phenomenex, USA) and a refractive index detector (RID; Shodex RI-101, Thermo Fisher, USA) with sulphuric acid (0.005 N) as eluent at a flow rate of 0.6 mL min The conversion analysis is based on released sugars from the initial cellulose and hemicellulose concentration (equation Statistical evaluation was performed with SPSS software (Version 25, IBM, USA). Significant differences (p ≤ 0.05) were evaluated by one-way ANOVA with Tukey HSD post-hoc tests. Generated box plot diagrams are based on mean values of the triplicates. The box plot diagrams depict minimum, maximum, upper quartile, lower quartile, and median values of a data set. Results are given in means and standard deviation. The determination of substrate composition in terms of cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin is essential for assessing conversion efficiencies in WMs. The six WMs indicated differences in their substrate composition ( The WM-applied pretreatment methods in E1 resulted in different sugar concentrations during enzymatic hydrolysis. All pretreatment methods showed increasing average total sugar concentrations during the first 24 h of enzymatic hydrolysis ( The pretreatments indicated different effects on enzymatic activities during the first 24 h. SE pretreated substrates indicated an 184% increase of total sugar concentration to 5.9 ± 2.0 g L The initial total sugar concentrations at 0 h also allowed evaluating sugar-releasing effects by pretreatments. CS pretreatment indicated higher amounts of released sugars compared to other pretreatments. An explanation of low initial sugar concentrations in SE and AFEX pretreated substrates can be found in the performed separation step. Solubilized sugars may have been discarded with the liquid phase, decreasing the total sugar concentration in the remaining solids. According to Mes-Hartree et al. [ For economic aspect, pretreatments need to be efficient in terms of high attainable sugar yields and low process costs. AFEX pretreatment requires large amounts of ammonia and energy to achieve optimum reaction conditions [ Enzyme assays showed enzymatic activities of 2394–6859 U mL To identify enzyme preferences on WMs in general, released sugar concentrations were compared after 24 h, according to the results of E1 ( To gain a more detailed picture about convertibility of specific WMs, enzymatic hydrolysis was performed with six different enzymes on CS pretreated WMs. The analyzed substrate conversions in E2 ranged from 4.8 to 34.0% ( Subsequently to results from E1 and E2, an enzymatic hydrolysis sugar yield potential analysis was performed with WM4 in E3 ( The considered economic (EL1) and overdosed enzyme loadings (EL10) indicated an increased sugar hydrolyzing effect for latter. For equally pretreated WM4, enzymatic hydrolysis sugar yields were always significantly higher for EL10 compared to EL1 (p ≤ 0.023). An increase of the enzyme loading resulted in a total sugar increase of 42% for CS pretreatment, 45% for SE pretreatment and 102% for AFEX pretreatment. This indicated that an increased enzyme loading has the potential to release significantly higher amounts of fermentable sugars. Highest enzymatic hydrolysis sugar yields of WM4 were found for AFEX pretreatment. Glucose, pentose and cellobiose concentrations were 9.8 g L Our results support the statement by Alvira et al. [ Comparing WM results with wheat straw indicated substrate-specific differences for efficient hydrolysis. In contrast to WM4, wheat straw reached its maximum glucose, pentose and cellobiose concentrations after SE pretreatment and 48 h of enzymatic hydrolysis with 21.2 g L Our results indicated substrate-based differences in enzymatic hydrolysis sugar yields regarding pretreatment methods. The results showed that AFEX-pretreated WM4 reached 99% of the highest total sugar yield of SE pretreated wheat straw. This indicated, that WM4 had similar bioethanol potentials compared to wheat straw, however, dependent on the applied pretreatment method. Our results indicated that WMs have highly variable enzymatic hydrolysis sugar yield potentials. Ideal parameters for the utilization of WMs in general cannot be derived due to various interdependencies of pretreatment method, enzyme type and substrate properties. Furthermore, it is advisable to adopt pretreatment and enzymatic hydrolysis properties to the species composition of the substrate. However, certain WM substrates have the potential to yield total sugar concentrations >32 g L This work was supported by The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. 