Hydrocyclone-thickener circuit is a promising solution to enhance the dewatering efficiency in mineral industries. The major challenge in the circuit is reducing particle size in the thickener feed and the opportunity is a rise in the residence time of sediments. In this work, the effect of particle size, bed depth and residence time on the pilot thickener performance were investigated. Furthermore, the influence of residence time was differentiated due to the variations in the bed depth and settling flux. Moreover, a new approach was introduced to estimate solids residence time in the thickener. Results indicated that a significant drop in the thickener performance was observed by reducing the particle size. Additionally, it was found that longer residence time and deeper bed increased the thickener performance while the bed depth had a stronger effect.Thickeners are widely utilized in mineral industries to recycle tailings and concentrate water content. During the last decade, the scarcity of global water resources became more serious. Employing a hydrocyclone-thickener circuit is a potential remedy to enhance the dewatering efficiency of thickeners ( Hydrocyclone is well known as a classifier, whereas it could be used as a dewatering tool (  Particle size affects the thickener capacity and compressibility of suspension in the bed ( Since copper concentrators are the largest producers of tailings in mineral industries, an improvement in the dewatering efficiency is essential. To achieve this, the hydrocyclone-thickener circuit may be promising for both existing and future concentrators. The main objective of this research is investigating the effect of particle size and residence time of sediments on the performance of a pilot scale thickener. Tests were conducted using the flotation tailings of Sarcheshmeh and Shahrebabak copper concentrators in Iran. A high molecular weight anionic polymer, with the commercial name CU43U was utilized to induce flocculated suspension. Stock flocculant solution (3 wt.%) was prepared for an hour and then diluted to 0.3 wt.% before application. Flocculant dosage was about 20 g/t during the experiments. A hydrocyclone with the diameter of 50 cm was employed to have a rough estimate of dewatering hydrocyclone performance. Hydrocyclone was mounted with an inclination of 45 degrees and the dimension of spigot as well as operational pressure were modified to enhance the dewatering efficiency. Hydrocyclone tests were conducted to have a rough estimation of solids and water recovery in the underflow. A column with the dimensions of 4 and 0.2 m was employed in this work ( Estimating the residence time of sediments in the thickener is complicated due to the water recovery in the bed. In this work, a new approach was introduced to estimate the residence time. Assuming the entire feed solids content is reported to the discharge, mean residence time of material in the thickener bed could be calculated using Eq. Number of samples were collected from hydrocyclone feed and discharges. Results indicated that the average solids concentration in the hydrocyclone underflow was 66 wt% that is significantly higher than the discharge of a paste thickener in the same conditions. Furthermore, it was found that the average of solids recovery in hydrocyclone underflow was 46%. This result indicates that dewatering hydrocyclone could produce a reasonably thick suspension.    According to the results obtained here, a finer particle size in the hydrocyclone overflow resulted in a lower thickener performance. It could be inferred that if the fine fraction in hydrocyclone overflow was remarkable, its impact on the thickener performance would be significant. Thus, during the sizing of dewatering hydrocyclone, the presence of excessive fines in the overflow must be avoided. The residence time of material in the bed is influenced by the settling flux or the bed depth. The effect of residence time by manipulating the bed depth ( As can be seen from According to   According to the results obtained here, in a hydrocyclone-thickener circuit, an increase in the thickener performance due to longer residence time might be negligible for fines.  According to A numerical example is presented here using the industrial data from copper concentrators in Iran to have a rough evaluation of hydrocyclone-thickener circuit. Suppose a shallow bed thickener (e.g. conventional or high rate) with the throughput of 1000 t/h with 28 and 40 wt.% solids concentrations in the feed and discharge, respectively. Thus, 42% of thickener feed water content is recycled and 58% is lost. Suppose a dewatering hydrocyclone was employed prior to the thickener. In this circumstance, according to the Section Regarding the hydrocyclone-paste thickener circuit, according to the essential role of compression and shear in this thickeners and the influence of fines on that, the effectiveness of this circuit could not be proved here and more research is required. In this work, the challenges and opportunities of a hydrocyclone-thickener circuit including the influences of particle size, bed depth and residence time on the thickener performance were studied. Results indicated that a remarkable reduction was observed in the thickener performance with the finer particles. It was found that particle size affects the floc structure and compressibility of suspension. Moreover, increasing the bed depth increased the thickener performance while the magnitude of the increase depends on the particle size. It was revealed that the thickener performance increased with the residence time. However, the effect of residence time due to the bed depth and settling flux are different. It was showed that utilizing the hydrocyclone before a shallow bed thickener could be beneficial while the effectiveness of hydrocyclone-paste thickener was not proved and needs more studies. The authors would like to thanks,