Purpose
                  The purpose of this prospective cohort study of patients treated with volar plating for distal radius fractures is to evaluate the efficacy (defined as detection rate, or the ability to detect dorsally protruding screws) of additional dorsal tangential views (DTV) after obtaining standard anteroposterior (AP) and elevated lateral views by evaluating the change in intraoperative strategy in 100 patients.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  100 patients aged 18 years and older undergoing volar plating for acute extra- or intra- articular distal radius fractures were prospectively enrolled. Intraoperative fluoroscopy views, including AP, elevated lateral and DTV were obtained. Intraoperative –screw– revision frequency for dorsal screw protrusion, screw position relative to volar plate and to dorsal compartment, and screw lengths were evaluated.
               
                  Results
                  Additional DTV led to a change of intraoperative management in 31 of 100 (31%) of patients. A total of 35 out of 504 screws (6.9%) were changed. Screws in the two most radial screws in the plate were at the highest risk of being revised; 16 (46%) screws in most radial position and nine (26%) screws in the 2nd from radial position were revised. Furthermore, five (14%) screws in both the 2nd from ulnar and most ulnar screw holes were revised after DTV. No screws were revised in the central hole. The median length of revised protruding screws was 22 mm (range, 12–26 mm), and these were changed to a mean length of 20  mm (range, 10–22 mm).
               
                  Conclusion
                  In this prospective series of 100 patients, obtaining additional DTV is found to be efficacious as it led to change in intraoperative strategy in one-third of patients. We concur with previous pilot studies that DTV, after obtaining conventional AP and elevated lateral views, is advised to avoid dorsally protruding screws, which could minimise the potential for iatrogenic extensor tendon rupture after volar plating for distal radius fractures. Diagnostic accuracy of DTV is subject of a subsequent prospective cohort study with post-operative CT to serve as the reference standard.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  .Prognostic IVolar plates for distal radius fractures are increasingly popular [ In 2015, Hill and colleagues recommended the intraoperative use of dorsal tangential view (DTV) to best detect dorsal screw penetration after volar plating based on a cadaveric study [ In our Level-I Trauma Centre DTV fluoroscopy is routinely obtained as per hospital protocol ( Based on our clinical experience and previous literature [ This project was approved by the local Human Research Ethics Committee, in accordance to the Declaration of Helsinki. At our Level-I Trauma Centre, we prospectively included 100 patients undergoing volar plating for extra- or intra-articular distal radius fractures, between September 2016 and May 2017. Patients were included in the study if they were aged 18 years or older, sustained an acute displaced fracture of the distal radius and had a complete radiographic assessment, including anteroposterior and lateral radiographs and/or CT scan displaying the complete fracture, and where open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) with a volar approach and volar locking plate (VA-LCP, Synthes, North Ryde, NSW, Australia) was indicated. The indication for surgery was radiological evidence of distal radius fracture instability [ Exclusion criteria were in accordance with the recent study by Brunner and colleagues [ A total of 100 patients with 100 distal radius fractures underwent surgery and met these inclusion criteria. Of these patients, the mean age was 57 years (range, 18–89). There were 30 (30%) men and 70 (70%) women. Distal radius fracture occurred in 50 right (50%) and 50 left (50%) wrists. According to the AO/Orthopaedic Trauma Association classification [ All fractures were surgically treated by or under the supervision of an attending trauma consultant at the Department of Orthopaedic Surgery. A volar approach through the FCR-bed was used to expose the volar radius. Variable locking compression plates (VA-LCP, Synthes, North Ryde, NSW, Australia) were used. The plate was used according to the recommendations of the manufacturer. Even though smooth pegs -that might reduce the risk on tendon pathology- are available for this design, the smooth peg configuration in this plate design potentially compromises the stability [ Prior to the index procedure, surgeons were instructed to save all their DTV views–including fluoroscopy views that revealed protruding screws– to our Digital Archiving System. Pre-operatively, surgeons did not receive additional specified instructions on performance or standardization of DTV fluoroscopy (Siemens, OEC 9900 Elite) as it has been common practice in our Level I Trauma Centre. Obtaining DTV as standardized in our trauma protocol is according to pre-clinical work by Haug [ Patient characteristics (age, gender, affected side and fracture type) were summarized with frequencies and percentages for categorical variables and with mean and standard deviation for continuous variables. SPSS 21.0 (IBM Corp, Armonk, New York) was used for statistical analyses. Power analysis revealed that with an estimated 35% of patients [ Post-hoc power analysis reveals 99% power (α = 0.05) with a total of 100 patients. A total of 35 out of 504 screws (6,9%) were changed after obtaining additional DTVs. This led to change of intraoperative strategy based on additional DTVs after standardized AP and elevated lateral views in 31 of 100 (31%) prospectively included patients. DTVs revealed dorsal cortex protrusion in 26 of 100 included fractures (26%) –the remainder 5 cases (5%) had screws changed to longer screws– with a median screw length of 22 mm (range, 12–26 mm) changed to 20  mm (range, 10–22 mm). Only one screw of 26 mm was used and exchanged, which represents an outlier and is an uncommon screw length to use in volar plating for distal radius fractures. Following changes to shorter screws, none continued to protrude on subsequent DTVs. Treating surgeons decided to change to longer screws in 5 cases (5%) with lengths from 16 mm (range, 14–20 mm) to 20 mm (range 16–24 mm). The exchange of screws was distributed equally among fracture types and was not found to be more prevalent in more complex cases: in Type A 13 cases out of 39 (33%), Type B 12 cases out of 39 (31%), Type C 6 cases out of 22 (27%) had one or more screws exchanged. Screws in the radial styloid had the highest risk of being too long; 16 (46%) were changed. No screws after DTV were changed in the central –Lister’s Tubercle– hole in plates with 5 holes. Nine (26%) in the 2nd from radial- and five (14%) in both 2nd from ulnar and ulnar positions were changed ( During the study period, one patient had an extensor pollicis longus (EPL) rupture, which may have been caused by either the protruding screw that was not identified on DTV, or fracture fragment spica obscuring the obtained view as identified on computed tomography ( The purpose of this prospective cohort study of patients treated with volar plating for distal radius fractures is to evaluate the efficacy (defined as detection rate, or the ability to detect dorsally protruding screws) of additional DTV after obtaining standard AP and elevated lateral views by evaluating the change in intraoperative strategy in 100 patients. To the best of our knowledge, to date there are no large prospective clinical trials to evaluate the efficacy of DTV in daily practice. In our prospective cohort of 100 included distal radius fractures in 100 patients we found that DTV identified protruding screws in 26 cases (26%), and let to change of intraoperative management in 31 cases (31%) - after standardized AP and elevated lateral views were deemed satisfactorily. Delayed ruptures of extensor tendons secondary to the use of volar locking compression plates for distal radial fractures is in some cases an avoidable iatrogenic complication [ In 2015, Brunner and colleagues evaluated the reliability of DTV clinically in a preliminary study of 22 patients. The authors found DTV to be reliable in terms of in vivo visualisation of the –fractured– dorsal radial cortex and reliable assessment of the distance between the screw tip and the dorsal cortex. In line with pre-clinical studies [ In contrast in 2016, the accuracy of DTV was debated in a review of 26 –non-consecutive– patients with both DTV and post-operative computed tomography (CT) available as the reference standard [ In a recent review article, Balfour advocated the use of ultrasound (US) to identify excessively long screws or screw penetration into joints [ This study should be interpreted in the light of strengths and weakness. This study is limited by the purpose and design –a prospective cohort study– rather than a randomized controlled trial comparing traditional AP and elevated lateral views in group 1, and an additional DTV in group 2. We considered a RCT to be unethical as the latter has been common practice in our institution with a pre-study estimate of 35% of change in intraoperative practice (i.e. change of screws) [ We conclude that obtaining additional DTV is found to be efficacious as it led to change in per-operative strategy in one-third of patients. We concur with previous pilot studies that obtaining DTV –the Lleyton Hewitt view in South Australia– after obtaining conventional AP and elevated lateral views is advised to avoid dorsally protruding screws, which could further minimise the potential for iatrogenic extensor tendon rupture caused by protruding screws after volar plating for distal radius fractures. Despite using this technique, the surgeon needs to be mindful that there is still a 1% chance of EPL tendon rupture [ There are no conflicts of interest to declare. No funding was provided for this study.