Denitrification losses from irrigated sandy soil in Central Spain were studied through laboratory and field experiments. In both cases, the acetylene inhibition technique was applied. In the laboratory, potential denitrification was estimated by varying soil nitrate and carbon availability as well as oxygen depletion through the soil water content at a constant (25°C) temperature. Potential denitrification was evaluated within a range of 6–12kg Nha−1
                     day−1. When extra soil nitrate and carbon contents were not supplied, observed potential denitrification ranged from 2 to 6kg Nha−1
                     day−1 depending on soil water content. The effect of temperature was also studied with the aim of calibrating the influence of the day–night cycle on denitrification. A simple experiment was carried out indicating a N2O+N2 emission four times greater in the case of treatment at a constant temperature than for treatment with a fluctuating temperature, but with the same average temperature. Field experiments were carried out for 2 years on two crops with different cycles: oats, grown in winter and spring with a short irrigation period, and maize, an intensively irrigated summer crop. Moreover, three N treatments were tested: two controls with different N levels and one fertilized with urea. Denitrification was periodically estimated, and soil temperature, water and nitrate content simultaneously measured. Daily denitrification rates (kg Nha−1
                     day−1) ranged from 0 for all treatments to 1.2 for the urea-treated plot. Maximum emission was observed with the urea treatment (40.7kg Nha−1) during the whole period of the experiment; 10% of N applied with urea fertilizer was estimated to be lost, mainly during the maize period, when high temperatures and soil N and water contents coincide. Finally, a prediction model was evaluated with acceptable results. This makes it possible to evaluate agronomic practices in relation to their effect on denitrification losses.Denitrification (N Denitrification may be of chemical or biological (bacterial) origin. Chemodenitrification is not carried out by micro-organisms and occurs in a reduction ambient with a pH under 5.5 ( Biological denitrification is much more usual. In the total or partial absence of oxygen, facultative aerobic Pseudomonas and Thiobacillus use N−NO Soil water content is an important factor controlling denitrification. Simulating management practices such as irrigation, The aim of this study was to estimate the magnitude of the denitrification losses from irrigated crops in central Spain. Likewise, we aimed to discover what the main environmental parameters controlling said losses are, and to what extent they have an effect. Finally, given that urea is one of the most widely used nitrogenous fertilizers, we wished to see how its use affects N losses from the soil through denitrification. The soil used for the laboratory experiments came from the CSIC's La Poveda Experimental Farm in Arganda del Rey, 30 Mean (last 10 years) temperature in this area is 13.5°C, with an average maximum of 20.7°C and minimum of 6.2°C. Mean annual rainfall is 461 Denitrification was first estimated in the laboratory to measure size and optimal conditions, and later in the field. In both cases, it was estimated through incubations using the acetylene inhibition technique ( The incubations were carried out in 1 Three independent experiments were carried out. Experiment 1: potential denitrification. The soil was incubated in theoretically optimal conditions for denitrification, i.e. anoxic conditions (submerged soil), a temperature of 25°C and high substrate (N−NO Four treatments were carried out with three replicates for each: 200 200 200 200 The gas samples were taken after 24 and 48 Experiment 2: constant temperature. Given the results of Experiment 1, a second experiment was designed to represent conditions more similar to those that may occur in the field. Thus, moisture was reduced and neither glucose nor N−NO 200 200 The gas samples were taken 24, 48 and 72 Experiment 3: fluctuating temperature. Given the results of the previous experiments, we attempted to reproduce field conditions better via a third experiment to discover the possible effect of temperature and, especially, of temperature fluctuations throughout the day. The treatments, with three replications, were conducted with a moisture content at field capacity (56 constant temperature of 25°C constant temperature of 18°C simulating temperature fluctuations in spring so that average temperature was 18°C, with a 23°C maximum and 12°C minimum. Temperatures were adjusted every 3 The experiment was conducted in 1996 and 1997. Nine 100-m In January 1996, the oat ( A mobile-line overhead sprinkler irrigation system was used for watering the experimental field, the irrigation dose being adjusted to crop requirements in accordance with the process described in N Six soil cores (2 Total N Numerous attempts have been made to explain the N cycle in agricultural soils using different mathematical models. The SOILN model ( The effect of oxygen availability ( In order to reflect the effect of temperature, a The effect of the nitrate is expressed by means of the Michaelis-Menten equation type, i.e. as a hyperbolic function controlled by a constant of average saturation.  The results of Experiment 2 indicate some losses due to denitrification in moisture conditions most similar to those occurring in the field. According to our experiment, denitrification losses may reach values between 2 and 6  Nitrous oxide accumulation due to denitrification initially behaves similarly in treatments at a constant temperature, but, after some hours, it increases significantly ( There were no significant differences ( At the end of the experiment, the effect of temperature was evident, both as regards magnitude and oscillations (  The N However, emissions did not occur at a constant rate, but instead peaked at critical periods. Specifically, 54% (22.0 Duncan's multiple range test revealed significant differences (  Correlation between denitrification and the experiment's controlled environmental parameters (temperature and moisture content) was studied. N  The results of the samples incubated at 18 and 25°C indicate that denitrification follows a zero order kinetics over 36 When The value obtained is Constant For urea, The main discrepancies occurred at times when it was difficult to explain the existence of high denitrification rates. In this sense, the model was seen to be particularly sensitive to moisture and temperature variations, which is why greater differences between observed and estimated values were found at the start of the experiment. The denitrification value accumulated over the 2 years that recording took place (40.7 The laboratory experiments showed the potential denitrification of soil. In the treatments to field capacity, denitrification losses could have been caused by simultaneous nitrification and denitrification phenomena. Moreover, the evident effect of day–night temperature oscillations was observed, since the denitrification processes slowed down, as was expected. Our values are very similar to those of Our results enable us to state that, in irrigated summer crops, there were N losses due to denitrification–nitrification. As these losses are mainly caused by soil moisture and soil nitrate content, careful management of agricultural practices involving fertilization and irrigation are very important when it comes to minimizing losses. As regards fertilizer use, it was estimated that 10% of N fertilizer applied to maize in top dressing may be lost, although fertilizer applications (150 The strong influence of nitrate content on denitrification can be seen by comparing Moreover, when moisture content was below threshold values ( Temperature is a controversial factor. On the one hand, some authors recognise its influence ( Despite our not being able to apportion N We verified that denitrification processes were simulated realistically in accordance with the three control parameters (moisture, nitrate content and temperature). In general, the model simulates denitrification losses changes well, in except at those times when the field results were difficult to explain in relation to the evolution of environmental parameters. The model could be very useful for simulating the effect of agricultural irrigation and nitrogenous fertilizer use on denitrification losses. We acknowledge the assistance of Angel Caballero and Pedro J. Hernáinz, attached to La Poveda Field Station (CCM, CSIC), in performing most of the field work and M.D. Atienza for her collaboration in the laboratory tasks.