HCl extractable mineral soluble in 0.03 N HCl the concentration of HCl found in human stomach is an index of its bioavailability from foods. The amount of HCl-extractable calcium, phosphorus and iron in raw and unprocessed seeds of rice bean and fababean were (70.2, 55.2), (78.0, 71.2) and (33.4, 35.1), respectively. Among all the domestic processing methods, sprouting was the best method followed by dehulling and soaking (12 h) for improving the extractability of Ca, P and Fe whereas did not affect the total mineral contents. The husks of these legumes had significantly lower levels of extractable Ca, P and Fe.Ricebean (RB-32) and fababean (VH-82-1), high yielding varieties of non-conventional pulses are good sources of dietary protein, ash, fat and crude fiber content ( Various processing methods namely soaking, dehulling, sprouting have been reported to lower the level of antinutrients phytic acid which is a powerful chelating agent for dietary essential minerals ( The seeds of ricebean (RB-32) and fababean (VH-82-1) were procured from the Department of Plant Breeding, CCS Haryana Agricultural University, Hisar, India. The seeds were cleaned of dust and other foreign particles prior to domestic processing treatments. Raw seeds were powdered in an electric grinder (Cyclotec, M/s Tecator, Hoganas, Sweden, using a 0.5-mm sieve size), packed in air-tight containers and used as a control.   All processed samples were dried in the hot air oven at 60 °C to a constant weight, ground in an electric grinder (Cyclotec, M/S Tecator, Hoganas, Sweden) using a 0.5-mm sieve size and packed in air-tight containers for further chemical analysis. Ca, P and Fe were extracted in 0.03 N HCl for 3 h at 37 °C and digested in diacid mixture. The amount of extractable calcium and phosphorus were analyzed by titration and colorimetric methods, respectively ( The obtained data were subjected to statistical analysis for working out the analysis of variance in a completely randomized design ( Total calcium, iron and phosphorus contents of ricebean and fababean were 311.7, 201.2; 6.6, 5.2; 257.1, 245.8 mg/100 g, respectively ( The HCl-extractability of calcium, iron and phosphorus was 70.2, 78.0 and 33.4%, respectively, in unprocessed ricebean seeds ( Unprocessed fababean seeds had the highest HCl-extractability of iron (71.2%) followed by that of calcium (55.2%) and phosphorus (35.1%). Processing methods namely, soaking, dehulling and germination improved the extractability of Ca, Fe and P to varying extents ( As the divalent cations are generally present in association with phytic acid in processed legumes and, therefore, may be responsible for lower extractability of these divalent cations in ricebean and fababean. Decrease in the level of phytic acid during soaking, dehulling and sprouting ( Sprouting was the best processing method followed by dehulling and soaking for improving the HCl extractability of Ca, P and Fe. Development and consumption of sprouted legume products should be encouraged by the vulnerable masses so as to improve their nutritional status.