In hydrocyclones, the classification efficiency is limited by the fines, which are discharged together with the water in the underflow. It is well known that the injection of water in the conical portion of the cyclone reduces the fines in the underflow. This paper presents an improved technique, which is done via an injection at the upper end of the apex or the conical end. This results in a greater washing effect and reduced consumption of wash water. The process is stabilized by controlled water injection specific to the underflow shape. This controlled wash water injection is applied to kaolin processing for the reduction of kaolin losses in the cyclone underflow.
                  A series of tests using 50-mm cyclones was conducted in this work, which demonstrates the marked improvement of the partition curves using controlled water injection.There have been several attempts focused on improving the washing of the sediment in the conical section of the hydrocyclone (  In summary, the application of water injection in cyclones has been restricted up to now to special cases and separations in the coarse range. The addition of water disrupts the cyclone flow and can easily deteriorate the separation. A further disadvantage is its sensitivity to changing feed conditions. The test rig consisted of a 50-mm hydrocyclone that was fed with a centrifugal pump and operated in a closed circuit. The hydrocyclone parameters are listed in The feed consisted of 30% feldspar (coarse) and 70% kaolin (fine). The concept of the water injection is shown in To fully understand this influence, the injection was installed at different distances from the cyclone end: 40 As expected, the best result is obtained when the injection point is positioned at the cone end (40  For fine particle displacement to the inner vortex, it is necessary to overcome a minimum tangential injection velocity  The optimum injection parameters must balance several aspects of the operation: the water consumption The effect of a 3  The most important implication from  This effect not only improves the cut size, but also the sharpness of separation, which is illustrated in  Low underflow diameters result in increased thickening, which enables better preconditions for the injection. A higher solid content at the injection point reduces the liquid that is to be displaced by the injection water. Consequently, hydrocyclones with water injection should be operated with apexes that are as small as possible. However, the increase of the cut size should also be taken into consideration. The relationship of the underflow diameter or the underflow solid content with the injection effect indicates that the feed conditions influence the process. Higher feed solid contents and/or coarser feeds will change the underflow solid content as well as the wash effect. Therefore, the injection must be controlled to stabilize the optimal injection rate. The control concept utilizes the measured underflow shape, which is dependent on the feed properties and the injection rate. The sensor monitoring the underflow stream is connected to the control database. Signals from the optical sensor, which indicate the shape and time behavior of the underflow, are transmitted to the interface together with the pump power input and the feed pressure. A valve in the water injection pipe performs the control action. As the water injection increases, the spray angle of the underflow tends to higher values. To operate with high solids content in the underflow, the cyclone must be stabilized at a small spray angle not far from the transition point spray/rope. Each control interval is 0.3 A new method of water injection to hydrocyclones, characterized by injection in the lowest possible point at the end of the apex nozzle, was investigated in this effort. An advantage of this solution is an improved separation relative to previous alternatives. The investigation confirmed that an optimum injection rate exists where a high washing effect of the fine particles is combined with stable or even smaller cut sizes, with a more defined separation resolution. The water consumption is reduced by 50% of the water in the underflow. However, the water injection at the apex is sensitive to variations in the feed. Therefore, the hydrocyclone operation with water injection must be stabilized at the optimum via a controlled water injection. This control is based on the measurement of the discharge shape of the underflow. This procedure enables the application of water injection even for small 50-mm cyclones. In these investigations, the kaolin loss in the under flow was reduced to about 50%. Possible applications of controlled water injection include desliming before flotation, kaolin preparation, or soil washing.