In this study, torrefied sawdust produced from pine sawdust in a fixed bed reactor was mixed with different binders in a ratio of 5–30wt.%, and then compressed into pellets in a single die press to explore the feasibility of making torrefied pellets from torrefied powders. The quality of torrefied pellets was examined based on pellet density, higher heating value, hardness, saturated moisture uptake, and energy density. Results showed that torrefied sawdust particles prepared under typical torrefaction conditions (280–300°C for 10–30min) could be made into strong pellets by compression at a die temperature higher than 220°C or by introducing biomass binders such as untreated sawdust, starch or lignin at a lower die temperature. The pellets density and bulk density made at a low die temperature with binders were slightly lower than those made at a die temperature of 220°C or higher without the binder, and the energy density of torrefied pellets was similar to the control pellets made from untreated sawdust. Since the raw sawdust is abundantly available and much cheaper than lignin and starch, it is recommended as a low-cost and effective binder for densifying torrefied sawdust into torrefied pellets.Biochar is a kind of charcoal produced at moderate to high temperatures from forest residues, agricultural residues, or organic wastes via torrefaction, pyrolysis or gasification. Biochar has many advantages such as high heating value, slow degradation, and low greenhouse gas emissions To densify biochar powders, a mechanical force is applied to compact particles into pellets. Rumpf and Knepper The quality of pellets, as determined by pellet density, heating value, hardness, moisture uptake, and energy density, strongly depends on the feedstock quality and the densification condition. Biochar can be produced over a wide range of temperatures (250–600 Binders have been explored to improve the quality of torrefied pellets. Wu investigated the use of lignosulphonate and starch as binders for the pelletization of torrefied sawdust produced from southern pine at 300 In the present work, we explored the raw biomass as a potential low-cost binder for torrefied pellets production based on the hypothesis that the large fraction of natural lignin in the raw biomass can be used as a natural binder for densification of torrefied sawdust. The performance of biomass binder and the quality of resulted torrefied pellets were investigated in comparison with lignin and starch binders, which have been examined extensively in the literature as effective binders for biochar densification and used commercially. To examine the feasibility of the proposed biomass binder, biochar prepared from pine sawdust under typical torrefaction conditions in a fixed bed reactor was densified into pellets with raw pine sawdust as a binder at different proportion. The quality of torrefied pellets was then assessed based on the pellet density, higher heating value, hardness, saturated moisture content, and energy density. Pine woodchips from FPInnovation were used as the test raw material in the present work. Pine woodchips were prepared by drying in a THELCO laboratory PRECISION oven (Thermo Electron Corporation, U.S.A.; Model: THELCO laboratory PRECISION) at 105 In the present work, untreated pine sawdust, lignin and starch were used as binders for the densification of biochar. The untreated pine sawdust includes three different sizes for examining the particle size effect. Starch in the powder form was purchased from Save-on-Foods store. Lignin in the powder form with an average molecular number of 10,000 and a molecular weight of 60,000 A bench-scale fixed-bed tubular reactor was used for the production of biochar. The unit includes a tubular reactor, an electrical gas pre-heater with a temperature controller and a power supply, a cooler, a condensate receiver, and a computer data acquisition system. The reactor has an inside diameter of 27 During the biochar production, the nitrogen flow rate was set at 0.014 A press machine (Measurement Technology Inc., USA; Model: MTI 50 To prepare sample for densification, biochar was mixed with the binder and 10 The single pellet density was calculated from measured mass and volume of individual pellets. A humidity chamber (ESPEC CORP, Japan; Model: LHU-113) was used to measure the saturated moisture content of pellets. Before the moisture uptake tests, pellets were dried in the THELCO laboratory PRECISION oven at 105 The Meyer hardness of pellets was also measured by the MTI 50 For the production of biochar, the reaction temperature plays a very important role.  In our previous work The most important parameter of pellets quality is the single pellet density, which directly relates to energy density and pellet strength. Many researchers reported the densification results for biochar samples prepared at typical torrefaction conditions (250–300 During pelletization of sawdust, the voids of the softened tracheid are significantly reduced under the compression force, as evidenced by the closeness of the single wood pellet density (1270  Since both lignin and starch have been widely used as the natural binders for making biochar and charcoal pellets/briquettes in commercial operations, it is important to compare the performance of biomass sawdust binder with lignin and starch in our current lab-scale single die test unit. Similar to biomass sawdust, starch and lignin as the binder can improve the durability of biochar pellets because starch increases the adhesion forces between biochar particles and lignin builds the solid bridges between biochar particles. Starch and lignin binders, however, cannot enhance the energy density of biochar pellets because, like raw sawdust, they cannot fill the new pores created in the biomass torrefaction process at a die temperature below their melting temperature. To compress torrefied biomass powders into strong pellets, different types of binders were explored. It was found that the raw biomass particles smaller than 1 The authors are grateful to the financial support from