AVEBE produces starch from potato, wheat and tapioca. Annually approximately 800,000 ton potato starch, used in paper and food industry is produced. Hydrocyclones are used for classification of starch and fibres and for washing out remaining soluble components from the starch slurry. The hydrocyclone batteries have between 6 and 20 stages. To choose the ”optimal” (meaning economical optimum based on energy consumption (pressure drop), flow, separation efficiency, wear resistance etc., which is determined by the dimensions of the hydrocyclone) hydrocyclone dimensions and column configuration, 26 different species of hydrocyclones of 10 and 15 mm were tested. For these investigations a statistical central composite experimental design is used. The results of the experimental design are used to model the response area of the hydrocyclone performance for the complete process parameter space. From the statistical process model the economic performance in the factory is calculated. All the different hydrocyclones have been listed based on economical performance in terms of exploitation costs per unit product (potato starch). Although the hydrocyclones ran under different process conditions, these process conditions gave optimal economical results for any particular hydrocyclone type.current good manufacturing practice central composite design deviation (–) diameter (mm) energy consumption (J) hydrocyclone yield (–) reduced hydrocyclone yield (–) height (mm) grade efficiency (%) reduced efficiency (%) liquid split (water flow in the concentrate flow deviated by water flow in the feed flow) (–) mean absolute error pressure (Pa) poly-amid poly-ethene poly-ether–ether-ketone poly-propene poly-urethane particle size distribution correlation coefficient flow ratio (concentrate flow deviated by feed flow) (–) standard error of estimate average velocity (m/s) angle (°) difference density (kg/m flow (kg/s) flow (m AVEBE produces starch from potato, wheat and tapioca. Annually approximately 800,000 ton potato starch, used in paper and food industry is produced. Hydrocyclones are used for classification of starch and fibres and for washing out remaining soluble components from the starch slurry. To describe the performance of hydrocyclones many parameters are used. In the past AVEBE used the density of concentrate flow and/or pressure drop between feed and overflow. With these performance indicators it is not possible to compare different hydrocyclones in columns. The new approach was to look at the total costs for the treatment of one unit of product (potato starch). For this investigation it is decided to look for commercially available small (smaller than 25 mm) hydrocyclones. A total of 26 different hydrocyclones from eleven suppliers, were tested. The process parameters to test these hydrocyclones are feed flow, solid concentration of the feed and the flow ratio at a constant temperature. The results were feed flow, feed density, feed pressure, feed PSD, concentrate flow, concentrate density, concentrate pressure, concentrate PSD, overflow flow, overflow density, overflow pressure, overflow PSD, process temperature and hydrocyclone geometry. To reduce the amount of measurements the statistical experimental design of the CCD scheme is used ( All hydrocyclones were tested in a test rig as shown in For the CCD scheme eventually three parameters (feed flow, feed density and flow ratio) were chosen. So the CCD scheme is filled with an average for all three parameters, a deviation from that average and an extreme deviation from the average of 2/3 of the initial deviation. In In a potato starch factory, the last 15 years a trend is seen to integrate all process parts to avoid unnecessary water consumption ( The “starch processing” part has to be described in detail ( Potatoes (   The casings are built together to hydrocyclone columns ( For the selection of the hydrocyclones for each cyclone the optimum based on fresh water consumption can be calculated. As an example, the consequences for increasing the freshwater consumption will be: Less investment in hydrocyclones due to less stages, higher energy cost for the higher hydraulic load per stage, higher steam consumption at the coagulation process and the evaporation process and also higher hydraulic load, so more energy consumption for the aerobic waste water treatment. All these consequences are put in a mathematical model of the total factory. In the current model the energy consumption of the hydrocyclones is based on the different flows and the different pressures of the feed, concentrate and overflow. Based on energy consumption of a single hydrocyclone, the energy consumption of a casing and a column can be calculated. It is assumed that there are no further energy losses in the casing (ideal situation). Also the number of stages is calculated under the restriction that the product specifications of the starch (fine fibre and soluble protein content) are met. Starch slurries wear all kind of material, especially with the shear forces and liquid speed at the inlet, concentrate outlet and overflow outlet of a hydrocyclone. In practice PE, PU, PA and PP hydrocyclones have to be exchanged once every year. So for this investigation the assumption is made that low wear resistance material hydrocyclones have to be changed every year, and that high wear resistance material hydrocyclones like PEEK en ceramics have a life time of 10 years or more. Starch losses of a single hydrocyclone will by definition not result in losses in the factory. The 15 mm hydrocyclone column is followed by all kinds of recovery steps. as shown in Beside the four parameters starch losses, water consumption, wear resistance and energy consumption also the concentrate density will determine the performance of a hydrocyclone. As shown in As described in “Measurements”, a CCD scheme with three independent process parameters gives 16 experiments per hydrocyclone ( The relative economic value is expressed as the ratio of the calculated value and the average of all measurements with 15 mm hydrocyclones. Looking at The CCD was chosen to obtain a good description of the response surface as function of the three process parameters with a low amount of experiments. The next step will be to model the operational cost and the concentrate density as a function of the process parameters. This can be done in three ways, either a physical model, a pure statistical model or a hybrid model. The available physical models are not accurate enough for our purpose. When using a pure statistical model the function found for the different hydrocyclones will be based on different parameters. A hybrid model is chosen were physical parameters are used to find the best statistical fit. One can adjust the coefficients to find the best fit each hydrocyclone. Looking at the results in this case we used one set of coefficients for the 15 mm and another set for the 10 mm hydrocyclones. To find an optimum equation for describing the operational costs and the concentrate density, not only the process parameters are used but also geometric parameters of the hydrocyclones. In With the aid of the StatGraphics software package, a relation was searched between the The second relation that had to be established was that of the underflow density obtained at the various process settings. In this case it was possible to obtain a single correlation, fitting all data, as only parameters obtained from the mass balance were grouped. The starting point in applying StatGraphics to obtain a correlation between various parameters is to establish the statistically significant parameters with the aid of an ANOVA analysis ( As a first attempt, data for both the 15 and 10 mm hydrocyclones were grouped in a single data file. This input was used for the ANOVA analysis to establish a correlation between the geometry and process settings, with either the total operating cost or concentrate flow and density as dependent variable. In the case of operating cost, a satisfactory correlation describing all cases could not be established. As stated above, this can be ascribed to the difference in starch price, water and energy cost used in calculating the total operating cost. If a single correlation is required, this would have to consider the starch loss separately––as a mass flow––and water consumption, rather than the cost of operation. Therefore, the data for 10 and 15 mm hydrocyclones were considered separately in modelling the operating cost. However, an identical equation could still be applied in the two cases. In modelling the concentrate density, it was possible to obtain a single correlation which fitted the data for 10 and 15 mm cyclones. To reduce the variability in predicting the concentrate density (i.e. to obtain a higher The statistical accuracy of the multiple regression analysis of the function of concentrate density to process settings and hydrocyclone geometry, the statistical parameters are shown in Again, the reduced yield correlation was first established, using the combined data for 10 and 15 mm cyclones. Subsequently, an attempt was made to improve the accuracy of the correlation (but keeping the same form), by considering the two data sets separately. Note that the combined data-set equation does not offer an improvement in accuracy in predicting the reduced yield for 10 mm cyclones. Although the The final correlation is for predicting the operational costs is relatively simple. Implicit in the reduced yield is the relation to cyclone geometry and process settings. The chosen correlation is by no means the only possible combination of parameters to model the operating cost. A fair estimate can also be achieved with a correlation of the form With such a correlation a With each multiple regression calculation performed, StatGraphic reports outliers, which do not seem to fit the general trend in a data set. In modelling operating cost, concentrate density and reduced yield it was found that the complete data set for one type of hydrocyclone was indicated as an unusual residual. This was the evaluation of a 15 mm hydrocyclone for application in tapioca starch refining. Clearly the hydrocyclone is not suitable for such an application and hence this data set was removed prior to determining the coefficients in the final correlation's. Tapioca starch has a small granules. In The correlation for predicting the total operating cost was applied at three levels of feed density, feed rates and Rf-values. At the same process setting the estimated underflow density was calculated. This gave a matrix of results, where the minimum cost point could be evaluated against the desired concentrate density. By considering the magnitude and sign ((+) or (−)) of the coefficients formula the minimum cost will be achieved at maximum feed rate, a high Rf value is desirable for operation at minimum cost, but will limit the achievable concentrate density, operational cost will increase proportional to the feed density, especially the concentrate diameter, but also the vortex height are significant geometrical parameters for the operating cost and achievable concentrate density. Considering these influences on the operational costs it is possible to rank the different hydrocyclones ( In • The use of a statistical experimental design to reduce the amount of experiments while keeping a good, reliable and robust model for the response surface gave reliable results for almost all tested hydrocyclones. • Using a hybrid model in which the statistically most important process parameters are used to describe the response area resulted in large differences in operational. By using an integrated approach the most important process parameters could be deducted. As a result of the statistical approach the physical underlying are not clear. • Small changes in hydrocyclone geometry have big influences on the process parameters (pressure drop, concentrate density etc.) which are leading in the integrated plant calculations of the variable costs for starch refining. • Particular important hydrocyclone geometry design factors for starch processing are the concentrate diameter ( • This study clearly indicates that an integrated approach for economic performance of hydrocyclones gives better results than strictly physical models describing hydrocyclones.