To describe the essence of the inter-particle breakage behavior of the granular materials in the cone crusher accurately, an improved model is established based on the inter-particle breakage theory and population balance theory. In this model, a relative particle size ratio is introduced for describing the breakage characteristics of particles with different size, and the transformation of particle shape is considered in the inter-particle breakage.
                  According to the standards of BS 812 part 105, the cubic and flaky particles are selected as breakage materials of inter-particle breakage experiment. Based on the experimental data, the influence of compression ratio, particle size distribution ratio and relative particle size ratio on the inter-particle breakage is investigated, the particle shape transformation function of polynomial form is built, and then the improved inter-particle breakage model considering the transformation of particle shape is established. Thus, the dynamic process of inter-particles breakage with two kinds of particle shapes in the cone crusher is simulated, and the flakiness index of cone crusher product can be calculated theoretically.
                  A full-scale test with ZS200MF cone crusher was conducted in Tangshan, China. The particle size distribution and particle shape component of the crushing product were investigated by simulation with the improved model. Through the comparison of the measurement and the simulation, the maximum error of cumulated weight distribution is 4.8%, and the maximum error of flakiness index is 4.6%, then the effectiveness and practicability of this model are proved. Thus, the improved model can predict the quality of crushing product by utilizing the granular property of feed, the geometry of crushing chamber and operational parameters of cone crusher, which provides a theoretical foundation for product quality improvement, high-energy crushing chamber design and operational parameters optimization of cone crusher.feed size vector of the cubic feed size vector of the flaky feed size vector of the cubic selection matrix of the cubic breakage matrix of the breakage operator matrix of the transportation operator matrix of the cubic transformation matrix of the cubic product size vector of the flaky product size vector of the flaky selection matrix of the flaky transformation matrix of the flaky breakage matrix of the cubic product size vector of the particle size distribution ratio, Eq. mass ratio of the average particle size in the compression ratio, Eq. compressed length, Eq. crushing zone height, Eq. relative particle size ratio, Eq. max size of feed particle, Eq. min size of feed particle, Eq. transformation function, Eq. transformed product weight, Eq. total product weight, Eq. parameters used in Eq. parameters used in Eq. The cone crusher is an indispensable piece of equipment in the crushing process of granular materials. It is widely used in mining, road construction, chemical industry and other industrial departments. The performance of cone crusher is reflected by the particle size distribution and particle shape component of the crushing product. The model of the inter-particle breakage of the cone crusher reveals the essence of the breakage behavior in the cone crusher. The model can calculate the information of particle size distribution and particle shape component in the dynamic crushing process and provide theoretical guidance of the optimization of the crushing product quality through the dynamic adjustment of parameters in crushing process. Hence, the research on inter-particles breakage model of granular material has important theoretical and practical significance. The model of inter-particle breakage behavior in cone crusher was investigated by many scholars. The crushing process is composed of a series of breakage events, and the feed of each breakage event is the product of the previous event. The aim of this paper is to put forward an improved method which can calculate the particle size distribution and particle shape component of the crushing product by the combination of particle information and the structure of cone crusher. Base on the studies of selection function of breakage model which is put forward by The granular material is fed into the cone crusher chamber through the inlet. Because of the gyration of the main shaft, the granular material is broken and discharged. According to the geometry of the crushing chamber and the flow characteristic of the granular material, the path of granular material can be obtained according to the flow model which is presented by The granular material is broken several times in the crushing chamber. The inter-particle breakage model can be applied to describe the essence of a series of broken behaviors. In one broken behavior, the granular material is partly broken, and the broken material is distributed randomly in the product. There are two forms of breakage behaviors in each crushing zone: the reduction of particle size and the transformation of particle shape. The reduction of particle size includes: the cubic particles are broken into smaller cubic particles, and the flaky particles are broken into smaller flaky particles. However, some of the cubic particles are broken into flaky particles with the influence of shear action between other particles, and at the same times, due to the geometrical characteristic of the flaky particles, they are more easily broken into cubic particles, and then the transformation of particle shape happens. Granular material in each crushing zone of cone crusher is composed of two kinds of particles with different size. The particle mixture is broken once when they pass through each crushing zone. One breakage in crushing zone includes one reduction of particle size and one transformation of particle shape, then, all kinds of breakage product are mixed and become the feed to the next stage of breakage. Based on the existing breakage model which is put forward by The feed of inter-particle breakage behaviors in the Due to the broken behavior of particles with different shape and size is similar, the entire inter-particle breakage considering the transformation of particle shape can be illustrated by the breakage of cubic particles. The cubic particles In the inter-particle breakage process, the part of cubic particles which is involved in the breakage is broken into smaller particles and just as Eq. Due to the transformation behaviors of particle shape in breakage, some of the breakage products of cubic particles are transformed into flaky particles and shown in Eq. The product of cubic feed which is shown in Eq. When a similar breakage process of flaky particles occurs, the cubic particle product of cone crusher which is shown in Eq. A similar breakage process of flaky particles occurs. The flaky particle product of cone crusher is shown in Eq. The final broken product of the Then the particle size distribution and the particle shape component of the cone crusher product can be solved, and the improved model is illustrated. In order to establish the improved model of inter-particle breakage considering the transformation of particle shape for cone crusher and calculate particle size distribution and particle shape component of the crushing product, the parameters of the selection function, the breakage function and the transformation function must be solved. Through the analysis of the experimental results, these functions are related to the granular property of the broken granular material before breakage, the characteristic of the crushing process and the particle size characteristics of the granular materials. The size distribution ratio The hematite which is used for ironmaking by SHOUGANG Group is chosen as the experimental material, and the particle size range of the experimental material is 0–40 According to the relevant standards of BS 812 part 105, the cubic and flaky particles are determined by the geometrical size of the particle. In the standards, the particle shape determination criterions for flaky particle are the particle length is 1.8 times greater than the average particle size or the thickness is 0.6 times less than the average particle size. The particles that need to be broken and the breakage product of each particle size fraction can be quickly determined by using vernier caliper. The effect of particle shape transformation on the crushing results and the size effect of the breakage process caused by the particle size are considered, and the influence of parameters of inter-particle breakage model on the crushing product is studied by the inter-particle breakage experiment using the cubic and flaky particles with different size. Particle distribution ratio The experimental equipment aims to imitate the inter-particles breakage in each crushing zone. The experimental equipment and breakage product are shown in The steps of the cubic particles experiment are as follows: According to the standards of particle shape in According to the height of the particles in the breakage cylinder ( After breakage, the height of the broken product in breakage cylinder is measured. The broken product is sieved and classified according to the particle shape. Then, the unbroken cubic particles, the broken cubic particles and the transformed flaky particles are weighed by electronic scale. So the data of particles size distribution and the particle shape component can be obtained. After the breakage in Step 3, the broken experimental product is mixed and put into breakage cylinder for the second breakage experiment with the same compression ratio in Step 3. The compression ratio is changed to 0.15, 0.2, 0.25, 0.3 and repeat the Step 1 to Step 4. The size of experimental cubic particles are changed to 20–25 In the inter-particle breakage, breakage behavior of flaky particles can be studied by using the similar experimental steps of the cubic particles breakage experiment. Due to the geometrical characteristic of flaky particles, the flaky particles in breakage cylinder cannot keep dense state whatever the particles in breakage cylinder are adjusted, so the experiment of flaky particles with high compression ratio is designed to reduce the effect of the useless compression ratio in the compacted stage. The steps of the flaky particles experiment are as follows: According to the standards of particle shape in BS 812 part 105, the flaky particles with size 31.5–40 After dumping into the breakage cylinder, the particles are leveled so that the horizontal error of the particle surface can be controlled in 1 According to the height of the particles in the breakage cylinder ( After breakage, the height of the broken product in breakage cylinder is measured. The broken product is sieved and classified according to the particle shape. Then, the unbroken flaky particles, the broken flaky particles and the transformed cubic particles are weighed by electronic scale. So the data of particle size distribution and the particle shape component can be obtained. The compression ratio is changed to 0.3, 0.4 and repeat the Step 1 to Step 3. The experimental flaky particles are changed to 20–25 Depending on the particle shape, the product of a cone crusher can be classified into cubic particles and flaky particles. One kind of particle shape of the crushing product is not only broken from the same shape particles but also transformed from another shape particle. Accordingly, it is necessary to consider the influence of transformation of particle shape on the broken results in the breakage model for cone crusher. The ratio of the weight of the transformed particle to the weight of particles before breakage is defined as the transformation function and can be achieved as Eq. According to the non-linear regression analysis of experimental data which is shown in The simulations of the transformation functions of the cubic and flaky particles are shown in The trends of transformation function show that the flaky particles are more easily transformed into the cubic particles in the compression with higher compression ratio. It depends on the geometry of flaky particles. These trends are more obvious in the breakage of particles with the larger size. Thus, mixed granular material is more easily broken into the cubic product after the higher-ratio compression and the mass ratio of the cubic granular material in the broken product is increased. Due to the selectivity of the inter-particle breakage, some parts of the granular material are unbroken after crushing. The selection function of cubic particles is a function of the compression ratio of crushing zone, the size distribution ratio of granular material and the relative particle size ratio of broken particles. With the repeated breakage of granular material in the crushing chamber, the particles size of product keeps reducing and the mass ratio of particles with smaller size continues increasing. So, the protection of smaller particles against larger particles in breakage behavior must be considered. In the breakage, the differences of the stress point and the defect of the particle are caused by the different size of particles. Therefore, the relative particle size ratio must be considered. The selection functions of the flaky particles and the cubic particles are similar. As the result of the larger difference of flaky particles geometry, the height of flaky particles that have the same length has a significant difference. Therefore, the significance of the statistical analysis of size distribution which is used for describing the uniformity of flaky particle size is not requisite. The selection function of flaky particles is a function of compression ratio and relative particle size ratio. According to the non-linear regression analysis of experimental data, the influence of the relative particle size ratio on selection function is considered, and then the selection functions are established as Eqs. The simulations of the selection functions are shown in The trends of selection function of cubic and flaky particles show that the larger cubic and flaky particles in the mixed granular material are more easily broken in compression with larger compression ratio. In the breakage of cubic particles, the mass ratio of the smaller particles is decreased when the particle size is well distributed. Then, the protective effect of smaller particles on larger particles is decreased, then, the bigger particles are more easily broken. The granular material is broken to the product with a series of sizes. The experimental data show a certain regularity in the mass ratio of the broken product with a series of sizes. The essence of breakage function is a size distribution of the broken product which is broken by the granular material with the certain size. Therefore, the breakage function is related to the particle size and the compression ratio. Based on the formula which The simulations of breakage functions are shown in Based on the improved model considering the transformation of particle shape, the test of cone crusher performance by using ZS200MF is performed at an aggregate product factory in Tangshan, China. The cone crushers (ZS200MF) are utilized for the fine crushing in this mineral process. The test object of ZS200MF in the production is hematite, gneiss and granite. The crushing performance of ZS200MF is simulated by using the improved model considering the transformation of particle shape. Base on the flow model which is presented by  As is shown in Through the breakage experiment with two kinds of particles in the lab, the inter-particle breakage of the cubic particle with 16–31.5 Through the research of the transformation function of inter-particle breakage, the transformation function of cubic particles is increased and the transformation function of flaky particles is decreased by improving the compression ratio and the relative particle size ratio, so the compression ratio and the relative particle size ratio, so the particle shape of the crushing product is more inclined to the cube. Thus, the flakiness index of cone crusher product is directly related the transformed amount which is affected by the transformation function. Thereby the positive significance of the equipment eccentricity improvement and the feed particle component adjustment on the quality of the crushing product can be explained theoretically. The relative particle size ratio is introduced in the selection function, and the influence of the transformation of particle shape is considered, then an improved model of inter-particle breakage considering the transformation of particle shape is established. The improved model provides an accurate method to describe the dynamic process of inter-particles breakage with two kinds of particle shapes in the cone crusher. Through the establishment of the improved model, the mathematical relationship between feed and product is built by the granular property of feed, the geometry of the crushing chamber and operational parameters of cone crusher, and the flakiness index of the crushing product can be calculated. Thus, the improved model provides a theoretical foundation for existing cone crusher optimization and high-energy crushing chamber design. The authors wish to acknowledge the