Based on the observation of non-steady state growth features and long-range interstitial diffusion, a growth mechanism for discontinuous precipitation is suggested in a multi-component system containing solutes of widely different diffusivities.Discontinuous precipitation refers to the formation of cells containing alternate lamellae of precipitated phase and solute-depleted matrix behind a grain boundary advancing into supersaturated matrix. Because of the deleterious effect of this precipitation on mechanical properties, it has attracted the attention of many researchers worldwide. However, as revealed by extensive reviews In the present work, a different system namely, the Fe–Cr–Mn–N system (high nitrogen austenitic stainless steels) has been examined in detail for the growth characteristics of discontinuous precipitation. This system is ideal for the study of discontinuous precipitation in multi-component systems because: (i) the steels investigated contain the substitutional solutes Cr and Mn as well as the interstitial solute nitrogen and (ii) a single precipitate namely, Cr  The solution treated material consisted of uniform, equiaxed grains of austenite. No discontinuous precipitation was observed up to 100 As reported earlier Ageing at 800 It is interesting to note that the migration rates decreased by three orders of magnitude (10 Electron probe microanalysis of aged samples was carried out to predict the diffusion of various elements. As discussed earlier  The present results can be explained as follows. The initial concentrations of nitrogen in B2 and B4 steel are 0.67 The reduction in nitrogen content also causes a decrease in the migration rate of the cell boundary, as the driving force for migration of the boundary comes from the deviation from chemical equilibrium, as suggested by Hillert and Lagneborg Higher initial nitrogen concentration promotes the diffusion of larger amounts of nitrogen. Hence more nitrides were formed in B4 steel indicating the faster kinetics of precipitation in the material. Also, the cell growth at 800 Based on the above observations, a qualitative model for the growth of discontinuous precipitation in the present multi-component system has been formulated. This mechanism shown in In the solution treated sample, the concentration of nitrogen is uniform everywhere and is represented by On ageing, Cr This sets up a large concentration gradient between the untransformed matrix and the cell matrix resulting in the flow of nitrogen from the former to the latter. Thus, long-range diffusion of nitrogen from untransformed matrix is necessary for the growth of Cr With the progress of ageing, the nitrogen concentration in the untransformed matrix ( As ageing progresses, A comparison of the characteristics of discontinuous precipitation in Cr–Ni–N system investigated by Kikuchi and coworkers Discontinuous precipitation in a multi-component Fe–Cr–Mn–N system revealed many non-steady growth features such as incomplete reaction, decrease in migration rates by many orders of magnitude and long-range interstitial diffusion. A growth mechanism has been proposed which takes into account all these features.