The hydrodeoxygenation (HDO) of 2-methoxyphenol using Mo2N supported on three commercial activated carbons (Pica, Norit and Cudu) with different textural and chemical properties was studied. The reaction was carried out in a batch reactor at 50bar of H2 and 300°C. The catalysts were prepared by wetness impregnation and nitrided with ammonia at 700°C. The supports and catalysts were characterized by N2 adsorption–desorption, thermal programmed desorption (TPD), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), X-ray fluorescence and X-ray diffraction (XRD). The Mo2N/Norit catalyst displayed higher HDO activity compared to the Mo2N/Cudu and Mo2N/Pica catalysts. HDO conversion increased when the Mo2N/Norit catalysts were activated with hydrogen for 6h at 400°C due to increased surface nitridation. The Mo2N/Norit catalyst displayed a higher phenol/catechol ratio relative to the Mo2N/Pica and Mo2N/Cudu catalysts, which displayed similar (phenol/catechol) ratios. The phenol/catechol ratio was unaffected by the H2 activation time.The transportation sector accounts for more than 30% of the energy consumption in the European Union, and consumption is continuously increasing Biomass may be gasified to biosyngas and then converted to liquid fuels and/or gases by Fischer Tropsch Synthesis (FTS) Laurent and Delmon Although transition metal sulfide catalysts have been effective for HDO of bio-oil, they suffer from deactivation during reaction processing In addition to metal sulfides, metal nitrides have shown to be stable and active for HDS The supported molybdenum oxide catalysts were prepared by wetness impregnation using aqueous solutions of ammonium heptamolybdate [(NH HDO of guaiacol was carried out using a batch reactor (model Parr 4841). The feed contained 0.232 The “apparent” surface area, micropore and mesopore volume and average pore diameter of the supports and catalysts were determined from nitrogen isotherms at −196 Temperature-programmed desorption (TPD) analysis of the activated carbons was carried out under inert atmosphere at 10 X-ray photoelectron spectra (XPS) of reduced catalysts were obtained on an Escalab 200R electron spectrometer using a Mg Kα (1253.6 X-ray diffraction (XRD) data were collected on a PANanalytical PRO X-ray diffractometer, using Cu radiation ( X-ray fluorescence data were collected on a Rigaku 3270 apparatus with a rhodium tube. Prior to analysis, the sample was emulsified in water and allowed to dry at room temperature. The sample mass was 0.020 The Zero Point Charge (ZPC) of the three carbons was determined using the ASTM method D3838-05. Approximately 40      The surface charge titration results (see The XPS results for the reduced Mo As can be seen in  The Mo/C and Mo/N surface atomic ratios for each of the three catalysts, including those prepared under different activation conditions (Mo The Mo/N ratio in the unsupported Mo  In addition, the porosity of the support has been shown to affect catalyst activity in Fischer-Tropsch synthesis The conversion of guaiacol was examined for the Mo  Nitrided molybdenum catalysts, either unsupported or supported on activated carbon, were active for HDO of 2-methoxyphenol. Selected commercial supports had different textural and chemical properties: (i) the Pica and Cudu carbons contained a significant fraction of micropores and the latter also had more abundant oxygen surface groups, and (ii) the Norit carbon was mainly mesoporous and had less oxygen surface functionalities than the Cudu support and more than the Pica support. The Mo The Mo Financial support for the present study was received from