Adhesive capsulitis of the hip is a condition of unknown etiology, characterized by loss of passive and active hip motion. Classified by various authors into either primary idiopathic, progressive painful loss of both passive and active range of motion or secondary resulting from known intrinsic or extrinsic causes.
               The gross anatomy of the hip joint is reviewed, as it is a multiaxial synovial ball and socket joint that is both functionally and structurally complex and is important in the understanding of the condition.
               The histologic changes of adhesive capsulitis of the hip are also reviewed and are shown to be similar to the changes seen in the shoulder. The pathologic process involves a chronic inflammatory reaction in the capsule and synovium with subsequent adherence to the femoral neck.
               The diagnosis of adhesive capsulitis is based on the clinical findings of decreased passive and active range of motion in all planes of the hip joint, without abnormal radiographic findings.
               The history, physical examination, and adjuvant imaging are important in identifying the source of the hip pain, and these are discussed as well, along with potential functional limitations and differential diagnosis.
               Treatment of adhesive capsulitis can be controversial, but conservative treatment is recommended, as the disease is usually self-limiting. Additional treatment options including trigger point injections, intra-articular injections, or surgical intervention for recalcitrant cases are reviewed as well.Thyroid dysfunction Recurrent minor trauma Diabetes mellitus (juvenile and adult onset) Female gender (>70%) Age (>40 years) Prolonged immobilization of a joint Coronary artery disease Autoimmune disorders After hip surgery Intra-articular loose bodies Osteoid osteoma Synovial chondromatosis Osteoarthritis Dupuytren contracture Elevated C-reactive protein level, positive HLA-B27/serum IgA level Myocardial infarction Pulmonary tuberculosis Bronchitis Stroke with hemiparesis  Adhesive capsulitis of the hip Frozen hip Contracture of the hip joint Ankylosis of the hip joint Adhesive capsulitis of the hip joint is a condition of unknown etiology characterized by the gradual loss of passive and active hip motion, which is a result of retraction of the fibrous joint capsule. Lequesne and colleagues The hip joint is functionally and structurally complex, consisting of the femoral articulation, acetabulum, supporting soft tissue, muscles, and cartilaginous structures ( The femoral articulation forms roughly two-thirds of a sphere, approximately 40% of which is covered by the acetabulum. Articular (hyaline) cartilage covers the femoral articulation except at the fovea capitis, a depression on the central surface. The acetabulum is formed by fusion of the ilium, ischium, and pubis. It is hemispheric in shape and projects anterolaterally and inferiorly. The lunate surface is the articular portion, and the nonarticular portion constitutes the floor (acetabular fossa). The acetabular fossa (covered by synovium) is continuous with the acetabular notch, which lies between the ends of the lunate surface. The acetabular fossa lies in the inferomedial portion, close to the ligamentum teres (round ligament), which attaches to the fovea capitis. The depth of the acetabulum is increased by the dense fibrocartilaginous labrum, which attaches to the rim of the acetabulum, except at the acetabular notch. The transverse ligament bridges the acetabular notch and in combination with the acetabular labrum forms a complete ring around the acetabulum. It converts the acetabular notch into a foramen, through which the intra-articular vessels pass to supply the head of the femur. The fibrous capsule of the hip joint attaches to the labrum to form a circular recess, which encloses the joint and most of the femoral neck (see Neviaser introduced the term The histologic changes of adhesive capsulitis seen in the hip are similar to those in the shoulder. There is chronic inflammatory reaction in the capsule and synovium with subsequent adherence to the femoral neck. Many authors acknowledge that adhesive capsulitis is a relatively common clinical syndrome when it occurs in the shoulders (2% to 5% of the general population) but is infrequently described in other joints, such as the wrist, hip, and ankles. The diagnosis of hip adhesive capsulitis is based on clinical findings of decreased passive and active range of motion in all planes of the hip joint, with no abnormal radiographic findings. Pain is usually a presenting symptom, especially with extreme external rotation or abduction, and is usually the reason for seeking medical evaluation. Gait difficulty may or may not be present, but it is usually not to the severity that a gait aid is required. The diagnosis of hip adhesive capsulitis is rarely made, possibly because the hip joint can sustain range of motion loss without significant disability, whereas even a mild loss of motion in the shoulders can result in significant difficulty with performance of routine activities of daily living. Hip pain can be caused by different intra-articular and extra-articular structures. Differentiating the specific pathologic structures can be challenging, but it is critical for appropriate medical management. The history, physical examination, and adjuvant imaging are crucial in identifying the source of pain. In patients with adhesive capsulitis of the hip, the clinical examination findings may be minimal. The patient may or may not exhibit an antalgic gait pattern. The neuromuscular and neurovascular examination findings are usually unremarkable. The back examination is usually benign, unless there is a concomitant spinal condition. Provocative maneuvers of the hip joint (i.e., Stinchfield and FABERE tests) may generate nonspecific groin discomfort. The hallmark finding on physical examination is limitation of range of motion of the hip joint in all planes (flexion-extension, internal and external rotation, and abduction-adduction). Functional limitations may differ, depending on the severity of pain and range of motion deficits. Difficulty with activities of daily living is limited to the lower extremities. This can be manifested as difficulty with lower extremity dressing, such as donning or doffing pants, socks, or shoes. There is difficulty in crossing one leg over the other, or sitting in a tailor’s position. There may be difficulty in sleeping on one side or the other or standing with the hip externally rotated and abducted. There may be difficulty with prolonged sitting or driving a car, especially if a manual shift is used. The onset of pain and inflammation causes reflex inhibition of the muscles around the joint, which can subsequently lead to loss of mobility and compensatory abnormal movement of the joint. If gait pattern is affected, recreational and vocational activities that require prolonged ambulation can be affected (i.e., golfing, tennis, or power walking for exercise). With time, there is resolution of pain, but residual range of motion deficits and limitation of function can remain. This persistent loss of mobility and dysfunction can lead to psychosocial issues, such as irritability, depression and anxiety, and disordered sleep patterns. Laboratory studies are important in the initial evaluation of intra-articular hip abnormalities. They help assess for autoimmune and rheumatologic conditions. The results of laboratory studies, including blood cell counts, electrolyte values, chemistry panels, acute phase reactants, and rheumatologic screening studies (such as antinuclear antibodies, double-stranded DNA, rheumatoid factor, and HLA-B27 antibodies), are usually normal in patients with adhesive capsulitis of the hip. Multiple imaging modalities are available to assess the pelvis and hip joint and surrounding soft tissues. Conventional radiography, including anteroposterior views, remains the initial imaging modality of choice in assessing patients with groin pain and dysfunction. These studies, however, are of limited value if there is internal derangement as the cause of hip pain, because findings are typically normal in those circumstances. In hip adhesive capsulitis, results of these studies are usually normal except for possible diffuse osteopenia, most likely related to pain and decreased range of motion from underlying disease. Bone scans can show increased uptake in the areas of osteopenia, but this is usually nonspecific. Focal accumulation of radionuclide reflects an alteration of balanced bone turnover due to changes in bone blood flow and can occur in several conditions. Ultrasonography of the hip has been widely accepted as a useful diagnostic tool in patients with a wide range of acute and chronic conditions affecting the hip or limited range of motion. It allows evaluation of different anatomic and pathologic structures, such as joint recess, bursa, tendons, and muscles. It also allows evaluation of the osseous structures of the joint, ischial tuberosity, and greater trochanter. It is useful for guided procedures in the hip joint and periarticular soft tissue under direct visualization. Ultrasonography has considerable advantages over computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI); these include absence of radiation, good visualization Supplemental imaging with CT or MRI is often used to further evaluate the pelvis and hip to rule out the presence of simple, nondisplaced avulsion to complex fractures and to assess for displacement, comminution, and locations of fragments. MRI is helpful in diagnosis of occult injuries and stress fractures and in the evaluation of the soft tissue and musculature of the pelvis and hip. Computed tomographic or MRA is the preferred examination for evaluation of the joint capsule, labrum, and articular cartilage. Intra-articular needle placement is confirmed under fluoroscopic guidance before 15 mL of 1:200 dilution of a gadolinium contrast agent and normal saline is injected into the joint. Characteristic arthroscopic findings show a hip joint with low volume and loss of normal recesses, high intracapsular pressure, and a thick capsule ( Lequesne described seven patients with pain and limitation of movement in the hip, which he called idiopathic capsular constriction of the hip.  Osteoarthritis of the hip joint (mild or early onset) Intra-articular loose bodies Irritable hip syndrome (pain with little or no restriction of movement) Iliopsoas bursitis or tendinosis Snapping hip syndrome (iliotibial band, iliopsoas tendon) Greater trochanteric pain syndrome, trochanteric bursitis, iliotibial band tendinitis Ischiofemoral impingement Femoroacetabular impingement Osteitis pubis Athletic pubalgia Subtle hip fractures or stress fracture Synovial osteochondromatosis Osteonecrosis of femoral head, avascular necrosis Labral disease Osteoid osteoma Neoplastic infiltration (whether it is metastatic disease or primary pelvic tumor) Pyogenic arthritis Hemochromatosis Spondyloarthropathy (ankylosing spondylitis) Diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis Diabetic cheiroarthropathy (syndrome of limited joint mobility) Lumbar radiculopathy Tumoral calcinosis Complex regional pain syndrome type Treatment of adhesive capsulitis of the hip is controversial. There are many studies, in both the rheumatologic and orthopedic literature, regarding treatment of the shoulder, but not much is written about treatment of the hips. Neviaser and Hannafin Conservative treatment is recommended as the disease is self-limited. Spontaneous recovery time on average is approximately 13 months, with a range of 5 to 18 months. Pain control can be achieved early with use of a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug or oral steroid. If this is not beneficial, an analgesic can be tried. Activity modification is recommended to prevent irritation of the involved extremity. Physical modalities, such as ice massage, superficial moist heat, transcutaneous nerve stimulation, interferential current therapy, and ultrasound, can be applied to help with pain control, swelling, and facilitation of physical therapy. Physical therapy is the treatment of choice. The goal of treatment is primarily to restore mobility. Passive mobilization techniques are used to restore the optimal joint kinematics. These techniques can involve lateral translation, distraction, and anteroposterior glide. These maneuvers are done with the patient lying supine; the proximal thigh is palpated while the distal leg rests over the therapist’s shoulder. The hip joint is distracted by the application of various forces parallel to the neck of the femur. Initially the mobilization techniques should be gentle, keeping within the range of pain and reactive muscle spasm. The intensity of the exercises can be adjusted according to the irritability of the joint. Ultimately stronger passive mobilization techniques may be required, in which the joint is taken strongly and specifically to the physiologic limit of range to restore the full function of the hip joint. Stretching of the muscles around the hip joint, which tend to shorten, is important. Active mobilization techniques can be used to restore the optimal length of the erector spinae, quadratus lumborum, hamstrings, rectus femoris, iliopsoas, tensor fascia lata, hip adductors, piriformis, and deep external rotators of the hip. Strengthening of the core muscles, gluteals, and hip groups should be done to address strength, endurance, and timing of recruitment of those muscle groups. Miller and coworkers Trigger point injection and intra-articular injection can be tried in recalcitrant cases not responding to conservative treatment. Trigger point injection can be helpful if there is associated muscle pain and spasm. Ultrasound-guided intra-articular injection with long-acting local anesthetic and corticosteroid has been used for pain control. Several randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trials have shown improvement of pain and hip disability after intra-articular injection of corticosteroids. Manipulation under anesthesia is widely used for adhesive capsulitis of the shoulder but is rarely used in treatment of hip adhesive capsulitis. Luukkainen and associates Surgical intervention may be deemed appropriate if conservative treatment fails and the symptoms persist for more than 15 months with interference of activities of daily living. Arthroscopic release is rarely performed. Mont and colleagues Disease complications are usually related to the range of motion deficits and associated pain that accompany hip adhesive capsulitis. Functional limitations, which vary from patient to patient, may develop. The loss of mobility at the hip joint can result in difficulties with prolonged stance, ambulation, and sitting. Sleeping postures can also be affected, as the patient may not be able to sleep on either side. Pharmacotherapy can lead to treatment complications. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs have well-documented side effects related to the gastrointestinal and renal systems. Oral steroids, if they are used at high doses for a prolonged time, can have systemic effects, such as easy bruising, weight gain, and osteoporosis. The pharmacotherapy complications can be minimized by closely observing the patient’s ongoing medical issues, medication use, and response and potential for drug interactions. Local injections can cause allergic reactions, infection at the injection site, hematoma, nerve damage, or tendon rupture with inadvertent injection into a nerve or tendon. Physical therapy can result in increased pain and dysfunction if it is not supervised by a well-trained, board-certified physical therapist. Manipulation under anesthesia can lead to an increased risk for chondrolysis and vascular and neurologic insult. Surgical complications are numerous and can include excessive blood loss and postsurgical infection. Compromise of the vascular supply to the femoral head can lead to avascular necrosis and the need for additional surgical procedures. Surgery can result in a cosmetically unpleasant incision around the hip.