In this study, the tailings of the silver leaching plant, Eti Gumus AS, Turkey, containing high amounts of cyanide were tested to determine optimum recovery of cyanide, using packed columns for volatilization stage of AVR (acidification, volatilization or stripping, reneutralization). All recovery tests were performed in a pilot plant constructed using random packing with column internals and practised for mass transfer calculations. The main parametrical results of each test were measured in the laboratory and statistical analysis was performed using multivariable regression analysis. The parameters investigated were the viscosity of slurry, specific density, flow time of slurry in the funnel, air velocity, pulp density (wt%), pH, gas/liquid flow ratio (G/L), operating time, recovery rates and ambient temperature. The complex effects of the parameters were evaluated by multivariable linear regression analysis, favourable models then being corrected by using variance analysis. Verification of the predictive models to prove their practical validity and residual analysis of data were performed for preliminary treatment using the AVR process of leached tailings.Cyanide recovery rate, % partial pressure of HCN Henry’s Law constant; atm/mol-fraction equilibrium mol fraction of HCN molar flow rate of air, kmol/h quantity of solution, kmol time, h mol fraction of HCN in the acidified solution initial mol fraction of HCN in the acidified solution total column height, m height of a transfer unit for liquid phase, m number of transfer units for liquid phase volumetric mass transfer rate, kmol HCN/m (stripping constant) Henry’s Law constant (dimensionless) volumetric air flow, m volumetric slurry flow, m CN CN Inter phase mass transfer rate of HCN, kmol/m the column cross sectional area, m log mean of driving force for mass ( mol fraction of CN in liquid mol fraction of liquid (slurry) flow rate, kg/m gas flow rate, kg/m gas density, kg/m slurry density, kg/m packing factor for 38 gravity constant outlet (bottom of column) inlet (top of column) Air stripping of contaminated effluents using a packed tower is still regarded today as the least expensive approach for VOCs (volatile organic compounds) removal. Likewise, as the regulated compounds (i.e., NO The tests were carried out on cyanide wastes slurry supplied by a silver leaching plant, Eti Gumus AS, Turkey, operating with the Merrill–Crowe process. There are five different types of silver ores, limonite-manganiferous ore, altered tuff, acidic tuff, waste from primitive mining operations and dolomitic ore in the treated slurry. Screen analysis of the slurry indicated that average granulometry was 80% The mass transfer parameters of volatilization column were measured and the principal coefficients were determined. Henry’s Law Constant is one of the basic parameters in the volatilization of HCN The volatilization ratio can be quantified by means of volumetric overall mass transfer coefficient ( Chemical analyses of slurry The standard AVR method requires the use of clarified solutions or barren bleeds. The application of the AVR process to pulp or slurries must be done at higher pH (usually 5.5–7.5  After each test, different values of ten parameters were determined separately and are summarized in In the regression method, the researcher decides which independent variables should be considered in the analysis. The stepwise regression, not necessarily the best, gives the alternative method of determining which independent variables are significant, by identifying good subset models. In the general multivariable regression model (Eq. The experimental determinations of Henry’s Law Constant were performed with the tailings of the plant at pH 6.5 For The intersection point was 0.1 Multivariable linear regression analysis was applied to describe the relationships between dependent and independent variables. The test results of volatilization process were evaluated for selection of optimum parametric values for maximum recovery. The purpose of multivariable linear regression analysis is to simultaneously identify two or more independent variables which explain variations of a dependent variable. In evaluating the results, the dependent variable considered to be relevant for cyanide recovery rate was denoted by Generally, a high correlation of independent and dependent variables is required in regression analysis. However, high correlation between independent variables, known as “multicollinearity”, creates a serious problem. When dealing with the nature of data, there is no single preferable or acceptable way of overcoming the multicollinearity problem. It is obvious that if two variables are measuring the same thing, one of them can be omitted with negligible information loss. Therefore, an independent variable included in the model should not be included in the stepwise regression method if it is highly correlated with one or more variables included in the model. The correlation matrix for recovery rate ( The correlation coefficient of pulp flow time through Marsh’s funnel, a device to measure density of drilling mud, is well correlated with specific density, pulp density of slurry and dynamic viscosity of slurry. The predictive model for recovery rate on preliminary treatment which can be explained by operation time, pulp density, ambient temperature, The multivariable linear regression coefficient The multivariable regression coefficient The multivariable regression coefficient Verification of the selected model was undertaken by considering the following criteria: the behaviour of The points fluctuate uniformly along the diagonal line, which means that the model is substantiated. A better test is to make a more direct comparison of the model and real data in the form of residuals, which show the difference between the real and modelled data. High asymmetry of the distribution of the residuals along the zero line suggests that there is a problem with the model. For this reason, a normal probability plot of residuals of the models is presented in The recovery of cyanide is a matter of interest from both an economical aspect and in protecting the receiving water from potential harmful effects of cyanide tailings. The recovery rate can not be defined by a single test or parameter. The determinations of slurry properties and test conditions which depend on chemical, physicochemical and mineralogical parameters, are essential for proper design of an AVR system to reach maximum mass transfer of HCN In this present paper, the proposals are follows: The selection of low operation times and near-natural pHs are necessary from economical view point and in preventing the potential toxic effects of AVR process as the preliminary treatment method. Some precious mining ores that have high grades consume high amount of sodium cyanide in the leaching operations and produce high-cyanide tailings where total cyanide concentration is over average (total CN