The objective of this study was to determine the effect of different prosthetic systems on the functional and radiographic outcomes after shoulder arthroplasty for fractures. This study comprised 35 patients (28 women and 7 men) with a mean age of 74 years (range, 56-88 years) who sustained 4-part fractures of the proximal humerus and were randomly allocated to 2 different groups regarding the type of prosthesis. The 2 systems used differ mainly in the type of fixation of the tuberosities. In group 1 (EPOCA), the fixation was achieved with wire cables through a medial and a lateral hole in the stem, whereas in group 2 (HAS), the fixation was performed by use of transosseous braided sutures. After a follow-up of 1 year, the functional and radiographic outcomes were evaluated. The retrieved data demonstrate that rigid fixation and anatomic positioning of the tuberosities (group 1) increase the rate of bony healing superior to all other factors. There was a statistically significant difference regarding the relative individual Constant score (P = .001) and the mean active range of motion (flexion, P < .001; abduction, P = .001; external rotation in adduction, P = .01; and external rotation in 90° abduction, P = .001) when both groups were compared, showing a better outcome in the EPOCA group for all parameters. Radiologic findings, like heterotopic ossification, glenoid erosion, or subluxation, had no significant influence on the outcome in this study. Accurate placement of the tuberosities and healing at the bone-bone interface of the rotator cuff seem to be the most important factors influencing the outcome in prosthetic care of fractures.The treatment of severely displaced proximal humeral fractures is still a challenge. Aside from nonoperative treatment, many operative techniques have been used to treat displaced proximal humeral fractures, including plates, screws, percutaneous K-wires, and primary arthroplasty. Malunion and osteolysis of the tuberosities appear to be the main reasons for poor shoulder function after prosthetic replacement. We performed a prospective randomized trial to compare the functional outcome of 2 shoulder prosthetic designs. Our hypothesis was that anatomic and rigid fixation regarding the anteromedial position of the lesser tuberosity significantly influences the functional outcome. Forty patients volunteered to participate in this prospective randomized study. Ten men and thirty women (mean age, 74.8 years) were recruited from a pool of patients diagnosed by an orthopaedic trauma surgeon at a level I trauma center. Patients were eligible if they were undergoing operative management of an acute 4-part proximal humeral fracture (11 C according to the AO/ASIF classification), were aged more than 50 years, and had a negative history of previous problems of either shoulder. All patients included in this study had isolated fractures of the proximal humerus. Primary exclusion criteria were age less than 50 years, concomitant vascular or neurologic injuries of the involved extremity, prior operative procedures, neurologic or mental disorders, and drug abuse. During a 22-month period, a consecutive series of 43 patients met these criteria. All were informed about the voluntary participation in the trial. Of these patients, 40 agreed to undergo the suggested procedure and were included in the study. The patients were randomly allocated either to a group receiving the HAS prosthesis (European Certification Number 0050; Stryker, Kalamazoo, MI) (group 1) or to a group receiving the EPOCA prosthesis (European Certification Number 0301; Argomedical, Cham, Switzerland) (group 2). Both prosthetic systems were designed to serve as total shoulder arthroplasty or hemiarthroplasty systems but were exclusively used as hemiarthroplasty systems in this series. Each system offers the option of selecting the appropriate offset by use of eccentric head designs. The main difference in the design is the modality of tuberosity management, as sufficient bony fixation and healing of the tuberosities comprise the major predictor of a good functional outcome. The 2 systems also differ in the volume of the stem in the metaphyseal area and, therefore, allow different amounts of additional cancellous bone grafting. The HAS prosthesis represents a third-generation system. The head has an eccentric configuration offering 4 different offset positions ( The EPOCA custom offset shoulder prosthesis, a third-generation system as well, has a full-bodied metal head that enables the surgeon to control the posterior offset. A metaphyseal double excenter allows independent medial and posterior offset adjustment. The fixation of the tuberosities is performed by either wire cables or nonabsorbable sutures. During this study, the fixation of the tuberosities was performed via cable wires. One wire was used to fix the lesser tuberosity by use of the medial hole on the stem of the prosthesis. The posterior end of this cable was also passed through the greater tuberosity to form a cerclage around both tuberosities. The second cable was passed through the greater tuberosity and through the lateral drill hole in the stem. All cases were performed by 4 attending surgeons with the patient under general anesthesia. Each of these surgeons has a vast experience in joint replacement surgery. They were chosen to participate in this study by the board of the institution. Each surgeon was informed at the beginning of the operation as to which implant had randomly been selected. The random list was designed to finally produce 2 groups of equal size. A standard deltopectoral approach was used in all cases. After exposure of the fracture, the macroscopic status of the rotator cuff and the tendon of the long head of the biceps were evaluated. In cases of severe degeneration of the biceps tendon, a tenodesis was carried out subsequent to the implantation. In all cases, the prosthetic stem was cemented. When the EPOCA prosthesis was selected, the tuberosities were rigidly fixed to the shoulder implant with suture cables. In all cases, bone grafting was performed by use of the cancellous bone of the patient’s humeral head. In none of the procedures was an additional acromioplasty or coracoacromial ligament resection performed to prevent anterior-superior instability in cases of secondary rotator cuff insufficiency. All patients’ shoulders were kept in an immobilizer for 2 weeks to prevent active external rotation. During this time, the arm was moved passively up to 30° of abduction and flexion by a physiotherapist for 15 minutes per day to avoid contractures and shoulder stiffness. Two weeks postoperatively, active range of motion was increased to the horizontal level; after another two weeks, active external rotation was initiated. This general rehabilitation protocol was used for all patients regardless of the type of implant. Follow-up occurred at 12 days, 3 weeks and 6 weeks, and 6 and 12 months. Functional evaluation was done by use of the individual relative Constant score (CS Unpaired Of 40 patients, 35 (88%) were available for follow-up after 1 year (18 in group 1 [EPOCA] and 17 in group 2 [HAS]). Three patients died, and two were lost to follow-up. In the remaining group, there were 28 women and 7 men. The mean age at the time of surgery was 74 years (range, 58-88 years) in group 1 and 73 years (range, 56-85 years) in group 2. There were no significant differences between the 2 groups as far as gender distribution or involvement of the dominant arm. No influence on the result could be derived from these factors. Surgery was performed within the first 7 days of injury (mean, 3.2 days) in 27 patients in the study group. The remaining 7 patients were operated on within the first month (mean, 16 days). The mean time to operation was 6.2 days in group 1 (range 0-26 days) and 8.5 days in group 2 (range 1-22 days), showing no significant difference ( Comparison of the unaffected shoulder in both groups showed no significant difference regarding the absolute Constant score ( In 31 cases, a biceps tenodesis was performed (18 in group 1 and 13 in group 2). The data did not show a significant difference for pain, as evaluated by the Constant score, in patients with or without biceps tenodesis. Regarding the CS We compared the results of the 4 surgeons but did not find any statistically significant differences. Regarding the evaluation of the postoperative radiologic control, 34 of 35 patients had anatomic positioning of the tuberosities at the end of the surgical procedure. One patient showed inadequate reduction (ie, greater tuberosity fixed >5 mm inferior to correct position). This patient showed good bony healing of the misplaced tuberosity without any further displacement. Of 34 patients with initial anatomic positioning of the tuberosities, 24 showed healing in the same position. In 10 patients, resorption of the tuberosities (2 in group 1 and 8 in group 2) was seen. These patients had a significantly decreased CS Two patients with deep infection were seen in group 1 (CS Since the classic article of Neer, The individual outcome is hard to predict. The most reliable subjective parameter is pain relief, The main goal of operative intervention is to maintain rigid fixation of the tuberosities for secure healing of the bone-bone interface. Prosthetic designs for degenerative joint replacement have undergone substantial changes in the last decade. Variable metaphyseal modular components and eccentric head configurations allow exact mediolateral and anteroposterior offset to imitate original anatomy as closely as possible. These technical developments improved the function and long-term outcome compared with previous prostheses. In our study, 2 prosthetic systems were compared to demonstrate the importance of accurate positioning of the tuberosities. This improves functional outcome and tuberosity union as well. Primary malpositioning of the tuberosities is believed to provoke decreased vascularization and to lead to avascular necrosis and rotator cuff deficiency. The main limitation of this study is the impossibility of evaluating the function of the injured shoulder before the fracture occurs. Therefore, examination of shoulder strength and active range of motion cannot be performed preoperatively. Comparison to the unaffected side gives statistically valid data but is not always objective in some cases because of degenerative changes of the rotator cuff or articular cartilage lesions. Taking these limitations into account, we conclude that shoulder prosthetic designs, which allow accurate placement of the tuberosities, are prerequisites for good functional outcome in the treatment of severely displaced proximal fractures of the humerus. Secondary resorption of the tuberosities is associated with poor clinical outcome.