An attempt has been made in this paper to investigate effect of collector type, particle size distribution, collector dosage, air flow rate, pulp density and wash water rate parameters on modified flotation parameters on sphalerite flotation in a flotation column. In the experimental studies, the fractional recoveries after 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 5, 10 and 20min of flotation time were fitted to first-order kinetic model R
                     =
                     R
                     ∞[1−exp(−kt)], where R is recovery at t time, R
                     ∞ is ultimate recovery and k is the first-order rate constant was used to draw the time–recovery curves. Two parameters, the ultimate recovery (R
                     ∞) and first-order rate constant (k), were then obtained from the model to fit an experimental time–recovery curve. A modified flotation rate constant (K
                     m) defined as product of R
                     ∞ and k, i.e., K
                     m
                     =
                     R
                     ∞
                     k, and selectivity index (SI) defined as the ratio of the modified rate constant of mineral I to the modified rate constant of mineral II (SI=
                     K
                     m of mineral I/K
                     m of mineral II), which could be collectively called “modified flotation parameters”, were calculated for each test and it was used to measure of flotation separation selectivity of sphalerite over pyrite. Timed batch tests on ground ore using a pilot flotation column and subsequent recovery and grade of experimental data and modified flotation parameters indicated that the optimum parameters are as follows: Dithiophospates collector type, finer particle size distribution (d
                     80
                     =0.125mm), low collector dosage (500g/t), low air flow rate (1.30cm/s), high pulp density (20% solids) and high wash water rate (0.5L/min).Flotation is one of the most complex mineral processing operations as it is affected by a very large number of variables. Many of these are beyond the control of the mineral engineer, and some cannot be even measured quantitatively with the available instruments. The relations between measured and controlled variables are intricately related. Sometimes simultaneously changing various component settings will reinforce a particular attribute. In addition, various component settings can cancel or counteract each other if changes are not chosen wisely Traditionally, the evaluation of flotation tests is based largely on a rougher recovery value achieved at a defined time. Since the cumulative recovery of a component in the concentrate is proportional to flotation time, the flotation process can be considered as a time–rate recovery process. Therefore, a mathematical flotation model that incorporates both a recovery and a rate function can completely describe flotation time–recovery profiles. They provide an excellent tool to evaluate flotation tests In froth flotation, air bubbles are injected into a moving stream of aqueous slurry containing a mixture of particles, so that only hydrophobic ores collected on the bubble surface and exit the stream. Owing to its simplicity, the process is widely used for separating a great variety of solid particles. However, a number of complex chemical and physical interaction aspects are involved in the literature on the study of this process, which has been studied from contact angles. Of these, kinetic approach has been highly instrumental in better understanding leading to reasonably accurate predictions Kinetic models can be used to analyze batch flotation results. Two parameters which are The value of a flotation concentrate containing a given mineral from which a desired metal is extracted by a metallurgical process decreases with an increase in the presence of minerals containing metals other than that of prime interest. It is thus necessary to design specific selective flotation collectors to separate the desired mineral from the gangue The flotation experiments were carried out using samples of sphalerite ore obtained from Postalli Mining Company, Kayseri, Turkey. Chemical analysis indicated that the ore contained mainly 16.47% Zn, 23.72% Fe, 0.87% Pb, 22.52% SiO Cytec International, Holland and SELSAN Metal Limited Company, Turkey supplied the collecting agents which were Dithiophospates (Aerofloat 7048 The individual flotation tests were performed in a flotation column. The experimental column set-up with auxiliary instrumentation is shown in For a standard flotation test, a sub-sample (0.5 In this study, the fractional recoveries after 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 5, 10 and 20 The floating and sinking fractions were recovered, vacuum filtered and dried in an oven at 90 In this study, collector performance of Potassium Amyl Xanthate was compared with Dithiophospates (Aerofloat 7048 The xanthates have been the workhorse of sulphide mineral flotation since the 1920s and represent the largest volume of any sulfide mineral collector. Xanthates are very good at recovering in unselective manner bulk sulfide minerals, including iron sulfides. The dithiophosphate collector family is the second major class of sulphide collectors from a collector volume viewpoint. Dithiophosphates generally show better iron sulfide rejection capability than do the xanthates Particle liberation plays an important role in flotation processes, as demonstrated by studies on the detachment of particles during bubble coalescence, or by comparison of kinetic parameters for liberated or locked particles. The size to which ore to be processed should be ground in order to optimise processing profitability while taking into account metallurgical balance and size-reduction cost is a very important parameter  It is well known that the collector dosage of sulphide ores flotation is an important variable. The effect of collector dosage on modified flotation parameters was investigated using 500 and 600 In this study, two tests in batch operation were performed at two different air flow rates such as, 1.30 and 2.20 In order to examine the effect of pulp density on the flotation, 7.5 and 20 The froth phase is extremely important in the operation of a flotation cell, seeing that, it is critical in determining the amount of unwanted gangue collected to the concentrate and thus the purity of product This study has examined the effect of collector types, particle size distribution, collector dosages, air flow rates, pulp densities and wash waters rate on modified flotation parameters for sphalerite flotation. Results indicated that Dithiophospate collectors (Aerofloat 7048  Zn and Fe recovery data; collector types (Dithiophospate and Potassium Amyl Xanthate), size distribution ( The modified flotation rate constant In the experimental studies showed that modified flotation rate constant and selectivity index are useful parameters in the flotation studies. This work has been supported by Cukurova University, Scientific Research Projects Directorate (BAP), project FBE.2002.D.215.