Introduction
                  The purpose of this study was to determine whether radiographic findings associated with thoracolumbar burst fractures could also indicate the presence of posterior ligamentous complex (PLC) injuries, which were identified through short-tau inversion-recovery (STIR)-weighted MRI.
               
                  Patients and method
                  Sixty-four patients were surgically treated for thoracolumbar burst fractures between April 2007 and February 2014 at our institution. Twenty-four patients were excluded from this study because of the lack of STIR-weighted MRIs, and therefore 40 patients were included in this study. The patients were divided into two groups based upon the integrity of the PLC, which was evaluated using STIR-weighted MRI: a P group with a PLC injury and a C group without such injury. The following radiographic parameters were evaluated: loss of vertebral body height (LOVBH), local kyphosis (LK), vertebral body translation, canal compromise (sagittal transverse ratio, STR), interlaminar distance (ISD), supraspinous distance (SSD) and interspinous distance (ISD). Frankel scale score and total severity score (load sharing and thoracolumbar injury classification systems, respectively) were also evaluated.
               
                  Results
                  Preoperative STIR-weighted MRI showed that 25 patients had a PLC injury (P group: 15 men and 10 women), and 15 patients did not have a PLC injury (C group: 8 men and 7 women). More patients in the P group had an LK>20°: 14 patients in the P group and 1 patient in the C group (p
                     <0.01). The % SSD differed between the P and C groups (118.8%±53.4% and 88.0%±24.3%, respectively; p
                     <0.05). Multivariate logistic analysis showed that an LK>20° was a risk factor for PLC injury in patients with thoracolumbar burst fractures (odds ratio, 55.5 [95% confidence interval, 1.30–2360.1]; p
                     <0.05).
               
                  Conclusions
                  These results demonstrate that while LOVBH, vertebral body translation, and canal compromise do not correlate significantly with the presence of a PLC injury in patients with thoracolumbar fractures, an LK>20° and increased % SSD are associated with a PLC injury.Although thoracolumbar burst fractures are a relatively common injury of the spine, they pose a challenge to the treating physician due to the controversy remaining over the diagnostic modalities and therapeutic options for this condition The controversy in part stems from the different methods employed to evaluate fracture stability, which leads to a variability in treatment choices for thoracolumbar burst fractures In the evaluation of thoracolumbar burst fractures, radiological examinations are of critical importance for detecting the presence of fractures, assessing the severity of the injury, and guiding clinical decisions. Plain radiographs provide important information regarding the injury, but the current modality of choice is computed tomography (CT), since it provides a more accurate portrayal of the degree of vertebral body comminution and canal compromise by the retropulsed bony fragment. The role of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in the assessment of spinal injuries is also continuing to evolve. Generally, in the absence of neurological deficits, MRI of thoracolumbar fractures is not considered necessary in the acute phase. However, MRI provides a direct visualization of the soft tissues of the spine, which previously could only be evaluated through secondary or indirect signs. In particular, MRI provides greater diagnostic accuracy for detecting PLC injuries The PLC is comprised of the supraspinous ligament, interspinous ligament, ligamentum flavum, and the facet capsule. The PLC is considered to be a critical predictor of spinal fracture stability Therefore, the purpose of this study was to determine whether radiographic findings associated with thoracolumbar burst fractures could be predictors of PLC injuries, which were identified through STIR-weighted MRI. This investigation was designed as a single-centre retrospective comparative study. The fractures were located in the thoracolumbar junction between T11 and L2. Sixty-four consecutive patients (38 men and 26 women) were treated surgically between April 2007 and February 2014 at a single institution. The exclusion criteria were: (1) pathological fractures, (2) underlying inflammatory arthropathies of the spine, (3) pre-existing neurological deficits, and (4) dislocation fractures. In the assessment and treatment of spinal trauma, a coherent and logical rationale must be followed in order to achieve the desired results, but individualised decisions are often required. Although non-operative treatment may play a role in cases without neurological deficit and instability, prolonged recumbency increases the risk for complications such as decubitus ulcers, deep vein thrombosis and pneumonia. Recognizing the fact that such complications can be reduced by early operative treatment, we recommended surgery for cases with neurological deficit and/or instability. The diagnosis of thoracolumbar burst fracture was established by X-ray and CT in the sagittal and axial planes. STIR-weighted MRI in the sagittal plane was used to identify the morphological pattern of the fractures and to evaluate the state of the intervertebral discs and the PLC ( Normalised loss of vertebral body height (LOVBH) was calculated as a percentage of the height loss normalised to the average of the vertebral bodies above and below the injured segment, as described by Willen et al. Vertebral translation was also measured on midsagittal CT images. Vertebral translation was taken as the distance from the postero-superior corner of the injured vertebral body to a line tangent to the posterior inferior cortex of the cephalad vertebral body (suprajacent translation) or to the posterior superior cortex of the caudal vertebral body (subjacent translation) ( The antero-posterior diameter and medial–lateral diameter of the spinal canal were measured at the injured segment. The sagittal transverse ratio (STR) was defined as the ratio of the antero-posterior spinal canal diameter to the medial–lateral spinal canal diameter, as described by Radcliff et al. Neurological injury was assessed from a retrospective review of the records of the consulting orthopaedic surgeon, acute care physician, and physiatry consulting services, as is the protocol at the authors’ institution. Neurological injuries were assigned a Frankel scale score. The total scores derived from the TLICS and the load sharing classification (LSC) system were also evaluated and compared between the two groups. Multivariate logistic regression analysis was used to identify independent risk factors for PLC injury. Statistical differences in the degree of LOVBH, LK, vertebral body translation, canal compromise (STR), ISD, SSD, and ISD between the patients with and without PLC injury were analyzed. Total severity score calculated by the LSC and TLICS and the Frankel scale score were also evaluated. Statistical analysis was performed using the Statistical Package foe the Social Sciences (SPSS version 20.0) software for Windows (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). All values are expressed as mean Twenty-four patients were excluded from the study because of the lack of STIR-weighted MRI, resulting in a total of 40 patients. The demographics of the patients are presented in Preoperative STIR-weighted MRI showed that 25 patients had a PLC injury (P group: 15 men and 10 women), and 15 patients did not have a PLC injury (C group: 8 men and 7 women) ( The total TLICS score was also significantly higher in the P group (6.1 The total TLICS score was also significantly higher in the P group: 6.1 This study used STIR-weighted MRI to identify the presence of a PLC injury in thoracolumbar fractures and examined whether radiographic parameters could be predictors of a PLC injury. While LOVBH, translation, and canal compromise (STR) were not associated with PLC injury, increased % SSD and LK Treatment of unstable thoracolumbar burst fractures is a controversial area of spine injury management. Biomechanical and clinical studies have shown that loss of >50% of the vertebral body height or angulation/kyphosis of the thoracolumbar junction of >20° results in acute spinal instability that would eventually lead to failure of the spinal segment with weight-bearing However, there are a few concerns surrounding this discussion. Previous studies that used only T1- and T2-weighted sagittal and axial spin-echo images to identify the presence of a PLC injury showed that they are severely limited in diagnostic accuracy. Vaccaro et al. In future studies, we hope to analyze the correlation between the PLC integrity evaluated by STIR-weighted MRI, intraoperative assessment of the PLC if surgery is performed, and its effect on the development of post-traumatic/postoperative kyphosis. There are some limitations to this study. First, it is possible that the study population included a higher percentage of severe acute cases, which may have biased the evaluations. However, the relatively low positive predictive value and specificity for MRI in evaluating the PLC injury, may lead to the overdiagnosis of injuries and overtreatment of stable lesions. Moreover, Vaccaro et al. The current study suggests that LK The authors report no conflicts of interest.