The coupling of photo-Fenton (chemical) and biological treatments has been used for the removal of Diuron and Linuron herbicides from water. The chemical reaction was employed as a pre-treatment step for the conversion of the toxic and non-biodegradable herbicides into biodegradable intermediates that were subsequently removed by means of a biological sequencing batch reactor (SBR). Multivariate experimental design was used to select four photo-Fenton reagent dose combinations for the coupling experiments. Concentrations of hydrogen peroxide between 10 and 250mgL−1, and iron (II) concentrations between 2 and 20mgL−1 have been tested. 15.9mgL−1 of Fe(II) and 202mgL−1 of H2O2 were needed to convert initial toxic and non-biodegradable herbicides into suitable intermediates for a subsequent biological treatment. Detrimental effects due to the excess of reactants were detected. Chemical oxygen demand (COD), average oxidation state (AOS), total organic carbon (TOC) and hydrogen peroxide concentration are the parameters used to trace the experiments course. Also, toxicity (EC50
                     15) and biodegradability (BOD5/COD) tests were carried out at the end of each chemical oxidation.
                  Complete disappearance of the herbicides from water was observed after the chemical treatment, while 3,4-dichloroaniline and 3,4-dichlorophenyl isocyanate were identified as the main by-products of the degradation process. Complete TOC removal was achieved after biological treatment in a SBR using a hydraulic retention time (HRT) of 2 days.The presence of pesticides in natural and drinking waters is a problem of environmental and human health concern. The main sources of pesticides pollution are agricultural runoffs and wastewaters generated at pesticide manufacturing plants ( Since their discovery in 1950, phenylurea compounds have been widely used to prevent the growth of undesirable plants. Diuron and Linuron are two phenylurea herbicides that inhibit photosynthesis, thus impeding weed growth. Both herbicides are toxic and non-biodegradable and they are mainly used for the control of germinating grass and broad-leaved weeds in many crops (e.g., cereals) ( Since herbicides, due to their biorecalcitrant and toxic properties, cannot be directly treated in conventional wastewater treatment plants based on the activity of a microbiological consortium, the development of new technologies aimed at the easy degradation of such substances is of practical interest. Due to the combination of both environmental and economic advantages, the coupling between advanced oxidation processes (AOPs) and biological treatments can be a suitable solution for the removal of toxic compounds from water ( AOPs are based in the use of the highly-reactive hydroxyl radicals ( Available AOPs are ozonation ( If minimization of Fenton reagents (Fe(II) and hydrogen peroxide) consumption is the goal to be achieved, multivariate experimental design is a clever option. Experimental design is a modern approach to the study of the simultaneous effects of several experimental parameters on chemical reaction ( Sequencing batch reactor (SBR), based on the biodegradation activity of a bacteria consortium, has been gaining considerable popularity as treatment method in recent years because of its high efficiency and flexibility ( The goal of this paper is to use an experimental design for the choice of minimum Fenton reactant doses able to convert Diuron and Linuron containing waters into biocompatible effluents, seeking the subsequent coupling to a biological SBR for complete organic load removal.  FeSO Photo-Fenton reagent concentrations were selected by means of multivariate experimental design. A central composite design was used to investigate the effect of hydrogen peroxide and iron (II) concentrations in the mineralization percentage. Eleven experiments were carried out. Concentration of hydrogen peroxide between 10 and 250 A sludge sample taken from the aerobic stage of an urban wastewater treatment plant in Manresa (Spain) and containing an initial volatile suspended solids (VSS) value around 5 Sample pH—around 7—and dissolved oxygen—not lower than 3 Initial herbicide concentration (HPLC), TOC, COD and hydrogen peroxide evolution were recorded along the oxidation process. The HPLC system included a LC-10 AT VP pump (Shimadzu) and a UV–Visible diode array detector (Agilent 1100 Series). The detection limit of the pesticides was 0.001 At the end of the oxidation process toxicity (EC In all biological analyses, hydrogen peroxide and iron in solution were previously removed to avoid errors in the measurement. Iron in solution was eliminated by raising pH to 8 and then filtering the solution. Hydrogen peroxide was eliminated by adding sodium sulphite, as explained above. The intermediate products of the photodegradation of both pesticides were extracted by solid phase extraction (Maxi-Clean C18 600 When SBR was used, volatile and total suspended solids (VSS and TSS) concentrations, using samples of 10 Oxidation of a Linuron and Diuron solution by photo-Fenton reagents was carried out in a batch reactor in order to ascertain whether this reaction could be used to generate an intermediate solution that could be subsequently degraded in a biological reactor. Thus, the possibility of coupled chemical–biological treatment of water containing Diuron and Linuron herbicides has been explored. Multivariate experimental design has been used to choose the best reactant combination needed for a given mineralization degree. Evolution of primary parameters like TOC, average oxidation state (AOS) and residual H There are two important factors affecting the rate of photo-Fenton reaction once the photon source is fixed: hydrogen peroxide dose and iron concentration. The hydrogen peroxide dose is important in order to obtain quantitative degradation, while the iron concentration is important for the reaction kinetics ( Eleven experiments were needed to obtain the following single polynomial expression used to fit experimental data: This expression shows the response factor ( The TOC removal was mainly influenced by Fe(II) concentration, as seen by the high coefficient of this factor in Eq. The formation of such a ferryl iron intermediate in iron-peroxide systems was firstly proposed by As seen in  Although the reactant dose D was much higher than the reactant dose B, similar results were obtained when comparing the experimental TOC removal and the AOS data (≅2) after photo-Fenton treatment (see Concerning effluents treated with reactant doses A and B, important differences on the TOC removal and the AOS recorded data during pre-treatment were observed. They were also noticeably different than the values obtained for effluents treated with reactant doses C and D (see The acute toxicity of the four different pre-treated effluents after 1 The biodegradability of the treated effluents after 1 Complete TOC removal of the phototreated effluents could be achieved by means of secondary biological treatment when doses C and D were used because BOD  A GC–MS analysis was carried out in order to elucidate those by-products that could be formed during Diuron and Linuron phototreatment. The analysis was done for the sample treated with dose C and after 15 3,4-dichloroaniline and 3,4-dichlorophenyl isocyanate were identified by the mass of the molecular and fragment ions and also through comparison with the Wiley library data with similarities up to 86%. HPLC analyses showed that the initial herbicides had disappeared before 40 A 30% of TOC reduction was obtained in the chemical step when wastewater was treated with dose B while 78% of the TOC was removed when using the coupled photo-Fenton and biological system (see A combined photo-Fenton and biological treatment has been evaluated for the treatment of water containing Diuron and Linuron herbicides. Multivariate experimental design has been applied to optimize Fenton reactant doses. The conclusions derived from this study are The excess in reactant doses, specially Fe(II), slow down mineralization rate during the photo-Fenton process. This fact could be due to the side reactions derived from oxidized forms of reactant species. Focusing on this fact, it has been demonstrated that there is an optimum reagent dose combination to reach a determined mineralization degree. With these optimized reagent doses, initial herbicides disappear from wastewater under mild conditions, and more biodegradable by-products are formed, and could be successfully degraded by means of a biological treatment. 3,4-dichloroaniline and 3,4-dichlorophenyl isocyanate have been identified as intermediates in the degradation pathway. The combined photo-Fenton and biological process can completely remove Diuron and Linuron herbicides from water when this is treated with [Fe(II)]=15.9 This work was supported by MEC (project CTQ2005-02808) and European Commission (CADOX project, EVK1-CT-2002-00122). We thank Makhteshim Agan España, S.A. for providing the Linuron herbicide.