The effects of the dosages (0.01%, 0.03%, 0.05%, 0.07%, 0.1%, and 0.3% by weight of cement binder) of an ultra-large size (56 ± 12 µm) of pristine graphene (PRG) industrialy manufactured by electrochemical process on compressive and tensile strengths of cement mortars are presented. To have a better understanding of the reinforcement mechanism of PRG-cementitious gels, the physicochemical and microstructure analyses were performed. The results show that the addition of PRG to cement mortars improves their mechanical properties, with characteristic concentration dependence. The mortar mix with 0.07% PRG is identified as the optimal concentration, which provides 34.3% and 26.9% improvement in compressive and tensile strength at 28 days, respectively. This enhancement is attributed to the improvement of the hydration degree of cement paste, resulting in more Calcium Silicate Hydrate gel production. This also comes from the reinforcement of the adhesion bond that was created from friction forces between PRG sheets and cement gels, resulting in strengthening cement matrix composites and impeding crack propagations in the structure. However, with the further increases in PRG contents (i.e. 0.1%, 0.3%), the enhancement of mechanical properties of mortars is limited due to the impact of the van der Waals force on the sedimentation of PRG suspension, leading to the poor dispersion of the prepared PRG suspension. These results suggests that industrially produced pristine graphene by electrochemical process is a promising additive for improving performances of construction materials.Cementitious materials are one of the most commonly used materials in the construction industry due to their high compressive strength. However, they suffer from poor tensile strength, flexural strength, fracture toughness and brittleness giving rise to durability issues Recently, cementitious material development has focused on the incorporation of nanomaterials to not only enhance the mechanical properties but also retard the propagation of cracks to generate a more durable composite In addition to inorganic nanomaterials, carbon-based materials, such as nanofibers and nanotubes, have been investigated in cementitious composites as additives and demonstrated they can improve the mechanical properties Graphene, a recently discovered two-dimensional (2D) carbon material, has many outstanding properties such as high electrical and thermal conductivity, high-temperature stability, high mechanical strength, ultra-large specific surface areas and high aspect ratios. Graphene is widely recognized to be an ideal additive to enhance performances of cementitious materials Graphene materials, such as rGO and PRG, are highly hydrophobic and less dispersible in water compared to GO. This is the reason of being less attractive to be incorporated into cement composites to improve cement performances regardless of their better mechanical properties To address these research gaps, the aim of this study is to investigate the use of industrially manufactured PRG produced by an electrochemical process with focus on studying the effects of the ultra-large size of PRG (i.e. 56 µm) and their dosages (i.e. from 0% to 0.3% by weight of cement binder) on the physicochemical and mechanical properties of PRG-cement mortars. Our hypothesis is that very large sheets of graphene with the size of several tens of micron will significantly improve the mechanical properties of cement. Most of the previous studies were based on PRG prepared in research laboratories with variable quality and less reproducible structural and mechanical characteristics. In this work, it is the first time to use industrially produced PRG manufactured by an electrochemical process that has recently been established by First Graphene Ltd in Perth, Australia, with the capacity of 100 t/year. To better understand the mechanism behind the positive effects of ultra-large PRG particles with different dosages on cement mortars, a series of microanalyses were completed using X-ray diffraction analysis (XRD), Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), Scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and Ultraviolet–visible spectrophotometer (UV–vis). Industrial production of graphene has dramatically reduced the cost of producing graphene in large quantities, allowing it to be incorporated into industrial-scale materials, such as concrete. Hence, the promising results from this study will provide an attractive avenue to practical applications of graphene-based materials for a broad range of construction materials to enhance their mechanical and durability properties. The PRG with the physical properties shown in The aqueous solution for mortar mixes, including water, PRG and superplasticizer, was prepared following the steps: (i) MasterGlenium SKY 8100 was mixed and stirred in water within 2 min; (ii) PRG was then added and stirred for 2 min; (iii) the solution was then sonicated by Ultrasonicator UIP1000hdT for 30 min to create the aqueous solution for the mortar mixes. A total of seven unique mixes of PRG-cement based mortars were prepared. Their detailed mix proportions are described in To prepare the mortar mixes, the procedures described below were adopted to improve the uniform of the cement matrix: natural sand and OPC were mixed together for four minutes, and then the aqueous solution (preparation procedures as described in The labels of the PRG-cement based mortar mixes shown in SEM was obtained by using the FEI Quanta 450, which analyzes and provides high-resolution images of surface topography. The SEM analysis was conducted at 28 days, and SEM specimens were cut from the samples of PRG-cement mortars at 28-day mechanical tests with the dimensions of about 5 × 5 × 5 mm to analyze their surface morphologies and microstructures. All these specimens were dried and then coated by a 5 nm-thick platinum layer to enhance the quality of SEM images. Particle size measurement of PRG dispersions was measured in triplicate by a Nanosight NS300 (Malvern Instruments) coupled with a green laser (532 nm) using the O-ring top-plate sample chamber configuration. The pre-installed Nanoparticle Tracking Analysis (NTA) software version 3.3 took into account the Brownian motion trajectory of the particles to measure its size. XRD was conducted by using the Rigaku MiniFlex 600 X-Ray diffractometer to find the mineralogical characteristics (i.e. the crystalline phases) of materials (i.e. OPC, natural sand, PRG, and hydration products of PRG-cement mortars). The XRD was worked at conditions 40 kV and 15 mA, 2θ = 5°–80° at 0.02° step size. The XRD specimens were collected from remnant pieces of PRG-cement mortars at 28-day compression tests, and then, they were dried in the oven for one day, then ground, and sieved into fine powders (i.e., < 10 µm) for analysis. TGA was performed by using the TGA Q500 instrument to investigate the effects of PRG on the hydration process of cement composites at 7 and 28 days. About 20 mg of the powder (i.e. < 10 µm) of mortar mixes was heated from room temperature to 900 °C with the heating rate of 10 °C per minute under the nitrogen atmosphere condition. The outcomes of the TGA analysis are able to identify the contents of evaporable water (i.e. free water covers outer surfaces of cement composites) and non-evaporable water (i.e. the water content bound by products (e.g. portlandite, calcium silicate hydrate gels) of the cement hydration process). Based on the proportion of the weight loss of testing samples, the hydration degree of cement pastes of the control and PRG-cement samples was calculated (the details are discussed later in FTIR was performed by using the Nicolet 6700 to determine specific functional groups and their intensities in samples, including PRG, cement, sand, powder cementitious materials at 28 days. The infrared spectrum was obtained by using the support of the spectrum analysis software, which shows spectrums in transmission mode with the range of frequency in wavenumber from 400 cm UV–vis was obtained by using Shimadzu UV-1601 to investigate the dispersion of PRG aqueous solution, varying with the time between two methods: 30 min sonicated by Ultrasonication UIP 1000hdT (Hielscher, Germany) and without sonication. The percentage of the transmittance of PRG aqueous solution determined by UV–vis varies with time is used to provide a quantitative analysis of the dispersity or sedimentation of the solution. The flow test of fresh mortars was performed immediately after mixed mortars, according to ASTM C1437 The morphology and physical properties of industrially produced PRG material used in this study are summarized in The observations of the sedimentation of PRG in aqueous solution with times between 30 min sonicated and without sonicated at the same 0.03% PRG content based on the percentage of transmittance of these solutions from UV–vis analysis are shown in  The 7 and 28 days compressive test results of the control mix and the mixes with different PRG concentrations, and their enhancement strengths compared to the control mortar are shown in  The observed improvement in the compressive and tensile strengths of the PRG-cement mortar composites with the highest strength at the PRG0.07 mix, which will be discussed in more details in The axial compressive stress and strain relationship of the mortar mixes with different PRG concentrations at 28 days is shown in The influence of the PRG concentrations on the mechanical properties of cement mortar composites at microscale was evaluated using microstructural tests: XRD, TGA, FTIR, and SEM. These tests were designed and conducted by four different contents of PRG as follows: 0 (the control mix), 0.03% (as shown the transparently effective effect of PRG), 0.07% (the optimum PRG content based on the experimental results from mechanical tests), 0.3% (the maximum PRG content). The XRD patterns of OPC, sand, and PRG-cement mortar mixes are shown in In cementitious composites, the main products of the hydrated cement paste are portlandite (Ca(OH)  Moreover, the major peaks of un-hydrated alite (2θ = 29.5°, 32.3°) in these mixes detailed in TGA is another well-known method used to analyze the hydration degree of cementitious composites, which is based on the content of portlandite and non-evaporable water calculated from samples  Based on Eqs. (7) and (8), the amount of portlandite and non-evaporable water of samples at 7 and 28 days are shown in The FTIR spectra of natural sand, OPC, and PRG are shown in For OPC, the bands at about 450 cm The major bands of PRG showed the stretching vibrations: from about 1000 cm  The SEM images of cracking patterns of the mortar mixes, i.e. PRG0, PRG0.03, PRG0.07, and PRG0.3, at 28 days at 50 µm and 30 µm magnification are shown in  By the addition of the 0.03%, 0.07%, and 0.3% PRG content ( When PRG concentration is increased up to 0.3%, it leads to poor dispersion. The agglomeration of PRG sheets occurs due to the effect of the van der Waals force. This creates multi-layers PRG sheets with thicker thickness, and hence, it prevents PRG sheets to contribute to improve the degree of the cement hydration process and to interact with the crystals compositions of cement gels. This leads to the reduction in mechanical strengths, which is in line with the results discussed in the previous sections and previous studies on a combination of graphene and cementitious composites The results of the investigation on the effects of different concentrations of industrially produced PRG by electrochemical exfoliation of graphite on the physicochemical and mechanical properties of PRG-cement mortar composites have been presented. The following key conclusions have been drawn based on the results and discussions in the study: The first study of the ultra-large size of PRG particles in average of 56 ± 12 µm produced by this industrial process has been confirmed that there is a significant enhancement of the ultra-large PRG size to mechanical properties of cementitious composites, compared to all previous studies using graphene based materials. It has been shown that the addition of PRG to cement mortars can improve their mechanical properties and the level of improvement depends on PRG contents. The 0.07% PRG mix has been identified as the optimal PRG concentration in this study, which provides 34.3% and 26.9% enhancement of compressive and tensile strengths at 28 days, respectively. PRG has improved the microstructure of the cement matrix, which comes from the rise in the hydration degree of cement pastes and the adhesive friction forces between PRG sheets and cement gels, and has also impeded crack propagations in the structures. The mixes with the PRG contents, which are higher of the optimal value (i.e. 0.07%), lead to poor dispersion resulting in the agglomeration of PRG sheets. This limits the improvement of the mechanical strengths. The results from XRD, TGA, FTIR, and SEM analyses have shown that there is a strong relationship between mechanical results and bonding gels, densities and arrangements of the crystals in the microstructures. The results and findings from this study have suggested a promising capability of industrially manufactured PRG using electrochemical process due to their unique properties to be used as a next-generation of additives in cementitious composites. This could improve the properties of building materials, such as mechanical, durability, conductivity, and shielding properties. We are currently in the process of investigating the effects of the different contents, sizes and types of PRG on these properties, and the findings will be presented in separate studies. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work is supported and funded by the ARC Research Hub for Graphene Enabled Industry Transformation (Grant IH150100003) and First Graphene Ltd. The authors also thank the Schools of Civil, Environmental and Mining Engineering and Chemical Engineering and Advanced Materials at the