The effects of using K2TaF7 as the raw material and sodium as the reducing agent on the characteristics of tantalum powder are investigated. Batch-type metallothermic reduction (BTMR) is used to charge the reactor with the raw material and the reducing agent, and external continuous supply metallothermic reduction (ESMR) is used to supply the raw material and the reducing agent at a constant rate at the temperature of the reduction reaction. In the case of ESMR, the yield increases by several tens of percent because of the uniform reaction between the raw material and the reducing agent. It is possible to obtain a powder of over 99.5% purity. The powder particles obtained with BTMR are relatively large (4–6μm) and have a coarse lamellar shape, while those prepared via ESMR are of uniform 1–2μm size with a coral-like shape. Measurements of the electric properties show that the leakage current and the dielectric dissipation are low with higher reliability in ESMR than in BTMR, and the capacitance is 26,000 and 8400CV for ESMR and in BTMR, respectively.Tantalum is a silver white metal belonging to Group V of the Periodic Table but is usually bluish because of the oxide film on its surface. The oxide film is formed through anode oxidation of tantalum and has a rectifying function and high permittivity, and it is electrically stable. Tantalum electrolytic capacitors have been used in various mobile electronic products such as mobile phones, personal digital assistants, laptop computers, controllers in airplanes, and vehicles. With an increasing demand for high reliability and small size in electronic products, technologies are still being developed for tantalum as a material meeting these requirements. The tantalum capacitor is an electrolytic capacitor that uses tantalum as the material of the electrodes. Similar to an aluminum electrolytic capacitor, it can attain a relatively large capacity. The tantalum electrolytic capacitor is superior to the aluminum electrolytic capacitor both in its temperature characteristic (i.e., the capacity changes according to temperature) and in its frequency characteristic. Unlike aluminum electrolytic capacitors that are made by wrapping kraft soaked in an electrolytic solution and use metal aluminum, tantalum electrolytic capacitors use an opening made when tantalum powder is sintered and hardened, so their electric features are outstanding. Tantalum capacitors have polarity and, in general, a capacitor itself has a (+) mark indicating the polarity. Connection must be made to the correct electrodes. In addition, tantalum capacitors are used in circuits that strictly control the changes in capacity caused by temperature and have somewhat high frequency. In the present study, tantalum powder is manufactured through metallothermic reduction A diagram of the experimental apparatus is shown in The experimental process can be briefly described as follows. In batch-type metallothermic reduction (BTMR), KCl and KF are prepared as diluents in a weight ratio of 4:1 and a total weight of 2000 In post-processing, the sample was washed with methanol and distilled water several times to remove the un-reacted Na and salt, and then a pickling process was applied A tantalum capacitor is made of pure tantalum powder. The typical particle size is 1–3 The contents of impurities present in the tantalum powder, are given in In the ESMR, however, the sudden rise in reaction temperature is prevented, and the reduction of the raw material takes place uniformly and, as a result, the impurity contents are low. In addition, because of the high-temperature treatment, gases such as oxygen could be controlled to remain below the allowed limit of 3000 According to a report by Izumi Scanning electron micrographs of the tantalum powder manufactured in this study and tantalum powder (c) for commercial capacitors are shown in Particle size can be controlled in various ways. Bose et al. The granularity distribution of tantalum powder manufactured in this investigation is shown in In manufacturing capacitors, a certain quantity of tantalum powder is dropped into a moulding machine and compressed into pellets. Here, fluidity is very important and, depending on the quantity of powder, the volume of pellets before and after sintering changes, which may cause defects in the capacitors. The globular tantalum powder manufactured with BTMR shows irregular granularity. As a result, the clustering is imperfect, and 40–50% of the particles are smaller than 325 Data that compare the electric properties with commercial tantalum capacitors are presented in The capacitance of the tantalum electrolytic capacitors is dependent on the granularity and particle shape of the tantalum powder. That is, capacitance is high in proportion with the surface area. While the capacitance of tantalum chip capacitors of a specific volume was 1 Measurements of the angle of permittivity loss (tan In summary, to increase the capacitance and reduce the dielectric loss and leakage current, it is necessary to improve the granularity, particle shape and purity of tantalum powder. Tantalum powder manufactured with ESMR contains low contents of heavy metals. The contents of Fe, Cr and Ni are lower by tens of ppm than those in the tantalum powder manufactured with BTMR, in which reduction occurres with the raw material, reductant and diluent loaded together. When the reductant and the raw material are supplied at a constant rate at the reduction temperature, the heat generated from the reaction can be controlled and the impurity contents are significantly lower due completion of the reaction. Despite the morphological aspects of tantalum powder, such as shape and granularity that are highly sensitive to reaction temperature, the ESMR process makes it possible to manufacture tantalum powders made up of large coral-shaped globular particles with a uniform granularity of 1–2 The capacitance of tantalum powder manufactured with BTMR is 8400 This work was supported by the Ministry of Commerce, Industry and Energy (MOCIE) through a project of the Regional Reserch Center (RRC) in Korea.