Based on the principles of biomimetic mineralization, biocomposite nanofibrous membranes were fabricated by the growth of CaP crystals on electrospun gelatin nanofibers to mimic both the physical architecture and chemical composition of natural bone ECM. Plenty more CaP crystals formed on the nanofibrous membrane containing Ca2+ ion precursors, in which these crystals were also observed on the inner side of membrane. The release rate of Ca2+ ion precursors from the nanofibrous membrane was slower than that of 
                        
                           P
                           
                              O
                              4
                              
                                 3
                                 −
                              
                           
                        
                      ion precursors, suggesting the existence of more strong intermolecular interaction between gelatin and Ca2+ ions. ATR-FTIR and XRD results clearly revealed the formation of CaP crystals mixed with apatite and CaCO3, or apatite and TCP on the membranes. The Ca/P molar ratio of crystals obtained from the XPS data was 2.03 and 1.60, which depended on the mineralization conditions. Higher amount of CaP crystals significantly accelerated the deposit rate of bone-like apatite on the surface of composite membrane, meaning to the improved in vivo bone bioactivity.Biomineral materials such as teeth, bones and shells are composed of inorganic crystals and biomacromolecules. The biominerals exhibited manifestly unique structures and special properties compared with their inorganic counterparts Natural bone is a composite material composed of a collagen matrix reinforced with hydroxyapatite (HA) crystals, which forms via the biological mineralization process The electrospinning technique has attracted a great deal of attention as it is an effective means to produce a nonwoven membrane of nanofibers. The interconnected porous nanofiber networks in electrospun membranes, having a very high surface-to-volume ratio, are particularly useful for biomedical applications such as scaffolds used in tissue engineering, wound dressing and drug delivery systems Gelatin is a natural biopolymer obtained by thermal denaturation or physical and chemical degradation of collagen. It is commonly used in tissue engineering, and clinically proven as temporary defect filler and wound dressing because of its biodegradability and biocompatibility Electrospun polymers or their composites, in the form of nanofibrous structure, have recently gained much interest for bone tissue engineering Gelatin from porcine skin (type A), 2,2,2-trifluoroethanol (TFE), glutaraldehyde solution (25% in H The electrospinning setup utilized in this study consisted of a syringe and needle (ID The as-electrospun nanofibrous structure of gelatin is water soluble and mechanically weak. Therefore, the crosslinking process was carried out to stabilize gelatin nanofibers by placing the air-dried nanofibrous membranes in a sealed dessicator containing 10 The morphology of composite nanofibrous membranes was observed by a field emission-scanning electronic microscope (FE-SEM, JSM-6335F, JEOL). Prior to SEM observation, all of the samples were coated with gold. The average diameter of nanofibers was determined by analyzing the SEM images with an image analyzing software (Image-Pro Plus, Media Cybernetics Inc.). For the same samples of FE-SEM, the spectrum of energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) was applied to detect the CaP distribution profile on the membrane surface. ATR-FTIR spectra of the samples were obtained with an ALPHA spectrometer (Bruker Optics). The surface chemical compositions of the samples were analyzed by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements (Quantera SXM, ULVAC-PHI). The incident X-ray was monochromated Al Kα radiation. X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements were carried out to characterize the crystalline phase of nanofibrous membranes with a PANalytical X-ray diffractometer X’Pert Pro using Cu Kα radiation at 40 A weighted amount (155 The formation of bone-like apatite on the surface of composite membranes was examined in SBF with ion concentrations nearly equal to those of human blood plasma Electrospun composite membranes have recently received much attention as scaffold candidates for bone tissue engineering. These composite membranes were found to show better bioactivity such as alkaline phosphatase activity and osteocalcin For the mineralization of gelatin nanofibers containing ion precursors, GEL-Ca or GEL-P was placed in previously prepared counterion solution, 0.5 To verify the formation of CaP crystals on the inner side of membrane, the cross-section of mineralized composite membranes was assayed by SEM. As shown in To assess the release profile of Ca The distribution of the CaP crystals on the composite membranes was measured with the EDX. ATR-FTIR analysis was carried out for surface characterization of GEL-P, GEL-P-Ca, GEL-Ca and GEL-Ca-P nanofibrous membranes in the range of 400–4000 The surface chemical composition of the composite membranes was determined by XPS. Crystallographic analysis was performed using XRD for elucidating the crystal structure change of nanofibrous membranes. The XRD patterns of nanofibrous membranes are illustrated in The essential requirement for an artificial material to bond to living bone is the formation of bone-like apatite on its surface when implanted in the living body, and that this in vivo apatite formation can be reproduced in a SBF with ion concentrations nearly equal to those of human blood plasma Studies in vitro on the biomimetic mineralization process are of immense value in the direct biotechnological exploitation of biogenic materials, the design of novel composite materials and the mimicking of biological processes. Recently, many researches have endeavored to develop novel bone-resembling materials such as electrospun biocomposite nanofibers. In the present study, gelatin/CaP composite nanofibrous membranes produced by the electrospinning and subsequent biomimetic mineralization were introduced for potential use in biomedical field. The resulting composite membranes showed morphology coated with high concentration of the CaP crystals. The type of ion precursor included in the electrospun gelatin nanofibers strongly affected the growth of CaP crystals on the nanofibrous membranes during the mineralization process, which finally influenced on the formation of bone-like apatite in SBF. It is concluded that this new method for making biomineralized composite membranes may be helpful to develop optimized artificial bone materials. This research was supported by Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the