Electrodeposition of metallic multilayers on Si is normally preceded by the vapour deposition of a metallic layer. Since vapour deposition produces an additional step in the production process, direct electrodeposition of multilayers on Si is desirable. However, direct electrodeposition on Si has resulted in low magnetoresistance (MR) – of the order of 1% – at room temperature. With the use of (i) electroless plated copper back contact, (ii) composite potentiostatic pulses, (iii) horizontal electrode configuration and (iv) non-continuous mode of deposition, a room temperature MR of 5.8% has been achieved.Electrodeposition of metallic multilayers on a Si substrate is a promising method for fabricating low-cost integrated magnetic field sensors and for the mass production of nanostructures for use in M-RAM's. Keefe et al. One major shortcoming with electrodeposition on Si is its relatively low electrical conductivity, compared to metals, a problem taken care off, for example, by Keefe et al. A natural question arises: is it possible to deposit multilayers directly – by a fully electrochemical method – on to Si and achieve a MR comparable with cases where a vapour-deposited back contact or buffer layer was present? Pattanaik et al. The nature of the pulse is an important factor in influencing the quality of the deposit and hence the MR. Mostly dual pulses and variations thereof have primarily been used for the deposition of magnetic multilayers. With these pulses, there is a possibility of a cementation (exchange) type of reaction which leads to the dissolution of Co during the pulse-off time Bakonyi et al. The objective of the present study has been to propose a cell configuration for the deposition of Co/Cu multilayers on Si having a reproducibly high MR by a fully (100%) electrochemical method. Single side polished, technical grade, (1 Initial studies Experiments were carried out in the potentiostatic mode, with the composite pulse being applied by a potentiostat. Before carrying out the deposition experiments, the optimum pulse parameters – (i) voltage, (ii) pulse on time ( MR was measured using the four point probe method with current in plane (CIP) and the magnetic field perpendicular to the plane (FPP). Here MR is defined as ( In the initial experiments the multilayer Si/Co27/Cu6/[Co3.5/Cu5.5] Seed layer consisting of 26 5 bi-layers of Co (3.5 Top layer consisting of 25 Despite repeated attempts, a MR of 2.12% could not be exceeded, a problem that could be attributed to two factors. First there may have been some discontinuity in the deposited Co and Cu bi-layers. Second, efforts to deposit more than 8 bi-layers consistently resulted in the entire multilayer structure “peeling off” from the Si substrate. The methodology used for resolving the above-mentioned problems is described below. Optical micrographs showed that the copper back contact was not uniformly deposited on Si and hence could have resulted in discontinuous deposits. Hence we optimised the composition of the electroless plating solutions. Two proprietary solutions, ES406 and ES703, were used. The criteria for selecting the electroless plating solution were based on: (i) continuity of the top layer, (ii) composition variation profile and (iii) MR values. One possible reason for the “peeling off” phenomena could be that the thick Co seed layer cannot provide good adherence to the substrate. Use of metals such as chromium, which form strong bonds with Si, as seed layers may allow the deposition of much larger number of bi-layers without spontaneous peeling off. Since the deposition of chromium would have required an additional step, further experiments were carried out in the horizontal electrode configuration, with the Si-substrate at the bottom. A comparison of Experiments were carried out, in turn, by first varying the thicknesses of the Cu and Co sub-layers from 2.5 For the seed layer optimisation experiments, the seed layer consisted of either Cu or Co and not Cu/Co as in previous experiments. Here both the Co and Cu layers were varied from 10 After the optimisation studies, all subsequent multilayers were deposited with the following configuration: Si/Cu10/[Co3.5/Cu8] It was stated earlier that powdery deposits are a manifestation of concentration polarisation. In order to avoid this problem, a non-continuous mode of deposition was used. Here, the power was switched off after a specified number of multilayers were deposited. The used electrolyte was then replaced with fresh electrolyte and the power switched on again. This sequence of operation was continued till the desired number of bi-layers was deposited. For 15 multilayers, the following sequence was adopted: 6, 3, 3, 3. To study the reproducibility of MR, two samples were prepared under identical conditions. The MR values obtained were 5.84% (see The present study has suggested that a fully electrochemical deposition of Co/Cu multilayers on a Si substrate, without resorting to physical deposition of back contact or buffer layer, resulting in a reasonably high MR is possible. A MR of 5.8% has been achieved which is comparable to that of Keefe et al. Both the electrode configuration and the mode of deposition appear to have a significant effect on the magnetoresistance of Co/Cu multilayers. High MR was obtained in the horizontal electrode configuration with a non-continuous mode of deposition. With (i) fine-tuning of the electrolyte composition, especially the pH since it can affect MR On a fundamental note, two important issues need to be resolved. First, the advantages of the composite pulse with respect to the dual pulses should be established. Second, the shape of the MR curve in The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the Armaments Research Board (ARMREB), Ministry of Defence, Govt. of India.