A particular variety of volcanogenic country rock breccia is described; a contact breccia that has been identified at Venetia, River Ranch and Wimbledon kimberlite pipes. The contact breccia is clast supported with no juvenile kimberlite component, has tightly packed, angular fragments (with occasional rounding of smaller particles), and has a shear-fabric dipping towards the center of each kimberlite pipe or volcanic event. Clasts have preferred orientations parallel to the fabric. Photographs of the breccia in the open pit face and measured data from drill core are analyzed specifically to quantify the clast size distributions and clast shapes by means of fractal analysis. The fractal dimension is one means of characterizing the breccia because the dimension can be specific to a fragmentation mechanism. Clast size distribution fractal dimensions in the coarser particles (greater than circa 3 cm) range from greater than 3 for nonsheared breccia, down to circa 2.3 for the sheared breccia. Breccia characterization based on this fractal analysis suggests that fragmentation occurred initially from confined high-energy explosions, followed by collapse and abrasion by subsequently gravity-induced rockmass subsidence. All studied contact breccias produced a distinctive fractal signature in the finer particles (<3 cm) of circa 1.6 that can be explained by a comminution fragmentation process in that particular particle size range. It is suggested that these subsidence breccias require a substantial volume deficit at depth within the volcanic pipe in order to explain their origin and size. The methodology used in this study could be used to characterize any other volcanic breccia and further model their origins.Volcanic breccias form in a variety of ways and the study of such breccias offers insight into the dynamic processes that can characterize a volcanic event. The description, characterization and interpretation of volcanic breccias related to kimberlite pipes are a fundamental aspect of current kimberlite emplacement models. The breccias found in kimberlite pipes show a wide spectrum of highly variable rock types, from the 100% fragmental kimberlite (tuffistic kimberlite) and the 100% magmatic kimberlite (hypabyssal kimberlite) to the country rock breccia with greater than 90% xenoliths. More commonly found within the kimberlite pipe are kimberlite breccias with fragmental or magmatic kimberlite matrix encapsulating xenolithic clasts. The xenolith content may range from 0% to 100% by volume, and xenolith size may range from less than a millimeter to many tens of metres in diameter. The xenoliths may be sourced from locally derived country rock, or deeper crustal rocks or even mantle-derived nodules. The clast shapes may vary from angular to well rounded. This paper describes a particular variety of country rock breccia; a contact breccia without any juvenile kimberlite component that has been observed by the author at Venetia, The Oaks (no data included in this study), River Ranch, and Wimbledon kimberlite pipes. Found on the external kimberlite pipe contacts, these country rock breccias may be bedded or massive, monolithic or heterolithic, and the clasts may also vary from angular to well rounded. Such breccias are also described in the literature for other pipes, such as Orapa southern lobe precursor breccias The raw data for the analyses on the contact breccias described in this paper comes from open-pit exposures at Venetia Mine, River Ranch Mine and Wimbledon quarry Venetia Mine is located 80 km west of Messina and just 25 km south of the Zimbabwe border It is not the intention of this paper to describe or discuss the various types of kimberlite facies at Venetia Mine (see rather The country rock breccia south of the Venetia K1 pipe The breccia itself is clast supported, with angular fragments. Preferred clast alignment is not always obvious, except within a few metres from the southern contact The clasts are monolithic in the sense that they derive from the local country rock, which in the case of the Venetia pipes is itself a heterogeneous mix of feldsphathic and biotite gneisses, biotite schists and amphibolite that is typical of the Limpopo Metamorphic Belt. At Venetia, the clasts in the country rock breccias are well mixed, but do not contain the shale clasts that are so abundant in the heterolithic kimberlite breccia facies filling the adjacent K1 pipe—that are most likely derived from an overlying, but now eroded Soutpansberg Group. This implies that the breccia clasts may have been transported (by some means) from their source more than a few tens of metres, but no more than a few hundreds of metres downwards. Clast sizes range from about 5 m in diameter to less than a millimeter. The larger clasts typically show signs of shearing apart. Dilation between the clasts is very low, but in general the clasts cannot be pieced together and dilation (in the absolute sense) must be high. Clasts are tightly packed together with no siliceous or carbonate cement. Drill core samples (drill core HDH2) often show clasts with a sandy, medium-grained matrix and secondary carbonate veining. The sandy matrix resembles a form of “rock flower”, but is not pervasive throughout the breccia. The source of the carbonate is most likely the kimberlite itself, introduced after brecciation. Also analyzed through photographs of pit exposures are breccias exposed in the northwestern contact of the K4 pipe (same area as the GDH41 pipe intersection in The other occurrences of breccia intersected in drill holes and circled in River Ranch Mine is located 12.5 km west–northwest of the border town of Bietbridge in Zimbabwe, and 1.6 km north of the Limpopo River The River Ranch contact breccia is similar to the Venetia contact breccias. It is a heterogeneous mix of feldsphathic and biotite gneisses, and amphibolite from the Beitbridge Group of the Limpopo Metamorphic Belt. The breccia is clast supported and has angular to subrounded fragments, as well as a strong fabric that dips towards the main kimberlite pipe (dip direction N81°E) at 32° from the horizontal Clast sizes range from 10 m down to less than a millimeter. Smaller clasts (typically less than 20 cm) show a higher degree of rounding. One sharp, subvertical internal contact was identified within the contact breccia that appears to predate the fabric, and separates a breccia facies that is dominated by amphibolitic clasts from a facies dominated by quartzo-feldsphathic clasts. The amphibolite-rich facies is only about 2 m wide and situated immediately adjacent the northern contact of the breccia body. No kimberlite was found in this contact breccia facies. The Wimbledon pipe is located about 10 km south of the town of Kimberley in South Africa The clasts are predominantly dolerite in composition, apparently sourced from an overlying dolerite sill that outcrops nearby the pipe. The breccia has a weak shear fabric that dips towards the pipe and steepens from 14° at the country rock contact to 41° at the kimberlite contact. The larger clasts are typically joint bounded, with one flat, joint-controlled side lying on or parallel to the shear planes. The linear alignment of such clast edges is often the only way to identify individual shear planes since the planes are not defined by mineral growth, plastic deformation or even clast size variations. One subvertical fault within 10 m of the kimberlite contact acts as an internal contact separating the dolerite breccia from a pure shale breccia facies. Within the relatively small exposed area of shale breccia, there is no obvious preferred clast orientation or fabric. Clasts are angular and range from about 0.5 m to millimeters in diameter. A fractal distribution is essentially a power-law distribution. Fractal distributions are being used ever more extensively in geology (e.g., In the blasting sciences and particularly in the metallurgy industry, particle size distributions are normally compared with empirical distributions such as the Rosin-Rammler  In this study, the radius of particles measured in drill core or in slope exposures are grouped into size bins and plotted as cumulative frequency versus bin size on a log–log graph The drill core samples were undertaken by measuring the length of each clast intersected along the center line of the drill core with a tape measure. They are therefore one-dimensional line samples. Samples taken in the open pit are scaled photographs on which each visible clast has been manually outlined Fractal analysis is also used to describe the complexity of a particle shape. Simplistically, if the particles' edge (analyzed as a line) appears self-similar (looks the same at any scale), the boundary can be defined as fractal. The length of a complex line is clearly greater when measured with a 1-mm measuring stick, than with a 10-m-long measuring stick. If the line is fractal then on a log–log graph the length of the line (or particle perimeter) shows a linear relationship to the scale of measurement. The gradient of the best-fit line is again the fractal dimension (Dr). In reality, geological particles are never true fractals, but show only fractal behaviour over a finite scale. The shape analysis technique used in this study was that of box-counting The dimensionality of a straight line or a line outlining a Euclidean shape is 1. A complex “rugged” line is filling a two-dimensional plane and the Dr value determined from fractal analysis of such a line must therefore lie between 1 and 2. The Dr value of geological particles typically ranges between 1 and 1.36, but in magmatic ash particles it may reach as high as 1.57 Two bench-scale (12 m high) photographs of the country rock breccia southwest of the Venetia K1 pipe were analyzed, the first right from the southern contact area In thin section (from the Venetia drill core hole HDH2, Two bench-scale (15 m high) photographs were analyzed from the River Ranch breccia, the first near the southern contact One bench-scale (15 m high) photograph from near the center of the Wimbledon breccia exposure was analyzed, with a total of 995 clasts individually identified on the image. The fractal distribution can be seen in   Note that all the above breccias show indications of a shear fabric in open-pit exposures. All drill holes illustrated in The breccias studied from drill core are clearly multifractal in nature (see inset log–log graphs in Some of the drill core results do not fall consistently into either of these two trends, and so an analysis was done to determine spatial variation in Ds through a number of the boreholes. The results are presented in Besides the fractal dimension, variations in average particle size are noticeable. Note the cyclic nature of the peaks on the moving-average size variation curves in  The plates of the De Beers Mine breccia and the New Elands Mine breccia from Focusing only on the Ds values at larger particle sizes, it appears as if sheared breccias have Ds values of around 2.1–2.3, but the nonsheared breccias from De Beers and New Elands Mines can have Ds values over 3. The drill core data from Venetia shows Ds values that drop to 2.1 (again for sheared breccia), but also rise far above 3. Note that the first stage of brecciation observed in thin section also had a Ds value of 3. Open-pit excavations often have abundant slope failures and fragmented rock accumulates at the base of the slope as talus fans. The Ds value determined from two rock failures in the Venetia Mine open-pit slope produced fairly poor fractal trends, but the most linear section of the curve is with the larger particles and has a Ds value of 2.15. The poor fractal results are also seen with blasted muckpile data and it is believed that a more representative sampling technique is required for continued comparative research on any such loose rock piles. However, it should be noted that the sheared breccias have a very similar fractal dimension (circa 2.1–2.3) to the rock failures. The fragmentation mechanism is collapse with breaking along preexisting joints, followed by impact collision and abrasion. Reprocessed data from The other facies of kimberlite breccia in the pipe should also be analyzed using fractals. In this study, one photograph of a kimberlite breccia with kimberlite matrix and greater then 75% xenoliths was analyzed for the Ds value of the xenoliths. This tuffistic kimberlite breccia (TKBB) is located in the southwest corner of the Venetia K1 pipe. The result is a Ds value of 1.3. It was not the objective of this study to compare or contrast the boundary fractal dimension (Dr) of the three kimberlite pipes studied, but to rather quantify the shape of the breccia clasts for general characterization purposes. The Dr value for the contact breccias at each of the sites is very similar, if not identical. A far more comprehensive study is required to get a statistically valid number of samples on sufficiently high-resolution photographs to compare each breccia site. Clast shapes from slope failure talus, from blast muckpiles and from a heterolithic kimberlite pipe breccia with greater than 75% xenoliths (TKBB) were compared to the contact breccias in order to try help with the characterization. The boundaries of 79 contact breccia clasts (the majority from River Ranch), 36 slope failure particles, 17 blasted particles (using industrial explosives) and 18 TKBB xenoliths were analyzed.  All boundary fractal analyses show very low Dr values and the average for the country rock breccias is 1.07±0.02. The breccia is closest to rock failure particles in roundness, circularity and Dr (1.05±0.02). The country rock breccia and the gravity induced rock failure particles also have the widest distribution in Dr values, circularity and roundness. The particles from the blasts show average Dr values of 1.04±0.01. Note that the TKBB xenoliths have consistent low roundness values in Most documented kimberlites pipes have multiple phases of intrusion (or even multiple, merged pipes) typically reflected in the pipe shape and the internal variation in composition (e.g., Jwaneng— Such work has already been done with volcanic ash particles. The country rock breccias at the localities studied and discussed in this paper vary in terms of the composition of the clasts, but the clasts are all sourced from the country rock lying near (adjacent or above) the breccia. The breccias are fairly similar with regard to clast size range and shape. The Ds values of the larger clast fraction in the breccias are remarkably similar at circa 2.3. They all occur as contact breccias on the edge of the kimberlite pipe and they all appear to have a shear fabric developed to a lesser or greater degree. This shear fabric is considered to be distinctive of this type of breccia at all the studied localities and is often enhanced by preferred clast orientations parallel to the fabric. However, drill hole and thin-section fractal studies, as well fractal studies on contact breccias from De Beers and New Elands Mines show that the Ds value can be substantially higher (>3). The high Ds values are interpreted to be directly linked to breccias without a shear fabric. Pockets of such nonsheared breccias have been observed in the Venetia contact breccias The size of the contact breccias seen at all three studied localities, the fact that they contain no kimberlite (besides later crosscutting magmatic intrusions), the high degree of mixing of country rock clasts, and the fact that there are sharp contacts with the kimberlite facies in the pipe suggests that they formed by relatively large rock mass failures in the country rock around the pipe sometime before the final stages of volcanism. The angles at which the breccias shear fabric dips into the pipe support the idea that the country rock was slumping or caving towards the kimberlite pipe. The similarity in Ds values of 2.1–2.3 (again at low Dr values) for the sheared breccias and slope failure talus (Ds=2.15 in The data presented here consistently shows fractal dimensions (Ds) at intermediate particle sizes of circa 1.6–1.7. Further reworking into the kimberlite pipe, such as the TKBB described previously, causes a further drop in Ds below 1.6 (TKBB plotted in Slope stability analyses could easily show that the volcanological process must produce a large excavation or volume deficit to allow the observed scale of breccias to fail and subside. In order for the failure to be kinematically possible, the base (“toe”) of the failure needs to be removed so that no further confining force is applied to the base. The most obvious location for such failures is in the volcanic crater. However, the kimberlite facies exposed in the Venetia K1 pipe, the River Ranch pipe and the Wimbledon pipe at the level of these large contact breccias have not been interpreted as crater facies, but seem more typical of the kimberlite pipe diatreme. The volcanic process must therefore produce a volume deficit at depth within the pipe in order to produce the observed contact breccias. Subsidence is a clearly documented and important component of phreatomagmatic volcanism The country rock breccias observed and sampled by photograph at Venetia Mine, River Ranch Mine and Wimbledon quarry share similar textural features. They are all tightly packed, clast supported, angular (often with subrounded smaller clasts) contact breccias found on the perimeter of the kimberlite pipe. They comprise 100% country rock fragments sourced from immediately adjacent or above the breccia. The breccias have all developed a shear fabric that is often enhanced by preferred clast alignment and dips towards the center of the kimberlite pipe. The breccias all have remarkably similar particle size fractal dimensions (Ds≈2.3 for particles of radius >3 cm, and Ds≈1.67 for particles of radius <3 cm). The breccias observed in drill core at Venetia Mine form a range from breccias with Ds>3 through to breccias with identical Ds values to the photographed breccias.  Based predominantly on the shear fabric that dips towards the center of the kimberlite pipe and the geometrical size of the breccias, and supported by the development of the apparent layering The technique described in this paper will allow the detailed structure and history of country rock breccias around pipes to be clearly mapped out, particularly through drill core samples. It may be possible to quantify the amount of subsequent shearing that a breccia has experienced by correlating its displacement to the drop in Ds value. The clear understanding of the brecciation mechanism is leading towards much more accurate modelling of the kimberlite pipe morphology. It may also become possible to broadly classify the depth of breccia within a kimberlite pipe based on the fractal properties of that breccia. The author acknowledges Venetia Mine, River Ranch Mine and De Beers for making the information in this document available for publication. This paper has benefited from the critical comments of Barbara Scott Smith, Jonathan Fowler and one anonymous reviewer.