The modification of eutectic die castings of Al–Si alloys using strontium and/or titanium refinement was studied. The results show that the most adequate microstructure is obtained from the alloy modified with the highest percentage of Ti.The most widely employed aluminium–silicon alloys are often hypoeutectic or eutectic. The microstructure of the Al–12 In those structures adequately modified by the precise addition of Sr, the eutectic silicon is found in the form of fine fibers Refining of the α-Al phase grains in Al–Si alloys by means of the addition of elements such as titanium or boron is a common industrial practice. The weight ratio required to form the nucleating TiB The nominal composition of the Al–12Si commercial alloy employed in the present study is listed in The industrial practice followed was: after melting the Al–12Si alloy ingots in the WMHOR-T-5000/2000 furnace that the firm Thyssen–Krupp Guss possesses in Mieres, Asturias, Spain, amounts of around 700 The experimental procedure followed was: in an initial test, no refiners or modifiers were added; in a second test, 600 0.04 0.06  Samples of each experimental composition were obtained for metallographic observation. These were prepared by conventional mechanical means and were etched with an aqueous solution of 0.5% HF in order to reveal the phases present in their microstructures. Observation was performed using a Nikon EPHIPHOT optical microscope connected to a KAPPA ImageBase image analyser. The measurements of the volume fraction and grain size of the α-Al phase, on the one hand, and of the volume fraction and mean linear intercept of the primary silicon cuboids, on the other, were obtained as a function of titanium and/or strontium addition, following quantitative metallographic techniques: point counting, areal analysis, and mean linear intercept measurements The microstructures observed after the different additions are shown in After the addition of Ti, it was observed that this element is capable of breaking down any trace of the columnar structure, giving rise to the cellular-type structure shown in The Ti added to the Sr-modified alloys seems to have an effect on the columnar–cellular transition, although the structure is still of the mixed type. It should be noted that in the more alloyed sample the directions of oriented growth are not obvious, as opposed to the slightly dual alloy sample, in which they are still clearly distinguished. This difference can be appreciated in After the addition of strontium, an initial finding is that the form of the eutectic silicon changes, transforming into uniformly distributed fibers/globules, as shown in As regards the primary silicon cuboids, the quantitative metallographic results shown in In the present research, the addition of titanium in the form of the Al–3Ti–1B master alloy was studied. The use of different master alloys for the purposes of refining Al–Si alloys is the subject of numerous research publications. Murty et al. Hengcheng et al. It was found that the addition of 0.05 From the observation of the samples simultaneously alloyed with Sr and Ti, it was possible to confirm the fineness of the eutectic in both cases (see  The addition of the Al–3Ti–1B master alloy in near-eutectic Al–Si alloys has a markedly positive influence on the refinement of the dendritic α-Al phase. Furthermore, the addition of Ti leads to an increase in the volume fraction of the α-Al phase and in the primary silicon cuboids and a decrease in the size of the latter. The addition of the Al–10Sr master alloy was found to increase the volume fraction of the primary α-Al dendrites. However, it should be noted that the results show an important decrease in the grain size. When refiner (Al–3Ti–1B) and modifier (Al–10Sr) are added simultaneously, their effectiveness in the melt becomes considerably reduced. No evidence of the poisoning effect between titanium and strontium on the fineness of the eutectic silicon phase was found in this study. The authors wish to express their thanks to Dr. Juan Jose del Campo, Professor of Materials Science at The University of Oviedo, and former manager of the Thyssen–Krupp Guss foundry for his help in designing the chemical compositions at a full-size scale, and for having granted access from the start of the research project to the present day to all the existing facilities at the foundry labs and elsewhere in the factory. We likewise wish to express our gratitude to the Vice-rectorate for Research of The University of Oviedo for economic support in the preparation of the draft version of this paper.