Two-dimensionally arrayed nanocolumns were fabricated by using a double-exposure laser holography method. The hexagonal lattice was formed by rotating the sample with 60° while the square lattice by 90° before the second laser exposure. The size and period of nanocolumns could be controlled accurately from 80 to 150 nm in diameter and 220 to 450 nm in period for square lattice by changing the incident angle of laser beam. The reactive ion etching (RIE) for a typical time of 30 min using CH4/H2 plasma enhanced the aspect ratio by more than 1.5 with a slight increase of the bottom width of columns. Furthermore, it was observed that a wet etching after reactive ion etching enhanced the photoluminescence intensity of nanocolumns due to the removal of sidewall damage.Photonic crystals (PC) are of considerable interest due to the predicted improvements in the device performance and/or realization of new functions by unprecedented control of light. PC is a kind of periodic nanostructure, which are arranged in a medium with a period of submicron order and produce unusual properties such as photonic band gaps in which the propagation of electromagnetic waves is forbidden and the spontaneous emission is inhibited An electron beam lithography, capable of patterning nanoscale materials, has been conventionally used to form the PC patterns due to its controllability of the feature size The holographic lithography method has the advantage of creating high-resolution periodic nanostructures over large areas In this article, we demonstrate that two-dimensional arrays of nanocolumns with a square and hexagonal lattice with variable widths and periods can be fabricated uniformly using the laser holography and the dry etching process. The aspect ratio of the nanocolumns could be increased to more than 1.5 by CH InP (20 nm)/InGaAsP (  The period for the sample with 1D grating for one time exposure or In the case of double exposure, the crystal period ( The precise etch control during the fabrication of photonic crystals (PCs) is important due to the nanometer scale nature of PCs.  To investigate the effect of RIE on the optical properties of nanocolumns, a PL measurement was performed at room temperature. In summary, two-dimensionally arrayed nanocolumns of InGaAsP/InP with variable sizes and periods have been fabricated by using the laser holography and reactive ion etching. By variations of incident angle of laser beam, the periods and diameters of the PR masks could be controlled precisely, and the InP nanocolumns with 80–150 nm in diameter, 220–450 nm in period, and 1.5–2.1 in aspect ratio were successfully fabricated by RIE. On the contrary, the surface crystal structure was controllable by the adjusting the sample rotation angle before second exposure. The aspect ratio of the columns was drastically increased and showed a linear dependency after 20 min of etching time. Furthermore, the photoluminescence spectrum of the post-wet-etched InGaAsP nanocolumns showed a large enhancement in intensity of InGaAsP column, suggesting the damage removal on the sidewall by wet etching method.