Background
                  Unicondylar fractures of the distal femur are rare, complex, intra-articular fractures. The objective of this multicentre study was to assess the reduction and fixation of unicondylar fractures.
               
                  Hypothesis
                  Anatomic reduction followed by strong fixation allows early rehabilitation therapy and provides good long-term outcomes.
               
                  Material and methods
                  We studied 163 fractures included in two multicentre studies, of which one was retrospective (n
                     =134) and the other prospective (n
                     =29). Follow-up of at least 1 year was required for inclusion. The treatment was at the discretion of the surgeon. Outcome measures were the clinical results assessed using the International Knee Society (IKS) scores and presence after fracture healing of malunion with angulation, an articular surface step-off, and/or tibio-femoral malalignment.
               
                  Results
                  Mean age of the study patients was 50.9±24 years, and most patients were males with no previous history of knee disorders. The fracture was due to a high-energy trauma in 51% of cases; 17% of patients had compound fractures and 44% multiple fractures or injuries. The lateral and medial condyles were equally affected. The fracture line was sagittal in 82% of cases and coronal (Hoffa fracture) in 18% of cases. Non-operative treatment was used in 5% of cases and internal fixation in 95% of cases, with either direct screw or buttress-plate fixation for the sagittal fractures and either direct or indirect screw fixation for the coronal fractures. After treatment of the fracture, 15% of patients had articular malunion due to insufficient reduction, with either valgus-varus (10%) or flexion-recurvatum (5%) deformity; and 12% of patients had an articular step-off visible on the antero-posterior or lateral radiograph. Rehabilitation therapy was started immediately in 65% of patients. Time to full weight bearing was 90 days and time to fracture healing 120 days. Complications consisted of disassembly of the construct (2%), avascular necrosis of the condyle (2%), and arthrolysis (5%). The material was removed in 11% of patients. At last follow-up, the IKS knee score was 71±20 and the IKS function score 64±7; flexion range was 106±28° (<90° in 27% of patients); and 12% of patients had knee osteoarthritis.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Anatomic reduction of unicondylar distal femoral fractures via an appropriate surgical approach, followed by stable internal fixation using either multiple large-diameter screws or a buttress-plate, allows immediate mobilisation, which in turn ensures good long-term outcomes.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  IV, cohort study.Unicondylar fractures of the distal femur are rare lesions Post-traumatic osteoarthritis is among the complications of intra-articular unicondylar distal femoral fractures To date, no consensus exists regarding the treatment type, surgical approach, or optimal internal fixation technique for unicondylar distal femoral fractures Our objective was to evaluate correlations linking early and late functional and anatomic outcomes to the treatment used in a multicentre cohort of patients with unicondylar distal femoral fractures. We hypothesised that anatomic reduction and strong fixation would lead to good long-term outcomes by allowing early rehabilitation therapy. Two multicentre studies, one retrospective and the other prospective, were conducted in 12 surgical centres. Patients with unicondylar fractures of the distal femur were included. Exclusion criteria were pathological fracture, peri-prosthetic fracture of the knee, child younger than 15 years and 3 months, and epiphyseal separation. In all, 163 patients were included. The retrospective cohort consisted of 134 assessable cases managed over a 10-year period (1 January 2001–31 December 2010) and the prospective cohort of 29 patients managed over a 1-year period (1 June 2011–31 May 2012). Follow-up was at least 1 year in all patients. The medical record data and the pre-operative and post-operative radiographs were entered into an online database, as well as the computed tomography (CT) scans obtained in 39% of patients. The data were used initially to validate the classification of the fracture in the AO system The treatment type and modalities were at the discretion of the surgeon, who could choose between non-operative treatment and operative treatment via an anterior or posterior approach with internal screw or plate fixation. Immediate mobilisation was an option, with no more than 60° of flexion for the first 45 days. Resumption of weight bearing was allowed of the radiographs taken after 2 months showed that the fracture was healed. Fracture site deformities after treatment were assessed on antero-posterior and lateral radiographs and classified as malunion with more than 2° of angulation, a greater than 2 Statistical comparisons relied on the Chi The study population was composed predominantly of males, with an active lifestyle and no history of knee abnormalities (95%) ( Of the 163 fractures, 134 (82%) were sagittal, including 66 lateral B1 fractures and 68 medial B2 fractures. The remaining 29 (18%) lesions were coronal B3 fractures. Non-surgical treatment was chosen in 9 (5%) patients. These patients were young individuals with non-displaced fractures, or patients with very limited functional demands, elderly patients with osteoporosis, or patients with B3 posterior unicondylar fractures. The treatment consisted only in a very short period of immobilisation, followed promptly by mobilisation of the knee. Surgical treatment was performed in 154 (95%) patients.  Rehabilitation therapy was started immediately in 65% of cases, with full weight bearing after 90 days. None of the patients required joint manipulation under anaesthesia for stiffness. No difficulties with skin management occurred in the patients with compound fractures. There were no cases of infection. Fracture healing was achieved within 120 days. Disassembly of the construct occurred in 2% of cases, after simple screw fixation with small-diameter screws (  Mean follow-up was 7 years. At last follow-up, the clinical evaluation showed moderate pain in 50% of patients and complete absence of pain in 46%, with a mean flexion range of 106°±28°. Among patients with malunion, 27% had less than 90° of knee flexion ( The main limitations of this study are the multicentre patient recruitment, retrospective data collection for most of the patients, and variability in practice patterns across surgical teams. A major strength of our study is the large sample size of 163 fractures. Previously published data are difficult to interpret, as they come from small non-randomised studies that did not involve statistical analyses The 82%/18% distribution of sagittal and coronal fractures in our study is consistent with earlier reports. In contrast, the similar number of lateral and medial condylar fractures is at variance with a report by Trillat et al. that the lateral condyle was affected more often than the medial condyle CT was performed pre-operatively in 39% of our patients. CT provides an evaluation of the displacement, detects comminution of the fracture site, and helps to choose the best approach and fixation method High-grade skin lesions with damage to the extensor mechanism Non-operative treatment without fracture reduction was chosen in 9 (5%) of our patients, in conformity with standard indications Our hypothesis regarding the anatomic reduction of unicondylar fractures is not borne out by our findings, since 27% of patients had radiographic intra-articular malunion, which was consistently due to insufficient reduction. The resulting abnormalities were valgus-varus deformity in 10% of cases, flexion-recurvatum deformity in 5%, and an antero-posterior or lateral articular surface step-off in 12%. Only very few cases of malunion have been reported in earlier studies of small numbers of patients. Selection of the approach has a major influence on the ability to achieve stable anatomic reduction Regarding our hypothesis that strong internal fixation allows early rehabilitation therapy, 65% of our patients started rehabilitation therapy immediately. Buttress-plates provide stronger fixation than do screws. A lateral buttress-plate was used in 23% of B1 fractures and a medial buttress-plate in 4% of B2 fractures. Screw fixation was used alone for all B3 fractures. For anatomic reasons, only anterior lag screws are perpendicular to the fracture line. These screws were used in 78% of patients. However, regardless of the anatomic features, direct posterior-to-anterior screw fixation via a posterior approach is stronger than lag screw fixation The functional outcomes at last follow-up in our study (IKS knee score, 71 The mean follow-up of 7 years in our study is too short to allow definite conclusions about the risk of osteoarthritis. The development of osteoarthritis was associated with post-operative malunion. Non-operative treatment of unicondylar distal femoral fractures is indicated in patients with limited functional needs or severe osteoporosis. Surgical treatment via an appropriate anterior approach allows anatomic reconstruction and strong internal fixation, using screws or a buttress-plate for sagittal fractures and lag screws for coronal fractures. Anatomic reduction followed by immediate mobilisation ensures good functional outcomes with no progression to osteoarthritis. The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest concerning this article. We are grateful to all the symposium participants who made this study possible: C. Hulet and T. Brunet (Caen), L. Pidhorz (Le Mans), C. Chantelot and G. Dumont (Lille), J-C. Bel and A. Cogan (Lyon), X. Flecher and M. Lebaron (Marseille), G. Piétu (Nantes), R. Bertin (Nîmes), C. Court and F. El Khoury (Paris, Bicêtre), E. Vandenbussche (Paris, HEGP), F. Dujardin and S. Rahali (Rouen), P. Bonnevialle and L. Bedes (Toulouse), and M. Ehlinger and G. Ducrot (Strasbourg).