Bioleaching tests were carried out in bench-scale piloting facilities, comprising fully controlled multi-stage continuously operated reactor systems using moderate thermophile and thermophile consortia under both uncontrolled and controlled redox potential conditions to assess the effect of temperature and redox control on chalcopyrite leach kinetics. The bench-scale studies demonstrated that copper recoveries >95% could be achieved without redox control, using a thermophilic culture at 70°C. Acceptable copper extractions could not be achieved under similar conditions at 45°C. A significant increase in the copper leach kinetics and copper extractions was, however, achieved by controlling the redox potential in the 45°C system at 420mV. Final copper extractions increased from 64% at high redox potential to 97% under controlled redox conditions and as a result of the improvement in the Cu leach performance there is potential to reduce the overall residence time of the process. A key advantage of the process is that the bioleaching process costs are minimized, since the pyrite was not oxidized.Over the past two decades, the optimization of bioleaching processes for the treatment of chalcopyrite ores and concentrates has been the subject of numerous research programmes. Many papers have dealt with the issue of slow kinetics of chalcopyrite bioleaching and its passivation. Various theories have been proposed to account for this phenomenon, mostly involving passivation of the mineral by ferric precipitates and/or sulfur, though there is no consensus on the exact mechanistic reason for the recalcitrance of chalcopyrite to leaching ( Advances in understanding the requirements for successful bioleaching of chalcopyrite concentrates have led to a number of experimental campaigns to show that high copper recoveries are achievable. Process options suggested include the use of high temperatures and thermophilic archaea, which have been successfully used in continuously operated bioleaching systems to overcome the slow and incomplete extraction of copper from chalcopyrite ( During recent years, the use of moderate thermophiles in bioleaching processes has received increased attention, since their optimal growth temperature of 45–52 The first commercial utilization of moderate thermophiles was by Bactech (Australia) Ltd for the bio-oxidation of a refractory gold concentrate in Western Australia. The plant at the Youanmi mine was operated at 45–47 In 2001, Mintek and its partners, Industrias Penoles S.A. de C.V. of Mexico and BacTech, successfully demonstrated the bioleaching of chalcopyrite using moderate thermophiles at an operating temperature of 45 The work presented in this paper describes research carried out on a low-grade chalcopyrite concentrate in continuously operated mini-pilot plant facilities to assess the effect of temperature and redox potential on chalcopyrite leach kinetics and copper extractions. For the treatment of this concentrate, which did not contain silver, a number of processing requirements had to be achieved, namely, high Cu extractions from the chalcopyrite-containing concentrate, reduction of processing costs because of the low-grade of the concentrate and minimisation of the environmental impact from the waste products produced. The test work was performed using Veliki Krivelj, a low-grade chalcopyrite concentrate provided by the Copper Institute Bor, Serbia. The concentrate was fine-milled in a stirred ball mill to a particle size of d The different proportions of each mineral phase in the feed concentrate and in the bioleach residues were determined by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) based image analysis. The concentrate was found to contain chalcopyrite and pyrite as the main mineral phases. Modal analysis of the feed is described in The study was performed with moderate thermophilic (45 Bioleach amenability test work performed at 70 The air supply was enriched with 0.3% CO In both systems, the reactors were fully baffled and agitation was by means of a dual impeller system, consisting of a standard 6-blade flat-blade Rushton turbine in combination with a 6-blade 45° axial flow impeller. While operating at high redox potential levels, the impeller speed was set at 450 The reactors were monitored daily for temperature, pH level, redox, oxygen and carbon dioxide uptake rates and the levels of copper and iron in solution. Once steady state conditions were reached, a set of pulp samples was collected from each reactor and the residues were analysed for copper, iron, elemental sulfur and sulfide sulfur. A portion of the bioleach residues was treated with HCl to re-dissolve precipitates, which allowed calculation of total Fe extracted. Modal analyses of the residue samples were performed using an automated scanning electron microscope. The Veliki Krivelj concentrate is categorized as “low-grade” due to its high pyrite content. The main copper mineral present in the concentrate is chalcopyrite and high copper recoveries were priority. The first objective of the study was to investigate the leach behaviour at 45 and 70 The results of the test obtained while operating at 70 Further attempts to optimize the process showed that the maximum feed solids concentration which could be tolerated under these operating conditions was around 12%. The stability of the process was compromised at higher feed concentrations and a reduction in the redox potential levels, oxygen uptake rates and Cu extractions was experienced ( In Test 2, using moderate thermophiles operating at 45 Central to the debate around the mechanism of chalcopyrite bioleaching is the apparent passivation of chalcopyrite at high solution redox and low operating temperatures. It was, however, observed by several authors that the passivation of chalcopyrite surfaces could be overcome by control of the redox potential when operating at low temperatures ( The first objective was to determine the optimum redox potential for chalcopyrite leaching to ensure maximum copper extractions. The test work was performed in a single-stage continuously operated reactor at a 3-day residence time and 10% feed solids concentration. The redox potential levels were controlled at different levels, varying between 380 and 580  In the first experiment, the redox potential in only the first stage reactor was controlled at 420 A significant increase in the copper leach kinetics was observed in the first stage reactor. The soluble copper concentrations increased from around 7 Further improvements involved reducing the redox potential in the second stage to 420 The benchmark operating conditions, against which the leach kinetics achieved at 45 Modal analyses of the residue confirmed that pyrite was the dominant mineral in the bioleach residue, accounting for around 95% of the sample ( In this study, bioleaching control strategies were demonstrated with the potential to significantly increase copper leaching rates from chalcopyrite-containing concentrates, using moderate thermophiles at 45 This work was carried out in the frame of the BioMinE project (NMP1-CT-500329-1) supported under the