This book is the first monograph on the topic of coal desulfurization to be published in a quarter-century. The previous standard book was Robert Meyers’ The book begins with a review of the analytical procedures for determining sulfur in coal, as well as the forms of sulfur: pyritic, organic, and sulfatic. Many sophisticated instrumental methods are mentioned, including, among others, Mössbauer and Auger spectroscopy. A chapter is also devoted to the discussion of the strategies for precombustion and postcombustion desulfurization. The heart of the book, some eleven chapters, covers the entire range of coal desulfurization processes. These include the various physical methods, such as heavy-media and gravity separations, flotation, flocculation and agglomeration, and magnetic and electrical methods. These physical methods receive most of the attention—about eight chapters—which is not unreasonable given their dominance of these processes in present-day desulfurization. Microbial and chemical desulfurization processes are also covered, in one chapter each. This book has several strengths. First, it is well written in a clear and straightforward manner. The text is aimed at the professional reader, that is, a person with some background in coal technology or mineral processing. Nevertheless, newcomers to the field should have little difficulty in reading it profitably. Second, there is an abundance of clear flow diagrams on most of the processes discussed and schematic diagrams of how equipment functions. These are, for the most part, very easy to follow. There are numerous tables of specific results for various desulfurization processes. Third, each chapter is accompanied by a large number of citations to the original literature—there appear to be about forty to eighty citations per chapter. Furthermore, the preponderance of these citations are to the literature of the 1990s and 1980s. Thus the citations guide the reader to many of the current results and most recent thinking in the field. That so large a proportion of citations are to the 80s and 90s allows the present book to build upon Meyers’ earlier monograph, which covered the field into the early- to mid-70s. Most of the data on desulfurization results that are presented in the tables and graphs appear to have been obtained for coals of the United States. While the fundamental principles of desulfurization should be applicable to virtually any coal, the notorious variability of composition and properties among various coals suggests that some caution may be needed before applying the specific results (but not the fundamental concepts) to coals from elsewhere in the world. This book is neither claimed nor even implied to be a history of coal desulfurization. While the very strong emphasis on the literature of the last two decades is a positive point in terms of making the book useful for practitioners, it means however that a reader interested in tracing the development of the field as a whole or of some of the specific processes can only start with the present volume and then work backwards in time through the monographs by Meyers and by Tsai, and beyond. This point is not intended to be critical of the authors; the book is a fine single-volume treatment of modern technology and recent findings. Given the continued emphasis on the environmental effects of fuel utilization, and increasing restrictions on emissions of SO