Development of cube texture after heavy cold deformation and annealing has been studied in powder metallurgically prepared pure Ni, Ni–5at.%Mo and Ni–5at.%W alloys for use as substrates for coated superconductor applications. Two grades of Ni powder with different purities have been used to prepare the initial materials. Addition of W and Mo is found to be beneficial in increasing the volume fraction of the cube component, irrespective of the purity of the Ni powder used. W particularly increases the volume fraction of the cube component in Ni by decreasing the volume fraction of the RD (rolling direction)-rotated cube grains. Studies on partially recrystallized samples indicate that in contrast to pure Ni, in Ni–5at.%W alloy the recrystallized grains are mostly cube oriented right from the beginning of recrystallization.Rolling assisted biaxially textured substrates (RABiTS™) method developed at ORNL, USA, is a very promising way of making coated superconductor tapes using highly cube textured nickel as the substrate material Two nickel powders of purities 99.99% (Sigma–Aldrich, −100 mesh) and 99.4% were used as the starting material. Pure Ni and Ni alloys of composition Ni–5at.%W and Ni–5at.%Mo were prepared by typical powder metallurgy (P/M) method of mixing the powders, pressing at 250  In order to determine the reason behind the observed difference in cube volume fractions in these three materials, the original datasets for the three materials acquired through EBSD were partitioned to give three new datasets. The new partitioned datasets consisted of only off cube grains (>15° misorientation from exact cube position) and subsequently the ODFs were calculated from these new datasets. The above observations in these three materials have also been supported by our investigations on materials of similar compositions and heat treatments, but differing only in the purity of the Ni powder used. The original datasets were partitioned using the same criterion as above and In order to understand the reason behind the presence of high fraction of RD-rotated cube grains in pure Ni than in Ni–5at.%W alloy these two materials (prepared using high purity Ni powder) were partially recrystallized for 30 The existence of RD- and TD (transverse direction)-rotated cube grains in the early stages of recrystallization has been confirmed through TEM studies in Cu specimens It has been shown previously that in the Ni–W alloy W atoms are almost uniformly distributed throughout the matrix The application of the above alloys is very much dependent on their mechanical strengths at the deposition temperatures of the buffer and superconducting layers, typically ranging between 700 The Amongst the three powder metallurgically prepared materials pure Ni, Ni–5at.%W and Ni–5at.%Mo alloys for use as substrates for coated superconductor applications, Ni–5at.%W alloy is found to develop the sharpest cube texture. In case of pure Ni the cube volume fraction and its twin fraction both are less than those of Ni–5at.%W alloy. In Ni and Ni–5at.%Mo alloy the intensity of the cube texture is less due to the presence of a strong RD-rotated cube component. In Ni–5at.%W alloy the cube texture is more perfect although a weak RD-rotated cube component is still present. The above observations suggest although Ni–5at.%W alloy is more prone to twin formation yet W is beneficial in increasing the volume fraction of cube component by diminishing the fraction of RD-rotated cube component. The RD-rotated cube grains in pure Ni are found to form from the beginning of recrystallization. In contrast, sharp cube oriented grains are found in Ni–5at.%W alloy from the onset of recrystallization leading to a sharp cube texture in this alloy after recrystallization. Similar observations are found in materials with similar composition and heat treated conditions using a less pure powder which strongly support the above findings. The authors are grateful to Professor Francis Wagner, Director LETAM, University of Metz, Metz France, for kindly providing laboratory facilities for the measurement of global texture of a number of samples.