Clavicle fractures comprise approximately 3% of all adult fractures and there is evidence that the incidence is increasing. Fractures of the lateral and middle third of the clavicle present distinct challenges in both surgical fixation techniques and clinical outcome, as such they should be recognised as separate clinical entities. Despite conflicting evidence, most studies indicate that superior clinical results are found in patients with united clavicle fractures rather than those that go onto non-union. Furthermore there is level-1 evidence that operative treatment of clavicle fractures leads to significantly increased rates of union. Despite these findings, significant controversy still exists on which patients would benefit from primary fixation and those who could successfully be managed non-operatively. We present an evidence-based review of clavicle fracture management including surgical indications, techniques, and results.The clavicle a double-curved S shaped bone. It is unique as the only long bone in the human body that lies horizontally. Its primary function is to act a strut for the scapula to suspend the upper limb away from the thorax thus allowing the extensive range of movement that the upper limb exhibits. The clavicle is a commonly fractured bone comprising 2.6–4% of all adult fractures. Traditionally clavicle fractures have been classified based on the anatomical location. Type I fractures occur within the middle third of the clavicle, whereas type II and type III fractures occur in the lateral and medial thirds, respectively. Robinson has proposed a universal classification system This review will focus on the management of middle and lateral third clavicle fractures. Approximately 15% of clavicle fractures occur within the lateral third of the bone. Once a decision to operate has been made the surgeon is presented with choice of techniques that can be utilised. These have traditionally included intramedullary devices, hook plates, K-wires, locked anatomical contoured plates fixation, coracoclavicular (CC) stabilisation using a suspensory device or screw, or a combination of the above. Hook plate or anatomical plate fixation requires only a superior approach to the clavicle; many surgeons may therefore find this preferable to CC stabilisation, which also requires exposure of the coracoid. A systematic review of several techniques used in 425 fractures showed similar non-union rates between methods (1.6%) but unacceptably high complication rates were noted in those treated with a hook plate (40.7%) or tension band wire (20.0%) ( Recent strategies have focussed on the use of a low profile locking plate and CC stabilization using a suspensory device such as a The position of the primary fracture lines and the integrity of the CC ligaments can guide the surgeon to choose appropriate fixation techniques for individual fracture patterns. If the fracture is medial to the coracoid it is unlikely that the CC ligaments are involved and the operative mode of fixation can be a plate alone, used in the same mode as when fixing a middle third clavicle fracture ( A recent prospective study by Beirere showed that surgery in patients with Neer IIb fractures using a low profile contoured plate without suspensory fixation had significantly lower Taft scores (indicating acromioclavicular joint instability) than other fracture patterns where the cc ligaments were intact. This supports the use of coracoclavicular fixation in this group of patients. Historically the majority of middle third clavicle fractures were managed non-operatively, largely due to two large case series in the 1960 by Neer and Rowe which demonstrated non-union rates of less than 1%. The clinical significance of clavicle shortening has received particular attention because of the biomechanical principle that the moment arm of the shoulder girdle muscles will be altered, potentially leading to increased fatigability and impaired shoulder function. However the evidence for this has been conflicting. Multiple retrospective reviews of non-operatively managed mid-shaft fractures showed that initial shortening of >2 cm was associated with a poor clinical outcome. In an effort to provide definitive answers on the optimum management for displaced mid-shaft clavicle fractures several prospective randomised controlled trials have been carried out comparing primary operative with non-operative treatment. Interestingly the three largest studies have produced similar results but the authors have drawn differing conclusions. The COTS study enrolled 132 patients and reported better significantly outcomes in the operative group (higher Constant scores and lower Disability of the Arm, Shoulder & Hand (DASH) scores) at all time points between 6 and 52 weeks. They also reported significantly higher rates of non-union and symptomatic malunion non-operative group. Patients were also more likely to be satisfied with the appearance of the shoulder in the operative group with only 3/62 patients unhappy at the appearance of the scar versus 10/49 in the non-operative group dissatisfied with a “droopy shoulder”. The overall conclusion of the study was to advocate primary plate fixation for displaced midshaft fractures in active adults. Robinson et al. postulated that the superior results shown in the COTS trial might have been due to a small number of patients in the non-operative group who had poor outcomes due to non-union. ‘The Clavicle Trial’ which reported in 2017, once again demonstrated improved early functional scores in patients undergoing primary operative fixation (six weeks and three months) but at nine months there were no significant differences between groups. Homogeneity in both trial methods and data has led to the publication of a meta-analysis, the pooled results of which can be useful when counselling patients of their treatment options ( It is clear from the published evidence that good clinical outcomes can be achieved with both operative and non-operative treatment. We advocate a patient centred approach i.e. a patient should be provided with sufficient information in order to make an informed decision specific to their needs. We therefore counsel patient that the choice is theirs to make but the relevant information is that the fracture is more likely to heal with surgery and the early outcome may be better but this effect diminishes within a year. The ‘price tag’ of surgery is the risk of complications, which may include the need for another operation to remove the plate or rare but more serious complications including deep infection and permanent nerve damage. If non-operative treatment is chosen and the fracture fails to heal then surgery is an option, which usually leads to good clinical outcomes and functional scores similar to primary fixation. Given that united fractures tend to do well it would be appealing to identify a way of identifying those patients who may go on to non-union. Unfortunately no reliable system exists. A systematic review by Jorgensen showed that the usual suspects of smoking, age, displacement and comminution could be associated with non-union The cost effectiveness of clavicle fixation is a controversial topic largely because the long term duration of benefit related to ORIF vs. non-operative treatment is unknown. Several authors have attempted to analyze the cost effectiveness in terms of quality of life adjusted years (QALYs) gained. Pearson et al. suggest a base-case cost per QALY gained for ORIF was USD 65,000, which is below the widely accepted USD 50,000/QALY cost effectiveness threshold. This study suggests that the benefits of surgery would need to persist for 9.3 years or more to reach the cost effectiveness threshold. Distal and mid-shaft clavicle fractures should be considered separate clinical entities. Surgical fixation or conservative treatment is a viable for most displaced fractures and patients should be given adequate information to make a decision, which is right for them. The Mechanism of injury, vertical fragment and shortening may not be an independent factor - but is likely to co-exist with displacement and degree of comminution and therefore might reasonably be included in the decision making process. It is also reasonable to surmise that younger, active patients or manual workers with displaced fractures may benefit from early surgery. Overall advocate a patient specific approach to treating these injuries based on fracture pattern, co-morbidity and patient expectations. Smoking is an independent risk factor for non-union in both operative and non-operative treatments and patients should be informed of this in order to improve their final clinical outcome. None. I certify that there is no conflict of interest with the authors of this manuscript regarding the material discussed in the manuscript. This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at