A reliable prediction of the caving behavior of strata and support capacity requirement for longwall workings has always been a challenge for rock mechanics researchers and mine planning engineers. It is very important for successful planning and implementation of high capacity longwall projects to have proper selection of site and compatible roof supports, to ensure safe operation of longwall face especially in massive and difficult to cave strata conditions. This paper illustrates a numerical modeling based integrated approach for predicting the progressive caving behavior of strata and optimum capacity requirement of powered support for longwall working in a given geo-mining and strata condition. A set of design criteria for selection of optimal capacity support integrating the field experience and the numerical modeling results of longwall panels, operated in a widely varying strata conditions in different coalfields of India. Case studies of two typical longwall workings are presented to assess the caving behavior and support requirement for safe operation of longwall working under the site specific regular and en masse caving strata conditions.Longwall is a globally proven mass mining technology for underground coal mining. The complex rock mechanics issues involved in this inflexible mining system demands careful planning for selection of suitable mining sites, and rational capacity support systems to ensure successful implementation of the project in a given geo-mining and strata condition. This subject bears utmost importance for those conditions where the natural genesis of the rock does not facilitate easy caving of overlying strata during progressive mining of the coal seam. Most of the coal seams in India are overlain by massive and difficult to cave strata formations. The uncertain strata behavior in terms of uncontrolled roof caving and face instability, coupled with damage of face supports, has been led to a major bottleneck in large-scale adoption of longwall technology under such strata conditions. For these reasons, the prediction of caving behavior and support requirement has been a major topic of research since the introduction of longwall faces. A reliable prediction of the caving behavior of strata helps in selection of sustainable mining parameters and rational capacity of supports. The design and operational parameters can be established and their effectiveness can be evaluated to reduce the risk of uncertainties in planning and decision making. It also helps development of a suitable and an effective method for dealing with the difficult caving roof. Confident use of available technology of roof softening by water infusion or pre-blasting, or induction of caving by hydro-fracturing or blasting in goaf has made it practically feasible to extract a longwall face successfully even under massive roof conditions As the longwall panels are equipped with costly self-advancing hydraulic powered support systems, decision about applicability of longwall and selection of an optimal rating of support for a given strata and geo-mining condition are very important. This is essential for reducing the strata control risk while planning of longwall working, especially in those conditions where the strata are difficult to cave. Therefore, development of a suitable approach for prediction of caving behavior and optimum support capacity requirement has become a prime necessity which can serve as a ‘ready-to-use’ tool for the mining industry. It will help the industry in effective decision making for reliable planning of longwall workings in a given geo-mining condition. Earlier, the authors reported a numerical modeling approach Subsequently, a mathematical approach integrated to the numerical modeling This paper illustrates an integrated modeling approach to predict the caving behavior and optimum rating of powered roof supports for safe operation of longwall working in a given geo-mining condition. The results of caving assessment model are further extended to formulate suitable support selection criteria for regular as well as Powered support longwall working is under operation for more than four decades in different coalfields of India, with its first introduction in Moonidih mine of Jharia coalfield in 1978. The data compiled for different panels under the work reported in this paper shows that depth of such worked out panels varied from 40 to 395 The caving characteristics of strata are quite interesting in shallow depth longwall workings. About 10 longwall faces in RVII seam in Jhanjra mine under Raniganj coalfield were extracted very successfully at a depth of 40–60 Two longwall faces in Samla seam at Khottadih mine in Raniganj coalfield were extracted with considerable strata control problem at a depth of 160–190 The longwall operations in Godavari Valley coalfield have been quite successful in general. The capacity of the support deployed at these faces ranges from 4×360 to 4×800 The span of main fall varied from 25 The integrated approach consists of formulating a numerical model for study of caving behavior of strata and evaluation of support performance with progressive face advance, using the numerical model for parametric study of caving behavior of strata and support performance for different capacities of supports, evaluation of the numerical modeling results for assessment of critical loading conditions under different conditions, and finally applying the support selection criteria for estimating the optimal support rating for the given strata and geo-mining condition. The numerical modeling procedure for simulating the progressive caving behavior of strata and support performance in longwall mines uses a two dimensional plain strain plasticity model Mohr–Coulomb plasticity model with tension cut off has been used to simulate the strata failure. This original Mohr–Coulomb plasticity model has been used with a slight modification to consider the reduction in cohesive strength of strata which has failed in tension. In the normal model, there is no such consideration, whereas here, the cohesive strength of the element failing in tension is reduced to zero, which is valid consideration and simulates the strain softening behavior of the strata without much of assumption. We have also considered the effect of shear failure in advance of the face, a phenomena very common in deep longwall workings. If the model detects considerable shear failure in advance of the face, the cohesive strength of those rock elements is reduced to 0.18 The loading behavior of powered support has been simulated to incorporate the lateral as well as vertical loading capability, the maximum lateral load resistance limited to 30% of its yield load capacity; while in case of pure vertical loading, the lateral load provided by the modeled support remains zero. The set to yield stiffness characteristics of the different capacity supports have been determined using stiffness of hydraulic legs measured in the laboratory. The numerical model uses the concept of Support load and face convergence are the two crucial parameters that can be used for quantification of support performance in a given geo-mining condition. The definition of optimum support capacity has been conceived by various researchers. An adequate capacity of support should not allow more convergence compared to a support of inadequate capacity It has been observed at a number of coal mines in coalfields in UK that the faces were extracted without any considerable strata control difficulty where the face convergence gradient varied from 7 to 60 Now, it is also known beyond doubt that the ‘bigger is better’ attitude is not a good practice in support selection for ground control The compilation of the field data under the work reported in this paper shows that observations are taken manually. Moreover, these are neither systematic not regular (usually taken once in a day or a shift). Manual observation at a moving face is not possible at higher frequency for a meaningful utilization and reference of such field data. The period of critical face loading or strata convergence is static in most of the cases, but it is very small to be recorded in any manual observation. Further, as the significant part of face convergence is absorbed in compaction of the loose debris accumulated over the canopy and under the base of the moving support, the support closure data are not representative of the face convergence value unless a correlation is established for various heights and sizes of the debris. It is also not justified to rely on the maximum convergence value showed by specific support, unless the full healthiness of operational practice regarding proper setting and advance of supports, working of the support hydraulics and performance of the yield valves are ensured during the face operation. In actual field condition, as observed in most of the Indian longwall faces, the setting pressure is about 60–80% of the rated value. During course of strata control study, the authors have found that hydraulic systems of 30% supports deployed at the face do not function properly. Yield valve of the supports are found to have pre-mature or over pressure bleeding at various longwall faces. In these conditions, the data can only be used for obtaining an estimate of the loading behavior of strata like the span of caving and strata behavior. Therefore, it is felt that numerical modeling result of support load and face convergence should not be directly compared with the field observed data for assessing the effectiveness of support performance. Hence, a different strategy is required to formulate any design criterion for selecting the optimal capacity of support for a longwall face. Keeping in view the above mentioned limitations and drawbacks of the field observed data; the results of numerical modeling observations have been used to classify the performance of different longwall faces in three groups However, the modeling observation for dynamic loading cases (Group III) cannot be solely relied upon the face convergence observed in the model because it is not representative of the actual loading condition observed in the field. Dynamic load is experienced by the support due to sudden release of failed rock mass from super-incumbent through caving Based on the above results obtained from integration of numerical modeling observations and field experience of various longwall faces, the approach for selection of optimal support capacity incorporates two different design considerations, namely, controlled face convergence and sustainable dynamic loading, to ensure sustainable strata control and safe working of supports in a given strata condition.   It uses the numerical modeling result to estimate the block size of the strata caved The worst loading condition of the support is assessed by estimating the maximum value of closure ( A calculation table is formulated to assess the closure velocity (Eq. A plot of induced load vs discharge rate is made. The minimum discharge corresponds to the point where the total load experienced by the support is just the 20% overload value. The peak discharge is the maximum value of the plot. Once the support undergoing dynamic loading achieves 20% overload of its nominal yield load value, the RYV starts yielding after the support closure For the condition where discharge requirement of rapid yield valve is more than 5500 litre per minute (LPM) (the maximum available capacity at present), the strata has either to be softened ahead of the face or it has to be broken by inducing the caving in goaf at appropriate time. In such cases, the entire modeling exercise is repeated with reduced rock mass strength properties to assess the caving behavior and support requirement for working under induced caving condition. The extent of the achievable reduction in strength and deformability of the rock upon its softening or induction of caving can be quantified from laboratory investigation. Modeling results of two typical case studies are illustrated. The first case represents the longwall working of panel 12 in Godavari Khani 10A mine of Singereni coalfields which has been worked without any considerable problem of strata control during progressive face advance. The second case represents the longwall working of Khottadih mine in Raniganj coalfields where extreme difficulty in strata control were experienced during progressive advance of face during working of first two panels, P1 and P2. The third longwall panel P3 collapsed due to uncontrolled caving of strata during progressive mining. GDK 10A mine is one of the mechanized underground projects in Ramagundam area of Singareni Collieries Company Limited (SCCL). It is situated at the Godavarikhani area of Karimnagar district in Andhra Pradesh. The mine was started in the year 1985 and longwall technology was introduced in this mine during year 1994. The average thickness of working seam no. 1 is 6–6.5 The strata behavior observations  The plot of front abutment stress at the face with progressive face advance ( A parametric study of various capacities of support from 600 to 1200 The plot of peak face convergence gradient for different support capacities ( This model describes the case study of Khottadih mine where the first two panels P1 and P2 were extracted with frequent dynamic loading of the supports and noticeable difficulties in face operation. The working of third panel was abandoned after collapse of the face As a panel specific borehole data could not be compiled for the collapsed face of panel 3, the borehole data referred for panels 1 and 2 and their numerical simulation results have been utilized for assessing the optimal support rating for this geo-mining and strata condition. The modeling results of load on the support with progressive face advance does not show any considerable increase in load on the support during first local fall of the immediate roof, which is observed at 10 The plot of front abutment stress at the face with progressive face advance shows its first peak value of 8.7 The model observation for the field support showed that the strata undergo Parametric simulation of progressive face advance has been done for support of capacity 600–1200 Further study of the movie of progressive face advance in  With the above consideration, maximum discharge requirement of RYV for different capacity supports used in both With the combined consideration of PFCG vs support capacity plot ( Prediction of caving behavior and support requirement for a given longwall working is a complex topic of research and requires in-depth understanding of the various issues related to this topic of applied rock mechanics. A considerable number of approaches based on newer concepts modification of the existing concepts have been developed by various researchers in different countries. However, the real challenge of developing a more logical and reliable approach is still existing through continuous enrichment of field experience, developing new modeling capabilities and increased usage of state of the art strata monitoring and site characterization techniques. The approach reported in this paper meets the strata control requirement under static as well as dynamic loading conditions. The basis of the support selection criteria proposed here, is originated from the numerical modeling approach developed in this work, which ensures that the stiffness of support and hence the loading characteristics of the selected support rating are well compatible with the ground response curve specific to the given geo-mining and strata conditions. The criteria ensure selection of support of the best possible rating which is essential for safe and smooth working of the face in both static and dynamic loading conditions. These criteria use a quantifiable objective function of support for smooth face advance. According to it, the optimum capacity of support should be such that it does not allow maximum face convergence to exceed a sustainable value so that the face remains stable facilitating smooth and regular face advance. Based on the numerical modeling results of extracted panels and their field experiences, a peak face convergence gradient of 75 The modeling study of panel 12 at GDK 10A mine showed regular caving of strata and an optimal support rating of 4×800 The modeling study of Khottadih working revealed that the problem of severe dynamic loading arising due to The step wise methodological description of this approach is as follows: Step 1: Identify the coal seam. Step 2: Identify the longwall panel. Step 3: Select the extraction height. Step 4: Drill NX size borehole with double tube core barrel representative of the panel to get the core samples. Step 5: Conduct detailed logging of core samples on site. Step 6: Compute RQD of rock formation. Step 7: Conduct laboratory tests for compressive strength, tensile strength and Young's modulus of coal as well as rock samples. Step 8: Identify the rock beds. Step 9: Apply Roof Separation Index approach to identify various layers in roof, lying within 15 times extraction height, where the strata may separate. Step 10: Estimate the thickness, Young's modulus and strength properties of the coal seam and the roof layers. Step 11: Estimate the rock mass strength for coal seam and roof layers. Step 12: Formulate the numerical model. Step 13: Conduct numerical simulation of progressive face advance taking different capacity of supports ranging from 400 to 1200 Step 14: Assess the failure mechanism as well as caving behavior of strata, support performance and loading behavior of the strata on the support in each case. Step 15: Follow the prediction procedure of ‘Cavability of Strata and Support Capacity’ as suggested in An integrated approach for prediction of the progressive caving behavior of strata and optimal support capacity requirement for safe working a longwall face in a given geo-mining and strata conditions is reported. A number of support selection criteria have been proposed which ensure selection of support of best possible rating. A peak face convergence gradient of 75 The proposed approach has been used for prediction of the caving behavior of strata and estimation of the optimal support rating for a few typical cases. It is found that the general concept of ‘bigger the better’ may not be a scientifically correct approach for support selection. It is necessary to have a tailor-made design approach for strata specific condition rather than adopting a general solution approach. The analysis of the observations amply justifies that numerical modeling approach described in this paper acts as an advanced diagnostic tool for assessing the likely strata control problems and suggesting probable remedies to ensure safety of the working and improving the productivity of mines. The authors are thankful to the Head, Department of Mining Engineering, ISM University for providing necessary laboratory facility for conducting the numerical modeling work. The authors are also thankful to the management of various longwall mines for their co-operation and encouragement for this work. The work reported in this paper is part of the Ph.D. thesis submitted to ISM University by the first author. The views and findings expressed in this paper are opinion of the authors and not necessarily of the organization they serve.