This work describes the analytical performance of the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for the fungicide chlorothalonil to effectively exploit as a simple and rapid detection system for pesticide residue on the scenes of the agricultural production and distribution. This ELISA represents the satisfactory analytical characteristics (I
                     50 value, 0.34ng/g; limit of detection, 0.052ng/g) to detect chlorothalonil at the regulatory values or thereabout in a sample. Noticeable cross-reactivities were shown with two fungicides, fthalide (58.8%) and pentachloronitrobenzene (quintozene) (20.0%), and some non-agrochemicals such as tetrachloroterephthalonitrile (96.8%) and tetrachlorophthalonitrile (68.3%). The influence of three organic solvents (methanol, acetone, and acetonitrile) used as extractants for chlorothalonil residue was evaluated, with the result that methanol was the most suitable solvent for the ELISA, and the final concentration in the well could be up to 5% (v/v) without any negative influence on the ELISA. It has been possible to directly analyze chlorothalonil residue only by giving dilution of each sample extract with water prior to the ELISA analysis. The average recovery values from the spiked samples by the ELISA were between 101.7 and 113.6% with the average coefficients of variation between 2.6 and 5.9%. Although the results obtained from the ELISA correlated well with those from the reference GC/MS methods for all agricultural samples (r
                     >0.98), the linear function inclined to the ELISA results because of loss during complex sample preparations for GC/MS analysis. Nevertheless, the results demonstrated that the proposed ELISA is a reliable, cost-effective, and rapid quantitative method for chlorothalonil residue.Chromatographic separations and highly sensitive and selective detectors outfitting with chromatographic units have been utilized for the accurate and precise detections and quantitation of families of pesticides possessing diverse physicochemical properties. Recently, Lehotay et al. Since ELISA normally requires no sample preparations such as concentration step or clean-up steps using solid-phase extraction (SPE) cartridges except for extraction procedure from solid samples, it is possible to attain quick and easy detection of pesticides from a sample, and therefore, the degradation of chlorothalonil by contact with matrix components during time-consuming sample preparation procedures could be minimally prevented by the reduction and the simplification. Also, because of the high specificity of the antibody, ELISA could readily detect traces of pesticides even from samples consisting of complicated matrices such as agricultural samples. Therefore, as reviewed in several reports This work describes the fundamental evaluation of the newly developed ELISA for chlorothalonil based on monoclonal antibody, by which four kinds of agricultural samples (cucumber, tomato, apple, and peach) were tested as models. The main objectives of this work are to evaluate the fundamental characteristics of the ELISA such as analytical sensitivity and cross-reactivity to several structurally related compounds, to ensure reliance (precision and accuracy) on the analytical results obtained by the ELISA by investigating matrix interference, precision study over several days, recovery study, and correlation study with the reference gas chromatographic (GC) method. Ultimately, we drew a comparison between the ELISA and GC methods concerning the cost and the analytical performances, and then judged the validity of the possible exploitation as a reliable regulatory detection method for residual chlorothalonil in agricultural products. Pesticide-grade chlorothalonil (99.9% purity by GC) was obtained from Kanto Chemical Co. Inc. (Tokyo, Japan). All other chemicals were of analytical grade, and solvents were of pesticide-grade. The ELISA kits for chlorothalonil (SmartAssay series) were from Horiba Biotechnology Co. Ltd. ( Standard solutions and properly diluted sample extracts were assayed according to the following procedure: 150 An HP6890 gas chromatograph was used to confirm the identity of chlorothalonil. It was fitted with an HP5973 mass selective detector, and was equipped with an HP7683 autosampler and an HP7683 split/splitless injector with electronic pressure control. Residual chlorothalonil was analyzed with a DB5-MS capillary column (30 Cucumber, tomato, apple, and peach samples, in which the absence of chlorothalonil and potential cross-reactant residues had been verified with GC analysis in advance, were purchased from a local market (Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan). Some known concentrations of chlorothalonil were spiked to 100 Sample preparation for ELISA analysis was performed according to the attached instruction in principle, except for extraction procedure. The amount corresponding to 5 The amount corresponding to 10  When comminuting agricultural samples, addition of phosphoric acid (50%, v/v or 85%, v/v) is obligatory by the Japanese official method The selectivity of the anti-chlorothalonil monoclonal antibody used in the ELISA was assessed with several analogues including agrochemicals and non-agrochemicals of closely related molecular structure as competitors. Cross-reactivity (CR) values for each compound are summarized in Water-miscible organic solvents such as acetone The influences of methanol, acetone, and acetonitrile were assessed by preparing standard curves using water containing 5% (v/v) final concentrations of each solvent in the well. The maximum absorbance ( The influence of final concentration of methanol on the sensitivity was also investigated in the same way as the above using various concentrations (1, 5, 10, 20, 30, and 40% (v/v) in water in the wells). The As reviewed in several reports Many extraction methods have been proposed for chlorothalonil residue in agricultural samples, for example, hand-shaking A precision study in which four kinds of agricultural samples were spiked with chlorothalonil at 0.1 To investigate accuracy of the ELISA, four kinds of agricultural samples in which no significant matrix interference has been observed were spiked at levels from 0.01 to 1.0 Linear regression analysis was applied to the data provided by the proposed ELISA method for nonpurified samples versus those provided by the reference GC/MS method for purified samples as shown in  Undoubtedly, it could be important to strive to develop a ELISA method for pesticide residue analysis anew, yet does it seem to be essential to attempt the improvement of the analytical handling and the economical improvement for more inexpensive analysis than conventional chromatographic methods? This work was supported by the Research Project for Utilizing Advanced Technologies in Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries. We also sincerely express our gratitude to Dr. Yasuo Ishii (The Japan Association for Advancement of Phyto-Regulators, Ibaraki, Japan) and Dr. Kazuaki Iijima (The Institute of Environmental Toxicology, Ibaraki, Japan) for their profitable suggestions.