The effect of the structure of polyethylene glycols [i.e. the presence of alkylphenyl group (APG) and the variation in the number of ethylene oxide groups (EOG) in the molecule] on the kinetics of zinc dissolution at 50°C in 0.5M H2SO4 containing impurities more positive than zinc (Co, Sb and Ge) was studied. It was found that nonylphenyl-polyethylene glycol with 15 EOG and APG in the molecule (S1), polyethylene glycols with 9 EOG (S2) and 45 EOG (S3) decrease zinc dissolution rate. The effect of surfactants decreases in order S1>S3>S2. The effect caused by the presence of nonylphenyl group in S1 surpasses that caused by the three times higher number of EOG in S3. The addition of S1 and S3 substantially inhibit the deposition (cementation) of impurities on zinc surface thus decreasing their effect on zinc dissolution.
                  Zinc surface morphology was examined after dissolution using scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Due to S1 and S3 adsorption, zinc surface remains compact (without holes and cracks) which strikingly reduces the quantity of dissolved metal.
                  The influence of S1 and S3 on zinc dissolution in the presence of Co, Sb and Ge confirms their inhibition effect on the negative action of above mentioned impurities during electrowinning stage in zinc hydrometallurgy.The negative effect of metal impurities more positive than zinc (Cu, Ni, Co, As, Sb, Ge) on zinc current efficiency during the electrowinning stage in zinc hydrometallurgy is based on the model of microgalvanic pairs [ The aim of the present paper is to study: (a) the change of zinc dissolution rate in 0.5 The experiments were carried out in a thermostated cell with a volume of 250 The influence of S1, S2 and S3 on zinc dissolution was determined by comparing the results obtained with and without surfactants. For a better illustration of the inhibition effect of surfactants on zinc dissolution in the presence of impurities, high temperature and high Co, Sb and Ge content were used. Molecule weight and number of EOG in S1, S2 and S3 are as follows: 880 The deposition (cementation) of metal impurities (Co, Sb and Ge) present in sulfuric acid solutions starts as soon as the zinc specimens are added. Our previous investigation on the cobalt cementation by zinc in the presence of antimony [ The variations in weight loss (g m The obtained results show the following substantial differences concerning the influence of surfactants S1, S2 and S3 on zinc dissolution in sulfuric acid containing Co, Sb and Ge: The highest values of the zinc dissolution rate were found during zinc dissolution in the presence of 2 In all experimental series, S1 substantially decreases zinc dissolution. The dissolution rate in the presence of Co, Sb and Ge is 5.17, 3.46 and 7.23 times lower due to S1. In addition, the dissolution rate in the presence of S1and Co The deposition of Co, Sb and Ge on zinc specimens during their dissolution in the presence of S1 and S3 is substantially lower than without surfactants; In all experimental series, surfactant S2 decreases zinc dissolution but its effect is too low compared to the effects of S1 and S3. The strongest inhibition effect of S2 on zinc dissolution is observed in the presence of Co Surfactants S1 and S3 substantially decrease the influence of Co, Sb and Ge on the zinc dissolution rate but the effect of S1is higher. The effect of S1, S2 and S3 can be related to their molecular structure. S1, S2 and S3 are long-chain polyethylene glycols with different numbers of EOG in their molecules. On the other hand, S1 includes a nonylphenyl group. A comparison of the values of B   The inhibition effect of polyethylene glycols on zinc dissolution at 50 The addition of S1 and S3 inhibits both the deposition of metal impurities on the zinc and the hydrogen evolution which results in a decrease in zinc dissolution. The surface of the samples dissolved in the presence of impurities without and with polyethylene glycols is very different. Adsorption of S1, S2 and S3 causes the formation of a more compact and level metal surface during zinc dissolution, which decreases metal losses. The highest density of dissolved zinc is observed in the presence of S1. The obtained influence of S1, S2 and S3 on zinc dissolution in sulfuric acid containing Co, Sb and Ge is a confirmation that these surfactants inhibit the negative action of impurities during zinc electrowinning stage.