Chicken eggshell is a biomineral composed of 95% calcite calcium carbonate mineral and of 3.5% organic matrix proteins. The assembly of mineral and its structural organization is controlled by its organic matrix. In a recent study [1], we have used quantitative proteomic, bioinformatic and functional analyses to explore the distribution of 216 eggshell matrix proteins at four key stages of shell mineralization defined as: (1) widespread deposition of amorphous calcium carbonate (ACC), (2) ACC transformation into crystalline calcite aggregates, (3) formation of larger calcite crystal units and (4) rapid growth of calcite as columnar structure with preferential crystal orientation. The current article detailed the quantitative analysis performed at the four stages of shell mineralization to determine the proteins which are the most abundant. Additionally, we reported the enriched GO terms and described the presence of 35 antimicrobial proteins equally distributed at all stages to keep the egg free of bacteria and of 81 proteins, the function of which could not be ascribed.  Proteomic analysis of 216 chicken eggshell matrix proteins. Gene Ontology terms enrichments investigating potential functions of eggshell matrix proteins. Quantitative data on protein abundances according to stages of eggshell formation. Annotation on quantified eggshell matrix proteins. Eggs were collected on brown-laying hens at 5, 6, 7 and 16 A total of 24 individual eggshell protein extracts were used. Six samples collected at the same time point were pooled in equal amounts for each time (5 All experiments were performed on a linear ion trap Fourier Transform Mass Spectrometer (FT-MS) LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled to an Ultimate The mass spectrometry proteomic data have been deposited into the ProteomeXchange Consortium A total of 261 proteins were identified using nr NCBI database. Keratins and bovine trypsin were eliminated from the list as they appeared to be contaminants or resulting from the digestion process. Protein sequences were aligned to eliminate all redundancies. Protein groups were determined using Clustal Omega multi-alignment algorithm A total of 216 non-redundant eggshell matrix protein sequences were identified. The resulting file ( In order to determine the potential functions of the 216 eggshell matrix proteins, 3231 GO terms were extracted from the protein sequences using GORetriever ( Two different methods were applied to discern the relative abundance of the proteins at the different stages of eggshell formation, firstly the emPAI was calculated for all proteins at each individual stage and secondly, GeLC–MS/MS analyses combined with label free spectral counting method were carried out to determine quantitative values at the four stages of mineralization for the 216 unique proteins. In the first approach, emPAI from the proteins was calculated amongst the proteins revealed at a particular stage of shell formation at 5, 6, 7 and 16 In the second approach, GeLC–MS/MS combined with label free quantitative analyses based on a spectral counting method were used to compare the abundances of the different proteins between the four stages of eggshell formation ( Potential functions of proteins were determined according to the literature, data annotations and functional domain database and highlighted 77 proteins with potential functions related to a mineralization process Beside these proteins, we identified 35 proteins with potential antimicrobial functions present at various stages of mineralization ( The most abundant protein in the shell matrix is Another group is constituted of antimicrobial proteins by depriving bacteria of essential nutrients. We report The study also revealed protease inhibitors which can be potentially antimicrobial by their ability to inhibit proteases secreted by some bacteria. Finally our study revealed several fragment of immunoglobulin ( Finally, out of the 175 eggshell matrix proteins showing significant variation of abundance according to the four stages of shell calcification, 81 could not be ascribed to any of these functional groups and were classified as “other or unknown role” ( Authors claim no conflict of interest. This research was funded by the The authors are grateful to the experimental units (UE-PEAT) for care of birds, and to the genotoul bioinformatics platform Toulouse Midi-Pyrenees for providing help and/or computing and/or storage resources. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at 