The data volume is growing rapidly in material science. Every year data volume is getting double in many context of material science. The growing rate of data in material science is demanding for new computational infrastructures that can speed-up material discovery and deployment. In this survey, we are focusing on the challenges in material science due to growing data rate, and how Big Data technology can play a major role in research of material science. This survey includes various disciplines that can be used with Big Data to provide better analysis in the material science research.Today the material science is emerging as a new processing technique in the field of various research and development, but the volume of data rate in the material science is growing rapidly The development of materials science consists of four different paradigms which is shown in Before moving further, it is required to explore the features of Big Data, and how it is beneficial in the context of material science. Apart from the large volume of data in material science, the various features collection, storage of data, retrieval of data, analysis of data, and visualization of data is a major challenging issue in the context of material science  The appropriate data pre-processing can be used for the modelling using supervised learning for predictive modelling. The caution need to be taken while splitting the data sets into training and testing, else the model may be prone to over-fitting and can show over optimistic accuracy. If the target attribute is numeric then regression approach can be applied, if the target attribute is categorical then other classification approaches can be applied There are various techniques that can be applied for Big Data analysis. These are the specific techniques that are frequently used in Big Data analysis for material sciences. In material science data collection, organization, and interpretation is required after each experiment. The statistical techniques are used to make a decision about the dependency between variables (Data). For example statistical techniques can be applied to determine what types of materials can increase the revenue, strength & desirable property of materials the most. The underlying techniques are applied to turn observation data into model and can also be used to predict analogy about the unseen data. The machine learning is the core of data analysis for material science insights. Today machine learning is used to analyze new material from massive heterogeneous data collections. The data mining technique explores and analyzes large volume of data to discover meaningful patterns. The underlying technique uses pattern-recognition rules, statistical rules, and rules drawn from machine learning model. Data mining has wide range of applicability in security analysis in material science. The data mining includes association rules learning, classification and regression, cluster analysis. The multidimensional visualization is highly approachable in the material science for data analysis to provide better insight & knowledge discovery. The visualization technique is also useful in identifying relationship among variables, trend of data. Visualization can reflect the entire data volume effectively. In In The work in Although Big Data is emerging research area in the context of material science but many issues need to be solved viz., privacy of data, preprocessing of data, and development of predictive algorithm. Data privacy is one of the major issues in Big Data application due to processing of large volume of sensitive data. Some of the techniques have been already proposed such as sub-tree based data storage and analysis using Bottom-up and Top-Down approach. However, sub-tree approaches are not suitable for large volume data privacy. Data pre-processing is the challenging issue in the Big Data management and analysis. The concern issue is due to large volume, velocity, and variety of data collected from heterogeneous sources. To address these issues two different approaches has been explored like tool selection and rule discovery. For pre-processing of data and their characteristics, various tools have been proposed. However, the challenge is which tool should be utilized for what type of data collection. The rule discovery is also one of the major solutions for the data pre-processing but again the challenge is how many rules should be discovered for a particular data collection. Big Data can perform better analysis with the predictive algorithm in the material science. However, most of the theory of material science does not matched with the predictive algorithms. The design and implementation of predictive algorithm can move the material science industry forward. Some of the predictive algorithms and their advantages have been discussed in In this review article, we present an overview of the Big Data and material science. The field of material science has matured rapidly, but each experiment in material science produces hundreds of thousands of data. The use of Big Data in material science can transform the material research. The Big data 5 V model is more appropriate in the context of material science data management and feature preservation. In this article, we also presented, how Big Data can be used for the knowledge discovery in material science. We reported some of the challenges involved in Big Data analysis like- privacy of data, data preprocessing, and applying predictive algorithms, that need to be addressed. The standardize materials data (preprocessed data) immensely help in statistical analysis and also resolve the veracity problem in materials science research. In spite of these challenges, the Big Data driven approach is on demand, new paradigm (fourth paradigm) of material science research. Compliance with Ethical Standards The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. This article does not contain any studies with human participants or animals performed by any of the authors. Informed consent was obtained from all individual participants included in the study.