A novel high-rate anaerobic reactor, called “Buoyant Filter Bioreactor” (BFBR), has been developed for treating lipid-rich complex wastewater. The BFBR is able to decouple the biomass and insoluble COD retention time from the hydraulic retention time by means of a granular filter bed made of buoyant polystyrene beads. Filter clogging is prevented by an automatic backwash driven by biogas release, which fluidizes the granular filter bed in a downward direction. During filter backwash, the solids captured in the filter are reintroduced into the reaction zone of the reactor. The reaction zone is provided with a mixing system, which is independent of the hydraulic retention time.
                  The performance of a laboratory-scale BFBR was studied for the treatment of dairy effluent, chosen as a model complex wastewater. The dairy effluent was not pre-treated for fat removal. The BFBR was operated over 400d and showed greater than 85% COD removal at 10kg COD/(m3/d). The COD conversion to methane in the BFBR was essentially complete. The BFBR performance improved with age, and with feed containing 3200mg COD/l, the treated effluent had 120mg COD/l and no turbidity.
                  The hold-up of degradable biosolids, including scum, inside the BFBR was estimated using starvation tests. When load is increased, scum accumulates inside the BFBR and then decays after undergoing change from hydrophobic to hydrophilic. This is explained as the accumulation of fat solids, its conversion to insoluble long chain fatty acids and its further solubilization and degradation.The development of modern high-rate anaerobic wastewater treatment reactors, like the UASB, fixed film and fluidized bed reactors, has made anaerobic digestion the most competitive treatment technology for high and medium strength biodegradable wastewaters. However, all modern high-rate anaerobic reactor systems have severely reduced capacity for the treatment of wastewater with insoluble and complex organic substrates, usually termed as “complex wastewater”. Such effluents are discharged by several industries including dairies, slaughterhouses, palm oil mills, food and fruit processing plants. Low-strength, municipal sewage is also a complex wastewater because a substantial fraction of its COD is present in insoluble form. There are several reasons why the current high-rate anaerobic reactor designs are effective only when wastewater COD is present either in soluble or rapidly solubilizable form. The primary concept used in high-rate anaerobic reactors is the decoupling of biomass retention time from hydraulic residence time. Various reactor designs differ by the method by which the hydraulic retention time is decoupled from the biomass retention time. It is assumed implicitly, in many anaerobic reactor designs, that the rate-limiting step of the anaerobic mineralization process is the conversion of volatile fatty acids to methane. The assumption is valid for many simple soluble organic substrates, whereas for complex effluents, the rate-limiting steps are most often hydrolysis and solublilization of insoluble substrates. Therefore, insoluble substrates should be retained in the reactor long enough for hydrolysis and solubilization, i.e., the decoupling of the insoluble COD retention time from the hydraulic retention time. Further, traditional high-rate anaerobic reactors have not explored fully concepts such as substrate to biomass mass transfer and gas–liquid mass transfer with regard to its potential for process intensification. Mass-transfer aspects assume greater significance in the treatment of complex wastewater, because the reactor has to facilitate contact of insoluble substrates, with insoluble biocatalysts, while the intermediates and products are in the gaseous and liquid form. The UASB reactor is not particularly suitable for the treatment of suspended-solids rich complex wastewater, because it is difficult to maintain sludge settleability ( The “Buoyant Filter Bioreactor” (BFBR) being developed by the Environmental Technology Programme at Regional Research Laboratory—CSIR (Thiruvananthapuram, India), is an attempt to enhance the loading rate and treatment efficiency of complex wastewater in anaerobic reactors. This paper describes the BFBR and its process performance when treating dairy effluents containing fat, as a model complex wastewater. Most full-scale anaerobic reactor installations for dairy effluent have pre-treatment systems installed to limit the entry of fat and lipids. Pre-treatment systems range from simple gravity separation fat traps to chemical-assisted dissolved air flotation systems. The float sludges produced require further stabilization for safe disposal. Lipid and long chain fatty acid (LCFA) degradation are considered to be the main problems affecting the anaerobic digestion of dairy effluent. Lipids contribute up to 60% of the COD of milk effluent and its hydrolysis and the subsequent biochemical reactions determine the efficiency of the reactor.   The influence of fat and proteins on the anaerobic biodegradability of dairy wastewater was studied in batch assays ( The inhibitory effects of oleic, stearic and linoleic acids in anaerobic sludges have been studied using batch assays (  A study of the digestion of sewage primary sludge solids in CSTRs operated at various retention times found that under acidogenic conditions, the solubilization of LCFAs, apparently through It is concluded that the various batch-assay-based studies provide evidence of LCFA inhibition of methanogens but do not give a correct indication of the magnitude of toxic concentrations in continuous reactors. Indeed, the performance of real reactors treating vegetable oil, dairy and slaughterhouse waste, as well as the performance of solid digestion reactors, points to practical and useful methanogenic rates obtainable from lipid-based substrates. The objective of this study is to show that essentially complete methanogenesis can be obtained in a BFBR with fat containing dairy effluent, at high volumetric organic loading rates and high sludge loading rates.  The BFBR is made from two 4 The filter (internal diameter 2.6 During operation, gas formed due to bioconversion and gas recirculated by pump (3) collect in the lower chamber forcing liquor into the upper chamber through the filter chamber. As a result of filtration action, biosolids and sludge are captured in the buoyant filter. After a pre-determined quantity of gas has accumulated in the lower chamber, it is released into the upper chamber using an automatic discharge mechanism. Gas release causes a rapid backflow of filtered liquor from the upper chamber to the lower chamber, causing the buoyant filter bed to fluidize and expand downward. Solids captured in the buoyant filter are washed out “backflushed”, into the lower chamber. The interval between successive backflushing is adjusted so as to prevent excessive build-up of filter pressure drop. A homemade hydraulic system, During the course of reactor operation, the BFBR was modified with a scum recirculation facility for the lower chamber in order to improve mixing. A scum collection vessel (270 The liquor in the lower chamber is mixed by gas recirulation using pump 3. The pumping rate of gas can be adjusted to change the interval between backflushing, so as to provide the longest possible filter run before backflushing. The BFBR was provided with a pH control facility, through scrubbing carbon dioxide from the recirculated biogas, which automatically adjusts for acidification. No control was provided against alkalification. The seed innoculum was obtained from a conventional pilot-scale biogas plant treating kitchen waste. The data was collected after a prolonged start-up and acclimatization period lasting several months. Synthetic dairy effluent ( The load applied to the BFBR is shown in pH in the digester was measured with an on-line pH probe (Cole Parmer, USA). Total biogas production was recorded with a wet-gas flow meter (Insref, India). Alkalinity and total volatile fatty acids (VFA) concentration in the BFBR were estimated titrimetrically ( LCFAs in the effluent and mixed liquor were determined by gas chromatography after extraction with hexane and esterification of the acids (Fisons 8000 gas chromatograph, Supelco OV1 capillary column (30 Filter media performance was checked prior to BFBR process study. The filtration rate applied was 1.5  The concentrations of individual volatile fatty acids were measured between day 350 and day 450 and are shown in The COD history of the BFBR, after acclimatization and achieving stable methane production is illustrated in Throughout the operation of the BFBR, effluent COD was less than 450 The methane production (CH Scum accumulation in the BFBR was visually observed during start-up and during step increases in load. In general, scum accumulation and degradation before achieving steady state, can be seen as passing through 3 stages:    The quantity of scum and biosolids in the BFBR was determined by measuring methane production, on stoppage of feed to the reactor—“starvation test”. The reactor is maintained in agitated condition and methane generation is measured till gas production ceases. On cessation of gas production, the reactor liquor is clear and separates into a fast settling sludge and very clear supernatant. Starvation tests were carried out on day 203, 293 and 408 and the results are summarized in LCFAs were determined in the reactor mixed liquor for 3 consecutive days prior to shut down on day 297. Only stearic and palmitic acids (C18:0 and C16:0) were detected in the liquor at low concentrations. Oleic acid (C18:1) was not detected in the liquor. At the end of starvation tests (day 203, 297, 408), the BFBR was totally free of scum and it was possible to note the nature of microbial sludge inside the reactor. It was observed that sludge formed settled rapidly if gas agitation was stopped. The sludge was in the form of irregular granules of about 2 After cessation of gas production, the biomass contained in the liquor was estimated by taking out the sludge, uniformly mixing and drawing a sample for determination of MLVSS. The results are given in Loss of methanogenic activity was observed when the BFBR was shutdown for longer than 1–2 weeks, and on restart the BFBR passes through the stages of scum build-up and degradation before steady methanation. This is seen e.g. on day of shutdown–restart–scum build-up: (249–263–273); (297–307–313). The BFBR is compared with other anaerobic reactor designs in pH and VFA data show that the reactor was not easily upset by acidification. This is expected when hydrolysis and solubilization (leading to acid formation) are rate-limiting steps rather than methanogenesis (acid removal). The low residual (soluble) COD observed in BFBR effluent (∼120 The observed features of scum formation inside the BFBR on step increase in organic loading may be explained in terms of known microbiology of anaerobic degradation process:    The mature sludge formed inside the BFBR had high methanogenic activity (e.g. day 408: 2.0 LCFA breakdown by LCFA breakdown in acid-phase reactors having low pH (high undissociated acetate concentration) is unlikely. In contrast, the BFBR provides low VFA methanogenic conditions which favour LCFA breakdown. The poor solubility of LCFA is another factor affecting breakdown of the compound. In solution, LCFA exists in liquor in both unionised and dissociated forms depending on pH. The total LCFA concentration varies with pH and may be calculated as (water solubility)/(1+10 The highly surface-active nature of LCFA salts (soaps) enables adsorption on bacterial surfaces and therefore, high-rate breakdown is possible even at low bulk liquid concentration. But the reactor should be sufficiently well mixed, to maintain solution phase LCFA concentration close to solubility limit, inspite of the high-turnover rate of soluble LCFA. The ability to provide mixing in BFBR independent of hydraulic retention time is a key element that enhances this process as compared with other high-rate reactors. The main hydrolysis product of milk fat, oleic acid C18:1, was below detection limit in the reactor liquor. The absence of unsaturated LCFA in liquor shows that conversion of unsaturated LCFA is not rate limiting. Since solubility and thermodynamic constraints of direct The increase in biomass quantity between day 203 and 293 indicates growth of adapted biomass (LCFA-degrading) and it corresponds to lower quantity of scum in the reactor. Between day 293 and day 408, the specific activity of sludge increases and less active biomass fractions disappear. The loss of activity of BFBR sludge on restart after relatively short shutdown is unusual. In the case of UASB reactors, sludge does not lose activity over starvation periods lasting several months. A possible explanation is the loss of free enzyme activity in the BFBR during starvation periods because of enzyme degradation. The formation of granular nature of sludge in the BFBR appears not to require selection pressures caused by washout of poor settling flocs, as usually seen in UASB systems. The mechanisms which lead to granulation in the BFBR are unknown.  The BFBR can be used to treat dairy effluent without fat removal pre-treatment. COD removal efficiency in excess of 90% is observed at a volumetric organic loading rate of 9.85 The reactor undergoes accumulation and degradation of scum before achieving stable methanation. The nature of scum changes from hydrophobic (fat) to hydrophilic (LCFA) in the degradation phase When the reactor is unfed, accumulated scum is completely degraded. The quantity of scum is estimated from the methane produced when the reactor is unfed—“starvation test”. If the reactor is unfed for a period of 1–2 weeks, the solids solubilization activity is lost and the BFBR again undergoes scum accumulation and degradation before regaining full activity. This indicates loss of free enzyme activity during shut-down. The BFBR biomass sludge is in the form of irregular shaped granules apparently formed without the washout of poor settling biomass. V.B.Manilal and Ajit Haridas acknowledge the Ministry of Non-conventional Energy Sources, Government of India, whose Grant No. 7/4/99-BG enabled this work. Technical contribution of the following is acknowledged: Karoonasankar Roat for construction of the BFBR reactor, V.K.Shajikumar for chemical analysis, Vijaya Prasad for BFBR drawings for fabrication and publication.