This study investigated the comprehensive utilization of spent magnesia-chrome refractories through gravity separation followed by flotation. The characteristics of refractories, the effects of various process parameters on the recovery of valuable metals and the adsorption mechanism of xanthate on silver were examined comprehensively. The results revealed that the metals penetrated into the refractories from cracks and holes. The penetrated metal particles were composed of different metal elements, several of which were dissolved in refractories. The optimum parameters were derived as follows: 60% particles passing a grinding fineness of 0.074 mm for gravity separation and regrinding tailing to 80% particles passing 0.074 mm for flotation, pH 8, 500 g/t of combined collector and 200 g/t of emulsified kerosene. Under these conditions, 99% Ag, 82% Pb and 81% Bi were recovered by a closed-circuit test. The obtained concentrates can be smelt as feeding, whereas the tailings with low impurities can be used as raw material for new refractories. The electrochemical and Fourier transform infrared measurements indicated that double xanthate and silver butyl xanthate were generated on the silver surface, which could improve the floatability of metals.For 50 years, the spinel structure has been used for refractory applications in metallurgical and other high-temperature industries. In particular, the chromite-based spinel is extensively used in various industries, such as secondary metallurgy, non-ferrous furnaces and cement making because of its high-temperature stability, low thermal expansion and outstanding erosion–corrosion performance at high temperatures ( The introduction of material revolution and chrome-free materials in refractory linings have considerably reduced the application of Cr Considering the decrease in chrome ores and the increase in processing cost, researchers have gradually explored the recovery of spent refractories. Given that the output of steel substantially exceeds that of non-ferrous metal, researchers have primarily focused on refractory materials produced by iron and steel enterprises ( Both gravity separation and flotation are economical technologies that are extensively applied for the recovery of metals in the mineral processing field. In this study, a combined process of gravity separation and flotation was proposed for the reutilization of spent magnesia-chrome refractories. This process can effectively recycle the metals contained in spent refractories, whereas refractories with minor or trace metal impurities can be used as raw materials for renewable refractories. This technology does not use activators, inhibitors and other adjusting agents, such that the wastewater generated in the industrial production can be returned to production after being settled. Thus, the entire process does not generate wastewater. In addition, this technology offers many advantages, such as low cost and simple operation. To assess the feasibility of the proposed technology, a detailed mineralogical analysis of the spent refractory was conducted, and then a series of gravity separation tests and flotation experiments was performed. In addition, the adsorption mechanism of butyl xanthate on a silver surface was examined by electrochemical and infrared spectrum measurements to provide a theoretical guidance of the recycling of silver from refractories through flotation. The spent magnesia-chrome refractory bricks used in the study were obtained from a silver refining furnace lining provided by a silver smelting plant in Hunan, China. A bulk sample of 100 kg crushed to −3 mm was prepared for the experiment by using standard techniques, followed by sampling through coning and quartering. The chemical composition was analysed by X-ray fluorescence (XRF; Rigaku, model ZSX Primus II) spectroscopy. The results revealed that the spent refractory bricks contained valuable metals, including 1.72% Ag, 5.10% Pb and 3.99% Bi ( The fine silver plate (3 mm thickness) used for the electrochemical and infrared spectra experiments was acquired from a silver smelter. XRF testing indicated that the purity of the silver plate was above 99%. After lathe machining and fine polishing, a sliver plate was cut into circular electrodes with a radius of 14 mm. The fine silver plate was sawed into sawdust and then grinded to 5 μm by using an agate mortar with the aid of sodium carbonate for infrared spectra experiment. Other chemicals used in the flotation experiments include: dilute sulfuric acid (H The equipment used in the gravity separation tests were frequency conversion slime tables (RK/LY-1100 × 500). For each test, the materials were wet ground in a laboratory ball mill and then separated by the slime tables. The process parameters were as follows: processing capacity, 20 kg/h; pulp density, 20 wt%; lateral gradient, 0.65°; horizontal flush water, 400 L/h; stroke, 16 mm; and stroke frequency, 450 min The flotation experiments were conducted in a 1.5 L laboratory cell made of Plexiglass. Prior to each test, 500 g of the samples was ground with a wet ball mill, transferred to the cell and conditioned for 1 min at an agitation speed of 1992 rpm. If necessary, the sample was added with a scheduled amount of H The electrochemical tests were performed using the Princeton Model 283 Potentiostat EG & G of the Princeton Electrochemical Measurement System. The round electrode surface was ultrasonically cleaned. The electrolytic cell was a three-electrode system, consisting of two wired graphite rods as the counter electrode and Ag/AgCl as the reference electrode. The potential values of this article were corrected to the standard hydrogen electrode potential. For each measurement, the electrode would be progressively polished with different types of sandpaper. Cyclic voltammetry tests were performed at the sweep rate of 20 mV/s. The infrared spectrum measurements were conducted using a Nicolet NEXUS 670 Fourier Transform Infrared Spectrometer in the measurement range of 4000–400 cm The new and spent magnesia-chrome refractories were cut and polished into microscopic sections, which were analysed by optical microscopy and SEM-EDS to investigate the existing forms of objective metals in the structure of spent magnesia-chrome refractories. As shown in Then, the spent refractories were cut from the working face to the other side, marked as c, d and e in sequence and analysed by optical microscopy, as shown in To determine the occurrence station and dissemination characteristics of the metals in the refractories, the sample was further analysed by SEM. As shown in The colour of the bright particles was not homogeneous, especially in large particles, such as in The average size of these particles was in the range of 20–50 μm, as shown in The images shown in The average density of the metals was approximately 10 g/cm The effect of grinding fineness on the recovery of metals by gravity separation was investigated, and the results are presented in Grinding fineness also plays an important role in the flotation process. Thus, the effect of grinding fineness on the recovery of metals by flotation was investigated. The results are presented in The grinding fineness is a necessary condition for an effective flotation. However, excessive grinding produces too many fine particles, which reduce the efficiency of flotation. As shown in To explore the effect of pH on the recovery of the metals, a series of experiments were conducted at different pH levels (5–9). The results are presented in As shown in The effects of different collectors (SIBX, BAD, ADD and MA) on the recovery of Ag, Pb and Bi were investigated under the following conditions: pH 8; emulsified kerosene, 200 g/t; and grinding fineness, 80%. The results are presented in The results indicated that all of the tested collectors were effective in metal flotation, but they exhibit slight differences. The metal grade was lower when BAD and MA were used as collectors as opposed to SIBX and ADD. The reason is that BAD showed a certain foaming performance, and MA is mixture of advanced xanthate. For these reasons, the selectivity of the beneficiation agent was reduced, thereby increasing the concentrate yield. When SIBX was used as the collector, the grade of Ag reached up to 9.19%, and the recovery rate was 95.80%. When ADD was used as the collector, the grades of Pb (12.07%) and Bi (20.71%) were higher than that of the rest. Therefore, the combined collector of SIBX and ADD was investigated further. The results are provided in As the proportion of SIBX increased, the metal grade decreased and the recovery initially increased and subsequently decreased. When the mass ratio of ADD to SIBX was 1:2, the yield of the concentrate was 18.07%; the grade of Ag was 9.36%, and its recovery was 96.68%; and the content of Pb and Bi were relatively higher than 1:2.5. However, when the proportion of SIBX was further increased, the grade and the recovery decreased. Therefore, the best collector for recovering metals in waste magnesia-chrome refractories was the combined collector of ADD and SIBX at an optimal mass ratio was 1:2. All subsequent experiments were performed using this combined collector. The nonpolar oil enhancement of hydrophobic agglomerate is due to the formation of oil films on hydrophobic particles to increase the particle hydrophobicity and the bridging of particles ( To assess the effect of nonpolar oil kerosene on the recovery of metals, a series of different kerosene dosage experiments was conducted. The results are presented in As shown in The advantage of gravity separation is that a high metal grade concentrate can be obtained with the grinding fineness of 60% particles passing 0.074 mm, and flotation can achieve a high metal recovery with the grinding fineness of 80% particles passing 0.074 mm. Therefore, a combined process of gravity separation and flotation was recommended to recover metals from spent magnesia-chrome refractories.  Through electrochemical analysis, the metallic Ag surface will undergo the following reaction as the voltage increases at pH 8: If [Ag At pH 8, the reversible potential of the reaction was 0.700 V. As shown in Under the same conditions, the addition of 1 mol/L xanthate (X) may result in the following: As shown in The spectra were obtained for silver samples (<5 μm), pure sodium isobutyl xanthate ((CH   The metals in the smelting process penetrated into the refractories from cracks and holes. Although few objective metals were dissolved in refractories, suggesting that they were improbable to separate by using physical processes, most of the metal particles were larger in size, non-spherical and had clear edges and corners. As such, they could be easily separated from the refractories through gravity separation and flotation. Grinding time, pH, EK dosage, collectors and its dosage significantly affected the recovery of metals. The optimum parameters were established as follows: grinding fineness of 60% particles passing 0.074 mm for gravity separation and regrinding tailing, and 80% particles passing 0.074 mm for flotation; pH 8; 500 g/t of the combined collector; and 200 g/t of emulsified kerosene. Under these conditions, approximately 99% Ag, 82% Pb and 81% Bi were recovered by a closed-circuit test. The obtained concentrates can be returned to the smelting process as feeding for metals, whereas the tailings with slight impurities can be reused as raw materials for new refractories. In the xanthate system, the surface of the silver produced a peak of xanthate oxidation to form a hydrophobic double xanthate product in the electrochemical experiments. Infrared spectroscopy showed revealed that a chemical reaction occurred between silver and xanthate in the xanthate system. Silver butyl xanthate was generated and physical adsorption occurred on the silver surface. The surface of Ag became hydrophobic to flotation under the combined action of double xanthate and silver butyl xanthate. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of this research by