An understanding of screening requires a knowledge of screening kinetics. The new model of screening kinetics presented in this paper is theoretically described and experimentally proven. Samples of different raw materials, different in their density, bulk density, particle size distribution and particle shape, were used.
                  The conducted experiments confirmed that the new model of screening kinetics successfully describes the process of screening of various raw materials even when they are exposed to a range of factors that most influence the screening process (dimensions of the screen, particle size distribution of raw materials, particle shape, and thickness of the bed on the screen).
                  The advantage of this model of screening kinetics lies in its simplicity as it is characterized by the fact that it has only one parameter, i.e., (k) – the screening rate constant, which is experimentally measured. This constant can be measured on the basis of a single screening experiment. This fact is very significant for practical applications of the model to an industrial screen.Previous studies have used two approaches to describe screening kinetics: a stochastic approach, and a kinetic approach. Within the stochastic approach ( Free screening, where the particles do not have an impact on one another on the screening surface ( Tight screening with interaction between the particles was present during this operation. This model was analyzed in detail by Application of the tight screening model under real-time conditions requires changing and defining new limiting conditions, which further lead to extremely complex calculations. The other approach to the screening process, adopted by a number of authors ( More than one model ( The integral form of Eq. In order to test Eq. Experiments conducted under different screening conditions and using various raw materials have shown that Eq. In order to test Eq. Compared to the stochastic models, the kinetic ones are simple and have one or, at the most, two parametres which are to be identified by experiment. Observing the point arrangements on Results of the screening kinetics being approximated by a linear relationship, we get the correlation coefficient within the limits from 0.7343 to 0.9406. Somewhat a lower correlation coefficient suggests that the tested screening kinetics model does not describe the screening kinetics in the best way. Unfortunately, no serious work dealing with the study of the kinetics of sieving have been published in the last 10 years. The model tested in this study was basically the kinetic model modified by the introduction of the screening probability coefficient ( The starting point of the new model of screening kinetics is that the speed of screening depends not only on the composition of a particle (− The probability of screening depends on the relation between the diameter of the particle ( During screening, the sequence of particles going through the screen is: ‘small’, (particles with the middle, diameter ( The mathematically defined change of the probability of screening enables a more accurate model of the screening kinetics to be defined, which describes the screening process from beginning to end. Searching for a mathematical definition which describes the change of probability of screening, the starting point was the assumption that the coefficient of change of probability of screening ( This assumption is the result of the experiment shown in  Substitution of ( By integrating Eq. That is: The screen undersize recovery ( Substitution of ( That is: Based on The first and most important characteristic of the new model of screening kinetics is its simplicity. It has only one parameter ( An ILM-LABOR sieve shaker was used to study sieving kinetics in the laboratory ( The sieving was carried out dry, using Tyler series sieves. Screening kinetics using the sieve shaker was studied on eight raw material samples: metal balls, quartz sand, mica, small and large magnesite, coal, copper ore and gravel. The particle size distribution, density and embankment density of screening are given in The samples were in a loose condition and filled the whole area of the screen in one layer and in many characteristic layers. Each experiment of the screening kinetics in the laboratory used one sample, which was removed from the sieve shaker after a specific period in order to define the screened mass and then returned to the sieve shaker for further screening. The data concerning the content of the particle size range (− The screening kinetics were studied under semi-industrial conditions using a continuous semi-industrial vibration-screen of the brand “DENVER” ( The screening surface used in the experiments was square with openings of 5 For the purposes of examining the screening kinetics, the screening area was devided into five sections: 100, 200, 300, 400, and 600 The screening kinetics on the semi-industrial vibration-screen was studied on samples of six raw materials: calcite, andesite, limestone, coal, copper ore and gravel. The particle size distribution, density and embankment density of the screening are given in The experiments were conducted on raw materials the particles of which differed in shape and size. The shapes of the different particles employed in the laboratory and semi-industrial experiments are given in The testing of the new model of screening kinetics was conducted on dry samples of different raw materials, with particles of different shapes and sizes, different thicknesses of the bed on the screen, different aperture sizes and different proportions of ‘small’ and ‘small-to-large’ particles. This means that all the most important factors were varied in the screening process. The results of the screening kinetics on the laboratory discontinual screens are graphically shown in the coordinate system The results of the screening kinetics on the semi-industrial vibration-screen of continual effect are graphically shown in the coordinate system The straight-line sequence of experimental points in all graphs, for all samples under various screening conditions, with very high correlation coefficients The assumption based on the experiments that the screening speed is in direct proportion to the mass of the particles (− Based on the experiment results, the screening rate constant ( The only parameter that affects the screening speed in this new model is the screening rate constant ( The first conclusion to be drawn is that the screening rate constant varies for different raw materials although the aperture size and other conditions may be the same. Three factors are important here: particle shape, proportions of ‘small’ and ‘small-to-large’ particles in the particle size range (− The second conclusion to be drawn is that the greater is the proportions of ‘small’ particles in the raw material, the higher will be the screening rate constant. This can be illustrated by the example of the screening of large magnesite on a screen the opening of which was 6.68 When dealing with raw materials of lower density with the other conditions being constant (the same aperture size, the same thickness of the bed on the screen and the same particle shape), the constant ( Generally, the constant decreases when the thickness of the bed is greater. This is because particles (− For the same raw material when the proportions of ‘small’ particles was the same, the constant ( The above drawn conclusions based on the results of experiments conducted using the laboratory vibration-screen are also valid for the results of the experiments in the semi-industrial vibration-screen. The research conducted in this paper gives the theoretical basis of a new model of screening kinetics, which was also experimentally proven on laboratory and semi-industrial vibration-screens, and its differential equation is as follows: Its integral form is: All the conducted experiments showed a significant straight-line sequence of experimental points of a high correlation coefficient ( One of the advantages of the new model lies in its simplicity which can be seen in the fact that it has only one parameter ( The practical value of the model, applied to the industrial screen, may be seen in the possibility of optimization and automatization of the screening process in the sense that the capacity of a screen for a given screen undersize recovery ( The only parameter, that in this model predetermines the screening speed is the screening rate constant ( For the same raw material, the rule is that for approximately the same proportions of ‘small’ particles in the particle size range (− The greater the proportions of ‘small’ particles in the lower class of largeness, the higher the screening rate constant ( When dealing with raw materials of greater particle density when the other screening conditions are the same, the screening rate constant ( The screening rate constant (