Fifteen consecutive patients with severely comminuted Rolando fractures were treated by closed reduction and fixation with a modified Suzuki frame without rubber bands, followed by immediate mobilization. All the fractures healed within 5 weeks. At 3 months, no rotational deformity was observed. The Kapandji score was equal that of the contralateral thumb in eight cases. No residual pain was recorded. Grip strength was 78% and pinch strength was 78% of the contralateral hand. One patient needed the frame tension modified. One patient developed a sensory deficit in the area of the superficial branch of the radial nerve that resolved spontaneously in 3 months. One patient healed with a 2-mm articular step-off, but the clinical outcome was good. Our retrospective study suggests that the small modification we made to the Suzuki frame provides a relatively simple and minimally invasive technique for the treatment of comminuted Rolando fractures.Fractures of the base of the first metacarpal account for 4% of all hand fractures For non-comminuted or slightly comminuted intra-articular fractures, the prevailing fixation techniques rely on plates and screws We previously reported the preliminary results of a single patient with a Rolando fracture From July 2012 to November 2015, 15 adult patients with a Rolando fracture having variable displacement and severe comminution were referred to our hand surgery department. Open fractures and complex traumas such as amputations, subtotal amputations and crush injuries were excluded from the study. Thirteen patients were men and two were women, with an average age of 40 years (range 18–86 years, SD 19.1). Eight fractures involved the dominant hand and seven the non-dominant hand. The histories given by the patients included a fall onto the hand in 11 cases, direct trauma in 3 cases and polytrauma with an unclear mechanism of the injury in 1 case. The mean time from injury to the surgical treatment was 3.5 days (range 1–10 days, SD 2.1). The surgical treatment was discussed with the patient at the time of arrival and a modified Suzuki frame was proposed as a fixation strategy to all patients. New anterior-posterior (AP), oblique and lateral (LL) plain digital X-rays were taken in all cases prior to surgery. We used a modified Suzuki frame as previously described by Giesen et al. Anesthesia was based on the patient's preference and/or need to surgically repair other injuries in polytrauma patients. Regional anesthesia was used in five cases, general anesthesia in six cases and local anesthesia in four cases. Closed reduction was performed and fixation was maintained with a modified Suzuki frame that consisted of one 1.6 The patients were encouraged to move the thumb immediately and began a controlled active mobilization regimen without splinting within one week after the procedure. All patients underwent their first clinical and radiological follow-up within 1 week of the surgery to verify the amount of distraction across the fracture and if necessary, modify it by changing the curvature of the frame's arms. In two cases, a CT-scan of the thumb 2 weeks post-surgery with the frame in place was performed in order to verify joint congruity ( The next follow-up was planned at 5 weeks postoperative (mean 33.8 days, range 27–41 days, SD 3.7). At this point, if bone union was visible on the radiographs, the K-wires were removed in an ambulatory setting without anesthesia. Follow-up was planned for all patients at a minimum of 3 months postoperative (mean 95 days, range 35–294 days, SD 66). All patients were seen by the surgeon at each follow-up. X-ray views were taken in a standardized manner to measure any postoperative articular step-off. At each follow-up, function of the affected thumb was measured using the Kapandji score Patients were assessed for early postoperative complications such as inadequate fixation, loss of reduction with formation of articular step-off, malrotation, infection and K-wire migration. Late complications such as rotational deformity, delayed union or tendon adhesions were also recorded. All fractures healed and the K-wires were removed after a mean of 33.8 days (range 27–41 days, SD 3.7). No evidence of inadequate fixation, loss of reduction, early or late rotational deformity or delayed fracture union was found. There were no articular step-offs of more than 1 Slight lateral migration of the proximal K-wires was observed in two patients. Two patients had a superficial pin site infection, which was successfully treated with a 1-week course of oral antibiotics. One patient had a slight form of neurapraxia of the superficial branch of the radial nerve (SBRN), which resolved spontaneously within 3 months. In one patient, the frame's tension had to be modified 1 week after surgery to reduce the distraction and restore the reduction. The patient's postoperative course was uneventful. At the final follow-up, the Jamar grip strength on the injured side was 23 All patients reported that they would undergo the same procedure again and that they would recommend it to others. Rolando fractures are frequently seen in the hand surgery units, accounting for 9–21% of all fractures of the first metacarpal Different authors have suggested using static external fixation. Unlike Buchler et al., who used a quadrilateral fixator in 1991, more recent studies relied on a simple, unilateral fixator A valid alternative was described by El-Sharkawy et al. in 2009: a dynamic external fixator that does not rely on rubber bands but uses three K-wires to control rotational forces Risk of damage to the radial artery and the SBRN limits the percutaneous use of K-wires in this area. We observed temporary palsy of the SBRN in one patient. We have no specific suggestions to avoid this risk completely, however careful and slow insertion of the K-wires is key. There was no evidence of SBRN or radial artery damage in any other patient. Pin tract infection is a risk and this technique requires high patient compliance. In our study, this kind of dynamic external fixation proved to be stable enough to allow early mobilization with no further protection needed. This may be an additional advantage of this technique, as the minimal invasiveness and early rehabilitation may produce a lower rate of adhesions and joint stiffness compared to plate and screw fixation. The risk of extensor tendon adhesion and scarring seems to be minimized by the absence of a surgical incision and the absence of metal under the tendons. No patient in our study required tenolysis, however the follow-up was rather short. One patient, who healed with a 2 Abi et al. Although open fixation with plate and screws of comminuted fractures of the base of the first metacarpal is stable and allows early mobilization, when small fragments are present, it can be extremely difficult to perform and can also cause tendon adhesions. Percutaneous fixation with K-wires is minimally invasive but is often followed by secondary displacement. It often requires some sort of immobilization. The modified Suzuki frame used in this study combines the advantages of both techniques. It is an effective, relatively simple, cost efficient, and minimally invasive technique that allows immediate mobilization of Rolando fractures. The study was not funded by any organizations. No approval required from the local ethics committee. The authors declare that they have no competing interest. We thank the Hand Therapy Department of the University Hospital of Zurich for their support in this study.