This paper presents trends in nonrenewable resource use for the past 100 years and a simulation model to explain the effect of different types of technological innovation on those trends. The extraction and proven reserves for many nonrenewable resources have risen steadily throughout this period, while the long-term average price has been constant. Existing formal models of nonrenewable resource use do not explain this long stability. This paper demonstrates that three types of technological advance can explain the price trend, namely, innovation in exploration, in extraction, and in use efficiency. The model can also be used to explore optimal distribution of different types of innovation. Optimization shows there are important conflicts between public and private welfare concerning the direction of research funds. For public welfare, the concentration of research would be in greater use efficiency, whereas for the private welfare of the extraction industry it would be in extraction innovation.The production and consumption of most virgin nonrenewable resources has grown continually in this century, in spite of intermittent warnings of imminent scarcity. For many nonrenewable resources, not only has the absolute amount of reserves increased, but even the years of coverage (at ever-higher use rates!). Concurrent with these trends is that deeper, further, and lower quality sources have been mined, as the more easily accessible fields and mines are used first, and the more difficult to extract are saved for later. Yet, despite increasing inaccessibility of the minerals the prices of many minerals and fuels have remained, on average, rather stable in this century. The obvious ‘missing link’ in these trends is increasing knowledge. New discoveries of reserves-increased knowledge of what is in the ground-replenish what we have used up. Better technologies for extraction allow us to win the ‘tug of war’ ( This paper explores the role of increasing knowledge, particularly different types of technological advances, on nonrenewable resource use in the future. The ultimate goal is to identify which technological advance leads us to sustainable resource use. Technological advance is considered in the areas of exploration, extraction, and use. The model is built on neo-classical formulations on discovery and non-renewable resource use in The following section shows some of the trends in nonrenewable resource use, as described above. The modern global economy uses a wide range of nonrenewable resources, from various fossil fuels to minerals and metals, as well as precious stones. It is beyond the scope of this paper to explore the trends in use, accessibility, and reserves for all these resources in this century. So, a limited selection will have to suffice as an exposition. From this selection, we make the assumption that the average trends for most other nonrenewable resources are similar in direction. In the model presented below, four important trends are used as guidelines for resource use; the global virgin extraction of resources, the price; the accessibility of resources and the estimated remaining world reserves.  The figure shows that for most of the resources shown, there is a rising trend in the extraction of all minerals — in particular for crude petroleum and aluminum. The two notable exceptions are tin and lead, the extraction of both of which has stagnated since around 1970.  It is very difficult to find time series of proven or estimated reserves. One reason for this is that the amount of reserves estimated depends on the economic cut-off price being used and assumptions about geological distribution. The few data available indicate that proven reserves have increased. For example, in 1935 the estimated global reserves of copper and lead were 100 and 10 million tons, respectively, and in 1998 these reserves had increased to 2300 and 1500 million tons (Minerals Yearbook, 1935; The accessibility of a resource measured in different units, such as ore grade, field size, seam thickness, or geographical distance have declined in this century. Even optimistic economists agree that although the historical continued stability of average prices and increase in usage create an image of endless supply, nonrenewable resources must have, by their nature, a finite economic lifetime ( Substitution has occurred for a series of fuel sources in this century as shown by The global availability of the resource is modeled according to the assumptions set forth by  Basically, Adelman and Pindyck describe three negative feedback loops, also mentioned in The model presented in this paper combines these three loops formally, and adds technological improvements in exploration and extraction to offset declining returns. The model also includes technological improvements in use efficiency to offset the effects of rising price on demand. The market form assumed in this model is a competitive one, where price is equal to marginal costs. Innovations apply to every firm in the market (see below). The research and development funding comes from a common pool, which could be government sponsored research or a collective fund for the industry. If we assumed a monopoly or an oligopoly, then the basic difference would be that firms could add a mark-up to their price over costs. The results basically hold for the market with a mark-up as well. Endogenous innovation models such as those described in The formulation for the rate of technological innovation is a combination of that presented in In order to examine the effects of different innovations on the cost of producing a resource, we need to split up the production process, most notably, into the activity of exploration and that of extraction. To simplify this, we assume that the total costs are the sum of the costs of exploration plus costs of extraction. We leave out the separation of labor and capital. This is not to say that labor and capital are considered irrelevant. In effect, the assumption is that technology determines the relative use of labor and capital, better technology leads to a more productive combination, and that the price of these factors is not affected by this industry. We also exclude research and development from costs, assuming it is an insignificant contributor to total costs. The costs of discovery (the returns on exploration) are a function of how the resource is distributed in the Earth, how much of the resource has been found already, and how technically able we are at locating it. Similarly, the costs of extraction are a function of distribution in the Earth; how much of the resource has already been extracted; the size of the pool of reserves to extract from; and our technical ability. The model cannot be solved analytically, and, therefore, we run alternative simulations (or, scenarios) to explore its dynamics. We present simulations in which investments in research and development are set exogenously to test the behavior of the model, and in which they are set to maximize discounted revenues, and discounted consumption. The two will be treated as proxies for private welfare of the firms and public welfare of consumers relatively. In neo-classical economics, the firms seek to maximize discounted profits and consumers’ discounted utility. In the case modeled here, profits are always zero because we model the competition situation, so we use revenues instead. Utility (usefulness derived from the use of a product) is seen as a positive function of consumption, and often marginal utility declines as consecutively more is consumed. A reserve of a natural resource Discoveries depend positively on the level of exploration investments, Extraction is equal to demand, Scarcity, As scarcity rises the proportion of revenues used for exploration increases Exploration investments are equal to the product of The variables determining investment are the same as in Total unit costs are equal to the sum of unit extraction costs and unit exploration or discovery costs. Extraction costs depend on the cumulative extraction (equal to cumulative use) of the resource, As cumulative use rises, the marginal returns of extraction decrease exponentially, and as reserves decline to zero, the costs of extraction go to infinity, as The competitive price, Increases in end use efficiency can offset declines in demand due to rising price for the resource. Demand, Note that end use efficiency is in the demand function twice. It reduces demand because it reduces the effective market size. But, it also enhances demand because it reduces the effective price. This double effect leads to some interesting results. Technology improvements result from investments in research and development. As research and development investments increase, the expected technology improvements, The state of the art level of technology diffuses into the society gradually because of delays in information diffusion and production and resident capital investments in older forms of technology. The average level of technology, In any model, the selection of the parameter values in the equations is bound to influence the time path of the variables in simulations. The The accessibility of resources for extraction is approximated by the inverse of the costs, As innovations are central to the paper, it is useful to pause for a moment and think about how innovations might affect natural resource use, before continuing on to the simulations. The effects of extraction innovations and exploration innovations are fairly straightforward. Extraction innovations directly lower costs. Exploration innovations lower the cost of discovery, but also lower extraction costs because for each given investment in exploration, better exploration technology increases amount discovered, therewith increasing the proven reserves, which reduces extraction costs. It is possible that better exploration technology has a second effect, namely, to reduce the investments necessary in exploration, which would reduce total costs. This is not considered in the present version of the model. Use efficiency innovations have a more complex influence and warrant a brief discussion. As mentioned above, use efficiency technologies have a dual effect, one is to reduce the demand for the resource, the other is to enhance demand by reducing the service price (see Consider the case of more fuel efficient cars. Say that new technology doubles the mileage per gallon of fuel, so that the fuel cost of driving a mile has dropped by 50%. This increases the driving of miles the way a price reduction usually would. But, driving these extra miles uses less fuel per mile. How these two effects change the fuel demand curve depends on the elasticities of demand and the extent of the efficiency increase, but the change in most cases will be less than the efficiency increase.  This section presents a simulation that reproduces historical trends of natural resource use discussed above, namely, increases in the use rate, the proven reserves, and difficulty of access, while prices decline or remain stable. The market size, or base demand, is assumed to grow 3% per simulation period. The simplest simulation to start with is one in which there is no technological innovation. The second simulation, for the same length of modeling time, includes technological innovation in extraction, discovery, and end-use efficiency. This is the most likely representation of actual history. We know from data on energy intensity that at least in this sector, the end use efficiency has increased during this century, and we can assume this is also true for other minerals. We can assume, although no data is available, that extraction efficiency has increased because it is possible to extract much more inaccessible resources without rises in costs. And discovery technology will have improved in this century along with all the other geological surveying instruments. For this illustrative simulation, we assume that the rate of innovation has been equal in all three technologies. These results are shown in By process of selective elimination, it was found that, the constant price is not reproducible with innovations in any one technology alone; the combination of extraction and use efficiency to a large extent account for the constant price; in these simulations, discovery innovations hardly lower price, but do result in more proven reserves. While it is not surprising that extraction innovations should keep price down, it is not immediately obvious that use efficiency should also, and that discovery innovation has so little effect. The reason that discovery has so little effect is that the model assumes, once proven reserves are large, adding more does not reduce costs further. Beyond a minimum level, the effect of having more reserves has almost no effect on costs. End-use efficiency keeps price down because the rate of use is lower — which means we use up the more accessible reserves more slowly — and this gives extraction innovations more time to keep up in the ‘constant war’ against diminishing returns. The historical simulations in Four simulations are shown here using the same parameters as the simulations in the above section, except for the proportion of revenues invested in research and development. The first simulation includes no research and development; the second includes research and development in investment technology only; the third in exploration technology only; and the fourth in end-use efficiency only.  Improvements in discovery technology do very little to alter this path, mostly because the effect of proven reserves on costs and price is small at the level of proven reserves existing in the model. By contrast, extraction innovation significantly raises and extends the use rate as expected because the costs of extraction are lower. However, the diminishing returns to extraction technology innovation, and the increasing difficulty of extraction eventually catch up to the system and prices rise, forcing the use rate down before the end of the simulation. Use efficiency innovations initially lower the use rate (price elasticity<1), but allows it to keep expanding well beyond the horizon afforded with extraction technology. There are two reasons for this. First, early low use rates — resulting from higher use efficiency — mean the resource is mined more slowly and, therefore, large, accessible fields and mines can operate longer. Second, when costs and prices do eventually rise, the public is willing to pay higher prices because more services can be obtained from use of the resource. Both of these effects postpone ‘functional exhaustion’. The second panel shows proven reserves. In our simulations, reserves are The third panel shows prices. As discussed in Revenues are illustrated in the final panel. In these simulations, early revenues are highest with no innovations at all. The extraction and end-use innovations initially lower revenues, but lengthen the revenue lifetime. Whether investment in research and development is profitable from the extraction firms’ point of view will depend on such factors as the discount rate. We do not consider competition here, but it is worth noting that, individually, firms might opt to research into cheaper extraction technology in order to compete while they assume other firms do not. If all firms make this decision, we end up with a price and a technology that is not necessarily optimal for the firms, but which does extend the economic lifetime of the resource. Social welfare might be modeled as the discounted value of service demand, that is, the actual services obtained from use of the resource (accounting for increases in use efficiency), while private welfare might be the discounted per period profits or revenues. The optimization of discounted services and discounted revenue is done by iteration, as the model has too many feedbacks to allow an analytical solution. The iteration process imposes a fixed, limited time horizon, and we choose the same time horizon as in the previous section. This is 200 periods (which have no relation to real time) which is usually long enough for discounted values to approach zero. To address the main question of the paper, the model is optimized over the mix of research and development in each of the three technologies discussed thus far, namely, extraction, end-use efficiency, and discovery. In the simulations below, the total research investment index is capped at 0.1 of revenues The results in The results imply a It is easy to explain why a resource mix skewed towards use-efficiency would benefit consumers more than a resource mix largely devoted to extraction efficiency. Consumers have a triple benefit from use-efficiency, namely, a lower service price, higher service from use of the resource, and a longer economic lifetime because the resource is used more slowly and prices rise more slowly. There is only a double benefit from extraction efficiency, namely, a lower price and a longer lifetime. Companies experience positive and negative effects from higher technological efficiency. Better technologies extend the economic lifetime of a resource, and raise use rates, but they lower prices. Extraction innovations are better for firms because in the early period of the simulation, use rates are higher than with use efficiency innovations. It is important to note that these results are largely independent of such factors as the relative costs of innovations in each technology, and the distribution of the resource. In the second set of optimizations, a mark-up in price over costs is included, the demand function is shifted, and a very high discount rate is tested. The mark-up means that the firms have some kind of market power, be it as an oligopoly or a monopoly, or some other protection from competition. The demand function is shifted upwards to allow for a higher mark-up. There are also two experiments with an extremely high discount rate of 0.2, one with a mark-up and one without. The results of these experiments are mixed, as shown in In the first experiment, a mark-up of 0.2 is applied, and the discount rate and demand function from above are maintained (at 0.07 and The second experiment shows the demand function shifted upwards to A high discount rate, which is set here at 0.2 per period, actually leads to a convergence of the optimization for discounted service and discounted revenues, namely, that all research investment be in extraction. This holds for a situation with a mark-up as well as the situation where price equals costs. The reason is that with the high discount rate, the optimization almost completely disregards the future where end-use efficiency benefits begin to accrue — because as less of the resource has been used up, the extraction and discovery costs are lower than they would otherwise be. Secondly, the ultimate value of the discounted service and discounted revenues are significantly lower with the mark-up than without. This is because the mark-up causes a short-term drop in use rates. But then, with a high enough discount rate, the short-term is all that counts. Over the past 100 years, long-term average real prices for many nonrenewable resources have been remarkably stable, in spite of greater difficulty of access and higher extraction rates. There has been neither the rise in prices predicted by Simulations with the model showed that with no innovations there would be a U-shaped development of prices (following A comparison of each technology separately shows that each has a different effect on use, cost and price, reserves, and revenues. Discovery technology improvement by itself does not produce improvements over no innovation at all. Extraction advance can lead to an extension of the economic lifetime of the resource, and lower prices combined with higher use rates. Finally, greater use efficiency extends the economic lifetime of the resource further than either of the two other technologies. It also leads to the highest levels of service (use/efficiency) obtained from use of the resource. Due to the high efficiency, demand remains high even if price climbs. Optimization shows that there can be significant conflict between public and private welfare with regards to the mix of technological innovation. The conflict persists under a wide range of parameter values. Under a wide range of combinations of parameters, service obtained from consumption is maximized when research investment is concentrated in use efficiency improvements. The discounted revenue of the resource production companies is maximized if innovation is mostly in extraction technology. However, there is no conflict if the discount rate is very high — in this case the optimal investment would be in extraction technology, as it brings the most short-term benefits to both consumers and firms. Many thanks to Steve O'Connor, Jerome Rothenberg and Nazli Choucri at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, David Kennett at Vassar College, Joseph Cornell at State University of New York, Syracuse, and an anonymous referee for valuable comments. All errors and foibles remaining are the author's. This research was made possible by a E. Schrodinger Grant from the Austrian Ministry of Science. The model can be examined and downloaded from the author's home page at Below are the specific equations used in the simulations presented in the paper. The level of each technology,  In a model such as this, the choice of key parameters and the equation formulations can influence the path of the simulations greatly. A sensitivity analysis shows which parameters are particularly influential to the results, and which are not. Table A shows a partial summary of our analysis.