The influence of ultrasonic irradiation on precipitation of Al(OH)3 crystals from supersaturated aluminate solution has been investigated under batch condition of isothermal crystallization. The results indicated that, the precipitation rate was greatly increased by ultrasonic irradiation. Compared with general process, the time of precipitation ratio from 0% to 45% was reduced about 15h under the irradiation of 20kHz, and also 33kHz. The effect of ultrasound on the precipitation process varies with ultrasound frequency. Irradiation of 33kHz ultrasound shortens the induction period and increases the second nucleation, while 20kHz enhance agglomeration and growth of Al(OH)3 which result in the increasing of the average diameter of final product by around 5μm. Raman spectra and UV-absorbance analysis indicated that ultrasound is beneficial to the formation of sodium–aluminate ion pair, which will increase the decomposition rate of supersaturated aluminate solution.During the Bayer process for alumina production, the alumina hydrates contained in bauxite are dissolved in hot sodium hydroxide solution and subsequently recovered by precipitation of gibbsite from supersaturated sodium aluminate solution. The growth rate of gibbsite crystals observed under industrial precipitation is inherently slow, resulting in small crystals as well as a low yield of gibbsite. Additionally, the crystallization process typically takes 2–3 It is well known that cavitation bubbles will be created when ultrasonic wave propagates through a liquid medium. As a cavitation bubble implodes, a localized hot spot is formed along with extremely large temperature and pressure gradients, the critical localized condition can results in enhancement of some chemical reactions ( The liquors were prepared from industrial sodium hydroxide and aluminum hydroxide. Industrial alkali was first dissolved in distilled water in a stainless-steel vessel, and the quantity of the distilled water is only half of the required volume. Then, aluminum hydroxide supplied by Pilot Alumina Plant of Zhengzhou Research Institute of Chalco was dissolved slowly in the hot alkali liquors with agitation. Finally, the total liquors were diluted to a certain volume with hot distilled water and filtered twice for the following experiments. Gibbsite seed crystals were also supplied by Pilot Alumina Plant of Zhengzhou Research Institute of Chalco, and by wet sieving to give crystals size range 45–150 A baffled, well-sealed, 1.5 A total of 5–6 slurry samples (20  The particle size distribution of different product was illustrated in Ultrasound influences not only the decomposition ratio of supersaturated solution but also the size distribution of product. The product obtained with using the ultrasound irradiation on the supersaturated solution contained more fine crystals than those obtained without using the ultrasound irradiation, and the mean size decreases with the increase of ultrasound frequency. Experimental results about the influence of ultrasound on the particle size distribution of Al(OH) From above experimental results, it can be found that ultrasound had accelerated the second nucleation process evidently, fine crystal of particles size less than 20 SEM images of the crystals indicated that there are different developmental stages in the formation process of new seed crystal surface layers during the induction period between under silence condition and under ultrasound condition. In the present study, it is found that the effect of ultrasound must be taken into account in the explanation of the differences between under silence condition and under ultrasonic sound condition in the recovery of crystal mass, particle size distribution of product as well as crystal morphology. In order to investigate the essential effect of ultrasound on the seed decomposition of supersaturated sodium aluminate solution, Raman spectra and Al There is an evidence to suggest that the alkali ion plays a pivotal role in the homogenous or secondary nucleation (  The precipitation of supersaturated caustic aluminate solution is promoted after the irradiation of ultrasound. In contest to the precipitation without the irradiation of ultrasound, the precipitation ratio is improved and the reaction time is shorted from 30 The enhancement is remarkable at various frequencies of ultrasound when the ultrasonic power gets the threshold value. On the other hand, the improvement is reduced if the ultrasonic power is larger than some value because the cavitation is weaker. In the early stage of crystallization, secondary nucleation is enhanced by using the irradiation of 33 Ultrasonic irradiation has changed the structure of sodium aluminate solution. The authors would like to thank the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 20476107) and the Major State Basic Research and Development Program of China (Grant No. 2005CB623702) for the financial support of this research.