The present study investigated a robust method for the preparation of four flavone C-glycosides, i.e. orientin, homoorientin, vitexin and isovitexin, which were prepared from an ethanol aqueous extract, i.e. antioxidant of bamboo leaves (AOB), by AB-8 resin-based column chromatography and preparative high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) using a mobile phase consisting of 10% and 15% (v/v) of acetonitrile and 1% acetic acid. These flavone C-glycosides were further purified by the drowning-out crystallization method using methanol and water as drowning-out anti-solvents and salting-out agents, respectively. The purity was assessed by analytical HPLC and the confirmation of chemical structures was performed by IR, MS, NMR and UV spectroscopy. Orientin (49mg), homoorientin (142mg), vitexin (15mg) and isovitexin (62mg) were prepared from 6.5g of crude column chromatography fraction obtained from 5L of AOB concentrated solution. The present method is robust and suitable for preparing available quantities of pure flavone C-glycosides and the quantification of orientin, homoorientin, vitexin and isovitexin in bamboo leaves.Secondary plant metabolites are biologically active non-nutrients that have been associated with the protection of human health ( Antioxidant of bamboo leaves (AOB), a pale brown powder extracted from bamboo leaves, was capable of blocking chain reactions of lipid autooxidation, chelating metal ions of transient state, scavenging nitrite compounds and blocking the synthetic reaction of nitrosamine ( A metabolic study performed previously by our research group reported these four flavone Orientin (5,7,3′,4′-tetrahydroxyflavone-8-glucoside), homoorientin (5,7,3′,4′-tetrahydroxyflavone-6-glucoside), vitexin (5,7,4′-trihydroxyflavone-8-glucoside) and isovitexin (5,7,4′-trihydroxyflavone-6-glucoside) (HPLC-grade) were purchased from Extrasynthese (Lyon, France). Acetonitrile and ethyl acetate (HPLC-grade both) were obtained from Tedia (Fairfield, OH, USA). Methanol (HPLC-grade) was purchased from Merck (Whitehouse Station, NJ, USA). All of other solvents and chemicals used in this study were of analytical grade. Redistilled water was used in the resin-based column chromatography while ultrapure water purified via the Milli-Q system (Millipore, Bedford, USA) was used during both preparative and analytical HPLC analysis. Stock and working standards of four flavone The concentrated solution of antioxidant of bamboo leaves (AOB) was provided by Zhejiang University Innoessen Co. Ltd. (Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China). AOB was prepared from the bamboo leaves of The resin-based column chromatography was performed on a low-pressure glass chromatographic column (150 The chromatographic separation was performed on a Waters DeltaPrep 400 Preparative Chromatography system equipped with Waters Prep LC Controller and Waters 2487 Dual The analytical method for the determination of flavone The fractions, which represented four flavone The preparative monomers of flavone Previous studies discussed the preparative isolation of flavone For the application of preparative HPLC technology, When fractions are collected from the preparative HPLC, it is then necessary to evaporate the mobile phase and consequently purify the chemicals studied in this work. To obtain flavone To further confirm the chemical structures of preparative flavone Four flavone