This paper examines the periodic natural convection in an enclosure filled with nanofluids. Whilst a heat source with oscillating heat flux is located on the left wall of the enclosure, the right wall is maintained at a relatively low temperature and the other walls are thermally insulated. Based upon numerical predictions, the effects of pertinent parameters such as Rayleigh number, solid volume fraction, heat source position, type of nanoparticles and oscillation period are examined. A periodic behaviour is found for the flow and temperature fields as a result of the oscillating heat flux. The utilisation of nanoparticles, in particular Cu, enhances the heat transfer especially at low Rayleigh numbers. In addition, the oscillation period of heat generation affects the maximum operational temperature of the heat source. It is also interesting to observe that the optimum position of the heat source on the left wall is a function of Rayleigh number. The results of this study can be used in the design of an effective cooling system for electronic components to help ensure effective and safe operational conditions.specific heat, J/kg gravitational acceleration, m/s convection heat transfer coefficient, W/m heat source length, m dimensionless heat source length ( thermal conductivity, W/mK enclosure length, m local Nusselt number on the heat source average Nusselt number fluid pressure, Pa modified pressure ( dimensionless pressure Prandtl number ( oscillating heat flux, W/m amplitude of oscillating heat flux, W/m Rayleigh number ( source term in Eq. time, s oscillation period, s temperature, K velocity components in dimensionless velocity components ( cartesian coordinates, m dimensionless coordinates ( distance of the heat source from the bottom wall, m dimensionless distance of the heat source from the bottom wall ( thermal diffusivity, m thermal expansion coefficient, 1/K temperature difference solid volume fraction non-dimensional parameter in Eq. diffusion term in Eq. Dynamic viscosity, Ns/m kinematic viscosity, m dimensionless temperature ( maximum heat source temperature along its length the highest value of the lowest value of density, kg/m time in dimensionless form ( oscillation period in dimensionless form ( maximum stream function cold wall fluid (pure water) nanofluid nanoparticle heat source Due to its various applications, buoyancy-driven heat transfer in enclosures filled with clear fluids has been comprehensively studied and documented in the literature in the past For the first time, Lage and Bejan Most of the studies on natural convection under oscillating thermal boundary conditions have utilised the base fluid with a low thermal conductivity, which, in turn, limits the heat transfer enhancement. Choi However, contradictory studies can be found which argue that the dispersion of nanoparticles in the base fluid may result in considerable decrease in the heat transfer The utilisation of nanofluids for cooling enhancement of systems with an oscillating heat flux can be considered as an area of interest for the designers of heat removal systems in the electronic industry. To the best knowledge of the authors, no study has yet been reported on this topic in the literature. As such, the focus of the present study is to examine the effects of pertinent parameters such as Rayleigh number, solid volume fraction, heat source position, type of nanoparticles and oscillation period on the natural convection cooling characteristics of an enclosure with an oscillating heat flux.  The enclosure is filled with a water-based nanofluid ( The equations that govern the conservation of mass, momentum and energy can be written in a non-dimensional form as shown in Eq. The non-dimensional initial conditions are The control volume formulation given by Patankar Rearranging the local Nusselt number by using the dimensionless parameters in Eq. The average Nusselt number is determined by integrating The time step independency study is carried out for a mesh size of 60 In order to validate the present code, the average Nusselt number, For this part of the analysis, an enclosure filled with a water-Cu nanofluid is considered. An oscillating heat source with a length of  One of the objectives of this research is to investigate the influence of nanofluids on the cooling performance of electronic components with periodic heat generation. Thus, it is a subject of interest to examine how the solid volume fraction of nanoparticles affects the cooling enhancement. The variation of the highest value of the heat source maximum temperature, (  This section examines how the position of the heat source on the left wall affects the cooling performance of the enclosure. The enclosure is filled with a water-Cu nanofluid ( The influence of different types of nanofluids on ( The heat generation oscillation period plays a critical role in the cooling mechanism of electronic components In order to have a better understanding of the influence of the oscillation period on the cooling process using both the nanofluid and pure water, the variations of the highest and lowest values of θ Natural convection cooling of an oscillating heat source embedded on the left wall of an enclosure filled with nanofluids has been numerically studied. The effects of various pertinent parameters such Rayleigh number, solid volume fraction, heat source position, type of nanofluid and oscillation period on the cooling performance of the enclosure are examined. The results of the present numerical analysis lead to the following conclusions: The oscillating heat flux generated by the heat source causes fluctuating behaviours for the flow and temperature fields as well as the heat source thermal parameters such Increasing Rayleigh number is associated with increasing the strength of buoyant flow circulation cells, enhancing the heat removal from the heat source and therefore, decreasing the heat source maximum temperature. The addition of nanoparticles into the pure water improves its thermal conductivity and enhances the heat removal from the heat source. At low Rayleigh numbers, where the conduction is the main heat transfer mechanism, this effect is more noticeable such that the addition of 20% Cu nanoparticles results in a 37% reduction of the heat source maximum temperature. The influence of the heat source position is a function of Rayleigh number. That is to say for the best cooling performance, the heat source should be positioned in the middle of the left wall for low Rayleigh numbers, however, for high Rayleigh numbers it should be located at the bottom of the left wall. The type of nanoparticles also influences the enhancement of heat source cooling process. For all values of Rayleigh number and solid volume fraction, Cu and TiO For both pure water and a nanofluid, as the oscillation period of heat generation increases, the amplitudes of The authors believe that the findings of this research study will provide useful information for the electronic industry to help maintain electronic components with oscillating heat generation under effective and safe operational conditions.