Over the last years, many research groups have developed supported TiO2-based materials in order to improve the engineering applications of photocatalytic technologies. However, not many attempts have been made to evaluate the optical behavior of these materials. This work focuses on the study of the photonic efficiencies of silica-supported TiO2 photocatalysts following the photodegradation of dichloroacetic acid (DCA) as model compound. Catalysts with different types of silica support and titania loadings were tested and their activity was found to be in correlation with the results of the clusters size distribution of the TiO2 nanocrystals. The photonic efficiency of the supported photocatalysts depends extremely on the optical density of the solid suspensions. Influence of the textural properties of the support and the titania loading on the optical density as well as on the photonic efficiency of the materials are discussed. The dependence of the absorption of radiation by the suspension on the catalyst concentration is also analyzed.TiO The results reported in the literature confirm a higher activity of powdered TiO Despite the large number of supported TiO The goal of this work is to report the results obtained during the evaluation of the photonic efficiencies of several supported photocatalysts recently developed ( The synthesis procedure of the silica-supported TiO Photodegradation experiments were carried out using a lamp field photoreactor with 64×110 The reaction suspensions consisted of 1 The initial photonic efficiencies were calculated as Preliminary experiments were carried out at pH=3 and 0.5 Similar results have been previously obtained for the photoxidation of cyanides ( The optical properties of the suspensions were studied by the measurement of the transmitted photon flux. Regarding the influence of the initial pH of the solution on the photonic efficiency, the study of the DCA photodegradation was carried out at initial pH values of 3, 7 and 10. It must be noticed that these are initial values and that the pH was not controlled during the reaction. Consequently, a decrease of the suspensions pH was noticed as the mineralization of DCA proceeds, especially when the initial pH was 7. The results shown in  From  Concerning the UV-A transmittance results shown in The analysis of the data does not show a correlation between the UV-A transmittance of every catalyst suspension and the photonic efficiency value. Whereas for the amorphous silica, the activity is, as expected, independent on the optical density, the rather weak maximum in the activity of the catalysts 40% TiO In summary, the higher activity of the 40%TiO In order to clarify the influence of the TiO Taking into account the values of UV-A transmittance for each catalyst suspension shown in Concerning the TiO Regarding the catalysts supported on SBA-15 silica, In summary, we can conclude that the higher optical density of the SBA-15 silica in comparison with the amorphous silica could not totally explain the higher activity of all the SBA-15 based photocatalysts as compared with the amorphous silica based materials. In addition, the narrower crystal size distribution achieved by using this mesostructured material seems to have an important effect. Concerning the TiO It is important to point out that an unbiased comparison of the photoactivity of supported photocatalysts is not an easy task. Due to different scattering properties of the different catalysts preparation, the use of the same amount of light-absorbing semiconductor material cannot guarantee a correct evaluation of the photonic efficiencies. On the other hand, the use of different catalyst concentrations to ensure similar absorption of the incoming radiation within the reactor also fails to perform the comparison properly due to the different semiconductor content. These facts show the high importance of both the catalytic and the optical properties for the design of an optimal photoreactor. Based upon our results, the photocatalyst 40%TiO The authors thank “Consejería de Educación, Comunidad de Madrid” for the financial support of this research through the project “Contrato-Programa Grupos Estratégicos de Investigación” and “Ministerio de Ciencia y Tecnología” through the project PPQ2000-1287.