Research in the field of Dissolved Air Flotation calls for studies on the fluid dynamics of the process for optimisation. This study describes a method using an Acoustic Doppler Velocimeter for measuring local water velocities in a DAF pilot plant, and presents the results from measurements done in the separation zone. A test of the ADV in bubbly water indicates a 50% reduction of the measured velocity in water containing higher concentrations of micro-bubbles. The bubble content and the hydraulic loading were shown to significantly influence the flow pattern at surface loading in the range 10–20 m/h. Micro-bubbles generated density gradients in the flotation tank and two major flow patterns were observed. Stratified flow was characterised by a horizontal flow in a bubbly upper layer and a plug-like flow in the bubble-free lower layer. The break-through flow was seen to short-circuit the water to the outlet, which most probably could be the reason for bad effluent quality at higher surface loading. Finally, three-dimensional flows were discovered, which also could have a deteriorating impact on the effluent quality.=hydraulic surface loading (m/h) =pressure (bar) =re-cycle rate of main flow (%) =coordinates for ADV positioning (cm) Removing particles from water using Dissolved Air Flotation (DAF) is a well-known process in water and wastewater treatment plants. In water treatment, the DAF is used as primary clarification and in wastewater treatment, the DAF process is applied for sludge thickening, secondary clarification and as polishing after secondary clarification. The mechanism of dissolved air flotation is to allow micro-bubbles of air to attach to the suspended particles in the water. The idea is to develop agglomerates with lower density than water, causing the floc to rise through the water and accumulate at the surface where they can be removed as sludge. The micro-bubbles are generated when pressurised and air-saturated re-cycle water is released in the contact zone. When the pressure is instantaneously reduced, the dissolved air precipitates into microscopic air-bubbles, which are mixed with the main water. Many factors play an important role in the performance of a dissolved air flotation plant (see By using the concept of a hydraulic surface loading; Studies done on sedimentation tanks show a significant discrepancy between theory and practice regarding the flow structure.   Considering all hydraulic aspects, some of which are indicated above, one realises the complexity and the importance of making serious efforts in gaining a fundamental understanding of the fluid dynamics in the DAF process. At the University in Lund, a study is ongoing in co-operation with the PURAC Group in Sweden, to determine the hydraulic behaviour in a dissolved air flotation pilot plant. The overall objective of the project is to increase the knowledge of the DAF process by focusing on the fluid dynamics in the flotation tank and correlating the hydraulic characteristics to removal efficiency, with the ultimate aim of increasing the hydraulic surface loading. The aim of this paper is to illustrate and discuss some problem areas: Is it possible to measure water velocities in bubbly water with an Acoustic Doppler Velocimeter? How does the addition of bubbles in the flotation process influence the flow behaviour in the separation zone? What flow behaviour can be discovered in the separation zone during the transition from a normal surface loading to a higher one? Is the flow behaviour discovered during the transition described in point 3 dependent on the air-bubble concentration? Is it possible to detect any flow related properties in the separation zone, which can be correlated to known design limitations for removal efficiency, such as maximum surface loading? Are there significant three-dimensional flows in the separation zone? The Pilot Plant consisted of a tank and the equipment for the production of the dispersion water ( The flow entered the flotation basin at the inlet (1) and was transported downwards to the inlet slot (2). The dispersion was added in the contact zone (3) via a bank of three needle valves mantled in the inlet slot. The water was brought upwards by the baffle (4) and entered the separation zone (5). The water left the tank through the outlet on the bottom of the tank (6). Re-cycled water ( The pilot plant had a capacity of 30 m The Acoustic Doppler Velocimeter (ADV) is based on the Doppler principle for measuring water velocities continuously and in three directions simultaneously. The measurement method is non-disturbing and the measurement volume is small (size <1 cm A pendulum was developed ( The steel bar was pushed back a certain, well-defined, distance and then released, which made the ADV probe move back and forth in an oscillatory way. This procedure was repeated ten times for several bubble contents. The ensemble average was calculated for each test condition and the resulting signals for an increasing dispersion rate are illustrated in In order to estimate the air content in the water the following rough calculation was done. Assuming an 85% saturated re-cycle stream at a pressure of 5 bar and a temperature of 20°C, the amount of released air in the contact zone would be 88 ml air/l re-cycle water. Adding 10% re-cycle water into 10 m The test results indicate a reduction of up to 50% of the velocity measured in bubbly water, for typical velocities of 30–80 cm/s ( The conclusion from the accuracy test is that the presence of significant amounts of bubbles reduces the measured velocity. The pattern seems to be correct as the mean pulses have the same interception values on the The standard deviation was greater in bubbly water. The accuracy of 0.05 cm/s according to The hydraulic surface loads 10.0, 12.5, 15.0, 17.5 and 20.0 m/h were chosen. The dispersion rates 5, 10 and 15% were studied for each loading, except when a certain loading or recycle rate seemed unnecessary for the purpose of the study. Measurements were done in the central longitudinal section and in a plan 75 cm above the bottom of the separation zone. All tests were performed in clear water without particles or floc under the assumption that they would not affect the flow patterns, as the floc density is about the same as for clear water. For example, a floc concentration of 800 mg suspended solids/l, a high concentration in clarification applications, would approximately change the bulk density of water with less than 0.15 kg/m Some parameters were considered to be of special interest. The main flow had to be steady. A drained Flygt pump was used, giving a constant flow and the deviation was estimated to be within ±1% of the pre-set desired flow. In order to test the method for reliability the condition 15 m/h surface loading and 10% re-cycle rate was measured twice, with a time span of 4 months separating the occasions. The test was successful and showed in principle the same result. In order to achieve the correct bubble size of about 40 The hydraulic surface loading was calculated as the incoming main flow divided by the total flotation surface area (1.0 m The measured velocities presented in this paper, are mean values over a period of about 100 s. The basin was defined in a The probe was lowered and located 5 cm above the volume to be measured. The sampling volume is located 5–6 cm from the probe according to the ADV Operational Manual ( Each velocity measurement lasted for approximately 80–120 s with a sample frequency of 25 Hz. After processing the measurement points for different parameters, the mean velocity was plotted on a vector plot or on a surface plot showing the overall flow situation. A base case at a hydraulic surface loading of 10 m/h adding 10% re-circulated water with no bubbles was first investigated ( When bubbles were added at 10 m/h and 10% re-cycle rate, the flows profile changed significantly ( If the surface loading was increased the flow pattern began to change ( A change of re-cycle rate (with bubbles) for constant surface loading 10 m/h did also affect the flow pattern ( The flow at surface loading 15 m/h and 5% dispersion (with bubbles) was a break-through flow ( When increasing the surface loading from 10 m/h to 15 m/h for the re-cycle rate 5% (with bubbles) a break-through developed and became more pronounced as the surface loading increased ( The flow pattern at re-cycle rate 15% (with bubbles) for increasing surface loading showed a typical stratified flow profile for 10 m/h ( A plan section was measured 75 cm above bottom. One stratified flow, 15 m/h surface loading and re-cycle rate 10%, and one break-through flow, 15 m/h surface loading and 5% re-cycle-rate, were chosen. The velocities discussed here are not adjusted to the reduction due to the bubble content in the water. The stratified case is shown in Studying the result from measurements done on the break-through case gives a different flow profile compared with the stratified case. A deep depression was found reaching from one wall to the other, in the line When measuring with the Acoustic Doppler Velocimeter in water containing micro-bubbles with a mean diameter of 40 The addition of bubbles in the flotation process significantly changed the flow pattern in the separation zone. In the bubble-free water case a large-scale rotating movement was found, encompassing the whole separation zone, i.e. rotating flow from the water surface down to the tank bottom. The content of micro-bubbles and not too high a hydraulic loading introduced important bulk density effects in the separation zone. In the first place a stable stratified flow situation occurred, with a less dense top layer containing larger amounts of micro-bubbles and a dense bottom layer with more or less clear bubble-free water. Secondly, a re-circulation flow occurred in the top layer with a horizontal downstream-directed flow close to the water surface and a return flow at the boundary between the two layers. This boundary was located approximately 75–90 cm above bottom, i.e. lower than the edge of the baffle. In the bottom layer a plug-like vertical flow seemed to arise down towards the outlet drainage pipes. A stratification such as discussed above, with a low density layer on top of a somewhat higher density layer, is stable under certain conditions, normally described by the Richardson’s number (see e.g. The stability of the stratification is probably the reason why there was a return-flow in the boundary between clear and bubbly water. The low-density water forced down by the downstream wall did not have the sufficient momentum to penetrate the high-density water below, which caused the flow to deviate again towards the inlet zone, creating a return-flow. The plug-like flow that was found in the clear water below the bubble cloud in the tank, is probably also attributed to the stratification phenomenon. As the water was transported in the return flow towards the inlet zone, bubbles were rising upwards, eventually leaving the water mass, which became more dense and heavier, causing the flow to successively “drop off” downwards towards the drainage pipes. Two typical flow patterns were detected in the study, the stratified flow case and the break-through flow case. The first case has been discussed above. The break-through flow was characterised as a flow pattern where the water immediately after leaving the contact zone deviated towards the outlet. At low re-cycle rates, such as 5%, the change of the flow pattern was clear and distinct when the surface loading was increased. Already at a surface loading 10 m/h the flow pattern became unstable in its character and at 12.5 m/h a break-through was fully developed. The reason why the break-through occurs under these circumstances has not yet been analysed fully. One explanation could be a decreasing stability of the stratification, i.e. a decrease of Richardson’s number. Factors affecting the stratification such as increased bubble content in the deeper regions of the tank, making the density gradient weaker, and a stronger return flow, are believed to cause decreasing stability and ultimately break-through. In water and wastewater plants the break-through flow could most probably be the reason for limiting the capacity of a DAF plant, i.e. causing high turbidity in the effluent. An increase in re-cycle rate, with a following higher air-content in the water, resulted in a homogenising of the flow, which became more stratified in character. It was sufficient with a 10% re-cycle rate in the case with 10 and 15 m/h surface loading. For surface loading 17.5 and 20 m/h, the higher dispersion rate did not seem to create the stratified flow observed for the lower loading. The flow generally tended to become unstable with increased surface loading. At 20 m/h a break-through was observed, even though the dispersion rate was as high as 15%. Furthermore, high dispersion rates and high surface loading seemed to result in high velocities in the top layer, which could be of great significance concerning sludge erosion problems. Three-dimensional flows were observed in the separation zone. In the stratified flow case there was a rotational flow with vertical axes in the plan. In the break-through case a strong flow upwards was observed in one of the corners, indicating local vertical flows. The strong flow of water towards the outlet during a break-through, however, was seen to be of a more two-dimensional character. Claes Magnusson carried out many of the measurements. Lennart Grahn, Jan-Åke Larsson and Bengt Malm contributed in the development of the equipment. In understanding the ADV, Professor Sven Lindbland and Claes Hovmalm were of great help. Purac Group in Sweden contributed with the pilot plant.