The administration of conventional dosage forms of itraconazole (ITZ) for cutaneous candidiasis treatment is limited by its poor aqueous solubility and the deep location ofCandida albicans(CA) in this disease. In the present work, we developed a nanocrystal (NC) form of ITZ, which was incorporated into dissolving microneedles (MNs) to facilitate skin delivery of ITZ into the infection site. The NCs were prepared by media milling with an ultra-small-scale device using Pluronic®F127 as a stabiliser. The antifungal activity of ITZ was enhanced by NC formulations (MIC value of 2.5 μg/ml), compared to a coarse dispersion of ITZ (MIC value of >2560 μg/ml). The formulation of ITZ into NCs increased dissolution rate by 3-fold. Furthermore, the dissolving MNs containing ITZ-NCs exhibited better dermatokinetic profiles, compared to needle-free patches and conventional creams containing ITZ-NCs. Importantly, the antifungal activity in anex vivocandidiasis infection model exhibited that the CA viability declined by up to 100% after 48 h of administration. These studies have verified the concept that the incorporation of ITZ-NCs into dissolving MNs can offer an effective approach for cutaneous candidiasis treatment.The skin is the principal protective barrier of the human body. However, it is suspectible to various diseases, with fungal infections being a significant health problem globally The treatment for severe cutaneous candidiasis continues to be a significant challenge and is limited to a few types of drugs, mainly azoles derivates. However, their use in clinical applications is normally restricted because of toxicity issues The formulation of nanocrystals (NCs) has become the strategy of preference for poorly soluble drugs with more than 20 products already approved in the market Dissolving microneedles (MNs) are minimally invasive devices, by-passing the major skin barrier and, therefore, resulting in high localisation of drugs in the skin In the present work, we specifically report for the first time the combination delivery system of ITZ-NCs and dissolving MNs for potential enhanced treatment of cutaneous candidiasis. The NCs were formulated and optimised using media milling using the ultra-small-scale device. The particle size, polydispersity index, shape and antifungal activity were also performed. Afterwards, the NCs were incorporated into dissolving MNs. Furthermore, Itraconazole (purity, ≥98%) of analytical grade was purchased from Tokyo Chemical Industry (Tokyo, Japan). Poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) (31–50 kDa), PVA (9–10 kDa) and Tween®80 were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (Dorset, UK). Pluronic® ITZ-NCs were prepared by media milling using the ultra-small-scale device described previously Particle size distribution and polydispersity index were determined by dynamic light scattering (DLS) using a NanoBrook Omni® analyser (Brookhaven, New York, USA). To this purpose, 5 µL of nanosuspension was manually dispersed in 4 mL of water and placed into plastic disposable cells. The equilibration time was set at 3 min and determinations were made at 25 °C. Results were expressed as mean values ± standard deviation (mean ± SD, n = 3). In scanning electron microscopy (SEM) experiments, coarse ITZ or a droplet of ITZ nanosuspension (heated at 37 °C to dryness) were deposited onto adhesive carbon tape, and observed in a TM3030 microscope (Hitachi, Krefeld, Germany). Additionally, a Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectrometer (Accutrac FT/IR-4100™ Series, Perkin Elmer, USA) was utilised to investigate the possibility of ITZ to chemically interact with the compounds used in the formulation. Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) measurement and X-ray powder diffraction of ITZ, ITZ-NCs and physical mixture (PM) of the optimised formulation were conducted using a differential scanning calorimeter (DSC 2920, TA Instruments, Surrey, UK) and an X-ray diffractometer (Rigaku Corporation, Kent, England), respectively. The Common mathematic models were applied to the percentage of drug released, as follows CA NCYC 610 (stock of Microbiology Laboratory, School of Pharmacy, Queen’s University Belfast, UK) was maintained at 4 °C. The fungi were cultivated in Saboaraud Dextrose Broth (SDB), at 37 °C and 100 rpm for 24 before antifungal activity studies. The collection of the fungal pellets was carried out by centrifugation at 3000 rpm for 30 min. The attained pellet was re-dispersed in fresh SDB. Following this, optical density of the fungal dispersions was set in order to obtain an equivalent to 1.5 × 10 A microtiter broth dilution method in 96-well bottom-plates was applied in determination of the minimal inhibitory concentrations (MIC) and minimal fungicidal concentrations (MFC) of ITZ in water (suspension form), ITZ in DMSO (solution form) and ITZ-NCs, according to the protocol of the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute The determination of time-killing kinetics of ITZ and ITZ-NCs against CA was carried out as per the method described previously Two-layered dissolving MNs of ITZ-NCs were prepared using silicone moulds with needle density of 16 × 16, pyramidal needles; 850 μm height [600 µm pyramidal tip, 250 µm base column] and 300 μm width at base and 300 μm interspacing ( A TA-TX2 Texture Analyser (Stable Microsystems, Haslmere, UK) was employed to evaluate the mechanical properties of dissolving MNs, as reported in a previous study In an attempt to calculate the amount of ITZ in MN needles, the needles were separated carefully from the baseplate using a scalpel and dissolved in 5 mL chloroform. The mixture was sonicated in a bath sonicator for 1 h. The mixture was centrifuged for 15 min at 14,000 rpm. The quantity of ITZ in the supernatant was measured by HPLC. The MNs containing ITZ-NCs were dispersed in the distilled water. Following this, the characteristics of NC, namely particle size and PDI were determined using DLS. The results obtained were compared to the initial characteristics of NC. In order to evaluate the dissolution time of MNs the  In order to evaluate drug distribution and deposition in the different layers of skin, samples were taken after 1 h, dermis Antifungal activity in an ex vivo fungal infection model in porcine skin The skins were disinfected by immersing in 70% ethanol for 1 h. The skin was allowed to dry in a biosafety cabinet for 20 min prior to the experiment Antifungal activity in the The concentrations of ITZ in each study were determined by All results were reported as means ± standard deviation (SD). GraphPad Prism® version 6 (GraphPad Software, San Diego, California, USA) was utilised to statistically analyse the results. To compare two cohorts, an unpaired Before the incorporation of ITZ in the MN formulations, it was transformed into NCs by media milling using an ultra-small-scale approach. As observed in  DSC thermal analysis was performed to evaluate the physicochemical interaction between any compounds and to determine whether the crystallinity was kept after the milling technique process. The thermograms from ITZ, PM and ITZ-NCs are shown in The To further understand the mechanism of release, common mathematic kinetic models were applied to the release profiles obtained. The most appropriate release model was chosen according to the correlation coefficient value. The correlation coefficient values were found to be 0.67, 0.98, 0.78, 0.81 and 0.66 for Zero-order, First-order, Higuchi, Korsmeyer-Peppas and Hixson-Crowell, respectively. As per the result, the release behaviour of ITZ-NCs formulation followed the First-order kinetic model best. Therefore, the release of ITZ from the formulation depends on the concentration of ITZ in the NC formulation Three treatments, namely ITZ–water, ITZ–DMSO and ITZ-NCs were tested on CA Time kill assays were performed to further investigate the time needed by ITZ to completely kill CA. The curves of the time kill of free ITZ in DMSO and ITZ-NCs against CA are depicted in In this study, the MNs were formulated using an aqueous blend of PVP and PVA. Our previous study showed that the combination of these water soluble polymers in the MN formulations were able to form MNs with better mechanical properties in comparison with the use of single polymer, due to the formation of hydrogen bond amongst C Mechanical properties evaluation was conducted to investigate the ability of dissolving MNs to resist compression. Essentially, the ability of MNs to penetrate the skin is an important characteristic in MNs application. To assess the mechanical properties of the MN formulations, the heights of initial MN needles were compared to the needle heights following the application of 32 N/MN array To further evaluate the ability of dissolving MNs to be inserted in the skin, Parafilm®M was employed as a validated skin stimulant. This prototypical has been developed by our research group to imitate human skin in MN insertion evaluation Following drying, the amount of ITZ localised in MN needles was quantified. The results showed that 3.29 ± 0.45 mg of ITZ were localised in F4 formulations. Therefore, this amount determind the dose of ITZ in one dissolving MN in the following evaluations. In the combination approach of nanotechnology and MNs, the particle properties, particularly particle size and PDI, should not be affected by MN formulations. In our study, following MN manufactures, the particle size and PDI of ITZ-NC in F4 were found to be 367 ± 33 nm and 0.32 ± 0.02, respectively. These properties were not statistically different ( The F4 needles were completely dissolved after 30 min, with needles partially liquefied and a decrease in height were visualised after 10 min ( The principal purpose of this study was to deliver the ITC-NC into the deeper layers of the skin, where CA colonises, infects the skin and causes cutaneous candidiasis The distribution profiles of ITZ in full-thickness porcine skin were further evaluated. The amount of ITZ distributed per cm Lastly, with the aim to verify the effectiveness of this combination delivery system, we assessed the fungal burden in an The findings of this extensive study suggest that the combinatorial approach of NC and dissolving MNs could enhance the penetrability of ITZ in Based on the findings presented in this study, it has been shown that the combination approach of NC and dissolving MNs enhanced the penetrability of ITZ in The authors wish to thank The Indonesian Endowment Fund for Education (