Since coal is not a homogeneous substance but a mixture of carbonaceous materials and mineral matter, it has a variety of surface properties. Therefore, it is not easy to control the properties of coal suspensions by simply adjusting variables, such as pH and/or electrolyte. A chemical agent needs to be added to control the properties of the coal suspensions. The aim of this investigation is to determine the adsorption behavior of an anionic dispersant in the presence of a wetting agent using some Turkish lignite samples. The presence of a wetting agent in the dispersant adsorption behavior is important, since usage of a wetting agent in the preparation of coal–water slurries which are acceptable for potential industrial users is of great importance. The effects of dispersant concentration, temperature and pH on the dispersant adsorption were studied systematically, and the experimental results are presented. Pellupur B69 as a dispersant, commercial mixture of formaldehyde condensate sodium salt of naphthalene sulphonic acid, and Texapon N25 as a wetting agent, a sodium lauryl ether sulfate, have been used.In the technology of coal–water slurries (CWSs), one of the major properties that needs to be controlled is the flow characteristics of the suspension. The flow characteristics of CWSs depend on a number of parameters. The most important parameters are Since coal is not a pure substance but a mixture of carbonaceous materials and mineral matter, it has a variety of surface properties. Therefore, it is not easy to control the properties of coal suspensions by simply adjusting variables such as pH and/or electrolyte. A chemical agent needs to be added to control the properties of the coal suspensions. The agents which are potentially suitable include surface active agents (ionic or nonionic), nonionic polymers or polyelectrolytes. These agents adsorb on the particle surface, thus modifying its surface properties. As the coal surface is hydrophobic by nature, CWSs comprise suspensions in which hydrophobic solid particles are forced to be dispersed in water by the action of electrostatic and/or steric repulsive forces created by adsorption of dispersing agents Chemical agents used in the preparation of CWSs need to be economical, providing the desired property at reasonably low concentrations. Because of the high cost of dispersants, it is indispensable to reduce the dispersant requirements for the preparation of CWSs. Reduction of the amount of dispersants usually impairs the flow property and the static stability of the CWS. Therefore, it is very important to examine the adsorption properties of the dispersant and the amount of dispersant which is really necessary to make the coal particles disperse in the water. The aim of this investigation is to determine the adsorption behavior of an anionic dispersant with Turkish lignite samples in the presence of a wetting agent. The effects of dispersant concentration, temperature and pH on the dispersant adsorption were investigated systematically. Kütahya-Gediz (KG), Yozgat-Sorgun (YS) and Çayırhan-Ankara (CA) lignite samples taken from different parts of Turkey were used in this investigation. Proximate analyses and calorific values of the lignite samples, determined according to ASTM standards The dispersant used in this investigation is an anionic type dispersant, whose commercial name is Pellupur B69, a commercial mixture of formaldehyde condensate sodium salt of naphthalene sulphonic acid, supplied by Henkel KGaA. The Texapon N25 (sodium lauryl ether sulfate), used as a wetting agent, was obtained from Henkel KGaA. The adsorption experiments were performed as follows: slurry with a concentration of 20% lignite by weight was used in the experiments. “Distilled water” containing 0.75% wetting agent on the basis of weight of the lignite was used in the preparation of the slurry. A given amount of dispersant weight percentage upon lignite was mixed with a given amount of “distilled water” thoroughly. Then a certain amount of lignite powder was added to the solution. This slurry was stirred at 500 rpm for a given time at a constant temperature. The slurry was then centrifuged and the supernatant was analyzed to determine the dispersant concentration by using a Hewlett Packard 8452 A Diode Array UV spectrophotometer with HP 89510 A UV/VIS software. The concentration of the dispersant was determined from the absorbance at 286 nm using predetermined calibration curves. The adsorption was calculated by using the initial and final dispersant concentrations. Since the usage of a wetting agent in the preparation of a CWS which is acceptable for potential industrial users is essential, the adsorption behavior of the Pellupur B69 dispersant was investigated in the presence of sodium lauryl ether sulfate as a wetting agent. Since the cost of the dispersant is high and an excess amount of dispersant causes some problems during the storage of the lignite–water slurry (LWS), it is essential to use the appropriate amount of dispersant in preparation of the slurry. The amount of dispersant used in the preparation of the slurry should be minimized as much as possible. Therefore, the adsorption behavior of an anionic type dispersant was investigated at different dispersant concentrations for the lignite samples studied. Stirring time was kept constant at 1 h in all experiments which are conducted to obtain the effect of dispersant concentration on adsorption. Since stirring time is one of the important parameters affecting the cost of the CWS, it must be kept as small as possible. Therefore, a dispersant adsorption with 70–80% was chosen as a target for stirring time, and this was achieved within 1 h stirring time. As can be seen from FTIR spectra of the lignite samples were compared to show whether the functional groups of the lignite samples are responsible for the differences in the dispersant adsorption behavior observed for each lignite sample. The CA lignite sample showed a strong peak at the band of ∼3400 cm Since the surface of coal is very complex in nature, the dispersant adsorption behavior changes from one sample to another, and it is difficult to explain the differences observed in dispersant adsorption behavior entirely. Our studies on dispersant adsorption behavior showed that a dispersant adsorption above 80% was not possible to attain for the KG lignite sample at its natural pH even after 10 h stirring time, whereas the dispersant adsorption was almost completed for the YS and CA lignite samples within 4 h. When the surface areas of the lignite samples studied are compared, it is seen that the surface areas of the KG and CA lignite samples are almost the same, but that of the YS sample is higher. Therefore, this does not seem to be the reason for the dispersant adsorption limitation observed for the KG lignite sample. The surface areas of the samples can be the same, but their pore size distribution might be different which may affect the dispersant adsorption behavior. One can expect that as the pore diameter of the sample becomes smaller, this might have caused a barrier to dispersant adsorption. This might have been the reason for the dispersant adsorption limitation of the KG lignite sample, and therefore, the pore size distributions of the samples were compared. The results are presented in As far as the aliphatic hydrocarbon and aromatic –CC– contents of the KG lignite sample are considered, the former is higher and the latter is lower than that of the other lignite samples used. Thus, it is possible to conclude that the KG lignite sample is more hydrophilic than the others. As far as the reasons mentioned above are considered, hydrophilic sites on the lignite surface, resulting from the aliphatic hydrocarbon content of the lignite adversely affect the adsorption behavior of the Pellupur B69 dispersant, naphthalene sulfonate-formaldehyde condensate. This result supports the general explanation of the adsorption mechanism of anionic surfactants on coal particles. In the literature, it is emphasized that anionic surfactants in a CWS adsorb on the alkyl groups at hydrophobic sites of the coal and, consequently, impart a negative charge to the coal particles. It has been demonstrated that the sodium polynapthalene sulfonate additive selectively adsorbs on the coal rather than on minerals  The results showed that the highest adsorption was achieved at low pH values. This effect becomes more apparent at the higher dispersant concentrations. The higher the pH value of the slurry, the lower is the adsorption of the Pellupur B69 dispersant. The natural pH of the slurries prepared from lignite samples was measured to be below 4.0. Preparing the slurry at its natural pH, i.e. with no addition of 1 M NH  The results revealed that increasing the adsorption temperature from 288 to 303 K does not change the adsorption of Pellupur B69 dispersant. In the investigation of the adsorption of the Pellupur B69 dispersant, an anionic type dispersant with sodium salt of naphthalene sulphonic acid formaldehyde condensate on Turkish lignite samples, the following results were obtained: 1. Dispersant adsorption was found to be different for the used lignite samples. Dispersant adsorption above 80% was not possible to attain for the KG lignite sample. It was concluded that neither surface area nor pore size distribution of the lignite sample is the reason for the dispersant adsorption limitation observed for the KG lignite sample. The aliphatic hydrocarbon content of the KG lignite sample is higher than those of the other lignite samples. This might have played a major role in dispersant adsorption limitation. 2. Hydrophilic sites on the lignite surface, resulting from the aliphatic hydrocarbon content of the lignite, adversely affected the adsorption behavior of the Pellupur B69 dispersant with sodium salt of naphthalene sulphonic acid formaldehyde condensate. 3. The results showed that the mineral matter content of lignite affects the adsorption behavior of naphthalene sulfonate-formaldehyde condensate. An increase in the mineral matter content makes the dispersant adsorption easier. 4. The highest dispersant adsorption was achieved at low pH values. The effect of pH on the dispersant adsorption of naphthalene sulfonate-formaldehyde condensate was found to become more apparent at the higher dispersant concentrations. The higher the pH value of the slurry, the lower is the adsorption of the dispersant. 5. The results showed that increasing the adsorption temperature from 288 to 303 K does not change the adsorption of the Pellupur B69 dispersant.