Dry turning tests were carried out on Cr12Mn5Ni4Mo3Al precipitation hardening semi-austenitic stainless steels with two kinds of carbide tools (WC/Co and WC/TiC/Co). The tool wear, the cutting forces, and the cutting temperature were measured. The element diffusion from the Cr12Mn5Ni4Mo3Al stainless steel to carbide tools (vice versa) at temperatures up to 600°C was examined. The morphology of the diffusion couples was detected by SEM. Results showed that WC/TiC/Co carbide tools are more suitable for the machining of Cr12Mn5Ni4Mo3Al stainless steel. The flank wear, the cutting forces, and the cutting temperature of WC/TiC/Co tool are smaller than that of the WC/Co one under the same test conditions. There was evidence of element diffusion from the tool rake face to the adhering chip (vice versa), which leads to the tool element loss and microstructure change. The wear mechanisms of the carbide tools in dry machining of Cr12Mn5Ni4Mo3Al stainless steel were mainly abrasive wear, adhesion and diffusion wear.Precipitation hardening semi-austenitic stainless steels are a class of high alloyed Cr, Ni, Mo, and Mn containing steels that provide an optimum combination of high strength, relatively good ductility and moderate corrosion resistance However, precipitation hardening semi-austenitic stainless steels are difficult to machine materials. Cutting of these materials has always been a topic of great interest for industrial production and scientific research worldwide. The chemical reactivity of precipitation hardening semi-austenitic stainless steels with tool materials and their consequent welding by adhesion onto the cutting tool during machining leads to excessive chipping, premature tool failure, and poor surface finish. Cutting of these stainless steels cause high temperatures at the tool–chip interface, high cutting temperature promotes thermally related wear phenomena. However, there are only few reports available concerning the machining of precipitation hardening semi-austenitic stainless steels. Cemented carbide tools are regarded as the most suitable tool material available commercially for the machining of stainless steels. In the present study, dry turning tests were carried out on precipitation hardening semi-austenitic stainless steels (Cr12Mn5Ni4Mo3Al) with two kinds of carbide tools (WC/Co and WC/TiC/Co). The tool wear, the cutting forces, and the cutting temperature were measured. The element diffusion from the Cr12Mn5Ni4Mo3Al stainless steel to carbide tools (vice versa) at temperatures up to 600 Dry turning tests were carried out on a CA6140 lathe. The cutting tools used were two kinds of cemented carbide tools (WC/Co and WC/TiC/Co), the composition, physical, and mechanical properties of these carbide tool materials are listed in No cutting fluid was used in the machining processes. Tests were carried out with the following parameters: cutting speed Diffusion tests were carried out by bringing into contact a Cr12Mn5Ni4Mo3Al stainless steel with carbide tool material, and heated in a stove with different temperatures. The purpose is to examine the element diffusion in this diffusion couple, and to find out the critical temperature, under the critical temperature, the elements will start to diffuse from the WC/Co or WC/TiC/Co carbide to the Cr12Mn5Ni4Mo3Al stainless steel (vice versa).    The SEM micrograph of the wear track at the rake face of the WC/TiC/Co carbide tool in dry cutting of Cr12Mn5Ni4Mo3Al stainless steels is shown in  The SEM micrograph of the wear track at the flank face of the WC/TiC/Co carbide tool in dry cutting of Cr12Mn5Ni4Mo3Al stainless steels is shown in Different modes of tool failure including abrasive wear, adhesive wear, and diffusion wear, were observed when machining Cr12Mn5Ni4Mo3Al precipitation hardening semi-austenitic stainless steel with carbide tools in this study. Among the tool wear patterns, adhesive and diffusion wear seem to be the main tool wear types. It is common that several tool wear patterns appear simultaneously at the same time and have an effect on each other Adhesive wear is the repeated adhesion of material to the tool, followed by failure within the tool. The increases in cutting temperature at higher speeds may cause workpiece materials pressure weld on to the tool rake face. Subsequent random plucking of the welded materials removes aggregates of the tool particles, which accelerate the tool wear The wear on the tool flank as shown in Diffusion wear involves element diffusion and chemical reaction between the work piece and the tool, and the process is activated by high temperatures and is observed mainly at the tool–chip interface. This type of wear is more pronounced at high cutting speeds or when there is a high temperature at the tool–chip interface, and is accelerated by a high chemical affinity between the work piece and the tool. At high cutting speeds, the temperature at the tool–chip interface increases and transfer of material between the workpiece material and the tool occurs The qualitative compositional profile of Fe, Cr, W, and Co diffusion across the WC/Co carbide and the Cr12Mn5Ni4Mo3Al stainless steel after heating in air atmosphere for 90 For observation of the adhesive joint interface between the rake face and the adhering chip and determination of diffusion mechanisms, the worn tools were sectioned perpendicular to the rake face. The microstructure near to the interface is illustrated in The average cutting temperature at the tool–chip interface measured by infrared thermography increases with the increase of cutting speeds, and is higher than 500 Dry turning tests were carried out on Cr12Mn5Ni4Mo3Al precipitation hardening semi-austenitic stainless steels with two kinds of carbide tools (WC/Co and WC/TiC/Co). The following conclusions were obtained: The WC/TiC/Co carbide tools are more suitable for the machining of Cr12Mn5Ni4Mo3Al stainless steel, and have higher flank wear resistance over the WC/Co one. There was evidence of diffusion of W and Co elements of the carbide tool to the Cr12Mn5Ni4Mo3Al stainless steels, and Fe, Cr, Mn, and Mo of the Cr12Mn5Ni4Mo3Al stainless steel to the carbide tool when the cutting temperature is above 400 The wear mechanisms of the carbide tools in dry machining of Cr12Mn5Ni4Mo3Al stainless steel were mainly abrasive wear, adhesion and diffusion wear. This work is supported by “