The kinetics of zinc extraction and stripping have been investigated for the ZnSO4/D2EHPA/diluent system (D2EHPA=di(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid), which is under consideration as a proposed reactive extraction liquid–liquid test system by the European Federation of Chemical Engineering. Data in low and high concentration domains have been fitted to chemical kinetic and kinetic–diffusive models in order to discern the mechanism of zinc extraction and stripping for practical operational conditions. The existence of the correlation between the estimated parameters and the contributions to the overall flux of the reactive species through the interface has been determined by statistical analysis. The study has concluded that both extraction and stripping rate processes are described by the same reaction mechanism scheme as suggested by Ajawin et al. [Chem. Eng. Res. Des. 61 (1983) 62] but with the stoichiometry and complexes proposed by Mansur et al. [Hydrometallurgy (2002)]. Flux equations lead to the calculation of the individual resistance terms for mass transfer and chemical reaction using simple equations with activity coefficients equal to unity. The extraction process shows mixed controlled kinetics, whereas the mass transfer of the zinc complex was found to be rate-determining for stripping conditions. The model satisfactorily explains the data with a relative error lower than 10%.The adoption of test systems for liquid–liquid extraction studies enables the evaluation of the mass transfer rates and the hydrodynamic features of different types of equipment based on reliable description of equilibrium and kinetics. Three ternary physical extraction systems have been recommended by the European Federation of Chemical Engineering Much work has been done over the last two decades to characterise the extraction stoichiometry of the ZnSO An equilibrium model assuming two consecutive reactions with all the activity coefficients equal to unity and the existence of two zinc complexes in the organic phase has been proposed by Since the equilibrium behaviour is therefore quantitatively known for engineering purposes at least, the problem remaining is the evaluation of the kinetics for extraction and stripping conditions. Reactive metal extraction depends on both the kinetics of chemical reactions taking place in the system and the rates of mass transfer of the species between the two liquid phases. If the extraction rate is diffusion-controlled, it will depend on the interfacial area and the concentration of the slow-diffusing species. When the extraction rate is chemically controlled, it is necessary to ascertain the location of the rate-controlling chemical reaction. In the present work, the kinetics of the extraction and stripping of zinc with D2EHPA in the constant interface-stirred cells have been investigated in order to discern the controlling mechanism of the system. The equilibrium model developed by The reaction mechanism for the extraction of zinc depends on the following sequential steps: (1) the Zn The combination of these elementary reaction steps results in the overall heterogeneous reaction,   Another mechanism has been extensively suggested in the literature to describe the kinetics of the ZnSO Kinetic mechanistic models with No mass transfer resistance is assumed. The model is a non-linear set of algebraic differential equations with two parameters to be estimated ( The interaction between mass transfer and reaction can be large in concentrated solutions because the concentrations of the reacting species at the interface are not the same as the bulk values. Thus, in the “Kinetic model,” the composition at the interface is that of the reactants only, but in the “Kinetic–Diffusive model,” it corresponds to the concentration of the species as given by the equilibrium expressions for the interfacial reactions: The connection between these concentrations is given by the diffusive mass transfer rate equations: There are six parameters to be estimated ( Kinetic data for extraction and stripping conditions as presented in The extraction kinetic experiments were performed by periodic sampling up to 150 min in a stirred cell at 25 °C (388.7 mL of each phase at a constant interfacial area of 44.18 cm The stripping kinetic tests were performed in a Hancil cell (100 mL of each phase with an interfacial area of 30.20 cm The chemical kinetic and diffusive mass transfer parameters have been estimated using the direct search method of Hooke and Jeaves The Hooke and Jeaves optimization procedure assumes a unimodal function. Therefore, if more than one minimum exists or the shape of the surface is unknown, several sets of starting values are recommended. This procedure has been carried out to calculate the confidence interval levels of each estimated parameter. All computer routines were carried out using the Fortran 90 code. Experimental kinetic data shown in The Models have been assessed using the data from If we analyse the fitting results from  Assuming now that no resistance to transfer of dimeric D2EHPA and protons is present in the overall process, the “Kinetic–Diffusive model” has been modified and newly fitted results are shown in “Mechanism 1” is therefore preferred to describe both extraction and stripping processes. The appropriate rate coefficients are finally obtained using the parameter values shown in The rate equations recommended according to these results can now be written in terms of individual rate coefficients and also overall coefficients The proposed mechanism In general terms, it has been observed that the experiments for extraction conditions investigated in this study (see The incorporation of chemical kinetic and diffusive mass transfer contributions are fundamental in modelling stripping data as observed by The model proposed in this work reaches the same equilibrium predicted by the model of Finally, it is not surprising that different values of The ZnSO The proposed model suggests that the balance between diffusional and chemical reaction controls is determined not only by hydrodynamic conditions affecting the mass transfer coefficients but also by the concentrations of the reacting species and equilibrium considerations. The use of equations based on overall rate coefficients makes it easier to quantify the mass transfer and chemical reaction contributions. The rate of the extraction process is generally mixed controlled. It is observed that models assuming no mass transfer rate control reproduce data only for very dilute systems because the ratio between the chemical reaction and mass transfer contributions is constant with time, so the mass transfer effect is absorbed by the chemical kinetic parameters. However, diffusional resistances have to be taken into consideration for more concentrated systems. No diffusive effect of the dimer-D2EHPA or protons has been found to be significant. On the other hand, the stripping process is mainly controlled by the diffusive mass transfer resistance from the organic phase, but the contribution of the chemical reaction increases with time. Additionally, no diffusive effect of dimer-D2EHPA, zinc ions or protons has been found to be significant for the stripping conditions. As observed by interfacial area (m concentration of specie objective function defined by ionic strength in mass transfer coefficient of specie concentration-based forward reaction rate constant of concentration-based equilibrium constant reaction of concentration-based equilibrium constant reaction of overall rate coefficient for extraction in concentration-based forward reaction rate constant of concentration-based forward reaction rate constant of overall rate coefficient for stripping in stoichiometric constant of the homogeneous reaction in stoichiometric constant of the heterogeneous reaction in mass transfer molar flux of specie number of experimental data overall molar flux of the heterogeneous reaction (mol/s m molecule of monomer-D2EHPA overall molar flux of the homogeneous reaction (mol/s m time (s) volume (m zinc ion adsorbed aqueous phase dimer-D2EHPA calculated value dimer-D2EHPA complex monomer-D2EHPA complex experimental value hydrogen ion organic phase at initial value at the interface The authors wish to thank the Fundação Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nı́vel Superior (CAPES—Brazilian Government Agency, PICDT/UFMG and PDEE Doctorate Grant no. 0299/99-5) for the financial support given to Marcelo B. Mansur.