The mineral tooeleite is without doubt an arsenic(III) mineral, as declared by Morin et al. [Morin, G., Rousse, G., Elkaim, E., 2007. Crystal structure of tooeleite, Fe6(AsO3)4SO4(OH)4
                     ·4H2O, a new iron arsenite oxyhydroxy-sulfate mineral relevant to acid mine drainage. American Mineralogist 92, 193–197], whereas in previously published work by Cesbron and Williams [Cesbron, F.P., Williams, S.A., 1992. Tooeleite, a new mineral from the US Mine, Tooele County, Utah. Mineralogical Magazine 56, 71–73] the arsenic was considered to contain arsenic(V). There has also been suggestion that in certain acid mine drainage there is evidence of bacterial mediation to form nano-particular and poorly ordered iron(III)–arsenic(III)/(V) hydroxy sulfates which may be efficient bioremediators, as in Duquesne et al. [Duquesne, K., Lebrun, S., Casiot, C., Bruneel, O., Personné, J.-C., Leblanc, M., Elbaz-Poulichet, F., Morin, G., Bonnefoy, V., 2003. Immobilization of arsenite and ferric iron by Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans and its relevance to acid mine drainage. Applied Environmental Microbiology 69, 6165–6173], and Morin et al. [Morin, G., Juillot, F., Bruneel, O., Personné, J.-C., Elbaz-Poulichet, F., Leblanc, M., Ildefonse, Ph., Calas, G., 2003. Bacterial formation of tooeleite and mixed As(III)/(V)–Fe(III) gels in the Carnoulès acid mine drainage. France. A XANES XRD, and SEM study. Environmental Science and Technology 37, 1705–1712]. Tooeleite was originally described by Cesbron and Williams (1992) as a new mineral from the US Mine at Gold Hill in Tooele County, Utah, USA, where gold had previously been mined for many years. These authors suggested a formula in which the arsenic was present as arsenic(V). The mineral occurrences at that US Mine had been earlier described by Nolan [Nolan, T.B., 1935. The Gold Hill Mining District. U.S.G.S. Professional Paper 177 pp.]. The work reported here now confirms that the mineral tooeleite is in fact an arsenic(III) compound which can be easily prepared in the laboratory by precipitation from pure components in aqueous solutions at temperatures up to at least 90°C. Other conclusions reached here are supported with the results from analysis of solutions and solids, as well as by X-ray diffraction analysis, thermogravimetric-differential thermal analysis, scanning electron microscopy, and also by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy analysis.Although for some years The specimens used in the Morin et al. study were from earlier samples obtained by It is interesting to note that Internet searches during 2006 for the mineral tooeleite reveal as many as 500 references which maintain the Previous work by both of the authors, Nishimura and Robins, over the past thirty years, has been conducted as part of an ongoing and long term effort to find compounds of low solubility or high adsorptivity that may be useful in removing arsenic from solution, (mostly hydrometallurgical process solutions). The work described now in this paper was conducted initially to investigate the likely existence and solubility of a possible ferric arsenite compound, which when identified was found by X-ray diffraction to be very similar to the mineral called All chemicals were of analytical grade. The Fe(III) and As(III) stock solutions were prepared by dissolving Fe A solution (200 The precipitates formed in these experiments were examined by chemical analysis, X-ray diffraction analysis (XRD), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), thermogravimetric- differential thermal analysis (TG-DTA), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and electron probe microanalysis (EPMA). Arsenic in the precipitates was determined by iodimetry after separating it as arsenious chloride in the distillation-separation gravimetric technique described in The chemical analysis of the precipitate obtained at pH 2.6 and 25   The binding energy (As 3d spectra) for the ferric arsenate compound, FeAsO The combined TGA and DTA curves for the same precipitate that was presented for the XPS and EPMA analysis are shown in The morphology of the precipitates that had been identified by X-ray diffraction (as in  The results in this paper, obtained by chemical analysis, XPS analysis and TG-DTA analysis indicate conclusively that The authors wish to express their greatest respect for Professor Emeritus Kazuteru Tozawa at Tohoku University who initiated their continuing interest and activity to gain a better understanding of the behaviour of arsenic in inorganic aqueous systems. We are also indebted to Masuo Itoh for the XPS analysis, Toshikatu Terui for the TG-DTA analysis, Takashi Kamaya for the SEM analysis, Viera Piegerova for SEM/EDS analysis, and to Dr. Rob Bowell for providing some specimens from Gold Hill, Utah.