This paper examines the relations between Cerchar abrasivity index (CAI) and petrographic properties of Coal Measures Rocks in the Zonguldak Coal Basin, Turkey. In this study, petrographic properties and abrasivity indices of 29 sedimentary rock samples were determined and the values of CAI and petrographic analysis results were compared. A good linear relationship between CAI and average quartz grain size parameters was found. The test results also showed that abrasivity was affected by the mineralogical composition, cement type, degree of cementation, quartz content, and average quartz grain size. It was found that abrasivity of rock was decreased by the low grade of cementation between abrasive minerals. CAI values and petrographic properties were used to estimate tool consumption in underground works in the Zonguldak Coal Basin. It was observed that when CAI values increased, tool consumption increased.Abrasion can be defined as the wearing or tearing away of particles from the surface. The abrasiveness of rock results in wearing of tools used in mining, drilling, and tunnelling applications ( Rock abrasiveness is a function of amount of quartz and other abrasive minerals in the rock, average quartz grain size, cement type, and cementation. The quartz content, which is the most dominant parameter ( While there are number of studies on drillability, excavability, and cuttability of Coal Measures Rocks in the Zonguldak Coal Basin, Turkey, there are few studies on rock abrasiveness. In this study, abrasiveness and petrographic properties (mineral composition, cement type, cementation degree, quartz content and average quartz grain size) of Coal Measures Rocks and the effects of these properties for determining of tool wear are proposed. While a large number of abrasiveness tests have been proposed, a very few have received acceptance in mining industry. In recent years, the Cerchar abrasivity index test has received considerable attention. The test was originally done at the Laboratoire du Center d'Etutes et Recherches des Charbonnages (CERCHAR) de France for coal mining applications and testing results of Cerchar was published by A classification of rock abrasiveness proposed by  The study area is between Kandilli, Zonguldak, Devrek, and Dirgine cities which are to the north of North Anatolian Fault in West Pontid, Turkey ( The 750 m thick Late Namurian–Langsettian Kozlu formation has mainly sandstone, conglomerate, siltstone, clay, and thick coal strata. In bottom, sandstone, coal, and mudstone are present and conglomerate, shale, and sandstone continue in top of the formation. The overlying 350 m thick Duckmantian–Bolsovian Karadon formation consists of grey-brown and yellow coloured coarse grained sandstone, conglomerate, coal, siltstone, mudstone and refractor clay (schiefertone) ( The previous works of CAI in some locations from the Zonguldak Coal Basin is given in Prism rock samples were prepared with a diamond rock saw. In the CAI tests, conical steel pins, as suggested above ( Thin sections of these 29 rock samples were prepared for the determination of mineralogical-petrographic analysis using Zeiss Axioplan polarising microscope. Descriptions of these samples were carried out for comparing between the mechanical and petrographic properties of these rock types. Furthermore, the ratios of minerals were measured by the standard Chayes methods using digital modal of polarising microscope ( Sandstone, siltstone, and mudstones were distinguished in macroscopic samples. Sandstones contain approximately 40–80% quartz, 3–20% feldspar, 2–20% mica (muscovite Siltstones have approximately 40–70% quartz, 5–10% feldspar, 3–25% mica (muscovite The remaining rock, mudstone has mainly clayey cement and 10% quartz as determined microscopically. However, reliable mineralogical differentiation was not made because of very small grain size. The equivalent quartz content ( When mudstone samples were not taken into consideration, a better linear relationship between quartz content and CAI was found, as shown in A similar linear relationship (CAI In addition to equivalent quartz content, amount of silica cement, and cement degree in rock, grain size of quartz is an important factor in determining tool wear. A comparison of the average quartz grain size of rocks and the CAI values is shown in According to the classification given in Cement degree is also an important factor in determining rock abrasivity. A comparison of the average cement degree of rocks and the CAI values is shown in It is important to note here that the above formula is valid when the cement degree is above 25%. The assessment of the abrasiveness of the Coal Measures Rocks was carried out as part of a program of work aimed at the prediction and control of abrasive wear of mining equipment. CAI test for rocks is widely used in the coal mining industry as a method of assessing the abrasiveness of rocks for tools in the mining industry. The wear of mine excavation equipment has long been known to be a significant factor in the economics of any rock working process. This, in turn, suggests that for this suite of rocks the abrasive mineral content may be the principal cause of wear to the tools. The relation between tool consumption (TC) and rock abrasiveness of the Coal Measures Rocks were determined as follows: The Cerchar test has gained popularity as a relatively convenient and inexpensive method of measuring and comparing the abrasiveness of rocks. The testing results of 29 sedimentary rocks from Zonguldak Coal Basin were analysed and following conclusions can be drawn from the study: When rocks are classified by considering the Cerchar abrasivity index, it is found that sandstone was very abrasive to abrasive; siltstone was medium abrasive to abrasive. In these type of rocks, tool consumption amount in mechanised excavation will be highly increased. The high quartz amount, silica- and ferrous A good linear relationship between the values of Cerchar abrasivity index of rocks and their quartz content, cement degree, equivalent quartz percentage, and quartz grain size has been found. Accordingly, it can be said that the higher quartz and abrasive minerals in the rock, the greater abrasiveness of the rock and, hence, the greater tool abrasion. The most important findings from the study are the linear relationship between CAI and tool consumption. This shows that increases in amount of quartz and other abrasive minerals in rock content, average grain size, and cementation have direct impact on tool consumptions. The authors thank Zonguldak Karaelmas University Research Fund (Project No: 2002-45-03-19) and the Department of Mining Engineering of Zonguldak Karaelmas and Çukurova Universities for their contributions in producing this study.