To predict beta transus of titanium alloys, artificial neural network (ANN) and multiple linear regression (MLR) models were developed based on the alloy composition. Mo, V, Zr, Cr, Fe, Al, Si and O were the principle determinants of beta transus. The ‘r
                     2’ (92.0% vs. 90.7%) and mean predicted error [training (1.4% vs. 2.8%) and testing (2% vs. 2.4%)] pattern in ANN and MLR models suggest superior performance of ANN model. Multifactor dimensionality reduction analysis showed interactions among Al, O and Cr, which were confirmed by the ANN model. The positive association of beta transus with aluminium equivalent and inverse association with molybdenum equivalent was demonstrated.Titanium alloys are being extensively used in the aerospace, industrial, chemical and biomedical fields due to their increased strength-to-density ratio, low density, superior corrosion resistance and ability to withstand elevated temperatures. These unique properties are attributed to the microstructure of these alloys The conventional method for the determination of beta transus was phase disappearing method wherein the alloys were subjected to ageing to precipitate α-phase. They are reheated to various temperatures with 15 Malinov et al. developed two ANN models to predict the mechanical properties of all the titanium alloys using processing parameters and chemical composition as inputs Multiple linear regression models are easy to compute and can be validated easily by different researchers. However, being linear models they might not explore interactions between alloying elements. In order to address this issue, artificial neural network models were developed to predict beta transus as they are capable of simulating non-linear relationships and complex interactions between alloying elements. In the current study, we have aimed to compare both the models in terms of predicting the beta transus, in exploring the individual influences of alloying elements and also to demonstrate any potential interactions between alloying elements that are likely to influence beta transus. The experimental data on the composition of alloying elements and beta transus was collected for 212 titanium alloys (26 alpha, 95 alpha For testing the utility of the prediction models, the alloy composition data of 57 titanium alloys (8 alpha, 40 alpha The ANN model was developed using the compositions of 19 alloying elements as the input variables and beta transus as the output variable. Data normalization was done by division with the maximum number in the respective column. Five transfer functions namely sigmoid, modified sigmoid, hyperbolic tangent, Gaussian and modified Gaussian were tried to find the optimal model of ANN. Hyperbolic tangent function yielded minimum sum of error. ANN architecture was built based on trial and error by adjusting hidden layers and nodes until minimum sum of error is obtained. The final model ( The MLR model was developed with 19 alloying elements as inputs and beta transus as the output variable. A multiple linear regression was deduced based on the data. Independent effects of alloying elements were also elucidated based on the probability values. The predictability was tested using ‘ This is a non-parametric statistical analysis platform that is capable of exploring the most significant interactions between variables that are likely to influence the outcome variable. The outcome variable should be categorical in nature with bimodal distribution. Hence, the beta transus data was segregate into two groups: below the median (0) and above the median (1). Composition of all the 19 alloying elements was used as input. Beta transus category was used as output. Frutcherman–Rheingold plot was obtained representative interaction between three variables. The entropy values of each variable were representative of its contribution towards beta transus. The colour of the connector was representative of the interaction strength in the following order: blue As shown in As shown in As shown in As shown in Hence, MLR equation can be summarized as: Beta transus (°C) In order to perform the sensitivity analysis of ANN model, Ti- The Mo content in titanium alloys from 0% to 18% caused the decrease in beta transus. As shown in In order to elucidate the role of possible interactions between alloying elements, MDR analysis was performed using median beta transus value as threshold to segregate the data into below the median and above the median. This analysis revealed possible trivariate interaction among two alpha stabilizers, i.e. Al, O and one beta stabilizer, i.e. Cr ( As shown in Furthermore, we have explored the impact of molybdenum equivalents and aluminium equivalents on the beta transus. As shown in ANN and MLR models explained 92.0% and 90.7% variability in beta transus of titanium alloys. Mo, V, Cr, Fe, Al, Si, O, N and Zr were shown to be statistically significant determinants of beta transus. The performance of ANN model was better than MLR model in predicting the beta transus in terms of percentage error across alpha, alpha We thank all the faculty of Department of Metallurgical Engineering, JNTU-Hyderabad for their valuable suggestions.