Purpose
                  To review retrospectively the outcome of retrograde intramedullary absorbable pin fixation for intra-articular fractures of the metacarpal head.
               
                  Methods
                  Nine patients with intra-articular fractures of the metacarpal head were treated surgically with 1.5-mm-diameter unsintered hydroxyapatite particles and a poly-l-lactide pin. There were 2 women and 7 men, mean age 28.9 years. Patients were observed for a mean of 13.1 months after surgery. The metacarpophalangeal joint was exposed through a dorsal skin incision. After reduction of the fracture, 2 unsintered hydroxyapatite particles and poly-l-lactide pins were inserted from the articular surface of the distal bone fragment into the medullary canal of the metacarpal. A volar aluminum orthosis was applied in the intrinsic plus position for a mean of 1.8 weeks (range, 0–4 weeks), and range of motion exercises were started after the orthosis was removed.
               
                  Results
                  Anatomical reduction and bony union were achieved in all patients. Mean period required to achieve bone union was 4.6 weeks. No patients experienced pain after healing; all resumed normal activities at the time of follow-up, when mean flexion and extension of the metacarpophalangeal joint were 82.8° and –2.2°, respectively. There were no malunions or osteoarthritic changes, no breakage of the pin, aseptic inflammation, or avascular necrosis of the metacarpal head, and no foreign body reactions.
               
                  Conclusions
                  We performed a retrograde intramedullary absorbable pin fixation for intra-articular fracture of the metacarpal head. Using this method, damage to the articular cartilage and surrounding soft tissue was minimized, range of motion exercise could be started early after surgery, and hardware removal surgery was not necessary.
               
                  Type of study/level of evidence
                  Therapeutic IV.There are few reports of metacarpal head fractures and a consensus on treatment has not been obtained. Because closed reduction is often impossible, a common practice is to perform open reduction internal fixation. To avoid potential problems, we performed a retrograde intramedullary absorbable pin fixation from the articular surface into the medullary canal of the metacarpal. We used Super-Fixsorb 30 threaded pins (Johnson & Johnson, Tokyo, Japan; and Teijin Medical Technologies, Osaka, Japan). This is an absorbable 1.5-mm-diameter threaded pin made from unsintered hydroxyapatite particles and poly- Nine consecutive patients with intra-articular fractures of the metacarpal head who underwent surgical treatment with 1.5-mm-diameter u-HA/PLLA pins between July, 2013 and December, 2017 were evaluated retrospectively. Patients included 2 women and 7 men, mean age 28.9 years (range, 13–70 years). The right hand was treated in 5 patients, and left in 4. Affected fingers included 1 index, 1 middle, 3 ring, and 4 little fingers. Three patients had 2-part fracture, 5 had 3-part fractures, and one patient had a 5-part fracture. Patients 2 and 3 had 2-part fractures with no collateral ligament attached to the distal bone fragment. Patients 1 and 6 through 9 had 3-part fractures, with the radial collateral ligament attached to one of the distal bone fragments and the ulnar collateral ligament attached to the other. Patient 4 had a 5-part fracture, with the radial collateral ligament attached to one of the distal bone fragments, the ulnar collateral ligament attached to the other, and the collateral ligaments unattached to the remaining 2 bone fragments. Patients were observed for a mean of 13.1 months (range, 12.3–14.4 months) after surgery without loss of follow-up. Patients were placed in the supine position under general anesthesia. A longitudinal 1.5-cm skin incision was made dorsally over the metacarpophalangeal (MCP) joint. The central band and joint capsule were longitudinally split at the center and the MCP joint was exposed. The fracture was reduced with the MCP joint passively flexed. Two 1.6-mm (0.062-in) K-wires were inserted from the articular surface of the distal bone fragment into the medullary canal of the metacarpal ( We evaluated the period required to achieve bone union, the degree of pain, ROM of the MCP joint at follow-up, and postoperative complications. Bone union was defined as continuity of the trabeculae pattern on a plain radiograph. We obtained informed consent from each patient and obtained appropriate institutional review board approval before case review. Bone union was achieved in all patients. Anatomical reduction was achieved in all except patients 4. In that patient, complete anatomical reduction was not achieved but satisfactory alignment of the metacarpal and congruency of the articular surface were achieved. The mean period required to achieve bone union was 4.6 weeks (range, 4.0–7.4 weeks). All patients reported no pain at latest follow-up and all had resumed normal activities. Mean flexion and extension of the MCP joint were 82.8° (range, 60° to 95°) and –2.2° (range, –20° to 0°), respectively, follow-up. In patient 1, the distal bone fragment was divided into dorsal and volar parts, so an additional K-wire was inserted in the dorsovolar direction. In patient 4, because of severely comminuted fractures, the ulnar bone fragment was fixed with the cortical screw and artificial bone substitute was employed to prevent shortening. In patient 5, a considerable MCP joint contracture remained because of noncompliance with therapy. There were no malunions, osteoarthritic changes, aseptic inflammation, avascular necrosis (AVN) of the metacarpal head, or foreign body reactions.  Metacarpal head fractures are comparatively rare and have been reported to constitute only approximately 4% to 5% of metacarpal fractures. Different types of fixation methods for metacarpal head fractures have been reported, but none have gained consensus. By using K-wires, small bone fragments can be fixed; damage to the articular surface is small. As described earlier, each reported treatment has associated morbidity. We performed retrograde intramedullary fixation by inserting a u-HA/PLLA pin from the articular surface to minimize damage to the articular cartilage and surrounding soft tissue. The u-HA/PLLA pin is 1.5 mm in diameter and is thinner than any screw, so damage to the articular cartilage can be minimized. Even if the distal bone fragment is comminuted, one u-HA/PLLA pin can be inserted per bone fragment. Because the u-HA/PLLA pin is completely inserted in the metacarpal, there is no influence on surrounding soft tissue such as the joint capsule or collateral ligament. The surface of the pin is threaded so that pin backout is unlikely to occur. Fixation stability of the u-HA/PLLA pin is stronger than that of the K-wire but weaker than that of the screw. In all cases, passive flexion and extension were performed during surgery after internal fixation, but migration of bone fragments was not observed and fixation stability was good. The u-HA/PLLA pin is made from 30% unsintered hydroxyapatite particles and 70% PLLA. Absorbable implants such as screws, pins, and plates made of u-HA/PLLA are in clinical use for orthopedic, oral, and plastic surgery. Foreign body reactions to bioabsorbable implants have been reported. Using this method, damage to the articular cartilage and surrounding soft tissue was minimized, ROM exercise could be started early after surgery, and removal surgery was not necessary. Although we observed no complications owing to the use of u-HA/PLLA in this series, accurate assessment of complications was difficult because of the small number of patients. Further studies are needed to evaluate the complications. We would like to acknowledge the professional manuscript services of Springer Nature Author Services.