The influence of mechano-chemical activation on biooxidation of auriferous flotation concentrate by a consortium of Acidithiobacilli species has been studied. The investigation revealed that substantial changes in the structure of the sulphides occurred when the concentrate was mechanically activated. The effects of activation were monitored through changes in the j-factor, mineral phases and also by chemical analysis. As a result of the changes in structure of the sulphide minerals, 96.7% biooxidation of the activated concentrate was achieved within 8days in contrast to 40% in the case of the non-activated sample after 20days. In the subsequent cyanidation process of the biooxidized residues using carbon-in-leach technique about 98% of gold in the mechanically activated concentrate was recovered whereas 74.6% was realised for the non-mechanically activated concentrate.In refractory gold ores containing arsenopyrite and pyrite, the gold particles are finely disseminated and occluded in the sulphide minerals. As such it is impossible to liberate the gold solely by mechanical grinding ( The changes in the crystal structure of minerals ( Research in biooxidation/bioleaching indicates that the activity of the bacterial strains are highly effective at mineral particle sites such as lattice defects, grooves, jagged edges, and points of micro-fracture in the mineral matrix ( The flotation concentrate used in this study was obtained from a mining company in Ghana, West Africa. The Mineralogical analysis on the flotation concentrate was conducted using Siemens D500 X-ray Diffractometer, and as shown in Representative samples of the flotation concentrate were milled under dry conditions in a vibratory mill on one hand and a ball mill on the other hand. Vibratory milling was done for 1, 2 and 3 Particle size analysis was conducted on the initial flotation concentrate, the 2 The bacterial strains used in the studies were cultured using 9 The growth rate of the microorganisms was determined using Griffin Colorimeter model 40 at a wavelength of 430 The activated and non-activated samples were pulped in 1-liter Erlenmeyer flasks and the pH of the slurries was adjusted to 1.7 with concentrated sulphuric acid. The activated samples released a gas which smelled like rotten eggs, suspected to be hydrogen sulphide gas, and the gas was tested with lead acetate paper for confirmation. This gas was possibly released from the reaction of sulphuric acid and pyrrhotite. The flasks were then sterilized at 120 The sterile samples were inoculated with 10% v/v of the inoculum (bacterial suspension) to obtain 15% pulp density. The flasks were then incubated in an orbital shaker which was set to rotate at 175 The washed samples were re-pulped and conditioned with lime to pH 11 to obtain 33% solids for bottle roll cyanidation by conventional and carbon-in-leach methods. Sodium cyanide and carbon concentrations used were 750  Partial chemical analysis of the flotation concentrate indicated the presence of gold (109 The common diffraction angles of arsenopyrite and pyrite make it difficult to ascertain the difference in their mechano-chemical effects. Hence their J-factors were measured using the (101) crystal plane of quartz. The J-factor obtained after three hours of vibratory milling of the flotation concentrate shows that significant distortion of the lattice structure occurred after 2 Consequently, x-ray diffractometry of the 2 The iron in Eq. The particle size analysis conducted shows that non-activated sample used in the bioleaching experiment was 90% passing 63 The electron micrographs as presented in The exponential growth of the bacterial strains spanned between 5 and 10  Since the ball-milled sample was finer than that of the vibratory-milled material ( The optimum extraction of arsenic was achieved at 15% pulp density ( The decline in the rate can be attributed to the fact that as pulp density increases, there is reduced concentration of dissolved oxygen. Consequently, the oxidation potential (Eh) of the solution is reduced thus hindering bacterial activity ( X-ray diffraction analysis conducted on the vibratory-milled biooxidized residue shows the formation of auric oxide (Au Cyanidation of the biooxidized residues as presented in The decline in the concentrations of gold in solution beyond 2 It has been found in this study that, vibratory milling of the flotation concentrate transformed the concentrate to a metastable state as a result of the high impact stress which prevails in vibratory mills. In contrast, milling the flotation concentrate using a ball mill resulted in substantial decrease in particle size. Mechano-chemical activation enhanced biological oxidation of the vibratory-milled sample resulting in near complete oxidation of sulphides. For example, in the case of arsenopyrite, the vibratory milling achieved 96.7% oxidation within 8 The study further showed that gold was also activated during vibratory milling, and together with good liberation during the pre-treatment stage resulted in the high cyanide dissolution (with 97.8% dissolution within 1 The authors are grateful to the Biological Science Department of Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology (KNUST), Kumasi, Ghana for the use of their Microbiology Laboratory. The first author also wishes to acknowledge Dr. Grace Ofori-Sarpong and Professor Richard Kwasi Amankwah of the Department of Mineral Engineering, University of Mines and Technology (UMaT), Tarkwa, Ghana for proofreading this work.