With the increasing mechanization of coal mining, the proportion of fine coal being mined has been rising. To date, the problem of dry separation of fine coal has not been satisfactorily solved. Based on analysis of the surface structure characteristics of a compound dry separation machine, an experimental system with a compound dry separation unit for fine coal separation was established. We analyze the most important structural elements: the effect of the bed plate on fine coal separation and the distribution of the unit bed material layer of the ash separator unit under different structural partition conditions. The value of the comprehensive index, segregation degree of ash and separation efficiency were introduced for evaluation of results. The results indicate an optimum set of baffle parameters (θ
                     =45, d
                     =55–60mm, and h
                     =60mm) for which the segregation degree of ash in the bed material S
                     
                        ash
                      is 0.98, the maximum value of the comprehensive index P is 3.43, and the separation efficiency is the highest.With coal as the main source of energy in China, coal production in 2015 was 3.75 The process flow of a − The test mainly analyzes the separation process of fine coal using the bed baffle effect. Material forms the corresponding change on the partition mainly occurs between the parameters, from the bottom along the height direction of the partition bulkheads bed material space is divided into 5 segments, and stratified sampling for laboratory analysis of ash. The schematic of the sampling is shown in The 0–6  The separation of raw coal is mainly done to reduce the ash content of coal, reduce the inorganic mineral impurities in coal, and increase the content of combustible coal. Based on the concept of ash separation degree, the material in the separator between the surfaces of the FGX dry separator is divided into The main purpose of the FGX dry separator for − The partition plate is installed on the bed surface at a certain angle. The coordinate system from the material feeding end to the gangue section is the X-axis, the discharge side is in the direction of the Y-axis, and the angle between the partition plate and the X-axis is As can be seen from The clapboard angle adopted in the experiment is 45°, with distances from the backboard and blow down of 60 As can be seen from In this study, the longitudinal distanced from the feed end to the bed surface of the waste bed is gradually shortened due to the fine coal separation bed of the trapezoidal structure. In view of this, to examine the effect of the length of the baffle on the separation process, it is now defined as the vertical distance of the baffle from the backplane (d) as shown in It can be seen from The effects of single factors on the separating process are studied in this paper. In order to study the interaction between a partition parameter and other factors, the optimal partition parameters were determined. Therefore, the response surface method is used to model and analyze the corresponding problems of multi-factor influence (i.e., ash separation degree) It can be seen from the The results show that the F value of the second-order polynomial model is 29.75, indicating that the effect of the combination of test factors on the sulfur separation is significant. It is clear that the Prob It can be seen from The mathematical model of the separating index Mathematical model in terms of factors of code: Mathematical model in terms of actual operational factors: In this paper, the parameters of the partition system are obtained as follows: In this paper, the FGX separating machine bed separator is used to study the separating efficiency of fine coal, and the influence of the height and length of the partition and the angle of the bed on the separating process is systematically analyzed. The distribution of the material is analyzed, and the phenomenon of backmixing of the bed particles is studied. At the same time, the best separating parameters are obtained, and the following conclusions are drawn: The comprehensive index The ash separation degree and Through the analysis of the influence of the factors on the separating process, the significance degree of the partition elements was found to be as follows: Height