Energy storage at low maintenance cost is one of the key challenges for generating electricity from the solar energy. This paper presents the theoretical analysis (verified by CFD) of the night time performance of a recently proposed conceptual system that integrates thermal storage (via phase change materials) and thermophotovoltaics for power generation. These storage integrated solar thermophotovoltaic (SISTPV) systems are attractive owing to their simple design (no moving parts) and modularity compared to conventional Concentrated Solar Power (CSP) technologies. Importantly, the ability of high temperature operation of these systems allows the use of silicon (melting point of 1680K) as the phase change material (PCM). Silicon’s very high latent heat of fusion of 1800kJ/kg and low cost ($1.70/kg), makes it an ideal heat storage medium enabling for an extremely high storage energy density and low weight modular systems. In this paper, the night time operation of the SISTPV system optimised for steady state is analysed. The results indicate that for any given PCM length, a combination of small taper ratio and large inlet hole-to-absorber area ratio are essential to increase the operation time and the average power produced during the night time. Additionally, the overall results show that there is a trade-off between running time and the average power produced during the night time. Average night time power densities as high as 30W/cm2 are possible if the system is designed with a small PCM length (10cm) to operate just a few hours after sun-set, but running times longer than 72h (3days) are possible for larger lengths (50cm) at the expense of a lower average power density of about 14W/cm2. In both cases the steady state system efficiency has been predicted to be about 30%. This makes SISTPV systems to be a versatile solution that can be adapted for operation in a broad range of locations with different climate conditions, even being used off-grid and in space applications.speed of light (m/s) Planck’s constant (m thermal conductivity (W/m time (h) spatial coordinate along length of tank (cm) cross sectional area (cm ratio of the absorber area to the inlet hole area (–) specific heat capacity at constant pressure (J/kg energy of photon (J) current density (Amps/cm length of phase change material (PCM) tank (cm) latent heat of fusion (kJ/kg) number of photons (–) power (W/m heat flux (W) temperature (K) taper ratio or emitter to absorber area ratio (–) melting line (cm) density (kg/m absorber average PV cell area Emitter end of solidification time inlet hole input to PCM tank liquid melting point solid total backside reflector bandgap rate of change with time per unit area Storage integrated solar thermophotovoltaics (SISTPV) systems were firstly proposed in the mid 90s ( The operating principle of a SISTPV system is simple ( Early SISTPV designs ( In our previous work ( As in This study broadens the understanding of the influence of the system design variables on the performance of the SISTPV system during the night time and provides general guidelines to designing practical systems in the near future. The system was described in detail in previous work ( The SISTPV system configuration analysed in this paper is shown in At the emitter/PV cells side, we assume a black body emitter and single junction PV cells with back-side reflectors (BSR) ( The analysis of the day-operation (steady state) of this system was presented in our previous work ( At night, the hot mirror is replaced by a reflecting mirror (the shutter in To describe the evolution of temperature and heat fluxes in the PCM storage tank we adopt the quasi-stationary approach used in previous work by  In steady state ( The total energy of the PCM tank at any given time (and interface location) comprising of a liquid and solid portion can be expressed as Integrating Eq. The final electrical power density (in watts per unit cell area) is obtained from The entire system at the new time-step is calculated by simultaneously solving Eqs. The PCM tank is considered discharged when The CFD model was created in the OpenFOAM Toolbox, and utilises the meltFoam solver developed for latent heat thermal energy storage modelling purposes ( The top surface and the side surfaces have an adiabatic boundary condition. In order to set the boundary condition of the emitter (bottom surface) heat flux (Eq. The meltFoam model described in section two was run for conditions described in Like with the meltFoam solver, the sensitivity of the time marching method to choice of Δ At the start of the night time operation, the absorber temperature drops from the initial value to the melting point of silicon. This happens because there is no input energy in the absorber side. Therefore, the entire liquid phase drives towards a thermal equilibrium to reach the melting temperature with no thermal gradient in the liquid. This is attained after a short but finite time. However, owing to the differences in The influence of different PCM lengths are explored below for the same three The temperature profiles in The general trends for  The time dependent profiles shown in Sections  The transient model developed using a time marching scheme based on the balanced enthalpy method allowed us to analyse the night time operation of the SISTPV system proposed in previous work. This model was verified against an independent CFD solver meltFoam running on the OpenFOAM platform. The model showed that the combination of low tapering ratio ( The authors thank Dr. Donald L. Chubb of NASA Glenn Research Center, for insightful discussions and comments.