Ethanol production from lignocellulosic materials provides an alternative energy production system. Rye and bermudagrass that are used in hog farms for nutrient uptake from swine wastewater have the potential for fuel ethanol production because they have a relative high cellulose and hemicellulose content. Dilute sulfuric acid pretreatment of rye straw and bermudagrass before enzymatic hydrolysis of cellulose was investigated in this study. The biomass at a solid loading rate of 10% was pretreated at 121°C with different sulfuric acid concentrations (0.6, 0.9, 1.2 and 1.5%, w/w) and residence times (30, 60, and 90min). Total reducing sugars, arabinose, galactose, glucose, and xylose in the prehydrolyzate were analyzed. In addition, the solid residues were hydrolyzed by cellulases to investigate the enzymatic digestibility. With the increasing acid concentration and residence time, the amount of arabinose and galactose in the filtrates increased. The glucose concentration in the prehydrolyzate of rye straw was not significantly influenced by the sulfuric acid concentration and residence time, but it increased in the prehydrolyzate of bermudagrass with the increase of pretreatment severity. The xylose concentration in the filtrates increased with the increase of sulfuric acid concentration and residence time. Most of the arabinan, galactan and xylan in the biomass were hydrolyzed during the acid pretreatment. Cellulose remaining in the pretreated feedstock was highly digestible by cellulases from Trichoderma reesei.Ethanol is a renewable energy resource that is used as a partial gasoline replacement. Ethanol is also an environmentally-friendly alternative to the gasoline additive methyl tertiary butyl ether (MTBE) that will be eliminated from gasoline in California by 2002 ( The bioconversion of lignocellulosic materials to ethanol contains two steps: hydrolysis of cellulose to reducing sugars and the following fermentation by yeast or bacteria to convert fermentable sugars to ethanol. The hydrolysis process currently used is either concentrated acid hydrolysis or enzymatic hydrolysis. Compared to acid hydrolysis, enzymatic hydrolysis is milder and more specific, but it requires pretreatment to improve the enzymatic digestibility. The pretreatment process can remove hemicellulose, reduce cellulose crystallinity, and increase the porosity of the materials. Comminution, steam explosion, ammonia fiber explosion, and acid or alkaline pretreatment processes have been extensively investigated ( The United States produced 1.77 Rye (scientific name: The biomass at a solid loading of 10% (w/w) was mixed with dilute sulfuric acid (final concentrations: 0.6, 0.9, 1.2, 1.5% (w/w)) and pretreated in an autoclave at 121 The solid residues recovered after sulfuric acid pretreatment at a solid loading of 5% were hydrolyzed by cellulases and β-glucosidase at 50 Moisture content of the biomass was measured by drying the sample at 105 Monosaccharides (arabinose, galactose, glucose, and xylose) in the hydrolyzates were separated using a Dionex DX-300 chromatography system (Dionex corporation) equipped with a CarboPac™ PA10 (4 Experimental data were statistically analyzed using the GLM procedure (SAS Institute, Cary, NC). The effects of pretreatment time and residence time on the yields of monomeric sugars and reducing sugars after acid pretreatment and enzymatic hydrolysis were analyzed using The chemical composition of rye straw is shown in After pretreatment at different sulfuric acid concentrations and times, the prehydrolyzate was collected. The amount of monosaccharides and total reducing sugars released from rye straw is shown in An empirical model was built to establish the relationship of monomeric sugar yield in the prehydrolyzate with dilute sulfuric acid concentration and pretreatment time: Synthetic cellulose Sigmacell 20 was used to identify the effect of enzyme loading on the digestibility experiment of the pretreated biomass. After 48 The chemical composition of bermudagrass was similar to that of rye straw except that bermudagrass had slightly more arabinan and galactan and less ash ( The monomeric sugar yields (arabinose, galactose, glucose and xylose) in the prehydrolyzate are shown in The same predictive model was proposed to establish the relationship of monomeric sugar yield in the prehydrolyzate with dilute sulfuric acid concentration and pretreatment time. The coefficients were shown in The pretreated solid residue was used for saccharification. The pretreatment time of 60 Rye straw and bermudagrass have the potential for fuel ethanol production. Dilute sulfuric acid pretreatment was effective in solubilizing hemicellulose in the biomass. About 50–66% of xylan in the biomass was hydrolyzed into monomeric xylose for sulfuric acid concentration higher than 1.2% and pretreatment time longer than 60