Energy consumption in buildings accounts for up to 34% of total energy demand in developed countries. Thermal energy storage (TES) through phase change materials (PCM) is considered as a promising solution for this energetic problem in buildings. The material used in this paper is an own-developed shape stabilized PCM with a polymeric matrix and 12% paraffin PCM, and it includes a waste from the recycling steel process known as electrical arc furnace dust (EAFD), which provides acoustic insulation performance capability. This dense sheet material was installed and experimentally tested. Ambient temperature, humidity, and wall temperatures were measured and the thermal behaviour and acoustic properties were registered. Finally, because of the nature of the waste used, a leaching test was also carried out. The thermal profiles show that the inclusion of PCM decreases the indoor ambient temperature up to 3 °C; the acoustic measurements performed in situ demonstrate that the new dense sheet material is able to acoustically insulate up to 4 dB more than the reference cubicle; and the leaching test results show that the material developed incorporating PCM and EAFD must be considered a non-hazardous material.Energy consumption in buildings represents 34% of total energy demand in developed countries In this scenario, worldwide there is considerable research effort to develop more sustainable and energy-efficient systems for implementing in the building sector Several researchers have developed their own equipment in order to measure the thermal behaviour of the constructive system simulated using a water bath or heating/cooling systems real ambient conditions The experiments presented in this paper were carried out in the experimental set-up of the University of Lleida, which is located in Puigverd de Lleida, Spain (see The PCM implemented in a building wall as a layer was developed and characterized by Barreneche et al. The present paper will present the experimental measurements which test the thermal performance of the new shape stabilized PCM used as a dense sheet when it is implemented as a layer of a building wall and will compare the results with a commercial constructive system. The acoustic behaviour will be measured The experimental set-up located in Puigverd de Lleida (Spain) consists of two identical cubicles with double cabins as is shown in In one of the cubicles the new shape stabilized PCM was installed and the other one was used as a reference where a commercial dense sheet was used. The temperature is measured inside both rooms on each wall as well as on the roof and floor. Furthermore, the indoor and outdoor ambient temperature and ambient humidity are measured over time. Moreover, the temperature in the intermediate wall is measured at five locations (up south, up north, down south, down north and centre) and the temperature is also controlled on the dense sheet and on the other walls (north, west and east). Two flux sensors are located in each intermediate wall in order to measure the heat crossing this wall. The control-sensors distribution is shown in Moreover, each cubicle has a heat pump and an electrical oil radiator in order to control the indoor temperature. The external walls of the room where the dense sheet is implemented were completely insulated with 8 cm PUR foam in order to minimize the external influence on the temperature fluctuation inside this room. The constructive system installed in the intermediate walls is shown in The constructive system described in The thermal experiment performed with the experimental set-up follows the temperature profile shown in The acoustic experimentation The pink noise source is located in the left chamber where the dense sheet developed is placed becoming the emitter chamber. The microphone to register the difference between levels is place on the chamber named receptor chamber. The location of the pink noise source is always in the emitter. In addition, three different measurement of each cubicle were performed as well as three measurement of background noise. The reverberation time will depend on the materials used to build the walls chamber which will increase the noise measured inside it. For that reason both parameters are included in the equation used to calculated the difference between levels. The difference between normalized levels ( The main acoustic insulation value (D Finally, a leaching test following the UNE-EN 12457-2 was performed to classify for the disposal of the product after its use. Moreover, the results concerning the heavy metal contents will be classified as inert, non-hazardous, or hazardous according to the European Directive. The material implemented in the experimental set-up described in the above section was a dense sheet used as shape stabilised PCM. This shape was manufactured in a Banbury mixer and shaped in a hot-roll lamination and 500 kg were obtained This material is composed by 12% wt. paraffin PCM (RT-21 commercialized by Rubitherm, T Stabilization/solidification technologies complete with Portland cement is the cheapest alternative but some problems regarding metal dissolution arise from the elevated pH in the leachate. This process is the least used Encapsulation methods of toxic metals. These methods are not commercially interesting, as they involve important investments and there is no metal recovery. Pyrometallurgical processes are used to remove lead and zinc from EAFD by fuming and then condensing the metals in relatively pure form. However, with pyrometallurgical processes there is no recycling of iron to the electrical arc furnace process Caustic based processes in which the leaching and dissolving steps employ simple chemistry that takes advantage of the amphoteric nature of zinc, lead, 25 tin, arsenic, selenium and aluminium can be used to treat EAFD The process of incorporating EAFD as filler into a polymer matrix, in order to obtain a composite formulation is followed in the Barreneche PhD thesis However, the inclusion of this dust inside an elastomeric matrix implies the isolation of the dust as the leaching test performs will discern On the other hand, the dense sheet installed in the other cubicle is the TECSOUND 35 commercialized by TEXSA and used as a reference in this study which has 2300 kg m The thermal profile of the materials implemented in both cubicles were registered over several consecutive days applying the same thermal conditions by controlling the temperature inside one chamber and leaving free floating conditions inside the other chamber. The temperature profiles of the dense sheet temperatures are presented in As it can be seen, the peak temperature on the wall containing PCM dense sheet was reduced up to 4 °C). In addition, the PCM effect is shown in this figure because the sample containing PCM reach the final temperature before and it remains constant until the experiment ends. However, the temperature inside the room where the commercial sheet is installed does not achieved constant temperature on any day. Moreover, a thermal reduction of 3 °C on the ambient temperature inside the room where the dense sheet contains PCM was achieved in the same experiments presented before as shown in Note that the indoor temperature is higher than 28 °C due to the outdoor temperature. The difference between levels considering the emitter chamber and the receptor one for both cubicles (PCM cubicle and reference cubicle) are listed in Acoustic measurements light up an acoustic insulation with differences of about 4 dB (difference between levels) between the PCM cubicle and the reference cubicle over almost all frequencies (see During the development stage of the PCM dense sheet, the leaching tests were considered a key issue because the raw material EAFD is a solid, classified as hazardous waste by the international society under the European Directive 2003/33/EC Leaching test results for heavy metals are listed in In addition, it is well known that the leaching behaviour of heavy metals like Zn, Cd and Pb is pH dependent, and is possible to stabilize them and reduce their leaching The peak temperature reduction on the wall containing PCM of 4 °C agrees very well with those obtained previously in other in-situ studies. In them, PCM was included either microencapsulated in a concrete wall Similarly, in-situ acoustic measurements achieved 4 dB higher value in acoustic insulation index compared to the commercial reference product considered (TECSOUND 35), showing an analogous behaviour to that measured in the laboratory All these results, plus the leaching tests presented in this paper show that the newly developed dense sheet compiles with all the necessary properties to be used in real applications and to be produced at industrial scale. Further work would be to carry out the required steps to achieve full commercialization. The thermal and acoustic behaviour of an intermediate wall as well as the environmental impact have been measured inside two cubicles of the experimental set-up located in Puigverd de Lleida (Spain). The first cubicle contains a PCM dense sheet that incorporates EAFD and the second one is considered the reference because a commercial dense sheet (TECSOUND 35) was installed. The thermals profiles expound that the inclusion of PCM decreases the ambient temperature up to 3 °C and the temperature on the south part of the intermediate wall (the one exposed to solar insolation) under thermal experiments. Moreover, the acoustic measurements performed The leaching test performed show that the material developed incorporating PCM and EAFD does not leach heavy metals with higher contents than the limits to consider the materials as hazardous material. Therefore, EAFD which is considered as special waste is very nearly isolated inside the EPDM matrix with PCM. In summary, the PCM dense sheet present better thermal behaviour (remaining the ambient temperature 3 °C lower), better acoustic insulation properties (4 dB higher) and the leaching test show similar results, therefore, it can be applied in real building as part of walls where acoustic and thermal aspects need to be improved. The research leading to these results has received funding from the