The most prominent role of mammalian ferritins is to provide an extensive iron-buffering capacity to cells. The large ferritin iron stores can be mobilized in vitro, but the functional relevance of the most efficient iron releasing agents remains elusive. Sulfide is a strongly reducing chemical generated by a series of enzymes. In the presence of limited amounts of sulfide a continuous rate of iron release from ferritin was observed and a majority of the protein iron core was recovered in solution. The rate constants for iron efflux triggered by several reducing or chelating compounds have been measured and compared. Although not as efficient as reduced flavins, sulfide displayed kinetic parameters which suggest a potential physiological role for the chalcogenide in converting the iron storage protein into apoferritin. To further probe the relevance of sulfide in the mobilization of iron, several enzymes, such as NifS, rhodanese, or sulfite reductase generating reduced forms of sulfur by different mechanisms, have been assayed for their ability to catalyze the release of iron from ferritin. The results show that full reduction of sulfur into sulfide is needed to deplete iron from ferritin. These reactions suggest links between sulfur metabolism and intracellular iron homeostasis.Ferritins are crucial elements of iron homeostasis in most organisms. They have been evidenced in animals, plants and bacteria for instance, but with somewhat different properties in these various cases. However, ferritins from different sources share the capacity to store very large amounts of iron (up to about 4500 atoms/molecule) as iron oxides accumulated in the large internal cavity of the protein with varying amounts of phosphate anions. Ferritin subunits are homologous and are assembled in heteropolymers of 24 polypeptide chains Mammalian ferritins are made up of two kinds (H and L) of subunits and are generally localized in the cytoplasm. The elongated, mainly α-helical, peptides organize into a highly symmetric structure generating the large hollow in which iron is stored. This internal shell can communicate with the exterior of the protein through different channels corresponding to the main symmetry axes of the molecules. In particular, the 3-fold intersubunit channels appear to interact with the ferrooxidase centers located on H-subunits in a key step of the ferritin iron loading process. Mammalian ferritin biosynthesis is mainly regulated at the translational level by the binding of iron regulatory proteins to the iron responsive elements lying on the 5′ non-coding sequence of the mRNA. Binding and repression of translation occur when iron is scarce or under several other stress conditions In aerobic organisms ferritins scavenge iron exceeding the normal needs of the cell. Under conditions of oxidative stress, iron catalyzes partial reduction of oxygen and may lead to cell damage by hydroxyl radicals and other products. In metazoans, these deleterious effects are avoided by inactivation of the iron regulatory proteins which detect the increased iron concentration, hence dissociating from the iron responsive element on the 5′ non-coding sequence of the mRNA and increasing ferritin translation. However, once stored in ferritin, the fate of the generally large amounts of ferric ions in the protein is not clear The release of iron from ferritin is triggered by reductants and chelators and some chemicals may play both roles Since the significance of many compounds shown to release iron from ferritin in vitro remains elusive, a survey of metabolites able to carry out the reaction is of interest. We have thus evaluated the ability of reduced species generated by the metabolism of sulfur-containing molecules to expel iron out from mammalian ferritins. In all experiments reported herein except iron loading of ferritins, strictly anaerobic conditions were implemented by use of argon lines or of an anaerobic chamber (Jacomex, Livry-Gargan, France) filled with purified argon Horse spleen ferritins (apo- and holoforms) were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich Co. Recombinant human H-ferritin was kindly provided by Dr. Sonia Levi (DIBIT, Milan, Italy) as frozen ammonium sulfate precipitate with 2 M urea The eluted ferritins were analyzed for their iron Since the reported rates for iron mobilization from ferritin depend somewhat on the metal loading of the protein Indeed, NADH and NADPH were unstable under the ultraviolet component of the polychromatic incident light of reversed-optics systems and their products had some ability (maybe via the generation of radicals) to release iron out of ferritin as measured by the accumulation of ferrous chelates as a function of the irradiation time (not shown). It was checked that no iron was expelled from ferritin by NADH and NADPH when the reaction was followed with the conventional Kontron 941 spectrophotometer at the visible wavelength corresponding to the absorbance maximum of the ferrous chelates. Alternatively, measurements were carried out with reverse-optics spectrophotometers connected through fiber optics not allowing light of wavelengths below 350 nm to pass through. Known concentrations of FMN, FAD, or riboflavin were fully reduced by a 6-fold excess of NADPH in the presence of Overexpression of The features generally shared by reactants previously shown to release iron from ferritin are their powerful reducing capacity or their metal chelating properties Second-order rate constants for iron release from ferritin induced by selected compounds of potential biological significance were determined ( Sulfide is very easily oxidized under aerobic conditions. However, the chalcogenide is generated as part of metabolism A subset of widespread pyridoxal 5′-phosphate (PLP)-dependent enzymes, including cysteine synthases, cystathionine β-lyase and the protein encoded by  In order to further probe the involvement of reduced sulfur species in this reaction, another enzyme producing persulfide by a different mechanism was studied. In mammals, rhodanese is a mitochondrial enzyme not belonging to the family of PLP-dependent transferases. It catalyzes sulfur transfer between thiosulfate and a thiophilic anion. A dithiol can play this role, but cyanide is most often used as the reaction may be of importance in cyanide detoxification The combination of thiosulfate and bovine liver rhodanese, or thiosulfate alone, only displayed marginal iron release from horse spleen ferritin ( The need for a sulfur carrier molecule in the above two examples to observe chelation of iron originating from ferritin has been superseded by the use of yet another enzyme able to generate sulfide as a direct product of its reaction. Sulfite reductase is one of the few enzymes catalyzing a six-electron reduction by use of a specific metal-based active site made of a reduced porphyrin, a siroheme, coupled to a [4Fe–4S] cluster. The enzyme occurs in plants and several other cells but not in animals. The assimilatory enzyme from The substrates of The comparative data of Iron loading of the ferritins was carried out in the absence of phosphate in the present study and the release of iron from mixed hydroxide-phosphate cores may quantitatively differ from the reported results Although the involvement of intact ferritin as iron supplier in animal cells remains to be clarified In contrast to the above scenario, a role for iron release from ferritin triggered by sulfide, i.e. under reducing conditions, may be considered. The physiological sources of sulfide are several. Among the enzymes used in this work with mammalian ferritins, only sulfite reductase is not present in animal cells. Rhodanese occurs in mitochondria Intracellular glutathione is abundant, with estimates around 5 mM, under normal conditions, but a steady state concentration of sulfide 500-fold smaller (10 μM) than that of the tripeptide is as efficient to release iron from human H-ferritin ( Mammalian tissues We thank Dr. Sonia Levi (DIBIT, Milan, Italy), Prof. Dennis R. Dean (Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, USA), Drs. Mahel Zeghouf and Jacques Covès (CEA/Grenoble, France) for providing us with some of the biological materials used in this work.