Cuprous oxide (Cu2O) nanoparticles have been successfully synthesized using copper acetate as precursor via supersaturation theory as a facile rout. Synthesis parameters, such as the reducing agent concentration, reaction temperature, reaction time, type of the reducing agent and rate of adding reducing agent were investigated. The experimental results indicated that size of the Cu2O nanoparticles is dependent on the above mentioned parameters. The Cu2O samples were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and also by ultra violet visible spectroscopy (UV–vis). Results showed that temperature has unique influence on to the fabrication of Cu2O nanoparticles which illustrate the higher the temperature of the synthesis the smaller the particles would be. Rate of reduction was specified as an influential factor in determining the particle size distribution. Particles with crystallite size of 74.01nm were obtained among this study. Metal oxides play an inconceivable role and are of paramount importance in many rapidly developing research areas such as the intersection of chemistry and materials science Cu Present work involves a facile additive-free and room temperature solution process for the synthesis of uniform cubic (lattice) Cu Copper acetate (Cu(CH Synthesis of Cu Phase/crystalline feature, crystallite size and particle size distribution by changing various parameters of the synthesized sample has been probed by powder X-ray diffraction using Philips X’Pert Pro diffractometer (XRD-D8 ADVANCED-BRUCHERS AXS model, Germany) with Cu K To study the effect of reduction rate, after preparing stock solution containing Cu(OH) XRD pattern of the reducing agent adding effect is illustrated in In addition, both the above-mentioned solutions have been checked due to absorption peaks using an UV–visible spectrophotometer. Results show that the peaks absorption edge of at-once method is shifted to the lower wavelength and since the particle size is proportional to the maximum wavelength ( Likewise, SEM images of above-mentioned processes approved the declared results. SEM images of drop-wise adding system is given in According to the observations, reaction at 10 As it has been emerged in UV–visible spectra by increasing the concentration of ascorbic acid in solution the absorption increases and To evaluate the results a calibration curve is needed due to justify the data. Absorption spectra of the samples shown in According to the spectra obtained in As it observed by using ascorbic acid, orange-colored solution will be formed quickly which indicate the formation of copper (I) oxide monomers. However, when using maltodextrin more time is needed to reduce the solution and red copper (I) oxide monomers become to appear. The main reason of the recent observation has been cited in the temperament of the maltodextrin which is nasty in reduction in comparison with ascorbic acid, nucleation period will be longer, and according to the XRD peaks ( According to experiments were done at different temperatures of 10 Cuprous oxide (Cu Authors gratefully thank the