Artificial femur stem of 316L stainless steel was fabricated by investment casting using vacuum induction melting. Different surface treatments: mechanical polishing, thermal oxidation and immersion in alkaline solution were applied. Thicker hydroxyapatite (HAP) layer was formed in the furnace-oxidized samples as compared to the mechanically polished ones. The alkaline treatment enhanced the precipitation of HAP on the samples. It was also observed that the HAP precipitation responded differently to the different phases of the microstructure. The austenite phase was observed to have more homogeneous and smoother layer of HAP. In addition, the growth of HAP was sometimes favored on the austenite phase rather than on ferrite phase.Fabrication of artificial joints and stems from biomaterials is an essential area of large potential and impact on the improvement of human and animal quality of life. For any material to act as a biomaterial, it must satisfy two essential characteristics: biofunctionality and biocompatibility. Biofunctionality is related to a set of properties which allows a device to perform a required function, while biocompatibility refers to the ability of the device to continue performing that function effectively in the body, and as long as necessary Hydroxyapatite (HAP, Ca The most widely used stainless steel for medical and dental applications is the austenitic grade AISI 316L Biomimetic process is a physicochemical method in which a substrate is soaked in a solution that simulates the physiologic conditions. The soaking time is long enough to form a desirable layer of calcium phosphate on the substrate Pieces of 316L stainless steel scrap were melted in a vacuum induction skull melting (ISM) furnace. Double vacuum melting process In our experiments, a wax pattern was made typical to the artificial femur stem profile and dimensions using rubber silicon, The as-grinded samples were mechanically polished using alumina paste until a mirror-like surface was obtained. The austenitic stainless steel (316L) forms a thin chromium oxide layer when exposed to air. This layer plays an important role in increasing corrosion resistance and apatite formation The alkaline treatment was performed as follows. Polished samples were immersed in NaOH (0.5 To evaluate the apatite-forming ability on 316L and the other alloy samples after different surface treatments, three samples from each surface treatment condition were immersed separately into a simulated body fluid (SBF) (known as Hanks' solution), for both of the neutral and acidic solutions. All samples were considered in investigation for any discrepancies in results. The chemical composition of the almost neutral SBF used (pH Since the pH of the body fluid may fall to 5 or even 4, when there is an inflammation caused by surgery or injury Prior to microstructure investigation, the samples were gold coated in order to facilitate the elemental analysis of hydroxyapatite by the EDS. The surface morphology of the treated samples and the elements present on the surface layer were then identified by Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) and Energy Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy (EDS). X-ray diffraction (XRD) using Cu-Kα radiation source was used for phase identification. Topography and roughness features of the samples after immersion in SBF were inspected by Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) “AA 5000 Scanning Probe Microscope” with sensitivity of 0.26  When the samples were thermally oxidized, an oxide layer was formed on the surface as shown in the XRD pattern of The AFM distribution of HAP layer in the thermally oxidized condition is shown in The results of the AFM surface roughness measurements of the polished and oxidized samples after immersion in SBF are presented in It is desirable for the metal implant to have high fixation strength with the host hard tissue. This strength can be improved using implants with rough surface. It is believed that the rough surface, even at the microscale, may enhance the potential for mechanical interlock at the implant–bone interface In case of alkaline treatment, a thin-coated layer with a prism in shape, In contrast to the previous treatments, immersion in alkaline solution showed some considerable differences: both in the roughness of the formed apatite and its distribution on the modified surface. In order to further confirm this observation, we compared this austenitic stainless steel sample (ASS) to duplex stainless steel (DSS), and super austenitic stainless steel (SASS) samples. The ASS contains 9% ferrite, and the DSS sample has 40% ferrite, while the SASS has a fully austenite structure.  To investigate the effect of these phases on the distribution of the HAP layer, AFM surface investigation was carried out for the SASS, ASS and DSS samples after immersion for 7 The distribution of the root mean square roughness values, Rq, of the SASS, ASS and DSS samples is shown in Although the austenitic, super austenitic and duplex stainless steels have sufficient corrosion resistance and mechanical strength for biomedical applications, there are still other factors to consider. Of these factors, which may be important especially for steels, are their magnetic properties. Ferromagnetic materials that can be affected by magnetic field are not suitable for the manufacture of implants However, the effect of microstructure on the HAP formation behavior on stainless steels, which is seen as a new finding of the current research, needs further investigation with detailed AFM studies and selected area diffraction (SAD) investigation at interfaces. In this work, different surface treatments were done on stainless steel 316L artificial stems fabricated by investment casting. The formation of hydroxyapatite on the surface of the treated samples was investigated. From the results of these experiments, the following conclusions are obtained: Much higher hydroxyapatite (HAP) layer was formed on the furnace oxidized samples after immersion in neutral simulated body fluid. The alkaline treatment successfully enhanced the formation of HAP on the surface of treated samples. Formation of HAP was frequently favored on the austenite phase rather than the ferrite phase, so that homogeneous layer of HAP with a smoother surface was obtained in the super austenitic stainless steel samples. The authors would like to acknowledge the staff in the Advanced Melting Unit “Central Metallurgical Research & Development Institute” for their help in the casting experiments. The support of Professor Neven Mawsouf and her students Mr. M. Abdelsalam, Mr. A. Atito and Mr. O. Abdelwahed at the Department of Mechanical Engineering, Cairo University in the AFM studies is highly acknowledged.