A novel SiO2-P2O5-CaO-SrO-Ag2O bioactive glass containing from 0 to 10mol% Ag2O was produced via the sol-gel method. The influence of silver content on in vitro hydroxyapatite (HA) formation, antibacterial and cell viability properties were investigated. The apatite shape and structure were evaluated by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) and X-ray diffraction analysis (XRD). The results demonstrated that the rate of formation of crystalline HA on SiO2-P2O5-CaO-SrO-Ag2O bioactive glass containing 5% Ag2O (BG-5A) was higher in comparison with other specimens. Formation of apatite nano-needles on the SiO2-P2O5-CaO-SrO-5%Ag2O surface in vitro, after 3 days soaking in SBF solution, demonstrated high bioactivity. The alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and 3-(4,5dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay evaluation methods illustrated that the presence of low silver (3% and 5% Ag2O) had stimulating effect on promoting both differentiation and proliferation of G292 osteoblastic cells. Finally, results offer that specimen BG-5A is well candidate for bone tissue application with considerable high antibacterial potential, bioactivity and optimal cell viability.The first synthesis of bioactive glass (BG) was developed by Hench et al. Two general routs have been used to synthesize the BGs: melting In recent years, different types of additives have been proposed to the SiO It has been reported that certain biological properties, such as accelerating wound healing and blood vessel formation Previous investigations have been shown that strontium has an important role in reducing fracture risk and increasing bone density reducing fracture risk in human's body. It has been shown that strontium stimulates the formation of new bone and prevents osteoclast-mediated resorption The last focus on the promotion of silver for different applications has been centered on the material's antibacterial activity The aim of this paper is to study the synergistic effect of Ag TEP (triethyl phosphate, OP (OC The chemical composition of the bioactive glass chosen for this research is 60SiO The final mixing was stored in closed containers at ambient temperature for 9 days to allow for proper formation of the gel. The produced gel was dried at 80 Bioactivity properties of the samples were studied by soaking samples in SBF solution Analysis of the phases in glasses and hydroxyapatite were performed by X-ray powder diffraction (INEL Equinox 3000) with the Cu- Kα radiation (wavelength k=1.540510 The functional groups of glass powders was analyzed using FTIR (Bomem MB 100 spectrometer). The glass powder with KBr (Potassium bromide) powder was blended by a ratio of 1–9. The blended composition was pressed into disc form with diameter less than 6 The microstructure of the synthesized bioactive glass were analyzed using SEM accelerating voltage of 20 The bioactive glass containing Ag The proliferation of the G292 osteoblastic cells were measured after exposure to various bioactive glass specimens, using (3-(4, 5dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2, 5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide) (MTT) assay. The cytotoxic results of provided bioactive glasses against G292 osteoblastic cells line were obtained from in the National Cell Bank of Iran (Pasteur Institute of Iran). Cells were cultured and maintained at 37 ALP is an enzyme whose presence signifies proliferation and separation of osteoblasts The quantitative data of experiments was reported as mean ± standard deviation (SD) of at least three repetition. The statistical significance of test groups was evaluated by GraphPad Prism (GraphPad Software, USA). P value was investigated lower than 0.05 as statistically significant. The changes of pH value in SBF solution during 21 days immersion of BG-1A, BG-3A, BG-5A, BG-8A, and BG-10A powders were shown in The pH of all specimens demonstrated similar behavior. The pH of SBF solution in BG-1A, BG-3A, BG-5A, BG-8A, BG-10A samples were 7.4–8.41, 8.37, 8.34, 8.26, 8.18 respectively, 7 days after soaking. The results showed a considerable increase in pH. The increase in pH indicated that the dissolution of cationic ions has occurred from the surface of the bioactive glass. At high pH, the silica network was attacked and silanols formation in this state. After 7 days of soaking, decreasing of all the SBF pH of specimens was due to the absorption of phosphate and calcium ions from the SBF. As a result, the hydroxyapatite layer formation on the surface of the specimens was increased.  The pattern exhibited intense diffraction peaks at 26°, 32°, 49° and 56° due to the reflections from (0 0 2), (2 1 1), (2 2 2) and (004) planes of hydroxyapatite layer The illustrated peaks at 38, 44, 64, 77, 82, due to the reflection from (111), (200), (220), (311), and (222) planes of metallic silver, respectively  The XRD results of bioactivity test (SBF) showed that the hydroxyapatite layer was formed on all the samples after 3 days of immersion ( The FTIR spectra of all the bioactive glasses are illustrated in  The surfaces of the BG-5A were covered by precipitation of the hydroxyapatite layer after 3 and 7 days soaking in SBF solution (  It can also be seen that the concentrations of P and Ca ions in SBF raised at day 2 followed by a decrease during the residual period. This might be due to the formation of a calcium phosphate (CaP) layer on the surface of the BG-5A during immersion in the SBF solution, which decrease the culture media of calcium Silicon plays a role in the stimulating cell activities of bioactive glass dissolution ions due to its major role in bone formation The in vitro cytotoxicity of bioactive glasses containing of various Ag The number of osteoblastic cells relatively decreased with increasing the amounts of silver (more than 5% Ag The alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity for osteoblastic cells of G292 was reported for each composition after1, 3 and 7 days of incubation ( The synthesis of novel SiO