This paper focuses firstly on the formulation and mechanical behaviour of concrete reinforced fibre and powder (CRFP). Secondly, we present the effect of silane treatment on the bond characteristics of the fibre–matrix of ultra-high-performance concrete (UHPC). The initial objective of the study was to optimize the incorporation of fibres and powders in high performance concrete (HPC). Two materials were investigated. The first involved replacing a volume of sand by an equivalent volume of fibres and powders. The second type was obtained by replacing an equivalent volume of silica fume with powders. Testing of the first material showed that the incorporation of fibres and powders by sand substitution increased the bending and tensile strength by 32%. In the second material, the substitution of silica fume by the powder led to an increase of 37% in flexural and tensile strengths.
                  The second section of this paper focuses on silane-treated fibres. The experimental results on fibre pullout tests under different conditions are reported. Various silane treatment contents ranging from 0% to 1% were studied. Fibre pullout tests were conducted to measure the bond characteristics of fibres in the UHPC matrix. The treatment by vinyl trimethoxy silane (VTMO) can effectively enhance the fibre–matrix interfacial properties, especially the fibre pullout energy. It was concluded that in terms of the bond characteristics, the optimal silane content is 0.5% under these conditions.Thermoset composite materials are used in a wide range of applications in industries such as the automotive sector and construction. Fibre-reinforced concrete provides advantages such as lightness, less frequent repair, and improved ductility and uniaxial tensile strength Today, more than 90% of production waste thermoset composites currently end up in landfills, at a high cost and with the increasing threat regulatory prohibition A great number of recycling technologies have been proposed and developed for thermoset composite materials, and these are summarized in The incineration process, which is currently the most used, will not be feasible in the near future. Indeed, a recent EU Directive on Landfill of Waste (Directive 99/31/EC) will result in a reduction in the amount of organic material that is landfilled. As a consequence, it is already illegal to landfill composite waste in many EU countries. Other directives deal with particular waste streams. The End-of-life Vehicle Directive (Directive 2000/53/EC) regulates the disposal of vehicles, and the requirements are as follows: From 2006, 85% of the weight of all end-of-life vehicles must be re-used, recycled or subject to energy recovery, and only 15% may be disposed of in landfill. From 2015, 85% of the weight of all end-of-life vehicles must be re-used or recycled; a further 10% may be subject to energy recovery, and a maximum of 5% of the vehicle may be disposed of in landfill. From 2007, it is the responsibility of the vehicle manufacturer to dispose of a vehicle. It is in this context that we undertook the present study, whose objective is to analyse the possibility of recycling thermoset composites in the civil engineering sector using mechanical treatment. This valorisation will be made by fabrication of concrete-reinforced fibre and powders (CRFPs). These concretes are very expensive, so their use is combined with conventional fibre-reinforced concrete (FRC) to strengthen local areas. CRFPs are advanced reinforced cementitious materials. “Ultra-high performance” refers principally to improved mechanical strength, fracture toughness, and durability The principal aim of this work is to develop CRFPs and present the effect of silane treatment on the bond characteristics of fibres in the UHP matrix. These reinforcements (fibres and powders) were recycled from thermoset composite parts (unsaturated polyester/glass fibre) from the automotive sector (iNoPLAST, France). The materials used for the cementitious matrix were selected for high compactness in the cement and silica fume and a strong deflocculating power for the superplasticizer: Portland cement CEM I 52.5 Silica fume powder with 85% SiO Glenium ACE 30 superplasticizer, supplied by B.A.S.F. Glenium ACE 30. Sand with a size grading of 125–400 Recycled fibres (unsaturated polyester/glass fibres): the fibres used were commercially available under the name RECY FIB-100 and are produced by MCR (Mixt Composite Recyclables, TOURNON, France). Their density, measured by means of a pycnometer with helium, was 1.873 Recycled powders: the powders used resulted from a fine grinding of glass-fibre-reinforced unsaturated polyester. Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) showed that these powders were a mixture of fibres 100–400 The fibres were treated with vinyltrimethoxysilane (VTMO), and silanisation was performed in three steps: Hydrolysis: 2.13% of the fibres by volume were mixed in isopropanol solution or water Silanisation: VTMO ((CH Drying: when the silanisation was finished, the fibres were dried by exposure to air for several minutes and then for 30 René LCPC software is an efficient tool for the determination of the packing density of any granular mixture for a given process of compaction Determination of the optimal content for reinforcement was achieved through 3-point bending tests. Fifteen formulations with different percentages of untreated fibre and powder were tested. Fibres were incorporated by substituting a volume of sand with an equivalent volume of fibre (blends M2, M3 and M4 ( Powders were introduced into the material in two ways. At first, they were incorporated in the same way as fibres, i.e., substitution of a volume of sand with a volume of powder (blend M2). Subsequently, they were introduced by substituting a volume of powder for a volume of silica fume (blends M5 and M6). The procedure for mixing the concrete-reinforced fibres and powders involved the following steps. First, the sand, cement, and silica fume were dry mixed into a 10-L ultra-high-energy capacity mixer for 60 40 40 10 Three specimens each were tested for compressive strength, three-point bending tests and pull-out tests. The specimens were demoulded after 24 The three-point bending tests were performed using an INSTRON 1500 Instrument in accordance with AFNOR NF-EN 196-1. Specimens containing between 0 and 11.54 At least three specimens were tested in a three-point bending configuration for each composite formulation. The load and bending values were recorded simultaneously. With the assumption that the material is homogeneous, the normal stress Several cubic specimens of various formulations and of dimensions of 40 A prismatic-shaped mould was used to prepare the fibre pull-out specimens, and the total length of the fibres was 20–23 The specimens were demoulded 24 Pull-out tests were conducted on treated and untreated fibres using a DMA testing machine (Dynamic Mechanical Analysis) with a cell capacity of 150 Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) was performed with a Hitachi 4300 This section presents the results obtained in the three-point bending and compressive tests for the various formulations presented in  The mechanical responses of composites with 4.41% of fibres (M3) and with 4.41% of fibres and 7.17% powder (M2) are compared in  The incorporation of waste fibres and powders into the cement matrix strongly affected the workability of fibre- and powder-reinforced concrete, especially the concrete with high fibre content. Several parameters, such as the fibre length, shape and aspect ratio, can play an important role in controlling the workability and mechanical performance of fibre-reinforced concrete The workability of the CRFP becomes poor when 4.1% of the volume fraction of fibres without powder incorporation is reached (sample M3). The first series represents the addition of fibres and powders by replacing a volume of sand with an equivalent volume of fibres and powders. Materials M1, M3, M4, M5, and M6 had nearly identical strength compared to a reference matrix, suggesting that fibres did not contribute to compressive strength (see A crucial finding reported in this study is that the fibres used have inhomogeneous cross-sectional areas and an apparent languor.   A total of three different of silane contents were used in the fibre treatments for this experimental program, as given in The frictional stress depends on the pull-out behaviour of the fibres in the matrix and can be determined by the maximum pull-out load For the surface area of the fibre, “ The fibres used are not homogeneous, and the results are very difficult to interpret with respect to friction stress. Thus, to estimate the interfacial bond strength, we must find the numbers of fibres embedded in the matrix to determine the perimeter of the fibres in contact with the matrix. The microscopic observation of fibres drawn after the pullout test showed that concrete does not infiltrate into the fibre. The effects of silane treatment on fibre bond strength, including the debond mode and the measured bond strength, have been reported. It has been found that the silanisation changes the fibre debond mode from strength-based to fracture-based, which is consistent with the interfacial-toughening mechanism observed in this experimental program The maximum bond stress, or the bond strength, is interpreted and summarized in To further investigate the interfacial-toughening mechanism of silane treatment, the microstructures of fibres drawn from various types of silane content were observed. The matrix adhering to the fibre can be worn during the pullout process and may accumulate near the fibre end. The cumulative matrix remnants in turn contribute to the resistance to the fibre pullout load. As can be observed in the microstructure, the cementitious remnants on fibre surface are expected to enhance the friction and resistance. This effect may be further magnified by the increased diameter of the fibres. Therefore, the greatly enhanced pullout energy is believed to be a reflection of this mechanism. The experimental results presented in this paper have verified that fibre treatment with silane can remarkably enhance the fibre–matrix bond characteristics, especially the interfacial-toughening effect on fibre slip. According to the bond strength and pullout energy measurements ( The aim of this study was to design and manufacture concrete-reinforced fibre and powder (CRFP) using recycled fibres obtained from the grinding of glass-fibre-reinforced unsaturated polyester. First, an ultra-high-performance cement matrix was designed with the objective of subsequent substitution of some constituents with fibres and powders. The maximum volume of fibres and powders incorporated in the matrix that maintained acceptable workability and high strength was 11.54%. It has been noted that the glass fibres improved the softening zone of the material and led to a 9% increase in bending strength. The powders provide a further increase in bending strength of 32% and an increase of 6% in compressive strength. Replacement of the silica fume with powders (materials M5 and M6) was found to provide a mechanical and economic advantage. For a substitution of 50% of the silica fume, an increase of 37% in flexural was obtained, while the compressive strength was identical to the reference matrix. The mechanical behaviour of this cementitious composite can be further improved by optimizing the fibre length and the fibre–matrix bonding. The addition of fibres or powders did not affect compressive strength. However, adding both fibres and powders led to an increase in the compressive strength of up to 6%. The workability of concrete-reinforced fibres and powders decreased with an increase in the volume of fibre and powder. However, this reinforcement strongly perturbed the granular arrangement of the matrix. Based on the results of bond strength and pullout energy, the optimal dosage of silane was 0.5% under the conditions of this experimental program. At this silane dosage, the bond strength, the pullout strength, the modulus of elasticity and the fibre pullout energy were the highest among all the cases. Compared to that of the matrix without silane treatment, the increase in pullout energy due to the silane treatment was more significant than the increase in bond strength. At the optimal silane dosage (0.5%), the pullout energy was increased by a factor of ten, whereas the bond strength was approximately three times better compared to 0% silane content. The difference can be attributed to the different effects of silane on pullout energy and on bond strength. The microstructure of fibres pulled out from the high silane content treatment revealed a large amount of cementitious materials adhered to the fibre surface. Consequently, the cementitious material contributed to the friction and resistance during the fibre pullout process. Therefore, the pullout energy is remarkably enhanced with fibres treated with silane (VTMO). The results of the fibre treatments are very encouraging and widen perspectives on the value of these fibres and powders in UHPC. Work is underway to increase the performance in uniaxial tensile strength of a UHP matrix reinforced with fibre treatments to verify the usefulness of silane treatments on fibre (unsaturated polyester/glass fibre) bond characteristics in UHPC.