The feasibility of using carbon dioxide (CO2) as a heat transfer fluid by organic Rankine cycle (ORC) in enhanced geothermal systems (EGS) in arid regions is explored in this paper. As CO2 is available for sequestration at high pressures from an Integrated Gasification Combined Cycle (IGCC) plant, this idea is examined by pairing an IGCC plant with an EGS plant to facilitate both the simultaneous extraction of geothermal heat and sequestration of CO2 as well as power generation from EGS. The ORC portion of EGS was modeled by ASPEN Plus version 7.3. Four different working fluids were chosen for the ORC portion of the EGS to absorb the geothermal energy from the CO2 in a binary heat exchanger. The power generated from the EGS and the lowest possible temperature at which CO2 can be discharged from the binary heat exchanger was evaluated for each working fluid. The addition of a preheater provides an opportunity to add a second cycle so that both CO2 and the working fluid can be discharged at the lowest possible temperature. In all cases, the thermal energy recovered from the EGS reservoir is substantially higher than that required to compress the CO2 stream from the IGCC for sequestration.Recoverable geothermal energy is available in low permeability sedimentary rocks and basement formations with low porosity. At a depth of 6.5 km from the surface, the thermal reserve is of the order of 1.1 × 10 The deepest geothermal well so far drilled in the United States is approximately 2.8 km and less than 100 geothermal wells are drilled so far Around 11.2 GW When water is used as a geothermal fluid for the extraction of geothermal heat energy, depending upon the available thermal energy in the geothermal fluid, there are four configurations possible for the conversion of geothermal energy into electricity. They are dry steam plants, single flash steam plants, double flash steam plants and binary steam plants. In dry steam plants, water injected into the geothermal well is recovered through the production well as dry steam. The production fluid will also contain non-condensable gases that typically account for 2% to 10% by wt of steam Predominantly, the geothermal fluid leaving the production well is a two phase mixture. The steam quality, indexed by the weight percentage of the steam in the mixture, is determined by the reservoir fluid conditions, well dimensions and well head pressure. The well head pressure is typically 0.5–1.0 MPa. In a single flash steam plant, the two phase mixture is fed to the cylindrical pressure vessel cyclone separator to separate the primary high pressure steam from the water. The high pressure steam is fed to the turbine for power generation. The hot water is circulated through heat exchangers for direct heat applications. In a double flash steam plant, the high pressure hot water is flashed through a control valve for the generation of steam that is subsequently expanded in a low pressure steam turbine for the generation of additional power. The amount of liquid wasted without the utilization of geothermal heat is 30 times more in a single flash power plant compared to that in a dry steam power plant Binary cycle plants use an organic Rankine cycle (ORC) where the geothermal heat is transferred from the geothermal fluid (water in most cases) to a working fluid. The direct contact between the geothermal fluid and the turbine, a feature typical in both single and double flash cycles, is avoided and prevent damage to the turbine vanes caused by small particles and non-condensable gases. Extensive studies have been conducted on the properties of working fluid that are suitable for the organic Rankine cycle In arid regions, for example in the southwest part of the United States where subsurface temperatures are elevated, it is not feasible to use water as a geothermal heat transfer fluid due to its scarcity. An alternative geothermal heat transfer fluid that is cheap and abundant is necessary for the absorption of geothermal heat in these regions. In the year 2010, the total amount of CO Air-blown combustion, oxycoal combustion and gasification are the three coal-based technologies that can be utilized for power generation  The total amount of CO We modeled the binary organic Rankine cycle in ASPEN Plus V7.3 to determine the effectiveness of five different working fluids in the utilization of geothermal energy extracted when CO In the first part of the study, a preheater was not used in the ORC. The working fluid is chosen to be in liquid state. It is compressed to high pressure with a pump. In the absence of the preheater, it directly enters the binary heat exchanger to absorb the geothermal heat from the CO Based on the assumptions in In the ORC, the pressure of the working fluid and its mass flow rate are the input conditions that determine the power output. The specific heat capacity and the thermodynamic properties of the working fluid determine the amount of power generated from the ORC for a certain amount of heat input. The amount of power generated, efficiency of power generation and the CO When ammonia is used as a working fluid, the power generated by the ORC increases continuously with increasing working fluid pressure. The efficiency at which it is generated also increases continuously from 12.7% to 23.2% with increasing working fluid pressure. The temperature at which CO From From In the second case study, the effect of a recuperator on power generated from EGS was studied for the two working fluids neopentane and When Pairing IGCC with EGS, in addition to producing electricity from the organic Rainkine cycle, recovers the work done to compress the CO This material is based upon work supported by the This report was prepared as an account of work sponsored by an agency of the United States Government. Neither the United States Government nor any agency thereof, nor any of their employees, makes any warranty, express or implied, or assumes any legal liability or responsibility for the accuracy, completeness, or usefulness of any information, apparatus, product, or process disclosed, or represents that its use would not infringe privately owned rights. Reference herein to any specific commercial product, process, or service by trade name, trademark, manufacturer, or otherwise does not necessarily constitute or imply its endorsement, recommendation, or favoring by the United States Government or any agency thereof. The views and opinions of authors expressed herein do not necessarily state or reflect those of the United States Government or any agency thereof.