We introduce here the concept of Geotribology as an approach to study friction, wear, and lubrication of geological systems. Methods of geotribology are applied here to characterize the friction and wear associated with slip along experimental faults composed of brittle rocks. The wear in these faults is dominated by brittle fracturing, plucking, scratching and fragmentation at asperities of all scales, including ‘effective asperities’ that develop and evolve during the slip. We derived a theoretical model for the rate of wear based on the observation that the dynamic strength of brittle materials is proportional to the product of load stress and loading period. In a slipping fault, the loading period of an asperity is inversely proportional to the slip velocity, and our derivations indicate that the wear-rate is proportional to the ratio of [shear-stress/slip-velocity]. By incorporating the rock hardness data into the model, we demonstrate that a single, universal function fits wear data of hundreds of experiments with granitic, carbonate and sandstone faults. In the next step, we demonstrate that the dynamic frictional strength of experimental faults is well explained in terms of the tribological parameter PV factor (= normal-stress · slip-velocity). This factor successfully delineates weakening and strengthening regimes of carbonate and granitic faults. Finally, our analysis revealed a puzzling observation that wear-rate and frictional strength have strikingly different dependencies on the loading conditions of normal-stress and slip-velocity; we discuss sources for this difference. We found that utilization of tribological tools in fault slip analyses leads to effective and insightful results.Tribology was established as a discipline by The term ‘geotribology’ was first mentioned by We follow previous studies ( To demonstrate the geotribological approach, we present here a critical review of wear and friction along brittle faults. In the first part, we examine the wear model of In general, a tribological system is defined by its blocks properties (e.g., cohesion, composition, and interface geometry), loading conditions, environmental conditions, and the characteristics of the layer separating the surfaces (e.g., lubricating agent) ( The basic model for the global wear, which was proposed by In general, wear occurs by failure at contacting asperities which are sites of high, local stresses ( Examination of experimental rock faults reveals two general styles of wear features. In the first wear style, two-body mode ( The second wear style, three-body mode, occurs while the fault is covered by a continuous gouge layer of finite thickness ( The effective asperities differ from the initial asperities at rock-rock contact by size. The asperities of a polished rock surface, which is the initial stage in most experimental analyses, are on the order of 1–10 Continuous quantification of the wear-rate during fault sliding can be accomplished by monitoring the fault-normal displacement with correction of thermal effects ( We examined the relations between the recorded steady-state wear-rates and the experimental conditions of slip slowness (= Recent analyses of wear along experimental faults provided systematic relations between the measured wear-rates, the applied load, and the slip-velocity for faults made of granites, carbonates, and sandstones ( Many studies revealed that brittle wear is facilitated by fracturing at contacting asperities in two-body mode ( We postulate that wear-rate variation reflects the strong dependence of dynamic brittle fracturing on loading rate. Examples of the strength dependence of brittle materials on the applied strain-rates are the increase of strain-rate that leads to strength increase ( In line of these observations, it was found that brittle strength is proportional to both load magnitude and load duration ( Eqs. Following the above observations that rock wear is governed by fracturing and fragmentation at asperities, we now postulate that the rate of wear is controlled by the rate of dynamic fracturing and the time-dependent rock strength (G). Since G is proportional to the impulse density, Ĵ, the fracturing at the asperities would be proportional to the density of the mechanical impulse. This relation between the impulse-density and asperities strength is now used for the derivation of a velocity dependent wear model describing wear through the integrated force over time (i.e., impulse) acting on an asperity. Consider two fault blocks of nominal area A that contain n asperities of mean dimension L and area L The shear force on the average asperity is where τ is the shear stress. The mechanical impulse on the average asperity is The impulse density on the entire fault Based on the time-dependence of brittle strength (Eq. The above model is based on one, observation-based assumption: the wear of brittle faults is controlled by dynamic fracturing and fragmentation at fault asperities. Using the time-dependence of dynamic fracturing, we derived the dependence of the wear-rate on the ratio [shear-stress/slip-velocity]. The model prediction (Eq. The wear model is based on fracturing failure at asperities, and thus, the K parameter in Eq. In this analysis, we used microindentation hardness for quartz (14.5 This result leads to two deductions. First, the power of b Once this relation (Eq. The model derived above (Eq. The dynamic weakening of faults during seismic slip motivated many analyses of shear along experimental faults at high velocity (e.g., Power-density, with units of MW/m The mutual dependence of frictional strength of both σ While carbonate faults show monotonic relations of frictional strength with PV increase ( This remarkable difference between these rock types can be explained by the differences in the micron-scale deformation mechanics at of the gouge and slip surfaces. Carbonates weakens at high dissipated energy by plastic flow and decomposition processes that produces localization of deformation, nano-scale particles, and highly smooth ‘mirror’ slip surface ( In the present study, we analyzed the tribological parameters of friction coefficient and wear-rate for three groups of rocks under steady-state slip. The wear-rate data ( We studied the evolution of friction and wear ( In summary, it is expected that wear-rate and friction coefficient would be proportional to each other when energy dissipation by fracturing is relatively large, e.g., during early slip along rough fault. During steady-state, asperity fracturing is less intense ( Analytical tools of tribology can be effectively adopted to the analysis of fault shear behavior and we propose to establish Geotribology as a sub-field in geosciences. In the present study, we demonstrate the effectiveness of geotribological approach for the derivation of a wear-rate model, and for the investigation of controlling parameters of frictional strength. The examination of wear and friction data from tens of experimental studies led to the following conclusions: It was widely observed that the wear of brittle faults by fracturing and fragmentation generates a gouge layer that separates the fault blocks. This process transfers a fault into a three-body system in which wear occurs at The present theoretical model indicates that fault wear-rate depends on the impulse-density that is the integrated force-over-time at effective asperities. The model predicts that the wear-rate, WR, is proportional to the ratio of τ/V We applied the model prediction to wear-rate data from granitic, carbonates and sandstone shear experiments, and found good fit over six orders of magnitudes with b The present model incorporates slip-velocity, and thus removes major limitation of previous wear models, and further, the model provides a single, predictive function to a wide range of rocks and slip conditions. We thus envision it as a universal wear model for brittle faults. The compilation of dynamic friction coefficient from 23 experimental series indicates that the weakening and/or strengthening of carbonates and granitic faults are best delineated by using the tribological tools of: (a) PV-factor, which is the product normal-stress and slip-velocity; (b) Friction-maps and wear-maps that present the experimental data in loading condition space. The present analysis was benefited from insightful discussions with Amir Sagy and Xiaofeng Chen. The authors acknowledge the thorough and constructive reviews by Takehiro Hirose and an anonymous reviewer. The work was supported, in part, by 