Microseismicity signals released during rock failure process are firstly recorded using microseismicity monitoring system. A wavelet transform scheme is then developed on the basis of the discrete wavelet transform and implemented into MATLAB to study the energy distribution characteristics of the monitored microseismicity signals. The wavelet transform scheme decomposes the recorded microseismicity signals into various wavelets at seven scales and eight frequency bands. The microseismicity energy at each frequency band is then calculated by integrating the wavelets in each scale. It is found that, for the microseismicity signals recorded during the uniaxial loading of the granite, the microseismicity energies are mainly distributed between the bands 7.8125–15.625 kHz, 15.625–31.250 kHz and 31.25–62.5 kHz and the percentages of the released energies at these frequency bands are 8.24%, 62.72%, 28.08% of the total energies, respectively. The results reveal that the microseismicity energies at these levels are directly related to the damage mechanisms of the granite although further studies are need to identify the failure modes. Then these monitored signals were processed using wavelet transformation to find out the frequency distribution rule and the frequency band energy varying rule of the acoustic emission (AE) signals during the different rock damage and failure stages. The rock failure mechanism was interpreted from the perspective of the relationship between AE signal frequency change and crack propagation. The frequency band energy distribution histograms of the microseismicity signals at different damage stages were computed and drawn by the energy calculation method of wavelet transformation implemented into MATLAB. The energy percentage of the low frequency band (d7-a7) and that of the dominated frequency band (d4-d6) and their variation rule were analyzed especially. Accordingly, the critical damage point is that the low frequency energy percentage is above a certain threshold. This index could be used as the failure precursor criterion for rock mass instability monitoring and early warning, since it provided a theoretical guidance for evaluating internal damage of rock. Finally, it is concluded that the proposed wavelet transform method may provide a new mean for the characteristics analysis of the microseismicity signals recorded by the microseismicity monitoring system and may stimulate the application of the microseismicity monitoring technology in the geotechnical and mining engineerings through analyzing the energy of the microseismicity signals to understand the law of microseismicity emitted by rockmass.When a rock specimen is loaded, the applied mechanical energy is transferred into strain energy stored in the rock. If the applied load is big enough, the rock may fail and the strain energy may be dissipated in the forms of fracture energy, surface energy, kinetic energy, etc. Thus, the deformation and fracture process of the rock under loading is actually the energy transformation process. Correspondingly, more and more researchers have been attracted to study the rock engineering problems from the energy point of view. During the rock failure process, part of the accumulated strain energy may be released as a seismic wave, which is the so-called acoustic emission (AE). There is considerable research reported in literatures on AE released during rock fracture and the corresponding AE signal processing ( There are two main methods for collecting and processing acoustic emission signals: (1) extracting and simplifying the characteristic parameters of acoustic emission signals, and analyzing and processing the acoustic emission using parametric analysis method; (2) collecting the acoustic emission signal waveform and directly analyzing the waveform using time-frequency analysis. In recent years, classical spectrum analysis based on Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) and modern spectrum analysis method represented by wavelet analysis have been applied in the field of acoustic emission of rock and concrete, and many progresses have been achieved ( Signal processing is based on spectral analysis by means of the Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT), which is the primary tool of digital acoustic signal processing. A FFT algorithm was used for computing the DFT with reduced execution time using MATLAB. AE signals were recorded with a sampling frequency of 2.5 × 10 However, there is no mature wavelet transform method till this moment for identifying and analyzing AE signals released by rock fracture, especially their energy distribution characteristics, although more and more microseismicity monitoring systems are nowadays installed for daily safety monitoring of various rock engineering applications such as slope stabilities ( Although the application of acoustic emission has become more and more popular, and great progresses have been achieved in the development and application acoustic emission monitoring equipment, there are still many problems to be solved in order to apply the acoustic emission to predict and forecast rock engineering instability, especially real-time monitoring and early warning. For example, due to the lack of the reliable criterion of damage precursors and related theoretical basis, the success rate of monitoring and forecasting rock engineering instability is usually low, and the effectiveness of the forecasting is often questioned. Therefore, from the perspective of the application of the acoustic emission technology in the real-time monitoring and early warning, the research on the acoustic emission characteristics during the rock failure progressive process will help to reveal the correlation between the monitored main acoustic emission parameters during the different failure stages, further understand the rock failure mechanism and put forward reasonable and effective damage precursor criteria. In this paper, the characteristics of the acoustic emission during the failure progressive process of rocks under uniaxial loading are firstly monitored. They are then analyzed through a series of the wavelet transforms to extract the acoustic emission frequency band energies during the different rock damage and failure stages. After that, the variation laws are derived for the changes of the frequency distribution and the frequency band energy ratio of the acoustic emission with the loading time, which provides a valuable basis for systematic exploration of the rock mass stability monitoring and early warning using the acoustic emission. In the following, the uniaxial compression strength test of a granite is first conducted to generate real AE signals, which are then recorded using an AE monitoring system. After that, a new wavelet analysis method is developed and implemented into MATLAB for the frequency band and energy characteristics analysis of AE signals. Finally, the proposed wavelet analysis method is applied to analyze the AE signals recorded during the uniaxial loading of the granite extracting characteristic parameters, evaluating magnitude spectrum ratios, and determining energy ratios. In order to obtain real AE signals for subsequent wavelet analyses, a granite is uniaxially loaded till failure in the laboratory and the released AE signals associated with the failure process of the granite are recorded using an AE monitoring system, as shown in  AE is attributed to the rapid release of the strain energy accumulated in the granite during loading. Thus, the energy content of the AE signal must be related to this energy release, too. The true energy of the AE signal is directly proportional to the area under the AE waveform ( Combining Eq. According to the orthogonality properties of the wavelet and scaling functions, the latter two items of Eq. Eq. At each frequency band, the AE energy can be calculated using Eq. Moreover, according to ( Eq. As introduced above, a number of AE signals are recorded during the uniaxial loading of the granite using the real-time AE monitoring system. The recorded AE signals are then analyzed using the discrete wavelet transform developed in-house in Section In the following, a typical AE signal, i.e., the AE event No. 1332, recorded during the uniaxial loading of the granite will be decomposed at 7 scales using the new wavelet transform method developed in Section   Moreover, it is found that the energy released due to the microcracking of the rock is mainly distributed in the frequency band in which the main rock fracture is located. For the granite tested in this study, the released energy from the microcracking was concentrated in the d5 frequency band. The percentage of the released energy is 62.72% of the total energy in the d5 frequency band. The percentage of the released energy is 28.08% and 8.24% of the total energy in the d4 and d6 frequency bands respectively. In the other frequency band, the percentage of the released energy is nearly zero. The main frequency band of the AE signals can be regarded as the characteristics of frequency band which can reflect the distribution characters of the AE energy. Finally, it is noted that the sum of the AE energy in each frequency band after the wavelet transform is equal to the AE energy of the original AE signals. For the typical AE signal analyzed here, the sum of the AE energy at each frequency band decomposed using the proposed wavelet transform is 0.865597 m Similarly, the acoustic emission signals recorded during different loading stages are analyzed according to the methods presented above, and the frequency band energy distribution characteristics of the acoustic emission signals during different loading stages are obtained, as shown in The acoustic emission energy at each failure stage is concentrated in the frequency bands d4-d6, while the energy at other frequency bands is extremely few and decays rapidly with the diffusion of the crack. In the initial compaction stage ( At the plastic deformation stage, the macroscopic crack increases rapidly due to the continuous crack propagation, which creates new surfaces in the material, and is accompanied by high amplitude, long wavelength and low frequency elastic vibrations. In view of this, low-frequency acoustic emission signal is produced with the load increasing and the gradually increasing crack propagation results in the migration of the acoustic emissions to those at the lower frequency. As shown in The energy proportion of the low frequency band increases but that of the dominant frequency band reduces. When the energy proportion of the dominant frequency band reaches a certain threshold (i.e., 50% or more), a critical point is reached between the internal crack propagation and the failure of rock. Moreover, according to the existing experimental results, a comprehensive analysis of the parameters, such as the acoustic emission counting rate and the acoustic emission event energy, shows that when the energy proportion of the dominant frequency band reaches 50% (or more), the main rupture has occurred and the larger macroscopic cracks have appeared inside the specimen. For different types of rocks, the threshold of the low frequency band energy ratio marking the main rupture should be different, which can be obtained by statistical analysis based on the tests of a large number of samples. The rock samples used in this experiment is intact granite. If the loading condition changes, no significant difference is found for the dominant frequency of the acoustic emission signals. Under the same loading conditions, the dominant frequency of the acoustic emission signals for different rocks increases with the increase of the rock strength. Therefore, although the characteristics of the acoustic emission frequency band and the corresponding energy summarized in this study are universal, the rock strength and actual loading conditions still need to be taken into account to determine the frequency band division and the critical point of the low frequency energy ratio in the specific application. Besides, the time and frequency energy distribution of the acoustic emission signals is analyzed using the time-varying power spectrum method proposed in a literature ( In this study, real AE signals are firstly generated by the uniaxial compression test of a granite specimen and monitored using an AE monitoring system. After that, a new wavelet scheme is developed on the basis of the discrete wavelet transform and implemented into MATLAB to analyzed the AE signals recorded during the uniaxial compression test of the granite. During the analysis, the recorded AE signals are decomposed into wavelets at seven levels. Each level represents a certain frequency band and the sum of the wavelets at all seven levels can accurately reconstructs the original AE signal without any signal loss. The approximate level, i.e., a7, has the lowest frequency band while the frequency increases up to 500 kHz from the approximate level to the detail level, i.e., from d7 to d1. After the decomposition process, the AE energy of the decomposed wavelet at each frequency band is calculated. It is found that the majority of the AE energy follows into three detail levels, i.e., b3 (d6), b4 (d5) and b5 (d4), which reveals that the AE energies at these levels are directly related to the damage mechanisms of the granite although further studies are need to identify the failure modes. Finally, it is concluded that the proposed wavelet transform scheme provides a new method of analyzing frequency band and energy characteristics of the AE signals. Compared with the commonly used statistical distribution method of frequency spectrum based on the Fourier transform, the proposed wavelet transform method has obvious advantages in the time and frequency domains. The energy characteristics of the AE signals are mapped into various frequency bands using the proposed wavelet transform method, which makes the energy characteristics of un-obvious AE signals stand out under various resolutions, i.e. scales. Thus, the proposed wavelet transform method may provide a new means for the characteristics analysis of the microseismicity signals recorded by the microseismicity monitoring system and may stimulate the application of the AE technology in the geotechnical engineering through analyzing the energy of the AE signals to understand the law of AE emitted by the failure of rockmass. The wavelet transform was used to analyze and process acoustic emission waveform signals monitored during uniaxial loading of granites to find out the frequency distribution characteristics of acoustic emission signals and the energy transition rule of the frequency bands in each destructive stage. The implemented wavelet transform can process the signals without oversight and redundancy and orthogonally decompose them into multiple independent components of the band, whose signal energy distribution and variation can accurately reflect the acoustic emission source. The rock destructive mechanism can be derived according to the relationship between the crack propagation and the frequency change of the acoustic emission signal. Lower frequency acoustic emission signals are generated by the expansion of larger macroscopic cracks. The total energy of the acoustic emission signals varies greatly during the different stages of destruction. By analyzing the energy proportion of the dominant frequency band and the variation of the energy proportion in different failure stages, a certain threshold of the low-frequency energy proportion is proposed as the precursor of the critical damage point, which is of great practical significance to the design of rock engineering instability monitoring and early warning system, and also provides a theoretical basis for assessing the internal damage of rock. The authors do not have any conflict of interest with other entities or researchers. The present work is partially supported by the