Electrodialysis and related processes have huge potential in the treatment of effluents from a variety of industrial processes. They can recover water and other valuable products, including heavy metal ions, acids and bases, nutrients, and organics. In recent years, novel and improved systems have been continuously developed as a result of research in the field, showing that the (near) zero liquid discharge approach can be affordable in several industrial applications. A larger market share is expected in the near future. ED has been studied and adopted for the treatment of effluents produced in several water-intensive industrial processes (e.g., metal finishing, tannery, and pulp and paper industries). These wastewaters often have a heterogeneous composition and may contain different kinds of contaminants, including heavy metals, acids, and organic matter. Due to its separation ability toward ions (and in general charged particles), ED is suitable for recovery operations of water and different products and has been playing an increasing role in the treatment of industrial effluents. In this chapter, the main applications of ED for industrial wastewaters are described, including conventional and nonconventional ED and integrated processes. Among the pollutants in industrial wastewater, heavy metals are very hazardous because they are toxic, carcinogenic, nonbiodegradable, recalcitrant, and bioaccumulative in living organisms. Therefore heavy metal pollution due to contaminated wastewater is a serious environmental problem and several treatment technologies have been proposed to deal with Several studies have been carried out on transport phenomena through ion exchange membranes (IEMs), providing results useful for the understanding of their basic mechanisms and with practical implications on ED processes. Transport properties of IEMs, influence of pH, formation of complexes, and competition among different ions are the most commonly studied aspects, but novel or modified membranes have been also proposed. For example, experiments with solutions containing Ni The selection of optimal operating conditions is crucial for enhancing the ED performance. Taguchi’s method can be used for this purpose. For example, it was used to select the best experimental conditions from a minimum number of tests, and experiments with different metal ions (including Cu, Zn, Pb, and Cr) were performed The following sections are devoted to ED applications for wastewater containing specific metal ions, produced by plating or other industrial processes. Finally, other ED applications concerning heavy metal ions are discussed. The nickel-plating process is performed by a galvanic bath followed by a series of rinsing stages. ED can be used to recover Ni ions from the first rinsing bath solution and to recycle them in the plating bath. In particular, the first rinsing tank solution is treated by ED and the concentrated product is reused in the plating bath, while the diluate product is recirculated to the second rinsing tank ( Recent tests conducted with synthetic solutions based on a commercial bright Ni electroplating Watts bath (NiCl ED was also adopted for the treatment of spent electroless Ni plating solutions in order to remove harmful ions, while maintaining high concentrations of useful ions Very high levels of recovery (~99.8%) and purity (93.9%) were obtained by an electrolysis-ED–EDI integrated process (EDI with 13 cell pairs and all channels filled by mixed bed), but at the cost of a nonnegligible additional complexity Other EDI processes were proposed in configurations that deviate significantly from conventional ED, but provided interesting results, thus being very promising. Among them, we mention three-compartment units with electroregeneration Optimal experimental conditions were investigated for the treatment of copper sulfate solutions by ED, showing that ED can be effective for Cu separation (removal percentages However, the toxicity of cyanide boosted the development of cyanide-free baths for Cu electroplating, and ED has also been tested for these solutions. For example, the simulated rinse water of a 1-hydroxyethane 1,1-diphosphonic acid (105 Promising results were also obtained in treatment by ED of electroplating solutions containing both Ni and Cu The operation of ED units can be conducted in the overlimiting regime where electroconvection occurs and intensifies mass transfer. High levels of separation and current efficiency ( Similarly to the case of Ni, a combined electrochemical process can be used for Cu solutions. For example, an ED pilot unit was used in combination with an electrolysis cell ( The separation of Cu–ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) complexes was found to be quicker and more effective in an ED unit in comparison with other electrochemical processes with or without membranes (electrolysis and electroelectrodialysis) Finally, an alternative to conventional ED is EDI. For example, a three-compartment EDI unit with an electroregenerated layered bed in the central (diluate) channel was used to treat ED can also be adopted in zinc-plating processes. Among them, the phosphate plating is performed in bath solutions with phosphoric acid for coating metals with a layer of Zn ED can also be used for the recovery of other Zn plating solutions. Complexation-enhanced ED ( Electroplating is also commonly performed by hexavalent chromium, which can exist under different stable ionic forms (Cr Simulated Cr(VI) wastewater at different concentrations was treated by ED in batch mode for a maximum time of 165 Real electroplating wastewater is contaminated by the presence of other ions, thus making the recovery process more difficult. A treatment coupling chemical precipitation and ED was applied to a real Cr(VI) electroplating wastewater (19 Some studies have been devoted to the application of EDI units for Cr(VI) separation Other applications of electrodialytic treatments concern wastewater containing Cr(III) (with or without Cr(VI)). The use of ED has been tested in combination with other membrane processes for the reclamation of a secondary effluent from a treatment plant of plating wastewater containing different heavy metal ions Hides and skin treatments consume large volumes of water with chemicals in several processing steps. Wastewater from tanning industries contain several pollutants, including organic matter, tannins, salts, and Cr(III). ED has been applied for the recycle of water and Cr(III) from tannery wastewater. Filtered spent chromium tanning solutions were fed in the diluate channels of an ED unit, where Cr(III) (present in cationic, nonionic, and anionic species) was retained, while other ions were selectively separated (i.e., transported in the concentrate solution) A two-step electrodialytic process was also proposed in the treatment of model solutions Integrated processes have provided good results in the treatment of real tannery wastewater, exhibiting high removals of COD, ions, color, and odor. The organic matter degradation was achieved in the first treatment by photoelectrochemical oxidation Among the various coatings performed in galvanic processes, cadmium electroplating by alkaline cyanide baths is quite common and the possibility to use ED for water recovery from their waste solutions has been tested in batch mode Wastewater from different origins (e.g., printing pigments, batteries, electronics, explosives, and metallurgical processes) contains lead and ED has been proposed for its treatment. The effect of the operating conditions (flow rate, temperature, concentration, and voltage) was assessed in experiments with Pb(NO The effect of pH is also important, and optimal values were found between 3 and 5 by experiments conducted in an ED pilot unit EDI has been used for the purification of waste solutions containing different heavy metal ions. For example, after optimization of the operational parameters in tests with a Among other applications, ED with complexation was performed. EDTA–metal chelation was used for selective separation by BMED of Li and Co ions in model solutions of Li-ion battery wastewater ED with complexation was also performed in an ED stack with three-compartment units ( ED was effectively applied in the reclamation of acidic solutions from Cu-electrorefining (with As and Sb ions as impurities) Another application of ED is for the treatment of goldmine effluent (containing cyanide, Na, Cu, and Zn as the main ions) Various EDI configurations were tested for the treatment of solutions with Co simulating primary coolants of nuclear power plants Environmental and economic problems are linked to large amounts of waste acidic/alkaline streams produced by several industrial processes. Therefore the recovery of such effluents is required for sustainable development. Moreover, the conversion of waste salts into acids and bases is an interesting option for valuable product recycling. In this context, ED and related processes have been proposed for the treatment of several industrial effluents, including waste acids containing metals, spent solutions from scrubbing processes, salty solutions, effluents containing organic matter, and organic acids, as discussed in detail in the following. Pickling is a common surface treatment in metal manufacturing processes. It is used to remove superficial impurities, thus guaranteeing successful subsequent treatments (e.g., painting and plating). Acid pickling of steel is the most common application, and is aimed at removing scale which contains oxides formed during hot working processes. The acid in the pickle liquor (H Different methods have been proposed for the regeneration of spent pickle liquors, including ED An integrated process coupling ED with BMED is an attractive option for the treatment of spent pickling solutions ED has also been applied for the recovery of spent acids from metal-containing solutions produced by other industrial processes, such as H Cost-effective integrated membrane processes were tested for the recovery of HCl from aluminium foil wastewater, coupling diffusion dialysis with ED Acid and base regeneration was also proven to be feasible by BMED with a crystallization pretreatment (fluidized pellet reactor reducing the scaling potential, BMED can be used in power plants for spent acid or base regeneration and/or gas recovery from solutions used in wet scrubbers for chemical absorption of flue gases. The recovery of the SO Another application for the treatment of flue gas desulfurization wastewater was proposed with a process coupling ion exchange and BMED ED can be a technoeconomically competitive method to remove (inorganic and organic) heat-stable salts formed in spent alkanolamine solutions adopted as absorbents for H The recovery of acid and base from industrial waste salt is a possible application of BMED. Sodium sulfate streams from rayon manufacture processes can be converted and recycled as H HNO An integrated process coupling SED with BMED ( Water splitting by BMED for salt conversion into acid and base has also been applied for treating wastewater containing organic matter. For example, the regeneration of ammonium and sulfuric acid from industrial glutamate production wastewater was successfully performed, restoring the membrane properties by acid–ultrasound cleaning for fouling removal Conventional ED can be used as a concentration method for acid or base recovery from other waste solutions containing organic compounds (e.g., acidic byproducts of palm oil Electrodialytic techniques have been extensively tested in the production of organic acids Another interesting application was proposed in the reclamation of industrial waste acid from metal finishing in order to produce organic acid (e.g., acetic acid) from the corresponding salt by ion substitution electrodialysis The oil and gas industry produces large amounts of wastewater, from extraction to refining processes. Both organic and inorganic components are contained in these effluents, thus requiring suitable treatments, including physicochemical and biological processes, to remove oil content and salinity. Also drainage waters (brines) from coal mines and contaminated or spent solutions from power plants need to be treated before discharge or reuse. ED has found some applications in these fields, both in industrial sites and in the context of academic research, as discussed in the following. Oil and gas extractions generate large volumes of wastewater. Estimates reported a global quantity of produced water of ~250 million barrels per day, corresponding roughly to three times the daily oil volume The content and composition of produced water may vary depending on the specific site. Total dissolved solids (TDS) range from a few to ~300,000 Two different examples of application of ED were reported by Ref. ED tests with simulated oil and gas-produced waters were performed in order to assess the possibility to achieve the quality standards of potable water, irrigation water, and livestock watering ED was used for salt solutions simulating shale gas hydraulic fracturing produced water, finding detrimental effects of calcium due to fouling in the cathode chamber, which were mitigated (calcium flux reduced by 47%–73% along with current density enhanced by ~40%) using an MVC at the cathode An interesting application of ED was recently proposed for the reuse of polymer flooding produced water Finally, the application of reverse electrodeionization (REDI) was suggested for the reduction of the energy demand in fracturing operations Water is consumed in many processes operated in petroleum refineries. Process water is that in contact with hydrocarbons and includes desalter effluent, sour water, tank bottom An example of industrial application dates back to the late 1980s and concerns the test of an electrodialysis reversal (EDR) pilot in the treatment plant at STANIC Industria Petrolifera of Livorno (Italy) Encouraging results were recently obtained by treatment systems based on hybrid membrane desalination processes including reverse osmosis (RO). EDR–RO The use of BMED for the regeneration of NaOH from spent caustic is another possible application shown to be feasible by preliminary experiments Drainage water used in coal mining contains a significant amount of salts and can be treated for reusing purposes. An EDR industrial plant was installed at the Tutuka power station in South Africa, purposely upgraded in order to also treat mine water Lab-scale experiments on low-salinity coal mine solutions supersaturated in sulfate salts were performed by an EDR unit fed in single-pass mode with different velocities between the diluate and the concentrate Experiments on acid mine drainage samples with high concentration of sulfates, coming from a carboniferous area in Criciúma/SC, Brazil exhibited high removal efficiencies Some applications of the ED technology have been implemented for the treatment of brackish water from power plants. A 7-year experience with the EDR industrial plant operating at the Tutuka power station, mentioned in the previous section, was documented Cooling tower blowdown water from a power plant was desalinated by an EDR pilot unit inserted in the treatment plant reported in Other applications in power plants concern the use of ED or BMED for the regeneration of spent acid or alkaline solutions from wet scrubbers, as reported in This section collects ED applications that do not fall in the classes previously described. Some of them are reported in Different studies were focused on the use of monovalent selective ion exchange membranes (MVMs) in ED units equipped with two-compartment cells for the treatment of saline effluents. After the early experiments with single salts Several industrial processes are sources of saline wastewater containing organic matter, and ED has been applied for their treatment, including the cases reported in Conventional ED and other ED-based techniques have the capability to separate charged species with high recovery of water and other materials, especially metals, acids, and bases, but also nutrients and organic matter. Therefore they find application in the treatment of effluents from many industrial sources. Among them, plating, pickling, and other metallurgical processes are the main ones. However, there are several further potential applications for desalination and recovery of waste effluents from the chemical and petrochemical industry, (nuclear) power plants, food industry, pulp and paper processes, and biorefineries, for example. Fouling and scaling can be mitigated by pretreatments and cleaning-in-place procedures. However, sometimes the membrane deterioration is partially irreversible, especially when caused by organics. Other technical drawbacks may be associated with insufficient purity of the product due to the transport of competing ions. In some cases, other limits may be due to high energy consumption. Moreover, great investment costs due to high membranes prices limit significantly the use at industrial scale. However, recent research is prolific, thus outlining a promising trend of progress. Many studies have been devoted to the development of novel membranes and the characterization of transport mechanisms to improve the process performance. Some technical limitations are overcome by using special IEMs (e.g., MVMs and proton-blocking IEMs) or NF/UF membranes. ED can be enhanced by complexation, and highly performing solutions can also be obtained by integrated schemes with membrane processes and/or other treatments. The implementation of emerging systems involving ED technologies with the objective of (near) ZLD is technically feasible in several cases. Therefore ED-based processes have huge potential. However, further improvements aimed at optimizing the process and reducing the energy consumption are needed to develop more competitive applications that can promote widerspread use at industrial scale. Within this perspective, a larger market can trigger positive feedback for membrane cost reduction. Finally, recent years have also been characterized by the development of similar processes or hybrid technologies, such as EDI  anion exchange membrane bipolar membrane bipolar membrane electrodialysis continuous electrodeionization cation exchange membrane electrodialysis electrodeionization ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid electrodialysis metathesis electrodialysis reversal ion exchange membrane microfiltration monovalent selective anion exchange membrane monovalent selective cation exchange membrane monovalent selective ion exchange membrane nanofiltration reverse electrodialysis reverse electrodeionization reverse osmosis selectrodialysis ultrafiltration zero liquid discharge  current efficiency specific energy consumption for produced solution (kWh