In this research, a new mechanochemical route has been introduced for solid-state reduction of MoS2 using metallic Zn powder as reductant. Nano particles of Mo and ZnS were synthesized as final product. When MoS2 and Zn were used as the starting mixture, the reaction was completed after 12h. Whereas this reaction was completed after 5h and 8h of milling in presence of Al2O3 and CaO respectively. In this research X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) was employed for studying the reactions’ progress. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), and laser particle size analyzing techniques were employed for studying the morphology and size distribution of the ball-milled powders. Results have shown that decreasing in size of particles in presence of Al2O3 and CaO was the main reason of improving kinetic of the reaction.Mechanical alloying (MA) is normally a dry, high-energy ball milling technique that has been employed in the production of a variety of commercially useful and scientifically interesting materials. The processing involves repeated cold welding, fracturing, and rewelding of powder particles in a high-energy ball mill resulting in the formation of alloy phases Molybdenum (Mo) is an important refractory metal that is usually extracted from its sulfide ore MoS On the other hand whenever mechanical alloying is considered as main method of synthesis, some technical points should be considered. Here the crystal structure of MoS The mechanochemical reduction of MoS This paper deals with the mechanochemical reduction of MoS Hence the aim of this research is to investigate the effect of adding brittle components to a ductile-ductile system in a high-energy ball milling process. So by adding Al In this research Molybdenite concentrate (purity ⩾97%, submicron) was prepared from Sarcheshme mine in Iran. Also micrometric Zn powder (purity ⩾99.5%) was prepared from Mashhad powder metallurgy Company. MoS The starting powder mixture in each system was charged into stainless steel cups under atmosphere. In order to reach the optimum of milling conditions and preventing the presence of any unreacted powder during the milling process, the steel balls with two different sizes (23 balls with 12 Mechanical alloying was carried out in a planetary ball-milling machine (M-200) with the rotary speed of 315  Merzhonov has employed adiabatic temperature to evaluate mode of reactions’ progress. He has stated that a reaction can take place spontaneously if its adiabatic temperature is more than 1800   In order to investigate the effect of lime on the rate of the reduction reaction the second system was milled for different hours.  Therefore, it can be concluded that in presence of Al In order to make a good comparison about these systems, Particle size distributions (PSD) of these systems after 2 In the milling process the powder particles are plastically deformed and get cold-welded. Furthermore, work hardening occurs due to the force of impact of the grinding medium and eventually the work-hardened powder particles fracture. Hence, by this way fresh and atomically clean surfaces are created   Also, the changes occurred in the peak of MoS  The 2 In order to show the effect of Al Also the morphology of the synthesized product powders belonging to system 1 and 3 is shown in Nano-sized particles of Mo and ZnS was successfully synthesized by the mechanochemical reduction of MoS