In geographical regions with sub-zero temperatures, natural freezing can potentially be used as an energy-efficient purification technique for industrial wastewaters. The utilization of this technique requires knowledge of the effect of impurities on the strength of the ice to enable the effective harvesting of produced ice. Previous studies of the mechanical properties of model-scale ice have tended to focus on the initial solution, and little consideration has been given to the amount of impurities trapped inside the ice. The aim of this research is to evaluate the separation efficiency during the natural freezing process by quantifying the impurities trapped inside the ice formed from known concentrations of aqueous solutions and to investigate the effect of impurities on the bulk mechanical properties of the ice.
                  In this study, twenty similar size ice beams were prepared in freezing boxes in a temperature-controlled cold room from five different aqueous solutions – tap water, and ethanol and sodium chloride aqueous solutions of two different molalities, i.e. 0.1 mol/kg and 0.3 mol/kg. The bending strength and natural frequencies of the ice samples were measured in the freezing conditions, and the concentrations of impurities in melted ice samples were determined. The research shows that with the ethanol and sodium chloride solutions, the concentration of impurities inside the ice clearly decreased in comparison to the initial solution. The structure of the ice from the different solutions differed significantly; as the tap water formed columnar ice, ethanol ice grew through large platelets, while the structure of the sodium chloride ice was a mixture of the two forms. The tap water yielded the highest strength ice and the ice formed from the ethanol aqueous solutions the weakest ice. The measurements indicated that the concentration of impurity in the ice reduces the mechanical strength and the magnitude of the effect varies with the chemical characteristic of impurity.The insufficiency of accessible water and worsening of water quality due to industrial discharges have made it necessary to find alternative and energy efficient water purification methods. The conventional processes to treat wastewaters are adsorption, chemical precipitation, electrolytic treatment, flotation, ion exchange, and membrane filtration, which all have unique properties and suitable water types. Natural freezing is an alternative method to achieve purification. When freezing is implemented in a wastewater basin under natural weather conditions, the cooling energy of arctic sub-zero temperature regions can be utilized to energy efficient wastewater treatment. A pure ice layer is forming over the wastewater basin similar way as in lakes, rivers and seas. A conceptual approach for wastewater purification by natural freezing is presented in During the freezing of a solution, heat of crystallization is released into the surroundings. The ice crystal lattice usually rejects solute molecules/ions because of their excessive size, preventing the formation of a solid solution with water ( The mechanical properties of ice have been the interest of research in glaciology and geosciences for decades ( The strength of sea ice and parameters affecting the strength have been the object of study for decades. In terms of impurities, the salinity (through brine volume) has been observed to have a clear effect on the mechanical properties of ice, see e.g. In addition, the studies have shown that the brine volume has a clear effect on the elastic and static modulus. The elastic modulus here refers to Young's modulus ( Besides salt (sodium chloride), the development of model scale ice has raised interest towards the effect of other chemicals on the strength of ice. The general conclusion is that adding these dopants to the water weakens the formed ice in terms of flexural strength (e.g.  However, in the development of the model scale ice, the interest is commonly in the initial solution and freezing process. Thus, the studies generally account for the mass concentration of the chemical in the initial solution and neglect how much of the chemical is trapped inside the ice, i.e. the amount of chemical actually affecting the properties of the ice. These simplifications are usually for practical reasons (it is easier to observe and control the mass concentration of the initial solution and then check the obtained mechanical properties). Furthermore, due to the weakening effect of chemicals, the model scale ice is difficult to move from in-situ without damaging it. Thus, the static modulus is commonly determined from the plate deflection and the flexural strength is determined from a cantilever beam test, as recommended by ITTC guidelines (ITTC The natural frequencies of the ice indicate the internal structure dynamic behaviour for a known geometry, i.e. an ice beam. They can be considered a measure determining the mechanical dynamic property of the ice. ( In the application of wastewater purification by freezing, measuring and determining the mechanical properties of ice are important. This information can be used to estimate the ice strength and to evaluate the needed force for breaking and collecting the ice in a purification process application. Analysing the ice strength by the four point bending test has been found to be accurate and commonly used method ( Hence, the aim of this research is to determine the amount of ethanol and sodium chloride trapped inside the laboratory-produced ice and their effect on the mechanical properties of the ice: the flexural strength, static and dynamic elastic modules. These parameters are required when designing a wastewater purification apparatus and testing the performance of ice breaking vessels. To our best understanding, the chemical quantity in the solution determined by the molality (moles of chemical per kg of water) is a better measure for the comparison of chemical impacts than using the mass percent (wt-%) based quantity due to the different molar masses of the studied chemicals. The molar mass of sodium chloride NaCl, 58.443 g/mol, is much higher than the molar mass of ethanol C After the solutions were prepared, each batch was divided into four freezing boxes made of insulated material, Finnfoam (housing insulation material, polystyrene), to prevent freezing on the sides and bottom, i.e. the cold was affecting the surface layer while the foam walls insulated the sides and bottom, thus replicating natural freezing. Therefore, the heat flux migrated mainly from the solution through the ice layer to cooling air. In total, twenty similar freezing boxes were used in the freezing experiments. The boxes consisted of outer and inner boxes. The utilization of two boxes allowed removing of the ice sample with low effort, as the ice could be taken out easily by lifting the inner box with the sample. The inner dimensions of the inner boxes were 60 cm in length and 15 cm in width. The depth of the inner box was lower than the depth of the outer box, as the aim was to freeze half of the solution in maximum. Thus, the separation efficiency of natural freezing could be kept at moderate level when <50% of solution is frozen ( The interior of the outer freezing box was lined with plastic to make the box waterproof. The open section between the inner and outer boxes was insulated by placing a piece of joint insulation foam, commonly used in buildings, between the boxes. Thus, it prevented the boxes from freezing together. An elastic rope was placed into the box to mount the frozen samples for the natural frequency measurements. Prior to pouring the solutions, each box was weighed with a Sartorius LC 34000P balance (capacity 34 kg and readability 0.5 g). Each sample contained 24 kg of the initial solution and was weighed in room temperature. After all of the boxes were prepared, weighed and filled with solutions, the boxes were taken into the cold room, where the targeted temperature was −5 °C. The samples were placed in the room in a four by five matrix form where each column formed a line of similar initial samples. The first row of solutions was closest to the door and the fourth row closest to the back wall. A temperature sensor was placed in each box in the first row to monitor the temperature in the liquid during freezing, and in addition, the ambient temperature was measured from the middle of the first row. A total of six PT100 thermometers were connected to two PicoLog PT-104 data loggers, which were connected via USBs to a laptop. The natural frequencies were measured in the cold room to avoid the melting of the ice samples. The measurement was conducted with an optical scanning laser Doppler vibrometer (SLDV). The SLDV is a non-contact and non-destructive method of measuring surface velocities and consequently natural frequencies. The optical signal allows measuring through transparent media, e.g. glass or water. It is based on the Doppler effect and measures the surface velocity of excited ice. ( The ice was hung with elastic rope, which was placed in the solution prior to freezing. There is a large difference in the stiffness of the ice and the elastic rope with which it is hung. This enables capturing only the ice internal dynamical behavior. The ice samples were also supported from the bottom to limit the rigid body motion. The modulus of elasticity (via dynamic measurement) The flexural strength of ice was measured with a four-point bending test in the cold room. After the loading, the distance of the breaking point was measured from the left-hand side support. In addition, the thickness and the width of the ice beam at the breaking point were measured. The ice beam is assumed to behave as an Euler-Bernoulli beam. At first, the moment equation along the beam is determined from the free-body diagram. It is assumed that the first failure in a bending situation occurs on the surface in tension, as the axial stress (in the longitudinal direction) maximum occurs on the surface of the beam. Knowing the relation ( The displacement was measured simultaneously with the force. This enables the determination of the static modulus of elasticity ( After the displacement equation is determined and the displacement is measured from a known location, the static modulus ( Unfortunately, some of the ice beams were broken when taken out from the freezing boxes. 4 of 30 beams (or halves) broke before the measurements. The fourth row of ice was mainly too weak for the bending strength test. Row 2 ice was measured as full beams. Rows 1 and 3 ice beams were cut in half for the bending test and static modulus of elasticity. Due to the test set-up, it was not possible to mount the displacement sensor on the rig for samples broken when taken out from the freezing boxes, as the span between the supports was small. The formed ice layer and concentrated residual solution under the ice layer were separated after the freezing test period by lifting up the ice layer from the freezing box. The total mass of the ice layer was weighed and the ice was moved to mechanical testing. A 500 ml sample was taken (after agitating the liquid) from the concentrated solution remaining in the box. After the mechanical tests of ice (the frequency measurement and flexural strength test), the ice samples for chemical analysis were collected within various horizontal layers sliced in sections of 1 to 4 cm thicknesses using a band saw. The ice pieces were rinsed with purified water, produced by Elga PureLab water system (resistivity 18.2 MΩ·cm, TOC < 5 ppb) to avoid external contamination during the ice handling. Composite ice samples from a layer were collected into a plastic bag for crushing with a hammer. The crushed ice was packed tightly in 250–500 ml polyethylene bottles for freeze storing, transporting and further chemical analysis. The total amount of samples was 70: 5 initial solution samples, 20 concentrated solution samples, 10 whole ice layer section cut samples and 35 ice layer samples from different horizontal layers. Furthermore, vertical and horizontal ice layer samples were cut and collected from the ice samples in rows two and three to visually observe the crystal structure by placing the samples between two polarizing films and directing light through the arrangement. All freeze stored samples were melted at room temperature. The samples containing tap water and ethanol were analyzed with a total organic carbon (TOC) analyser (Shimadzu TOC-L + ASI-L Autosampler, detection limit 4 μg/l) to determine the concentration of total organic carbon. Ethanol concentrations were further calculated based on TOC concentrations. Molar mass of ethanol C The temperatures were recorded from the first row samples with an interval of one minute until the samples in the second last row (row 2) were taken out from the freezing boxes. The samples in row four were taken out after 53 h of freezing at −5 °C. However, the samples were rather thin (P4 35 mm, E4a 12 mm and E4b 9 mm, S4a 22 mm and S4b 19 mm). The S4a and P4 samples were the only ones rigid enough to be hung from the flexural rope for the elastic modulus measurements. Then, the ice growth continued in other rows at lower temperatures for longer freezing times to be able to produce thicker ice layers for mechanical testing purposes. The temperature was first lowered to −15 °C for 13 h, and after that raised to −10 °C. As a result, the samples in row three were taken out after 75 h of freezing, of which 60 h was at −5 °C, 13 h at −15 °C and 2 h at −10 °C. The thicknesses of the ice samples were 59 to 72 mm and the samples were strong enough for the mechanical property tests. To stop the ice growth in the two remaining sample rows, the temperature was increased to −5 °C. The samples in rows two and one were frozen an additional 4.5 and 6 h, respectively, at −5 °C before removal from the freezing boxes. The ice samples could be distinguished from the outlook from the surface of the ice; see row a) in The ice from tap water (P) had the most homogeneous ice crystal structure. The ice samples were clearly transparent and the top and bottom surfaces were smooth. The ice structure was columnar, with all of the crystals oriented almost vertically; see the vertical thin section in The ice grown from ethanol solutions (Ea and Eb) had the most irregular structure. The ice first grew an approximately 9 mm solid layer. After this layer, dendritic crystal platelets started to grow. The diameters of the platelets were up to 100 mm, the thickness was up to 5 mm, and the orientation appeared to be random. There were distinguished regions between the platelets, and many platelets were not connected. When the freezing continued, bridges between the platelets started to form, leading to a more solid ice structure. However, the bottom of the ice remained irregular and thin sections showed that the gaps had not fully closed; see The ice from the sodium chloride solution (Sa and Sb) had a structure between the tap water and ice frozen in the ethanol solution. The ice was cloudy and almost opaque. The top surface was smooth but the bottom surface rough. The ice grew in platelets, but thinner and smaller in diameter than in the ice obtained from the ethanol solution. The platelets were oriented locally in the same direction, see Prior to the mechanical and chemical measurements, the physical properties were measured. The average length of the ice samples was 567 mm and the width 143 mm. Average ice mass growth rates (g/h, m In the following section, the average properties of each measurement are calculated from the samples of rows one, two and three, and results are compared. The samples of the fourth row were taken out first when the amount of ice was still very low and mechanical measurements could not be performed with three ice samples out of five.     The flexural strength results show that tap water ice is the strongest, as expected, and the ethanol solution ice is the weakest. This may partly result from the structure of the ice. As noted in the method description, the beams were assumed to be solid in the calculation of the second moment of inertia as it was not possible to measure the actual porosity. It should be noted that, especially, in the case of ethanol ice, the beams were to solid ice through the thickness and contained pores. Thus, the determined When these conducted measurements are compared with the previous studies about naturally formed ice in lakes, rivers and seas, the results are reasonable. The tap water represents (in terms of salinity) freshwater ice and the measured values are similar to the values of freshwater ice. The strength of the sodium chloride solutions is similar to lower values of the sea ice strength. Also the static and dynamic elastic modulus values of the tap water and sodium chloride solutions are in the same range as with sea and freshwater ice. The ice grown from the ethanol solution showed higher values than those obtained with fine grained ethanol model scale ice as addressed by  The results show that the average separation efficiency with a 0.3 mol/kg ethanol solution, 64%, is higher than with a 0.1 mol/kg ethanol solution, 47%, whereas separation efficiencies with both sodium chloride solutions are at the same level, close to 70%. This peculiar difference in efficiencies could not be noticed within row four ice samples with a higher freezing temperature (−5 °C) and therefore induced lower ice growth rates. The separation efficiency with the 0.3 mol/kg ethanol solution was 71% and with 0.1 mol/kg 73%, while with a 0.3 mol/kg sodium chloride solution it was 73% and with 0.1 mol/kg as high as 86%. It is already recognised that higher separation efficiencies can be achieved with lower ice growth rates and dilute solutions ( The five different initial aqueous solutions – tap water, ethanol and sodium chloride solutions of molalities 0.1 and 0.3 mol/kg – transformed into visually distinguishable ice structures during natural air-cooled freezing. The differences were noticeable also in terms of the conducted chemical and mechanical measurements. Tap water was used as a reference liquid as well as a solvent in ethanol and sodium chloride solutions to compare the properties of the studied ice when ice formed from tap water had the highest flexural strength and natural frequency. The dopants added to the tap water changed the mechanical properties and chemical analysis results of the ice. The platelet diameter and thickness in the intermediate growth stage were the greatest and the orientation was the most random for ice formed from ethanol solutions, which affected the final structure of the ice so that the ethanol ice had the most irregular structure. Based on the research, the ice formed from the ethanol solution is more fragile than the ice formed from the tap water, as the flexural strength is much lower than in tap water ice and sodium chloride ice. Ethanol appeared to weaken the ice more effectively compared to sodium chloride. In summary, the amount of added chemical dopants, ethanol and sodium chloride, was reduced with variation from 47% to 86% by natural freezing at cooling air temperatures −15 °C and − 5 °C, respectively. This verifies the assumption that higher separation efficiencies can be obtained by lower ice growth rates at higher freezing temperatures, but different chemical characteristics still seem to affect the efficiency level as well. The present study gives a good basis for further research concerning the development of ice harvesting techniques and purification efficiency investigations of freeze separation applications with real wastewaters. The project was funded by the