Processing of aluminium dross is one of the most challenging tasks because of its toxic nature. The dross generated while melting at various facilities is generally remelted with salts to recover residual metal values. The remaining residue dross contains mostly aluminium oxide, alloying elements and salts such as NaCl or KCl. This residue dross while stock piling creates pollution of the adjoining area as salts leach out to water stream and also emits harmful gases. In the present study domestic aluminium dross was treated for developing a suitable process flow sheet to obtain η-alumina a high valued product. Initially H2SO4 leaching was carried out for both un-washed and washed dross. With un-washed dross the leaching efficiency achieved was ∼71% but washing of dross followed by leaching raised the recovery to ∼84%. Washing of dross is essential to have higher alumina recovery and also to recover salt for recycling. The liquor obtained after treatment of the dross with acid was further processed to obtain aluminium hydroxide of amorphous nature by hydrolyzing aluminium sulphate with aqueous ammonia. The aluminium hydroxide was then subjected to calcinations which resulted in the formation of η-alumina at 900°C.Disposal and recycling of dross produced during aluminium melting is a worldwide problem. Majority of dross is disposed off in landfill sites, which is likely to result in leaching of toxic metal ions into ground water causing serious pollution problems ( Aluminium dross is formed by natural oxidation of molten aluminium. The metal when comes in contact with air forms oxide of aluminium at the outer surface of the melt. The residual metal part in the dross is removed by remelting it by adding salt flux to minimize the oxidation. The oxide in the dross exhibits the form of a long continuous net where aluminium stays entrapped. The molten flux also breaks this framework and facilitates the coalescence of aluminium drops that sinks to the aluminium bath ( The increasing demand of valuable materials and environmental standard enforcement has forced the development of suitable treatment facilities for industrial wastes. Further, for sustainable development, replacement of primary resources with secondary resources has also become very essential. Scanning of literature shows that attempts have already been made to utilize aluminium dross by adopting either pyro- or hydrometallurgical methods. The conventional dross oxide treatment consists of grinding the dross, sieving to recover the metal value followed by water leaching to dissolve the salt in water from residue oxide. The salt is recovered back by filtering and evaporation technique. The residue which contains primarily alumina and other alloying elements is then calcined. In another process aluminium is mechanically separated from the oxide part and the remaining oxide fines are blended into a product that can be used for steel industries. In recent times Portland cement industries use certain quantities of alumina for the production of cement ( Alcan ( In a Korean process (  In India no significant effort has been made to reclaim the dross and add value to the waste. The dross is treated mostly in unorganized sectors for preparation of impure chemicals, crackers and castable refractories as mentioned earlier. In the present study an attempt has been made to develop a process flow sheet to recover salt and alumina value to produce η-alumina. Aluminium dross is a waste material obtained from aluminium melting plants whose composition differs due to the various alloying elements used during melting. The dross used in this work was collected from a domestic dross producer, which contains mainly ∼65% alumina, 4% SiO The dissolution experiments of dross in H Leaching of both un-washed and washed dross oxide in sulfuric acid medium was carried out to evaluate the leaching behavior. After screening, the <850   It has been found, therefore that the optimum recovery of alumina for original dross is 88%, with 30  It has been observed from the above results that maximum recovery of 88% can be achieved with 30 The leaching of original dross with stoichiometric amount of acid resulted in only ∼70% alumina dissolution. In addition the salts will contaminate the leach liquor. These salts in the leach liquor will contaminate the hydroxide in the precipitation stage and thus the ultimate product. In order to improve the leaching efficiency and prevent contamination of leach liquor from the soluble salts, some leaching experiments were carried out after washing the dross. This has improved the leaching efficiency as well as brought almost all the salts into the washed solution. It was then decided to introduce a washing step to remove the soluble salts followed by its recovery. So a detailed study on water washing of the dross followed by leaching was taken up. As discussed earlier the salts used in the dross during melting are water-soluble salts like KCl and NaCl. The total quantity of the salt present in the dross was found to be around 8%. Prior to acid leaching the dross was subjected to water washing for salt recovery. The variables considered in these set of experiments were time and washing temperature. All these experiments were carried out under stirring condition with 20 The effect of time on washing was carried out from 1 to 24 To improve the salt recovery efficiency, washing of the dross was carried out at 80 This washed solution was evaporated to obtain KCl and NaCl crystals, which can be recycled during melting of dross. Acid leaching studies were carried out with both washed dross, and washed and dried dross. In these cases, 10 The washed dross showed maximum recovery of ∼84% with 15% (v/v) acid and 10% dross (w/v). The improvement in leaching efficiency for washed dross may be due to the removal of salts from the alumina surfaces. This finding has good implication, as inclusion of a washing step is essential to recover the salts from the filtrate as well as removal of washable impurities, which might otherwise end up with the final product. X-ray diffraction data ( The leach liquor obtained from sulphuric acid leaching contains 10–12 The amorphous aluminium hydroxide during calcination undergoes phase transformation and produces different forms of transition oxides. The phase transformation depends on the precursor material. The different transition aluminas available are χ, η, γ and ρ alumina in low temperature range (250–900 TGA study of the precipitated aluminium hydroxide indicated two distinctive high rates of weight loss zones i.e. at 250  The process developed for the treatment of aluminium dross is unique in nature. The treatment options available mostly aimed to optimize the recovery of metal part from oxide part and rest was land filled. In this study only alumina part was subjected to the treatment after recovering the metal part by screening. A flow sheet has been developed where initially water-soluble salt is recovered by water washings. H The authors are grateful to Ministry of Environment and Forests, Govt. of India, New Delhi, for the financial support to carry out the work. They are also grateful to M/s Agarvanshi Aluminium, Secunderabad for supplying the aluminium dross. The authors also like to thank the Director, Regional Research Laboratory, for permission to publish this paper. They are also thankful to Dr. P.S. Mukherjee and Dr. Rajeev for XRD/XRF analyses.