The performance of natural draft dry cooling towers (NDDCTs) can be improved by wetted-medium evaporative pre-cooling. However, the pre-cooling benefit is season dependent and is significantly affected by wetted media. To further investigate the effect of wetted medium type on pre-cooling performance, the current study simulates a pre-cooled NDDCT using two typical types of wetted media, i.e., film (Cellulose7060 and PVC1200) and trickle (Trickle125 and Trickle100). A MATLAB program was developed and was validated against published data. The model was then used to carry out case study of a 120m-high NDDCT pre-cooled using the selected wetted media with fixed thickness of 300mm. Both the medium performance and pre-cooled NDDCT performance were compared to recommend the characteristics of wetted media promising for evaporative pre-cooling. Simulation finds that the media with high or low cooling efficiencies and pressure drops are not promising for the studied pre-cooling case while those media with middle cooling efficiencies and pressure drops intend to produce much performance enhancement and Cellulose7060 is a representative of such kind of medium. For the 120m-high NDDCT, the wetted-medium pre-cooling can raise the heat rejection rate of the tower without pre-cooling from 45MW to 92MW, 76MW, 68MW and 65MW by Cellulose7060, PVC1200, Trickle125 and Trickle100, respectively at ambient temperature of 50°C and humidity of 20%.area, m specific heat, J/(kg temperature correction factor gravitational acceleration, m/s height, m loss coefficient medium thickness, m medium geometric length, m mass flow rate, kg/s pressure drop, Pa heat transfer rate, W volumetric flow rate, m temperature, K velocity, m/s overall heat transfer coefficient, W/(m natural draft dry cooling tower difference cooling efficiency, % density, kg/m positions within or around the towers dry air or air side constants air-water vapor mixture separation and redirection of flow at the lower edge of the tower shell contraction expansion at the heat exchanger heat exchanger logarithmic mean wetted medium water wet bulb water inlet water outlet kinetic energy at the outlet of the tower Renewable energy has been an important political topic for a long time. One of the most promising ways to use solar energy is concentrated solar power (CSP). CSP technologies generate electricity by concentrating the solar radiation beam onto a small area, where a heat transfer fluid is heated up and this energy is ultimately transferred to the steam. Electricity is then generated by an electric generator which is driven by a steam turbine with the efficiency limited by the Carnot cycle The major drawback of NDDCTs is their low performance, especially at hot days. Previous studies find that the performance of NDDCTs can be improved by wetted-medium evaporative pre-cooling when the ambient air is hot and dry According to He et al. The wetted medium is the most important element in a direct evaporative cooling system Generally, the wetted media fall into three main categories: splash, film and trickle This paper simulates the pre-cooled NDDCT using four wetted media (i.e., Cellulose7060, PVC1200, Trickle125 and Trickle100) based on a MATLAB program. Two typical types of wetted media with the potential of evaporative pre-cooling are selected through literature review and are comparatively studied. Meanwhile, the characteristics of wetted media promising for evaporative pre-cooling of NDDCTs are summarized. The present work can be distinguished from previous studies due to (1) the wetted media designed for wet cooling tower use (PVC1200, Trickle125 and Trickle100) are studied so as to fulfil the purpose of evaporative pre-cooling of air; (2) the ranges of wetted-medium cooling efficiency and pressure drop promising for the pre-cooling enhancement of a 120 The operation of a pre-cooled NDDCT is coupled by energy and draft equations The draft equation balances the buoyancy against the total flow resistances, i.e., The flow resistances in Eq. The mathematical model of a NDDCT is similar to that of the pre-cooled NDDCT, except for the calculations of To simulate the pre-cooled cooling tower using the four selected wetted media, the medium performance is one of the key issues. The pressure drop introduced by wetted media is of critical importance in NDDCT applications. It is critical because the pressure drop will affect the air mass flow rate passing through the tower. The cooling efficiency is a key factor in determining the performance of direct evaporative cooling system. It determines how close the air gets to the state of saturation The constants in Eq. The cooling efficiency data of the four media can be correlated using Eq. The constants in Eq. The following simulations will use the above correlations of cooling efficiency and pressure drop to model the performance of wetted media. The heat and mass transfer in the pre-cooled NDDCT is coupled with air flow through the tower while the air flow is determined by balancing the energy and draft equations through an iterative process In the iterative process, the performance of wetted-medium evaporative cooling is characterized by the cooling efficiency (Eq. Finally, a value of air mass flow rate can be found that satisfies both the energy and draft equations. The values of hot water outlet temperature, air temperature leaving the heat exchanger, air mass flow rate, heat rejection rate, cooling efficiency and pressure drop of wetted media when used to pre-cool the NDDCTs can be found simultaneously. For each ambient temperature ( The iterative algorithms of the NDDCT and the pre-cooled NDDCT are similar with only small difference. For the iteration process of the NDDCT, there is no need to consider the cooling efficiency and pressure drop associated with wetted-medium pre-cooling. Meanwhile, the iteration process is simplified as the Step 3 to Step 5 are omitted. The heat and mass transfer in the pre-cooled tower is coupled with air flow through the tower while the air flow is determined by balancing the energy and draft equations through an iterative process. Since there is no wetted-medium pre-cooling in use so far in NDDCTs, it is difficult to do a rigorous comparison with measured pre-cooled NDDCT performance. However, the MATLAB code of NDDCT without pre-cooling was compared with the case study reported by Kröger The proposed cooling tower has designed conditions as listed in For evaporative pre-cooling system, the cooling efficiency is acknowledged to be nearly constant when the supplied water flow rate is enough to fully wet the media (fully wetted medium means there is no streaking and dry area in the medium) The wetted medium performance is coupled with the tower performance but will be reported here for reference. The cooling efficiency and pressure drop of the wetted media when used to pre-cool the NDDCTs at medium thicknesses of 300 As demonstrated in In this section, the performance comparisons of the NDDCTs pre-cooled using the four selected wetted media at medium thicknesses of 300 The air mass flow rate decreases with the increase in ambient temperature, which is because the driving force (the buoyancy, which is due to the air density difference resulting from the temperature difference between the tower inside and outside air) is decreased at higher ambient temperatures. This applies to the towers with or without pre-cooling. In terms of heat rejection rate, although pre-cooling decreases the inlet air temperature and thus improves heat rejection rate through Eq. In For the pre-cooling application of NDDCTs, the cooling efficiency intends to improve the tower heat rejection performance by reducing the tower inlet air temperature while the extra pressure drop in reverse impairs the tower heat rejection performance through its contribution to the flow resistances (thereby reducing the air mass flow rate passing through the tower, e.g., Overall, the Cellulose7060 with the pressure drops of 28.6–272.1 The current study simulates pre-cooling of a 120 The project was supported by “