Sulfur speciation on the surface of pyrite leached by extreme thermophile Acidianus manzaensis YN-25 was investigated by using scanning electron microscopy (SEM), X-ray diffraction (XRD), Raman spectroscopy and sulfur K-edge X-ray absorption near edge structure spectroscopy (XANES). SEM micrographs showed leaching products with numerous holes were formed into the surface of leached pyrite. XRD spectra indicated that the leach residues were mainly composed of pyrite and jarosite. The sulfur K-edge XANES indicated that elemental sulfur, thiosulfate and/or thiosulfate-like species and jarosite were formed on the mineral surface. Raman spectroscopy further verified the presence of jarosite, elemental sulfur and thiosulfate. Jarosite formed in pyrite leaching appeared much later than in chalcopyrite leaching by the same strain. Jarosite on the mineral surface may account for the passivation of pyrite oxidation, with the passivation effect of elemental sulfur which is less important. In addition, the thiosulfate detected in this study provided novel evidence for surface-bound thiosulfate involved in the stepwise oxidation of pyrite by the extreme thermophile A. manzaensis.Pyrite usually coexists in base metal sulfide ores and the presence of pyrite can promote the leaching of chalcopyrite ( The temperature dependency of pyrite biooxidation rates is well documented ( Besides jarosite, it is reported that sulfur-rich layers may also be formed and inhibit the bioleaching process ( The oxidation mechanism of pyrite has been widely investigated, but to our knowledge there is no research about the mechanism in extreme thermophilic leaching systems. The stepwise oxidation of pyrite and the formation of surface-bound thiosulfate have been confirmed (  In a previous study ( The strain Pyrite used in the present study was provided by the Institute of Minerals Processing, Central South University. The main components were analyzed by X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy as shown in Polymeric sulfur was prepared by hydrolysis of S Jarosite was prepared following the method described by Potassium tetrathionate was purchased from Sigma, and other standard compounds including elemental sulfur, sodium thiosulfate, and sodium sulfite of A.R. grade were purchased from Da Mao Chemical Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd, Tianjin, China. The leaching experiments were carried out with the same conditions and procedures as in the previous study ( All of the instrumental details, calibration and sample preparation were performed as described by XANES measurements were carried out at 4B7A beam-line (medium X-ray beam-line 2100–6000 Raman spectroscopic study was performed by Raman spectrometer (Jobin Yvon LabRam-010 micro-Raman system, France) equipped with Labspec 4.02 software attached to an integral Olympus BX 41 microscope, with the excitation source of 632 The leaching characteristics of pyrite in bacteria inoculated and sterile control flasks are shown in The SEM graphs of pyrite in sterile control and bioleaching experiments are shown in The XRD patterns of the original pyrite, residuals in sterile control and bioleaching experiments are shown in Pyrite, thiosulfate, sulfite, jarosite, tetrathionate, and elemental sulfur that may appear in the surface residue were chosen as the references, and their sulfur K-edge XANES spectra are shown in In order to verify the species found in the mineral surface by XANES analysis, the leaching residual were further analyzed by Raman spectrometry. The obtained spectra were checked with the standards of jarosite, elemental sulfur, polymeric sulfur, sodium thiosulfate and pyrite, respectively. The results in The leaching products detected by SEM analysis were similar to the jarosite product observed by In It is regarded that ferric ions not only promote pyrite dissolution but also accelerate jarosite formation ( There are some disputes on the nature of sulfur-rich layer. Some researchers believed elemental sulfur, rather than polysulfide to be the component of the sulfur-rich layer (  Although S In addition, thiosulfate might bind to the pyrite surface. It is supplemental evidence to the thiosulfate mechanism in which the surface-bound thiosulfate-like species Py–S–SO The decomposition pathway following Eq. Jarosite, elemental sulfur, and thiosulfate and/or thiosulfate-like species were found on the mineral surface during the leaching of pyrite with the extreme thermophile This work was supported by the