Construction of support characteristic curves is an important aspect of the implementation of the convergence-confinement method of tunnel support design. This paper presents a detailed analysis of the equations required to construct the support characteristic curve of a combined support system consisting of closed circular steel sets linked to the periphery of the tunnel by equally spaced prismatic wood blocks. This particular problem has been treated in the classical literature of underground excavation design in rock, although without providing details of the origin or validity of the equations. This paper fills this gap, providing the derivation and validation of all the equations required to construct the support characteristic curve for the combined support system. The paper shows that both the stiffness and maximum load that the combined support system can take increases as the angle between equally spaced wood blocks is decreased (or the number of blocks for the steel section is increased). In the limit, when the angle between wood blocks is assumed to be zero, the paper shows that the classical equations for construction of support characteristic curve for a steel set subjected to uniform radial load are recovered. The paper presents also a practical example illustrating the application of all equations needed to construct the support characteristic curve for the combined support system.The convergence-confinement method of tunnel support design is a convenient analytical-graphical procedure for estimating the required support, particularly in the early stages of the process of tunnel support design (see, for example, This paper addresses the construction of the support characteristic curve, in particular, the one corresponding to circular steel sets linked to the periphery of the tunnel through equally spaced wood blocks. These types of support have been and are still used in construction of circular tunnels and shafts of relative to moderate size, not only for civil engineering but also for mining engineering purposes (see, for example, For the case of support consisting of steel sets installed with wood blocks, load-displacement relationships needed to construct the support characteristic curve have been originally presented by The objective of this paper is therefore to present a comprehensive discussion on the construction of support characteristic curves for blocked steel sets in the convergence-confinement method of tunnel support design, providing the full set of equations and the details of their derivation and validation, together with an illustrative practical example of construction of the support characteristic curve. The problem to be analyzed in this paper is shown in The support system comprised by steel set and wood blocks, which in following sections will be referred to as the Referring to Referring again to In the elastic solution for displacements of the steel set in To facilitate the interpretation of the formulation presented in the following sections, Appendix It is instructive to consider first the case in which the ground load, For this case, using the formulation of Euler-Bernoulli beams, that is equivalent to the formulation for For the case in which the ground load is applied to the steel set as a uniformly distributed radial load, and again considering the formulation of For the case in which the wood blocks are uniformly spaced a finite angle, The validity of the solution given by Eqs. Similarly, for Eq. For Eq. For Eq. Finally, for Eq. Section  The diagrams in This section discusses the construction of the characteristic curve of the combined blocked steel set, which involves determining the linear stiffness and the maximum pressure that the ground can transmit to the combined support to avoid failure of the constituent parts. As done in the previous subsection, and to simplify the analysis, the radius of the steel set, It is instructive to consider first the construction of the support characteristic curve for the case in which the ground is assumed to transmit the load to the steel set as a uniformly distributed radial load directly, without the existence of wood blocks. The following subsection addresses this case. Section Eq. The determination of the linear stiffness of the steel set is addressed next. Eq. The linear stiffness of the steel set, Construction of the support characteristic curve for the combined blocked steel set support requires first defining the characteristic curve for the steel set and wood blocks separately. Below, the behaviour of steel sets, wood blocks and combined support are discussed in that order. The analysis of a circular steel set subjected to the radial point forces presented in Section At point Similarly, at point The maximum and minimum stresses at the extrados and intrados edges of the section of the steel set in Next, Eqs. At point At point At point At point Since different combinations of variables in Eqs. The determination of the linear stiffness of the steel set is addressed next. At point  Replacing Eq. Again, The maximum ground pressure that the wood blocks can transmit to the steel set as well as the linear stiffness of the wood blocks are considered next. Eq. To avoid failure of the wood block in compression, the normal stress, The determination of the linear stiffness of the wood block is addressed next. Assuming that the wood block is a rectangular elastic prism of height, The combined deformability of steel set and wood blocks is discussed next. For the problem represented in The validity of Eq. An example of construction of support characteristic curves using Eqs. The application example involves a circular tunnel of radius  The support system for the tunnel involves steel sets with wood blocks assumed to be spaced a distance   Inspection of the different support characteristic curves in The full set of equations required to construct the support characteristic curve for a combined support system consisting of closed circular steel sets linked to the periphery of the tunnel by equally spaced prismatic wood blocks has been presented in preceding sections and in the appendix of this paper. Several observations of practical relevance with regard to the linear stiffness and maximum load that the combined support system can take have been made in this paper. This includes the observation that both the linear stiffness and the maximum load the combined support system takes increase when the angle between equally spaced wood blocks is decreased (or the number of blocks for the steel section is increased). It should be noted that the formulation considered in this paper is that corresponding to The authors acknowledge the financial support received from the The derivation of the solution presented in this appendix follows the formulation of The problem to be solved is represented in Assuming an infinitesimal stretch of steel set covering the infinitesimal angle, Similarly, the equation stating equilibrium of forces in the tangential direction at the arbitrary point Considering equilibrium of moments, the relationship between bending moment and shear force results For the case of Note that because of Eqs. As explained in Eq. This appendix provides the demonstration of the two cases of circular steel support considered in the main text, namely, the case of uniformly distributed load and the case of equally spaced radial point forces, as represented in For the case of a steel set that is subjected to a uniformly distributed load, the radial load in Application of the boundary condition Eqs. Replacing Eqs. For the case of a steel set that is subjected to equally spaced radial point forces, Application of the boundary condition Eqs. Replacing Eqs.