Background
                  Tibial plafond fractures are a uncommon injury, and the outcomes described in literature are generally poor. The purposes were to determine the effect of the tibial plafond fractures on general health-related quality of life, and to examine the factors that influence these outcomes.
               
                  Methods
                  Retrospective study of 43 patients with average age of 45.6 (range 18–69) years who were also invited for a clinical and radiological reassessment. The primary outcome measure was quality of life assessed by the Short Form-36 questionnaire. Visual analogue scale for pain, and motion of both ankle and subtalar joints were also assessed. Radiological evaluation was performed to assess bone healing, fracture reduction quality, and tibial alignment.
               
                  Results
                  The mean follow-up at last visit was 8.1 (range, 4–12) years. Patients who had suffered plafond fracture had significantly poorer quality of life compared with age- and gender-matched general population of our country regardless of the treatment method used. Multivariate analyses showed that the age had influence on the emotional outcomes, educational level and fracture pattern on physical outcomes, and marital status, fracture reduction quality, and ankle motion on both physical and mental component summaries.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Tibial plafond fractures have a significant negative impact on general health-related quality of life regardless of the operative treatment used which reflects injury severity. In addition, psychosocial characteristics of patients may influence the outcomes.Tibial plafond fractures are uncommon, and are difficult to manage Several studies have investigated the clinical outcomes after tibial plafond fracture but most of them focused on a specific operative technique or complications such as infection, bone healing or posttraumatic osteoarthritis The purpose of this study was to determine the effect of the tibial plafond fractures on general health-related quality of life, and to examine the factors that influence these outcomes. A retrospective study was designed to assess quality of life after tibial plafond fracture. Selected patients were also invited for a clinical and radiological additional assessment. The study was approved by our institutional ethics committee, and informed consent was required. All consecutive patients who had been treated for a tibial plafond fracture at our centre between January 2002 and December 2010 were eligible for study. The inclusion criteria were age 18 years or older, unilateral tibial plafond fracture, AO/OTA Forty-three patients met the inclusion criteria, and their characteristics are shown in On admission, tibial fractures were in initially treated with plaster splint (4 patients) or external fixation (39 patients). The definitive tibial stabilisation was external fixation in 17 patients, and open reduction and internal fixation (locking plates and screws) and bone grafts when necessary in 26 patients. In these last patients, the definitive stabilisation was performed when the skin condition has improved with an average time from injury to operation of 7.9 (range, 6–14) days. Early complications were seen in 9 patients (21%), including skin necrosis in 4, wound superficial infection in 3, and deep infection in 2. There was no significant difference in complication rate between the two treatment methods ( All 43 patients who met inclusion criteria were contacted and were invited to return for clinical reassessment. All patients accepted and they signed an informed consent. A clinical and radiological examination including CT scan was performed at this last visit. The primary outcome measure was the Short Form-36 (SF36) health survey questionnaire validated for our country Standard radiographs (anteroposterior, mortise and lateral views) were taken in each visit during the period of followup. At last visit, radiographs and CT scans of both ankles were taken. Quality of reduction was classified as successful or unsuccessful based on the radiological criteria of Teeny and Wiss Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS software v. 10.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, USA). In all analysis, statistical significance was considered for p values less than 0.05. Normality was assessed by Smirnov–Kolmogorov test. Preliminary bivariate analyses included parametric and nonparametric two-tailed tests were conducted to examine the primary outcomes according to the patient characteristics, injury, and treatment. Categorical data were evaluated using chi-square or Fisher's exact tests, and continuous variable by Student The sample size was assessed for estimation of a relative risk in a cohort study. Using an estimated fracture prevalence of one per thousand (samples ratio of 0.001), assuming a standardised average difference of 0.45 (clinical relevant difference of 15 points in health-related quality of life), and confidence level of 0.95, to obtain a power of 0.80 required 39 patients. The average time from injury to last visit was 8.1 (range, 4–12) years. There were no significant differences in patient characteristics ( At last follow-up, the average motion in the injured ankle was 9.2° (range, 0–26°) for dorsiflexion, and 26.2° (range, 6–44°) for plantar flexion The range of motion (ROM) on the injured ankle (average 35.2°; standard deviation 18.3°) was significantly lower than on the uninjured ankle (average 60.3°; sd 9.9°) ( The average VAS-pain during walking was 5.8 (range, 0–10). A lower score of 4 was found in 50% of patients. No significant difference in VAS score was found between the fracture types ( The SF36 questionnaire was completed by all 43 patients, and the outcomes are shown in However, the multivariate analysis showed other significant differences. Regarding PCS ( Tibial plafond fractures are severe injuries difficult to treat, and often result in poor functional outcomes In the present study a validated, self-administered questionnaire of general health was used to assess specifically the patient's perspective on their health status after fracture. Our main outcome was that the patients who had suffered tibial plafond fracture had significantly poorer quality of life as compared with the age- and gender-matched general population regardless of the treatment method used. Multivariate analyses showed that the age had influence on the emotional outcomes, educational level and fracture pattern on physical outcomes, and marital status, fracture reduction quality, and ankle motion on both physical and mental component summaries. Thus, also a critical result was the importance of the psychosocial impact on the outcomes. In the literature, outcome after tibial plafond fracture depend on multiple factors. However, comparisons are difficult to perform because of variability of the samples, fracture types, and outcome measurements. With the use of SF36, Sands et al. In this study, age over 55 years negatively influenced the mental health score, which was similar to other studies In the present study, better SF36 scores were achieved in married patients or with higher education level, which indicated the importance of the psychosocial component on the outcomes in our study. Ware et al. Despite adequate treatment of type C fractures with joint reconstruction and restoration of distal tibia alignment, outcomes were not always favourable in our study, which was similar to other The onset of posttraumatic arthritis is a controversy factor because its effect on clinical outcome was not clear. Similar to our study, other authors found a poor association between radiological degenerative changes and functional outcomes Limitations of this study include the intrinsic weakness of a retrospective study. Although the sample size was relatively small, we obtained a reasonable statistical power. However, the power calculation was only based on the main outcome measure, and could be a lack of statistical power for some of the other variables. On the other hand, the SF36 questionnaire is a validated instrument for assessing overall outcomes and has been used in previous studies of patients with tibial plafond fractures In conclusion, with use of a validated outcome measure we found that tibial plafond fractures had a significant negative impact on general health-related quality of life regardless of the operative treatment used. This finding reflects injury severity. In addition, psychosocial characteristics of the patients may influence the outcomes. Larger and longer studies are needed to validate these findings. The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.