This paper examines the possibilities of increasing the use of wood from private forests in Lithuania for bioenergy purposes. Potential wood fuel supply and consumption were investigated using a literature review and analysis of statistical data. Costs of wood chips production were calculated applying economic simulation. The analysis showed that 0.6Mm3 (1.2TWh) of firewood is produced and about 0.3Mm3 (0.6TWh) of forest logging residues could be used annually for fuel in private forests. The available volume will increase in coming decades. In total, Lithuanian households had increased wood fuel consumption by five times during 10 years and exceeded 2.3Mm3 (4.6TWh) in 2003. Firewood production for home consumption is one of the most important forest owners’ objectives.
                  The cost of forest chips varied from 19 to 36eurom−3 in pre-commercial thinnings and from 20 to 28eurom−3 in final thinnings. The lack of specific policies supporting the use of natural resources is causing a lack of incentive to increase the use of local fuels.Peculiarities regarding the supply of wood-based biomass for energy at the individual forest owner level in Lithuania are based on historical and socio-economic factors. The structure of forest ownership has been changing due to ongoing land reform processes since Lithuania regained independence in 1991. Privatisation brought a lot of changes to the forest sector, from ownership structure to forest management and use of forest resources. By 1st January 2006, the private forest sector constituted 218,000 private forest owners. Private forests occupied 717,000 Small-scale private forest properties are common in Lithuania. The average size of a forest estate is 3.4 In Lithuania, interest in biofuel has risen quite recently. After the commencement of construction of biofuel heating plants, private forest owners gained a possibility to earn extra income. Forest chips production began recently and to date it has not been clear what the production costs are. The purpose of this paper is to analyse supply, costs and home consumption of wood fuel from the private forests of Lithuania. Possibilities for wood fuel supply from private forests and home consumption were analysed using a literature review and the analysis of statistical data. Information on logging volumes in Lithuania is provided by the State Forest Inventory and Management Institute. The institute calculated the prognosis for the use of forest resources including logging residues (tops, branches, stumps and bark) in the 21st century The forecast of wood fuel resources was carried out with the help of forest dynamics and use of the model “Kupolis”, which simulates the use and dynamics of timber resources. The model has four subsystems: regeneration, stand growth, timber use and dynamics. Though the stand is the basic unit of simulation, any aggregated or sampled data can be used for simulation in cases for which the data structure is analogous to that for the stand. The smallest scale for model application is one compartment (stand). The biggest scale covers all forests in Lithuania, i.e. more than 1 million compartments. The strategy for the forest regeneration subsystem can be described as planting of tree species according to valid silvicultural rules and goals. The modelling of stand growth is based on regression models developed for eight dominant tree species. The subsystem for thinnings generates a strategy that well complies with present silvicultural recommendations. The main requirements in the subsystem for final thinnings are continuing and sustainable use, and also smoothing of age class structure. The model “Kupolis” is described in more detail by Petrauskas and Kuliešis The Department of Statistics annually prepares Lithuania's energy balance. The most valuable data for our investigation are the data on firewood usage at the household level. In addition, several projects and studies dealing with wood fuel use have been carried out in Lithuania The profitability of forest chips was studied using an economic simulation method. The cost of forest chips was compared with the market price. The market price was estimated using literature analysis and interviews with forest fuel suppliers. The cost was calculated for whole trees from pre-commercial thinnings and for logging residue chips from clear cuttings. The cost structure of forest chips depends on harvesting technology and site conditions. At present, two chips procurement methods The cost of forest chips was calculated by evaluating four factors: volume of cut whole trees from pre-commercial thinnings or volume of logging residues from clear thinnings; forwarding distance; comminution; distance from comminution landing to heating plant. The cost of forest chips ( The production costs of forest chips were calculated as The operational costs of equipments were calculated as The calculated operational costs for the equipment are presented in Chips transportation time expenditure ( Labour costs are given in On 1st January 2006, total forest area was 2.1 According to the prognosis for logging amounts in Lithuanian forests Use of forest logging residues for biofuel has just started in Lithuania. Logging residues are compiled from tops, thin stems, branches, bark and stumps. Large amounts of logging residues accumulate in state (1.6 According to the data from the Department of Statistics, about 3 The use of firewood in households has a long tradition in Lithuania. The main sources of fuel are chopped firewood and strips. Chips and pellets are seldom used for household heating due to their higher price compared to traditional firewood The dynamics of forest chips prices in Lithuanian markets ( An increasing number of wood fuel plants together with increasing prices of oil and natural gas cause the increase in chips price. It seems that the price of chips will rise in the future. The cost of whole-tree chips from pre-commercial thinnings depended on the amount of energy wood, forwarding distance and transportation distance. The cost of whole-tree chips varied from 19 to 36 The structure of the cost depended on the production conditions. The approximate cost of whole-tree chips from pre-commercial thinnings can be calculated as ( The costs of forest chip production from logging residues varied from 20 to 28 The approximate cost of chips from logging residues can be calculated as( Supply of forest chips depends on production profitability. We compared calculated costs of forest chip production from logging residues and whole trees from pre-commercial thinnings with the market price, which was 22 The economic viability of whole-tree chips from pre-commercial thinnings was very low ( The cost of chips from logging residues was lower than the market price under the best production conditions, when the distance of forwarding was 100–350 During recent years, roundwood supply from private forests in Lithuania has consistently risen. The felling volume of private forests was more than 2 In spite of increasing activities in the private forest sector, the supply of roundwood and, especially, wood biomass for energy may increase in the future for several reasons. First of all, forest management activity has been suspended in some forest areas due to the forest restitution process. By 1st January 2006, the area of forests reserved for restitution covered 353,000 Tendencies in the use of private forest resources have appeared in the results of surveys of private forest owner's objectives and attitudes, which were obtained by the Lithuanian Forest Research Institute in 2003 and 2004. The results of the surveys of private forest owners showed that one of the main forest management objectives for private forest owners is firewood production for home consumption. According to the data derived from the survey carried out in 2003, wood fuel use for household heating was very important to 39.9% of private forest owners, important to 30.9%, neither important nor unimportant to 7.2%, unimportant to 15.3% and 6.7% of respondents did not answer. The importance of getting wood fuel was rated in a similar way by the respondents of the interviews in 2004 ( The survey information was analysed and private forest owners were grouped using cluster analysis. The forest management objectives were the main feature for the grouping. Four groups were established: The supply of forest logging residues for fuel from the private forest sector is currently very low. High forest chip production costs suggest that subsidies are required to develop forest fuel production from private forests. Subsidies are especially necessary for pre-commercial forest thinnings. This would help to increase the use of forest fuel resources and to improve forest stand quality. In Finland, wood fuel use is promoted by means of taxation, investment aid and support for chip production from young stands Our calculated forest chip cost was 20–28 In most cases, the cost of chips from pre-commercial thinnings is higher than that from final cuttings Household consumption of wood fuel influences the supply of biofuel. In the Baltic States, wood fuel sale for the household sector decreases due to the privatisation process. A significant number of owners collect firewood for their own needs in their forests. According to the statistical data for Lithuania, the production of firewood and wood waste reached 3.0 Research results Promotion of wood fuel use could be carried out by introducing environmental taxes on fossil fuel heating plants. The lack of specific policies supporting the use of natural resources causes a lack of incentive to increase the use of local fuels About 0.6 Lithuanian households increased wood fuel consumption by five times during 10 years and exceeded 2.2 The cost of whole-tree chips from pre-commercial thinnings amounted to 19–36 The cost of logging residue chips from final cuttings amounted to 20–28 The lack of specific policies supporting the use of natural resources is causing a lack of incentive to increase the use of local fuels. More information and research on the private forest sector is required for planning and developing biofuel use.