Water-based slurries with silica (SiO2) nanoparticles, graphene oxide (GO) nanosheets and GO/SiO2 hybrid nanostructures as abrasives were synthesised in order to achieve a high-efficiency and low-damage lapping. Tribological characteristics of SiO2, GO and GO/SiO2 nanoslurries were systematically investigated to optimise slurry formulae, and the lubricating mechanisms involved were revealed based on the analyses of worn surfaces and used slurries. Machining performance of the optimised slurries was then examined in the fixed abrasive lapping of glass substrates in terms of surface quality and material removal. The GO/SiO2 slurry of 0.16 wt.% at a mass ratio of 1:1 generated a lubricating layer consisting of C deposited and SiO2 dynamic films at the rubbing interface. This improved friction and wear conditions at the contact, producing a significantly lower COF and a better worn surface quality than those slurries containing only GO or SiO2. The lapping with the GO/SiO2 slurry thus reduced the surface damage on glass and achieved a crack-free subsurface. In comparison with a conventional lapping, the new lapping process resulted in a 35% reduction in surface roughness, but a 28% increase in material removal rate. Such improvements were attributed to the synergistic lubrication behaviour of the formed nanostructures of GO/SiO2 in water.Fixed abrasive lapping is usually a slurry-free and high-efficiency machining process, where abrasive grains are incorporated onto lapping pads in order to cut substrate materials. Machining coolants without any abrasives are generally used as lubricants/coolants in the process for reduction of friction at the abrasive-substrate interface. Fixed lapping has so far shown a promising potential in the fabrication of ceramics, optical devices and sapphire substrates. For example, To take the potential of the fixed abrasive lapping and negate its shortage, water-based coolants or suspensions are often used. Recently, aqueous nanosuspensions that contain nanomaterials have attracted increasingly attention as coolants and lubricants in precision and ultra-precision manufacturing fields owing to their low-cost, clean and eco-friendly properties. The addition of nanomaterials was found to have significantly improved the tribological and machining performance of the base suspensions owing to their lubricating, rolling and polishing effects. For example, In the work, the lubricating characteristics of water-based slurries with SiO Multi-layer graphene oxide (GO) nanosheets were used as lubricating additives, which had a thickness of 4˜6 nm and an original lateral dimension of 10˜50 μm. SiO The morphologies of GO, SiO The friction tests of the aqueous nanoslurries were performed on a tribometer (UMT-3, Bruker, USA) with a block-on-ring testing module introduced in The machining characteristics of the nanoslurries and machining coolant in fixed abrasive lapping were evaluated. The experimental rig was schematically shown in After friction tests, the steel blocks were ultrasonically cleaned in acetone and DI water for 15 min to remove any residues. The confocal microscope was used to measure their worn surface roughness. The worn surfaces were also examined using a scanning electron microscope (SEM, JSM 6610, JEOL, Japan), equipped with an energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscope (EDS) module and an X-ray photon spectroscopy (Axis Ultra XPS, Kratos, UK). The glass substrates after lapping were dipped into acetone and ultrasonically cleaned for 10 min, and were then all ultrasonically cleaned in DI water for 5 min. The specimen surfaces were analysed with a field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM, JSM-7800 F, JEOL, Japan). To examine subsurface characteristics, the lapped glass substrates were cross-sectioned with an interface angle of 25° using the interface sectioning polishing method established by   The variations of wetting angles of the machining coolant and nanoslurries were measured by dropping them on a lapped AISI 304 stainless steel substrate, and are plotted as a function of testing time in  The effect of nanostructure concentration on the COF and the surface roughness, R  TEM was also employed to examine the used SiO  In summary, the lubrication performance of GO/SiO   The effects of normal force, rotational speed and abrasive size on MRR were systematically investigated using both machining coolant and nanoslurry. As shown in    The experimental results clearly substantiated that the improved performance of the fixed abrasive lapping of optical glass was due to the use of the GO/SiO In this work, water-based slurries that uses dimensionally integrated GO/SiO The formation of dimensionally integrated GO/SiO The lubricating film that consists of deposited C and SiO The use of the GO/SiO The improved lapping performance was attributed to the synergistic lubrication behaviour of the formed GO/SiO The authors would like to acknowledge the financial supports from