Short-term potential carbon (C) and nitrogen (N) mineralization of soil organic matter and belowground plant litter was determined in the top soil layer of a sandy soil of a short-rotation coppice (SRC) and the effect of addition of lime, mineral nitrogen and poplar roots was determined. Lime addition was equivalent to 1.2mgCaCO3
                     g−1, mineral N and root litter were added corresponding to 6.8μgNg−1 and 13.8mgrootsg−1 soil respectively. Partitioning of carbon dioxide (CO2) derived from lime and soil organic matter (SOM) was calculated by using stable isotope analysis of the CO2. In addition, particulate organic matter (POM) as well as microbial biomass carbon and nitrogen were analyzed after 51days of incubation.
                  Addition of lime decreased CO2 derived from organic matter in all treatments, but the level of decrease varied with N and root litter addition. Microbial biomass C and N increased with N addition in soil without root litter but decreased with root litter, nevertheless an immobilization of mineral N was especially high in soil amended with root litter. Particulate organic matter (POM) decreased by 41% of its dry weight in root litter amended soil. Liming decreased decomposition of POM in these soils, whereas no effect was observed after addition of mineral nitrogen or mineral nitrogen and lime. These results show that liming has the potential to decrease C mineralization of humified organic matter as well as plant residues and that decreased mineralization of organic matter occurred after liming, even if mineral N was added.Recultivation of short rotation coppices (SRC) into arable land meets multiple challenges. Cultivation of rapidly growing trees often results in a decline of the soil pH ( Although liming is a common agricultural practice and the effect on soil properties has been extensively studied, the effect on soil organic matter (SOM) stocks is still poorly known ( Similar to C mineralization, adverse effects of liming on N mineralization are observed. Results depend upon the type of organic matter, with increased N mineralization in O horizons of an acid forest soil but no effect on the N mineralization of the mineral soil ( Application of lime to a soil leads to a net emission of CO The short-term effect of liming on the dynamics of organic matter after reconversion of SRC has not been investigated before, but it is assumed that the effect is different from the effect observed in forest and arable soils. Reconverted soils differ from arable soils in the high input of woody plant residues, with coarse harvest residues accounting for 16 to 30 To explore the effects of lime and mineral nitrogen on C mineralization and N mineralization, a topsoil from an SRC with single, double or triple mixtures of poplar root litter, lime and mineral fertilizer was incubated. Partitioning of CO Soil samples from the upper mineral soil layer (0–30 For soil analysis at the beginning and during the incubation, 100 Determination of microbial biomass was carried out by the fumigation–extraction method as described by Particulate organic matter (POM) was determined for treatments with added root litter and the control soil only. 100 CO The δ Data of C and N-mineralization, microbial biomass and pH, were statistically analyzed by a three factorial analyses of variance (ANOVA) for effects of L (liming), N addition (N) and root litter addition (R) and their interaction. As particulate organic matter was only analyzed in control and all root amended treatments, root litter addition was analyzed by a single factorial ANOVA and lime and N addition in root litter amended soil was analyzed by a two factorial ANOVA. The prerequisites for ANOVA, normality of the residuals and homogeneity of variances, were tested. LS Means were computed for the display of results. If higher order interactions were significant main effects or lower order interactions were not interpreted, even if significant. Statistical analyses were performed using SAS ( Total cumulative CO Lime as well as root addition increased pH significantly, although changes were small ( Particulate organic matter was significantly higher in root litter amended soils (P The results reveal that lime decreases CO Contrary to the results in mineral soils, liming of forest soils induces high C mineralization rates of forest humus layers ( In root litter amended soils, N was immobilized as has been shown for other crop residues with a high CN ratio ( In contrast to field investigations of acidic forest soils, where liming increased N mineralization in O horizons ( Microbial biomass decreased by liming, although the pH slightly increased. After liming a short term increase of available C substrate often increase microbial activity, but with depletion of these substrates microbial biomass does not change or even decrease ( No attempt was made to distinguish between root litter and soil carbon by δ Treatment effects on POM and CO In this experiment the CN ratio of the POM increased with incubation time in the single root litter treatment. This increase was probably due to the preferential decomposition of N rich components of the root litter. In contrast, a decrease of the CN ratio with proceeding decomposition frequently observed in depth profiles of humus layers was observed when root litter and lime were added simultaneously. The decrease is often due to the relative increase of N with increasing C mineralization. However, the decreased CN ratio of POM with liming, particularly observed with N addition, was not a function of the C-loss of POM, as the amount of POM-C did not differ between both treatments. The much lower CN ratio of the POM in the root litter, mineral N and lime added soil was probably due to immobilized N in microbial biomass concentrated on the POM fraction. Studies have demonstrated that plant residues represent hot spots of microbial activity ( C mineralization of organic matter in recently limed soil is overestimated if lime-derived CO The technical assistance of Kadiga Abolkassim, Sybille Faust and Gabriele Dormann is highly appreciated. Dr. Jens Dyckmans and Reinhard Langel, Centre for Stable Isotope Research and Analysis, University of Göttingen, are thanked for stable isotope measurements. This work was funded by the