The contents of Au, Ga, As, Sb and other elements in two hundred and thirty-four samples of coal, partings, roof and floor collected from Guizhou Province, China were analyzed by Instrumental Neutron-Activation Analysis (INAA). In order to discuss the relationship between Au, Ga in coal and in coal ash, the contents of Au and Ga in 815°C coal ash were also determined by INAA and partial Ga by Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry (ICP-MS). The analysis results showed that: (1) the average contents of Au and Ga in upper Permian coal from Guizhou are 6.92ng/g and 10.65μg/g, respectively, far higher than that in Chinese coal and world coal; the average contents of Au (59.73ng/g) and Ga (19.16μg/g) in partings, roof and floor are higher than that in the coal and the Clarke value of sedimentary rock (especially for Au); (2) during the coal ashing process, Ga is enriched in the residues more easily than Au, which is mainly because of the difference in the mode of occurrence of the two elements. Gallium mainly occurs as the substitute of Al in the form of isomorph, which makes it hard to volatize; while Au shows a high association with organic matter, sulfide, and carbonates, and some may be nano-gold, which is easily volatile during coal combustion. Only Au occurred in the aluminosilicate is easily left in the residues; (3) we collected data on the Au and Ga contents in coal and coal ash from China and then conducted correlation analysis by combining data from coals and coal ashes worldwide; the cut-off grades of Au and Ga in coal are considered to be 200ng/g and 60μg/g, respectively. This method could also be used to determine the cut-off grade of other valuable elements in coal.China is the largest coal production and consumption country in the world. By 2013, coal production in China has exceeded 3.6 billion tons per year. Generally, every 4 tons of coal combustion will produce 1 ton of coal ash The precious metal minerals in coal basins can be extracted as by-products during secondary treatment of the coal or as the products of coal combustion In order to explore the relationship between the Au and Ga contents in coal and in coal ash, and further determine their cut-off grade in coal, we conduct an analysis of the Au and Ga contents in 234 coal and 75 coal ash samples. Samples were collected from working coal mines in Guizhou Province, China, 234 pieces in total, including 44 partings, roof and floor samples, and 190 coal samples. All of the coal samples are mixed and ply samples of upper Permian coal seam and feed of 4 power plants. Proximate analysis (total moisture, volatile matter, and ash yield) was conducted using ISO recommendations (ISO-11722 The contents of Au and Ga in Guizhou coal range from 1.16 to 313  Generally, it is believed that Ga in coal mainly occurs as inorganic phase and replaces Al in aluminiferous minerals (mainly boehmite) in the form of isomorph The occurrence mode of Au in coal is considerably complex. Seredin et al. Despite the large estimated resources of Ga in bauxites (1 The industrial cut-off grade of some elements in coal could be judged by the cut-off grade in coal ash. However, due to the difference of coal category, mode of occurrence, combustion condition, it might be hard to propose a unified cut-off grade for one element with a specific case study on a coal mine. Therefore, we collected data worldwide about the contents of Au It was recommended in China, 1–2 30 Therefore, we think that the cut-off grades of Au and Ga in coal are 200 In this study, we collected data on the Au and Ga contents from 190 coal samples in Guizhou province and then conducted a correlation analysis with data from coals and coal ashes worldwide. The research results are as below: The average contents of Au and Ga in upper Permian coal, Guizhou Province, China, are 6.92 Gallium in Guizhou coal occurs mainly in the inorganic form, but not all of Ga occurs in the form of isomorph in aluminiferous minerals, partial Ga existing in other forms (organic phase) which could easily volatile during the coal combustion process. By contrast, Ga occurring as isomorph in aluminiferous minerals is easily enriched in the coal combustion residues. The occurrence mode of Au in Guizhou coal is complex. Gold shows an association with organic matter, sulfide, carbonate and clay minerals; some Au may occur as nano-gold. The Au occurring in organic matter, sulfide, carbonate, and the nano-gold in coal is easily volatile during the coal combustion, resulting in the Au content in some coal samples higher than that in coal ash. The cut-off grades of Au and Ga in coal are considered to be 200 This study was supported by