Introduction
                  Distal humerus fractures are fairly rare. But as our population ages, these fractures become more complex and the choice of treatment more delicate. Poor bone quality results in many technical problems and the fixation hardware stability remains at risk. The goal of this study was to evaluate the functional recovery and morbidity of complex distal humerus fractures in elderly patients when treated with elbow prosthesis.
               
                  Hypothesis
                  Good functional recovery can be achieved with a total joint replacement.
               
                  Patients and methods
                  This series consisted of 20 patients (18 women and two men) having an average age of 80years (range 65–93, median 80). Based on the AO classification, there were two Type A2 fractures, two Type B fractures, 15 Type C fractures and one fracture that could not be classified because of previous rheumatoid disease history at this elbow. Two fractures were open. In two cases, the olecranon was also fractured. Treatment consisted of the implantation of a Coonrad-Morrey, hinge-type total elbow prosthesis (Zimmer®, Warsaw, IN, USA). The Mayo Clinic surgical approach was used 17 times and the transolecranon approach was used three times. Primary arthroplasty was performed in 19 cases and the surgery was performed after six weeks of conservative treatment (diagnostic delay) in one case. Unrestricted motion was allowed after surgery, but a maximum of 0.5kg could be carried during the first 3months; this was subsequently increased to 2.5kg.
               
                  Results
                  Fifteen of the 20 patients were available for reevaluation with an average follow-up of 3.6years (range 1.7–5.5, median 3.4). Four patients had died and one was lost to follow-up. The average range of motion was 97° (range 60–130°), comprising an average flexion of 130° (range 110–140°) and average loss of extension of 33° (range 0–80°). Pronation and supination were normal. The average Mayo Elbow Performance Score (MEPS) was 83 (range 60–100, median 80). X-rays revealed seven cases of radiolucent lines, with two being progressive. There was no visible wear of the polyethylene bushings at the hinge. Six patients had moderate periarticular heterotopic ossification. The two cases of olecranon osteotomy and one case of olecranon fracture had healed. There were no surgical site infections but two cases of ulnar compression, one of which required neurolysis. There was one case of humeral component loosening after 6years, but the implant was not changed.
               
                  Discussion
                  The clinical range of motion results were comparable to published data. The functional scores were slightly lower, mainly because of the pain factor. The initial results were encouraging and consistent with published data as long as the indications were well-chosen. Based on this retrospective study, total elbow arthroplasty can be a valid alternative in the surgeon's treatment armamentarium for complex distal humerus fractures in elderly patients who have moderate functional demands. Our results support our hypothesis, since we found good functional recovery without associated morbidity.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  Level IV retrospective study without comparator.Distal humerus fractures occur in less than 2% of cases, thus are fairly rare We chose to use total joint replacement as a treatment for complex distal humerus fractures in patients above 65 The goal of this study was to evaluate the functional recovery and morbidity associated with this surgery. Our hypothesis was that functional recovery would be at least comparable to the recovery attained with internal fixation, with lower morbidity, but without having to systematically resort to restrictive rehabilitation. A retrospective, continuous study was performed (2003–2009) on patients greater than 65 Our series comprised 20 fractures in 20 patients (18 women, two men) having an average age of 80 All of our patients were retired and did not participate in sports. Five patients did some gardening. Three patients also suffered from rheumatoid arthritis, with radiological signs of the elbow being affected in one case. None of the patients had a history of trauma at the elbow. There were 13 right and seven left elbows. The dominant side was affected 16 times (80%). In most cases, the injury mechanism involved an accident at home such as a fall from a standing position. Fractures were classified according to the AO system Upon admission, two of the fractures were Gustilo Stage 1 open fractures The prosthesis was used for primary arthroplasty in 19 cases; in the other case, the prosthesis was implanted after failure of conservative treatment with secondary displacement ( The Coonrad-Morrey, semi-constrained total elbow prosthesis was used in all the patients (Zimmer The procedure was performed under general anaesthesia with the patient in lateral decubitus and without a tourniquet cuff. A posterior approach was used, either by reflecting the triceps ( Postoperative rehabilitation consisted of a home program with unrestricted motion. A sling and swath with the elbow at 90° was typically used in the first few days after surgery to provide pain relief. Carrying loads of more than 0.5 The follow-up consisted of clinical and radiological evaluations. A subjective opinion of satisfaction was collect from the patient and classified as either “satisfied patient” or “non-satisfied patient”. This information is important since it has been correlated to independence during everyday life. Active elbow flexion and extension, and forearm pronation and supination range of motion were measured with a goniometer. The Mayo Elbow Performance Score (MEPS) was used to evaluate the functional recovery The radiological assessment consisted of A/P and lateral X-rays to look for signs of loosening. The analysis was performed according to the criteria described by Morrey type 0: radiolucent line less than 1 type 0: radiolucent line of 1 type 0: radiolucent line greater than 1 type 0: radiolucent line greater than 2 type 4: significant loosening. Any potential periarticular heterotopic ossification was identified. The healing of the osteotomy or olecranon fracture was also determined. Wear in the polyethylene bushings could not be systemically measured because the stress X-rays were inconsistent. There was no significant effect of the quality of the cement application on the occurrence of periprosthetic radiolucent lines. But the follow-up may not have been long enough to see this effect. During the review, we sought to evaluate functional recovery with the MEPS score and the DASH score. We realized that in this (very) elderly population, many could not answer at least three of the questions, thus the DASH score could not be interpreted. Given the small number of completed DASH tests, the results are not included in this report. At the latest follow-up visit, one patient was lost to follow-up and four had died during the first year after the surgery for reasons unrelated to the fracture. Thus fifteen patients were reviewed with an average follow-up of 3.4 A large number of patients ( Average elbow flexion was 130° (range 90–140°). The average extension deficit was 33° (range 0–80°). The average range of motion was 97° (range 60–130°). Seven patients (47%) had a “useful” range of motion, which is defined as 0/30/130° of motion or more than 100° of amplitude The female patient who also presented with an ipsilateral proximal humerus fracture upon admission was lost to follow-up. The female patient who also presented with an ipsilateral distal radius fracture at admission had 0/30/130° motion, 120° of pronation–supination and an MEPS score of 95 at the follow-up visit. All the olecranon fractures and osteotomies had healed. The anterior graft was integrated in 14 cases (93%). At the latest follow-up, periprosthetic radiolucent lines were apparent in seven cases (30%). Five were Type 1 located at the humeral component and one was bipolar Type 2. These did not change over time and were asymptomatic. One female patient showed Type 3 progressive radiolucent changes in the humerus ( The ulnar nerve was involved in two cases. The first case regressed spontaneously. Because of motor and sensory deficit, the second case required neurolysis; strength was partially restored but the paresthesia did not change. There were no infections or general complications. Six patients developed periprosthetic heterotopic ossifications without significant consequences to the joint range of motion ( The standard treatment for distal humerus fractures is open reduction and internal fixation Distal humerus hemiarthroplasty has also been proposed. But these studies included a small number of patients and had a short follow-up. However, the preliminary results were intriguing as the joint range of motion was well restored ( But the high complication rate, especially later on, must make us weary of having this as an arthroplasty indication in a trauma context. We reported one case of humeral component loosening that was not revised. This mechanical failure may have been caused by the lack or resorption of the bone graft under the anterior flange of the humeral component. For the two reported cases of ulnar nerve involvement, we discovered that a fragment of the medial column had been left in place, which would explain the nerve compression. This was more likely a technical error as opposed to a faulty surgical indication. Our two main goals for the series were attained: satisfactory functional recovery for the patients in the short and medium term, and a low immediate complication rate. Thus treatment of these complex elbow fractures in elderly patients with a prosthesis can reasonably be a therapeutic option. But the indications should be limited to complex fractures where internal fixation would be precarious, elderly and osteoporotic patients are affected, and the functional demands are reasonable. Thus joint replacement is an alternative to internal fixation. Based on our review of literature, three studies have compared these two treatments in patients above 65 years of age. Two were retrospective Complex distal humerus fractures in elderly patients are challenging to treat. One of the therapeutic options is a total elbow replacement implant. Such implants liberate the surgeon from problems caused by bone quality and fracture complexity. Based on our results, the total elbow implant leads to satisfactory functional recovery in a population with low functional demands. Recovery of the joint range of motion in our series was not optimal, which has persuaded us to more systematically involve a physiotherapist in our rehabilitation protocol. In a trauma context, the indication must be made carefully. The preferred indications are a complex fracture in an elderly subject with low functional demands and/or significant co-morbidities, or in a patient who also already has signs of rheumatoid arthritis in the elbow. The new implants providing angular stability are also a treatment option in these specific indications and this population. The results with the plate versus arthroplasty should be compared in future studies. The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest concerning this article.