Knowledge of the grade of valuable elements and its variation is not sufficient for geometallurgy. Minerals define not only the value of the deposit, but also the method of extraction and concentration. A number of methods for obtaining mineral grades were evaluated with a focus on geometallurgical applicability, precision and trueness. For a geometallurgical program, the number of samples to be analyzed is large, therefore a method for obtaining mineral grades needs to be cost-efficient, relatively fast, and reliable. Automated mineralogy based on scanning electron microscopy is generally regarded as the most reliable method for analyzing mineral grades. However, the method is time demanding and expensive. Quantitative X-ray diffraction has a relatively high detection limit, 0.5%, while the method is not suitable for some base and precious metal ores, it still provides significant details on gangue mineral grades. The application of the element-to-mineral conversion has been limited to the simple mineralogy because the number of elements analyzed limits the number of calculable mineral grades. This study investigates a new method for the estimation of mineral grades applicable for geometallurgy by combining both the element-to-mineral conversion method and quantitative X-ray diffraction with Rietveld refinement. The proposed method not only delivers the required turnover for geometallurgy, but also overcomes the shortcomings if quantitative X-ray diffraction or element-to-mineral is used alone.Geometallurgy is a cross-disciplinary approach that connects information from geology, mineral processing and subsequent downstream processes into a model in order to describe variability in the ore deposit to be used in production planning and management ( A geometallurgical program is an industrial application of geometallurgy. It provides a way to map the variation in the ore body, to handle the data and to give forecast on metallurgical performance on spatial level. The program also comprises a procedure to employ complex geological information and transfer them to geometallurgical domains to be used in process improvement, production planning and business decision-making. The program is an instrument, which should evolve and change to ensure that geometallurgical domains address properly the metallurgical performance. Knowledge on the grades of valuable elements and their variation alone is not sufficient for geometallurgy. Firstly, in several ore types the distribution of the valuable elements is complex. For example in nickel sulfide ores, it is important to know the distribution of nickel between non-sulfides and the different sulfide minerals ( Different levels of mineralogical and chemical information as summarized in In a mineralogical approach of geometallurgy, information of the mineral grades is required for the entire ore body ( Mineral grades and textural information are commonly analyzed in polished sections. Automated mineralogy based on scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and optical image analyses (OIA) are the known techniques. SEM-based automated mineralogy is commonly regarded as the most reliable way of estimating mineral grades. However, the method requires careful and tedious sample preparation and the method itself is costly and time-consuming ( Alternative methods such as quantitative XRD by Rietveld analysis ( The element-to-mineral conversion method is a traditional and simple way to estimate mineral grades by simultaneously solving a set of mass balance equations formulated between chemical elements and minerals. The method is restricted to relatively simple mineralogy where the number of minerals is not larger than the number of analyzed components and the chemical composition of the minerals (mineral matrix) is known. Mathematically this can be written in the following form: The element-to-mineral conversion should not be confused with normative mineralogy methods such as the CIPW Norm or the Cation Norm ( Quantitative XRD methods include Known Addition, Absorption-Diffraction, Mineral Intensity Factors (MIFs) and Full-pattern-fitting (  To improve bulk mineralogy estimation, a combination of the Rietveld and chemical analysis has been used by This study uses several types of iron ore samples to compare different methods of analyzing bulk mineralogy, i.e. mineral grades, to be applied in geometallurgy and process mineralogy. In the comparison of the methods, solely their potential to estimate bulk mineral grades is considered. Additional information that some methods offer are considered in the final evaluation of the methods. The element-to-mineral conversions, quantitative XRD by Rietveld analysis and SEM-based automated mineralogy are used in this study. An additional method called Trueness is defined as “ The trueness of a measurement method is achievable when it is possible to conceive a true value. However, in chemical and mineralogical analysis it is quite common that the true value is unknown. This can be overcome by establishing a reference to another measurement method or by preparing a synthetic standard or reference sample ( Commonly standards or artificially mixed samples are used for evaluating the trueness. For the analysis of mineral grades, standards are not commonly available. As this study aims to evaluate different analysis methods of mineral grades for practical geometallurgy, the usage of a synthetic sample was avoided. Synthetic samples would not represent the original textures, complexity and variation existing in natural samples. Moreover, using synthetic samples would lead to underestimating the error in the analysis of ore samples in practice. The alternative way to evaluate the trueness is to compare against a valid reference. However, the references such as XRF analysis for chemical analysis or SEM-based automated mineralogy for mineral grades cannot be regarded as true values. Therefore, when using these references for the estimation of the trueness, which is now unknown, instead of the term trueness the term Here, the precision of the methods is addressed by the standard deviation. The estimate of the standard deviation is done by replicate samples and replicate analyses. Repeating only the measurement gives the repeatability and repeating the sample preparation and measurement gives the reproducibility. In this study, the standard deviation calculated for XRF and quantitative XRD by Rietveld analysis is a measure of reproducibility, while for automated mineralogy it is a measure of repeatability. Based on boot strapping technique The measurement of the For the measuring of Northern Sweden is a significant mining district in Europe and characterized by diverse styles of mineralization including Fe oxide, Cu A total of 20 ore and process samples from different iron ore deposits in Northern Sweden were collected for this study. The iron grade in the ore samples (drill cores) varied from 21.3% to 63.0% Fe and the ore samples were classified as semi-massive hematite ore and massive magnetite ore ( The samples, for different analyses, went through multiple sample preparation steps. From crushed samples, a part was taken for a preparation of resin mounts. The remaining part was pulverized in the disc mill and split into two parts. The first part was used for X-ray fluorescence analysis, and the second was further ground with a swing mill. The fine powder was used for filling the back-loading holders with an opening of 26 Chemical analyses of the samples ( The first trial of the X-ray powder diffraction analyses were done at Luleå University of Technology (LTU) using a PANalytical Empyrean X-ray diffractometer equipped with a copper tube, Pixel3D detector and pyrolytic graphite monochromator. The 2 X-ray diffraction and Rietveld refinement with a copper tube and monochromator on the iron ore samples led to underestimation of iron mineral phases ( Additionally, two of the samples were measured several times in Helmholtz-Institute for Resource Technology in Freiberg using PANalytical Empyrean, equipped with a Cobalt tube, monochromator and Xe proportional counter detector. The step width and 2 Automated mineralogy is commonly regarded as the most reliable method for the analysis of mineral grades. However, its capabilities are beyond reporting only mineral grades. It provides textural properties such as grain size and shape, mineral associations and mineral liberation numerically. In ore projects, normally 0.3–2.0 When assaying a large number of samples (>10,000), sizing is not an option since it multiplies the number of samples to be analyzed. In analysis of polished sections, using unsized samples introduces segmentation and stereological errors. The stereological error is less significant than segmentation error and is more influential in the liberation analysis than bulk mineralogy analysis as shown by A Merlin SEM – Zeiss Gemini (FESEM, Luleå University of Technology, Sweden) with Oxford Instrument EDS detector and IncaMineral software was used for automated mineralogy analyses. The IncaMineral system combines backscattered detector images with EDS information in the analysis of automated mineralogy ( To confirm IncaMineral results quality, two resin mount samples were analyzed at the geometallurgy laboratory, Technical University of Freiberg by Mineral Liberation Analyzer (MLA) system, which was equipped with FEI Quanta 650F and two Bruker Quantax X-Flash 5030 energy-dispersive X-ray spectrometers. The automated mineralogy analysis provided a mineral list, which includes more than 15 phases. In some of the samples, even several types of one mineral were found, e.g. several amphiboles. For geometallurgy, this is not practical and some simplification is necessary. The simplification is also required for comparing the methods. Therefore, the main phases in the samples were classified into groups of albite (Ab), actinolite (Act), apatite (Ap), biotite (Bt), diopside (Di), orthoclase (Or), quartz (Qtz), andradite (Adr), scapolite (Scp), calcite (Cal), magnetite (Mgt) and hematite (Hem). In the grouping of the minerals and the selection of group representer, the similar behavior of the minerals in the iron processing plant, similarity in their chemical compositions, and abundance of the mineral in the group were considered to streamline application and evaluation of the methods. For example, group of actinolite consists of various amphibole minerals such as tremolite, actinolite and hornblende. The chemical compositions of the minerals ( EMC method is the fastest and the most practical method of obtaining mineral grades when the existing minerals and their chemical compositions are known. Principally, the EMC method solves a system of linear equations where mineral grades are the unknown variables. In cases where the linear system is not determined, the least-square method can be applied to find an approximate solution. Negative solutions are not acceptable for mineral grades, thus a nonnegative method is used. Several numerical methods exist for solving the system of equations with non-negativity constraints. These include the nonnegative least-square algorithm (NNLS) ( Based on the information available (elemental assays and chemical composition of minerals), mineral grades can be calculated by the nonnegative least-square method. However, here the system of linear equations is underdetermined by having 12 unknowns (mineral grades) and 9 equations (reliable elemental assays and Satmagan). Therefore, mathematically this system of linear equations does not have a unique solution not even when non-negativity constraint is added. Practically this means that mineral grades are calculated for nine phases and for other phases, the solution gives zero grades. The calculation of mineral grades with the EMC method can be done sequentially, i.e. system of equations can be divided into two or more set of equations, and each set forms a calculation round of its own. The rounds are solved sequentially and the residual chemical composition of the round will be used in the following round. EMC with rounds enables to have a better control on important elements and to reach a solution where the back-calculated chemical composition matches perfectly with assays for selected elements. For example in iron ores, silicates are calculated first with non-negative least squares solution and finally iron and titanium oxides are calculated from residual iron and titanium ( Generally, the combined EMC–XRD method originated to overcome limitations of EMC and XRD. It takes mineral grades by the Rietveld analysis as an initial estimate and changes mineral grades to minimize the following function: Optimizing functions in MATLAB were used for advanced combination of XRD and XRF data for solving the mineral grades. This is referred to as the combined EMC–XRD method. It is essential to have a good estimate of the magnetite hematite ratio in iron ores since this ratio defines the process line the ore is fed into ( From a geometallurgical point of view, magnetite, hematite and apatite are the most important minerals. The analytical results for these minerals by different methods are compared in Having a good estimate of the gangue silicate minerals in the ore is crucial considering that silica is one of the quality requirements for an iron concentrate. The main silicate minerals in the samples are albite, actinolite and biotite. Iron bearing garnet i.e. andradite is found with calcite in samples ( Considering iron ore processing, biotite, andradite and silicate minerals have significance. Estimation of the biotite and andradite grade by EMC is underestimated and therefore wrong ( Repeats and replicates were used for estimation of the standard deviation of the analyses. For establishing the error model for precision, the relative standard deviation against mineral grade was fitted with Eq. For quality control, two resin mounts analyzed by IncaMineral were also analyzed by Mineral Liberation Analyzer (MLA). Comparing analyzed minerals by IncaMineral against MLA analysis ( Automated mineralogy analysis results were used as the reference values when comparing The alternative way of evaluating Reliable analysis of mineral grades is a crucial part of resource characterization, process mineralogy, and geometallurgy. It is a prerequisite for deportment analysis, mineralogical mass balancing and modeling and simulation of mineral processing circuits. Recently automated mineralogy has become the major method for the analysis of mineral grades. In geometallurgy the method, however, is far too expensive and time demanding. When there is a need for assaying mineral grades in thousands of ore samples, sizing to narrow size fractions is needed and the total number of samples for the analysis becomes very big. Therefore, an alternative method is needed for better value. Quantitative X-ray diffraction with Rietveld analysis has been proposed as a quick mineralogical method for geometallurgy. Challenges in the method are the detection limit and general doubts about its precision and trueness when there is complex mineralogy. Partially, these challenges can be overcome by proper sample preparation ( Instead of using quantitative X-ray diffraction for getting exact mineral grades, the method has been used for classifying purposes, such as geometallurgical domaining and ore block grading ( A combined method using weighted values ( Any technique for the analysis of mineral grades in a geometallurgical program requires careful mineralogical study before the method is routinely applied. In combined method, the mineralogical study must provide information on the list of all possible minerals, their crystal structure, and their chemical composition. Additionally, to be able to apply the combined method, the minerals need to be grouped in a sensible way, i.e. groups consist of minerals with similarity in chemical composition as well as process behavior. Therefore, nature of the ore body and the process define the grouping of minerals, acceptable error, and eventually the method to be used. However, combined method is not a universal solution for every situation as it is. Principally, the algorithm for estimating mineral grades can take as many restrictive constraints as needed. Therefore, if several minor minerals are present in the sample but the information for calculating mineral grades is insufficient, the combined method requires additional constraints to converge to the optimal solution. In addition, the assumption used here is that the chemical composition of minerals is known and does not vary. Strictly speaking, this is not a realistic assumption, but it simplifies the complex situation for finding a bridge between elemental assays and mineral grades. It is relatively rare to find error estimation for the analyses of mineral grades published in the literature and research reports. For quality control, back-calculated chemical composition is often plotted against the analyzed ones (e.g. The precision and degree of trueness of an analysis for mineral grades are dependent on the abundance of a phase in a sample and the number of observations collected. In automated mineralogy, this depends on the number of particles and grains analyzed. In X-ray techniques (X-ray diffraction and X-ray fluorescence), the ratio of signal to noise, thus analysis time, plays the role. Here a simple equation was used to describe the standard deviation and the RMSD in the wide grade range where analysis conditions are the same as commonly used in process mineralogy. This approach is practical when individual standard deviations are needed for measurements. Examples of such problems are circuit mass balancing and Monte Carlo simulations. The methods available for obtaining mineral grades either directly (such as quantitative XRD by Rietveld analysis and automated mineralogy) or indirectly (EMC and combined EMC–XRD) have different advantages and disadvantages. The problem remaining is that with all methods the back-calculated chemical composition does not match perfectly with the chemical assays of the commodity elements. The challenge is that as resource geologists and metallurgist have a long tradition to work with chemical assays, they find it difficult to take parallel mineralogical information that is not fully consistent with chemical assays. Weighting can be a solution for that but more work is needed to establish solid grounds for defining the weighting factors and to control that weighing does not cause the mineral grades to drift too far away from the true mineral composition. For a selection of the best possible option further information regarding practical considerations such as sample preparation, costs, detection limit, and the information that method offers are necessary ( Conclusions from the work done are summarized below: Three different methods for the analysis of mineral grades were compared firstly in terms of the A combined technique of quantitative X-ray diffraction and element-to-mineral conversion has been introduced to overcome the limitations of each of the techniques. Thus, it is suggested to be suitable for geometallurgy for the analysis of mineral grades in bulk. The combined method gives an estimate on both magnetite and hematite grades and can replace tedious Satmagan and wet chemical Fe A problem occurring with all methods is that back-calculated chemical composition from mineral grades does not match perfectly with the elemental grades of commodities received from chemical assays. This can be partially solved by combined method, however, this can be fully avoided for certain elements by weighting, but this requires further development. The authors acknowledge the financial support from the Hjalmar Lundbohm Research Centre (HLRC) and thank LKAB for providing samples and analysis. The authors kindly thank the support from Kari Niiranen, Therese Lindberg, and Andreas Fredriksson from LKAB. Cecilia Lund (Luleå University of Technology) helped in automated mineralogy and finalizing the article. Megan Becker (University of Cape Town) gave comments and suggestions on the draft paper. They all are greatly appreciated. The authors are grateful to the ProMinNET research group for comments and advice provided during the meetings. The help of Jukka Laukkanen from Geological Survey of Finland (GTK) in XRD analysis is appreciated.