Treatment of the posterior malleolus has been debated among orthopedic surgeons. Most orthopedic surgeons will fix the posterior malleolus if it is larger than 25% to 30% of the distal articular surface. The most common method of fixation of the posterior malleolus is by indirect reduction and anteroposterior screws. In the present study, we describe the technique and results of treatment of the posterior malleolus by direct reduction through the posterolateral approach to the ankle. The decision to fix the posterior malleolus was determined by its size and displacement. A total of 12 consecutive patients underwent the posterolateral approach to reduce the posterior malleolus, and these were fixed by posterior plate. Two patients were lost to follow-up in the early postoperative period (both after 2 months). No deep infection or wound dehiscence occurred. Ten patients had adequate (<2-mm displacement of the articular surface) radiologic reduction at the final follow-up visit. There were 2 cases of 2 mm or more of articular surface displacement at the final follow-up visit (1 patient had 2-mm displacement noted in the immediate postoperative period and 1 patient had adequate reduction in the beginning but was displaced with additional follow-up). The posterolateral approach to the ankle is a useful tool to treat certain cases of posterior malleolus fracture. It allows good visualization and stable fixation of the posterior malleolus.Posterior malleolar fracture is an important element of some ankle fractures. No consensus has been reached on the treatment of the posterior malleolus fracture. Traditionally, the decision regarding the surgical fixation of the posterior malleolus depended on its size. Small avulsion fractures usually do not need surgical stabilization of the posterior malleolus; however, larger displaced fragments of the posterior tibial plafond involving more than 25% to 30% of the articular surface require surgical reduction and stabilization No universal consensus has been reached on the best method to reduce and stabilize the posterior tibial malleolus. Indirect reduction with stabilization of the posterior malleolus using anteroposterior screws is the most common method of fixation of the posterior malleolus among orthopedic surgeons Our hypothesis is that the use of the posterolateral approach for the treatment of certain types of posterior malleolus fracture can lead to good results with a low incidence of complications. The purpose of the present study is to describe the technique and our results using the posterolateral approach to reduce and stabilize posterior malleoli in the surgical treatment of ankle fractures. This was a retrospective consecutive case series study. We included all patients who had undergone a posterolateral approach for the treatment of a posterior malleolar fracture from 2003 to 2009. The institutional review board approved the present study. A total of 12 patients were included in our study. The mean patient age was 41 (range 20 to 61) years. Of the 12 patients, 10 were men and 2 were women. Three patients had undergone application of a temporary spanning external fixator shortly after injury until definitive fixation surgery. The indication to reduce and stabilize the posterior malleolus was determined by its size and amount of displacement. Fixation of the posterior malleolus was done if the fragment was more than 30% of the tibial plafond and the posterior malleolus was displaced more than 2 mm after closed reduction of the ankle. No medical comorbidities were considered as an indication or a contraindication to using the posterolateral approach to the ankle. Of these 12 patients, 2 had previous open reduction and internal fixation of the ankle fracture and had presented with posterior subluxation of the ankle in the early postoperative period. Of the 12 patients, 10 were followed up until bone healing, and 2 were lost to follow-up before bone healing (both after 2 months). The mean follow-up period was 5.3 (range 2 to 72) months. We reviewed the medical records and radiographs of the patients. The surgical procedure, reduction of the fracture, early complications, and wound healing were assessed. The patients were positioned prone with the tourniquet applied over the proximal thigh. A posterolateral approach was used. The skin incision was midway between the lateral border of the Achilles tendon and the fibula. The sural nerve was identified and protected. The sural nerve courses the lateral border of the Achilles tendon (going from medially to laterally) approximately 10 cm proximal to the Achilles tendon insertion. However, the sural nerve anatomy is highly variable, and the surgeon should perform meticulous blunt dissection to avoid injury of the nerve and its branches A separate medial incision was used to treat the medial malleolar fracture. An assistant held the leg with the knee flexed. The medial malleolus was reduced and fixed with partially threaded screws (regular or cannulated). Postoperatively, the leg was immobilized in a splint or cam boot. The sutures were removed after 2 weeks and the range of motion exercises started. Weight bearing was begun by 10 weeks postoperatively when advancing signs of union were seen on the radiograph ( All 12 patients had a posterolateral approach to reduce the posterior malleolus. Of the 12 patients, 2 were lost to follow-up in the early postoperative period (both after 2 months). None of the 10 patients (who were followed up for >2 months) developed delayed union or nonunion, and bone healing was obtained in all of them by 4 months after surgery. The wounds in all patients healed satisfactory. No deep wound infection and wound dehiscence developed. The fibular fracture was internally fixed in all cases using a posterior plate. The medial malleolus was fixed by a separate incision in 9 cases. Assessment of the postoperative radiographs at the last follow-up visit showed adequate radiologic reduction in 10 patients with less than 2 mm of displacement of the distal tibial articular surface ( Fixation of the posterior malleolus has been debated among surgeons; however, most orthopedic surgeons will fix the posterior malleolus if it is greater than 25% of the distal articular surface The method of fixation of the posterior malleolus was traditionally from the anterior aspect by using indirect reduction and an anteroposterior screw, relying on the attachment of the posterior inferior tibiofibular ligament between the fibula and posterior malleolus Many surgical approaches to the posterior malleolus have been described. A long medial incision with dislocation of the ankle was used to reach the posterior fragment. This method requires extensive soft tissue stripping of the fracture fragments The posterolateral approach was described originally for bone grafting Indirect reduction and screw fixation is less invasive than direct reduction using a posterolateral approach; however, the anterior incision does not allow adequate visualization of the fragment and does not allow removal of the interposed periosteum or removal of organized blood clots (if surgery is performed more than a few days after the fracture). The posterolateral approach provides a real internervous plane between the flexor hallucis longus muscles (supplied by the tibial nerve) and the peroneal muscles (supplied by the superficial peroneal nerve). There will be muscle tissue between the hardware and the skin. This is in contrast to the anterior or medial approach to the tibia or the lateral approach to the fibula in which all the hardware lies immediately under the skin and can cause irritation later on. Wound dehiscence in the posterolateral approach will not lead to the same disastrous complications as with other approaches to the ankle. Thus, in patients with fracture dislocation of the ankle, this approach is safer than other approaches. In the case of major soft tissue contusion, bruising often does not involve the posterior aspect of the leg; thus, the posterolateral approach could be used without increased risk We used the space between the flexor hallucis longus and the peroneal tendons to reach both the posterior surface of the tibia and fibula. Some investigators have described the approach as reaching the posterior surface of the tibia by retracting the flexor hallucis longus laterally Few peer-reviewed reports of this approach have been published. Miller Talbot et al If the medial malleolus is not fractured, the patient can be placed in the lateral position. If the medial malleolus is fractured, the patient should be placed in the prone position. Fixation of the medial malleolus can be difficult using the posterolateral approach. The knee should be flexed, with an assistant holding the leg, and a separate incision performed medially. The position of the fracture fragments will be awkward for the surgeon used to fixing the medial malleolus fracture with the patient in the supine position. This can potentially lead to malreduction of the medial malleolus. We did not have malreduction in any of our patients; however, in the series by Huber et al We do not use the posterolateral approach for all our patients with posterior malleolus fractures. We had only 12 cases with the posterolateral approach in more than 5 years (on average, we perform 2 to 3 cases of ankle fracture reduction each week). Our preferred method of fixation for ankle fractures with a posterior malleolus fracture is anatomic reduction and rigid fixation of the lateral malleolus (using the lateral approach). This continues to be our primary method of fixation, used for the vast majority of patients. Fixation of the fibula will allow for indirect reduction of the posterior malleolus by the attachment of the posterior inferior tibiofibular ligament. Fixation of the lateral malleolus using a direct lateral approach (with or without syndesmotic fixation) in the presence of a small posterior malleolus fracture is a safe and effective procedure with minimal risks. In the case of a large (>30%) nondisplaced posterior malleolus fracture, the same approach (fixation of the fibula using the lateral approach) can be used with the addition of percutaneous anteroposterior screws. Most orthopedic surgeons will choose the same approach Amorosa et al Our results regarding wound healing, fracture reduction, and bone healing are consistent with those from other studies of the posterolateral approach of the ankle that studied a relatively large number of patients Our results and the results of similar studies In conclusion, we found that the posterolateral approach is a useful approach to treat fractures of the posterior malleolus with good visualization to achieve good reduction with minimal complications. We believe it should be used only for displaced fractures that involve more than 30% of the distal articular tibial surface and that continue to be displaced more than 2 mm after closed reduction of the ankle. This is because the posterolateral approach still requires more invasive surgery with more dissection than fixing the lateral malleolus using the lateral approach and relying on indirect reduction of the posterior malleolus. Surgeons should be aware that when using this approach, fixation of the medial malleolus might be more difficult than usual because of the patient’s position. Also, this approach might give less predictable results if used to treat high-energy pilon fractures.