 The DAF reactor has two functions, to provide collisions or contact opportunities between air bubbles and flocs and to provide removal of the floc-bubble aggregates. Conceptually, DAF is thus modeled as a two step process as depicted in Small air bubbles are formed instantaneously after injection of the pressurized recycle flow into the contact zone influent at the bottom of the tank– see A size distribution of bubbles from to 10–100 μm or greater is produced with generally lower mean sizes found for higher saturator pressures. A mean value of 60 μm is a good The density of air bubbles is a fundamental property needed for calculating bubble volume concentrations and bubble rise velocities. The density of air bubbles depends on pressure, temperature, and humidity. While the pressure decreases from about 125 kPa at the bottom of the contact zone to approximately 101.3 kPa at the top, for purposes of using densities to calculate bubble rise velocities, the lower atmospheric pressure of 101.3 kPa is used. Moist air densities are presented in The air bubble suspension in the contact zone is characterized first in terms of the mass concentration ( The mass concentration of air released in the contact zone ( The classical Stokes equation is used to calculate air bubble rise velocities for bubble sizes up to 100 μm. The bubbles have a spherical shape It is useful to distinguish between the sizes of bubbles and particles for dispersed air flotation versus dissolved air flotation processes. Dispersed air flotation processes commonly used for mineral separation from ores involve large bubbles and large particles, sizes of millimeters or fraction thereof. The adhesion or attachment of these large bubbles to particles is described as a three phase phenomena in which contact angles are measured and used to quantify adhesion. High contact angles indicate strong bubble attachment and hydrophobic particle surface conditions. Dissolved air flotation, on the other hand, involves much smaller bubbles and particles, sizes of micrometers. Here, small particles attach to small bubbles but do not involve contact angles. In fact, Derjaguin The model framework considers two steps: 1) collision opportunities and 2) particle attachment to the bubbles. The first step involves mechanisms of how particles are transported from the bulk water to the vicinity of the bubble surface. As particles approach the bubble surface, interaction forces can prevent attachment or facilitate attachment if the forces are attractive. The key equations of the contact zone model are summarized next. Discussion The DAF reactor has two functions, to provide collisions opportunities between flocs and air bubbles and to provide removal of the floc-bubble aggregates. These two functions are carried out in the contact and separation zones, respectively, as depicted in Air bubbles in the The total single collector efficiency is incorporated into a kinetic expression for collision of particles with bubbles Pretreatment coagulation affects the particle-bubble attachment efficiency (α One approach to evaluating α  As particles are transported from the bulk solution to close distances at the bubble surface, forces between the bubble and particle affect attachment, as depicted in Air bubbles carry a negative charge, even in distilled water or distilled water containing simple non-hydrolyzing salts. Negative zeta potentials have been reported in the range of −15 to −25 mV [  Ducker Another force that can hinder collisions, and thus attachment, is hydrodynamic retardation. This is the force that causes a deviation in the particle trajectory as the particle approaches the bubble surface due to resistance to motion from thinning of the viscous water between the particle and bubble. The single collector collision efficiency equations presented above, for interception and settling ( In summary, coagulation is essential in water treatment to reduce repulsive charge interactions between particles or flocs and bubbles. Favorable attachment (high α  Model predictions in which the contact zone detention time is varied ( Model predictions for removing 20 μm flocs are presented in To calculate the rise velocity of floc-bubble aggregates requires the determination of the aggregate size and density. The aggregate equivalent diameter ( Bubble sizes in the separation zone are more likely larger than in the contact zone due to a decrease in water pressure in the upper portion of the separation zone, and perhaps, due to coalescence. Leppinen and Dalziel   The separation zone of the DAF tank (see Using the simple Hazen concept, There is a discrepancy between these predictions and experience. Practical experience and design practice shows that DAF tanks can operate at 20 m h DAF is particularly suited to water supplies with characteristics such as those containing low density particles and those yielding low density particles following chemical coagulation. Supply types include those containing 1) natural color, 2) algae, 3) low turbidity (< 10 NTU) and low TOC, and 4) moderate mineral turbidities (10–50 NTU). Those containing color or algae are obvious choices. High quality supplies with low turbidity and TOC are good candidates for DAF treatment compared to direct filtration treatment because DAF clarification provides an additional process for particle and pathogen removal, and compared to sedimentation because high quality source waters produce low density floc difficult to settle without extensive flocculation and often the use of floc aid polymers. DAF performance is also less affected by low temperature compared to sedimentation so supplies in regions that have cold waters are also a good choice for DAF. To generalize, DAF is a good choice for reservoir supplies and should be considered for river supplies that fit the water quality types described. DAF has several advantages. It is more efficient than settling in removing low density particles, even at the much higher hydraulic loadings – compare 5 to 40 m h Algae have low densities, near that of water, which enables them to be nearly buoyant and reside near the surface of reservoirs and maintain photosynthetic activity. If you consider that many algae have sizes of 1 to 20 μm, then Recent studies have demonstrated that DAF is more effective than settling in removing Developments in DAF plant design are summarized, especially those dealing with flocculation pretreatment and with DAF hydraulic loadings. Prior to about 1990, it was typical to design flocculation tanks much like flocculation ahead of sedimentation. Long flocculation tank detention times of 20 to 30 min with 2 to 3 stages of tapered mixing intensity were common. Using the principle obtained from the contact zone modeling presented in Again prior to about 1990, DAF tanks were sized for hydraulic loadings of 5 to 10 m h 