In this paper, the utilization of assisted reverse electrodialysis (A-RED), recently used for pre-desalination, is proposed as a general method to reduce the energy requirements of electrolysis processes and evaluated for two model processes: (i) the cathodic conversion of carbon dioxide to formic acid; (ii) the anodic treatment of water contaminated by organics. In A-RED, two solutions with different salt content and an external potential difference, applied in the direction of the natural salinity gradient, are both used to drive redox processes. It was shown, for the first time, that the cathodic conversion of CO2 to formic acid can be performed by both reverse electrodialysis (RED) and A-RED, saving electric energy with respect to electrolysis processes. A-RED allows to increase significantly the production of formic acid with respect to RED (after 4 h, 2 and 6.3 mM were produced for RED and A-RED with an additional external cell potential of 0.8 V, respectively, for a salinity ratio SR = 3300). For the anodic treatment of wastewater, A-RED allowed to accelerate the removal of organics and/or to use smaller salinity gradients with respect to RED (as an example, after 2 h with a SR of 4.4, an abatement of TOC of 55 and 92% was obtained with RED and A-RED with 1.5 V, respectively) and to save electrical energy with respect to electrolysis. A simplified economic analysis performed for the anodic treatment of the adopted synthetic wastewater has shown that A-RED presents the most appealing economic data with respect to both electrolysis and RED in most of investigated cases.In the last two decades, a large effort was carried out to increase the utilization of renewable energies. In 2017, 13.5% of the world total primary energy supply was produced from renewable energy sources, which includes hydro, solar, wind, biofuels, waste, geothermal and tidal Salinity gradients are widely available both in nature (estuaries or coastal areas, mixing of seawater and brackish water) However, the development of redox processes driven by salinity gradients is strongly limited, in order to use not too large and too expensively RED stacks, to cases where small cell potentials are required and large salinity gradients are available, thus not allowing to exploit the energy present in waters with limited salinity gradients or to help processes that require high cell potentials. In this context, we want here to propose the utilization of assisted reverse electrodialysis (A-RED) in order to use a larger range of salinity gradients and to sustain electrolysis processes characterized also by high cell potentials, reducing the investment costs for the RED stack. In A-RED, an external current is applied in the direction of the diffusional transport of ions which follows chemical potential gradients, thus allowing to couple the external electric energy and the energy coming from salinity gradient Experiments were performed in a homemade lab scale stack previously described in detail Synthetic wastewaters were prepared dissolving NaCl (analytical grade, assay > 99.8% Sigma Aldrich, Italy) and formic acid (puriss. p.a., ACS reagent, reag. Ph. Eur., ≥ 98%, purchased from Sigma Aldrich, Italy, 120 mg L In the experiments, in particular, the salinity of HC solution is comparable to that of brine; while the LC solution reflects seawater or brackish, respectively, for the treatment of wastewater or CO For RED the potential drop across a fixed external resistance and the current intensity were recorded by potentiostat. Reported current densities were based on the cathode geometric area (100 cm The organic abatement (X) was defined by For the CO CV and LSC characterizations were performed by using a conventional three-electrode cell equipped with a Sn electrode as working electrode, a Saturated Calomel Electrode reference and a Pt wire counter electrode. Before each characterization, Tin foil (0.1 cm The first case-study involved the anodic treatment of a synthetic wastewater with an initial TOC content of 120 mg L E° for chlorides reduction to chlorine is 1.36 V vs. SHE and a small overpotential is expected at adopted Ru based anodes. At the cathode, for small current densities, the reduction of oxygen solubilized in water is expected (working potential between −0.2 and −0.4 V at carbonaceous cathodes) while for high currents, when the oxygen reduction becomes limited by mass transfer, the hydrogen evolution takes place needing larger potentials. It has been also shown that a major drawback of these processes is given by the significant energetic consumptions, which limits its application In particular, for  The improvements offered by A-RED with respect to electrolysis can be better observed looking at Hence, on overall the results reported in The electrochemical conversion of CO Agarwal et al. RED experiments were carried out using a concentration of NaCl of 150 g L Hence, the adoption of A-RED seems particularly important to sustain the electrolytic process. A series of A-RED experiments was carried out using an initial To better evaluate this aspect, some A-RED experiments were repeated at 0.5 V reducing the initial  Assisted reverse electrodialysis (A-RED) is here proposed for the first time for two different model redox processes, the cathodic conversion of carbon dioxide to formic acid and the anodic treatment of water contaminated by organics, and compared with both electrolysis and RED. In general, the work presents a first proof of concept that A-RED can be potentially used for many purposes, including redox processes that require high cell potentials, using waters with lower salinity gradients with respect to RED with relatively small stacks and reducing the energetic consumptions with respect to conventional electrolysis. More in detail, the main conclusions of the work for the reduction of carbon dioxide to formic acid are: it was shown, for the first-time, that the cathodic conversion of CO the adoption of A-RED increases significantly the production of formic acid and gives rise to a more stable current with respect to RED using a small external cell potential of 0.5–0.8 V; as an example, with an applied cell potential of 0.8 V, a final concentration of formic acid of about 6.3 mM was achieved vs. the 2.0 mM obtained by RED. The main conclusions of the work for the anodic removal of TOC for a synthetic wastewater are: A-RED was used for the first time for the anodic treatment of a synthetic wastewater contaminated by organics; in particular, A-RED gives higher abatement of TOC with respect to RED and requires lower applied cell potentials with respect to electrolysis; as an example, after 2 h with a the removal of TOC increased by means of an enhancement of salinity gradient and/or of the applied cell potential; the adoption of A-RED allowed to obtain a partial removal of the TOC also using a low salinity gradient of 2.2, which is not sufficient for RED process, strongly reducing the energetic requirements with respect to electrolysis. Furthermore, a simplified economic analysis was also performed in the case of the treatment of the synthetic wastewater by RED, electrolysis and A-RED. According to the estimations, A-RED allows to decrease both the energetic costs and capital investments with respect to electrolysis, in most of investigated cases.  None. University of Palermo is gratefully acknowledged for the financial support (FFR Scialdone 2018–2020).