Polyurethane (PU) foams have both geometry and mechanical property anisotropy. Metal foams, which are manufacturing by investment casting or melt deposition method and using PU foam as a template, also have mechanical property anisotropy. This work studied the mechanical properties in two directions of titanium foam with four different cell sizes fabricated using the replica impregnation method. The two directions are (1) the loading direction parallel to the foaming direction where the cells are elongated (EL direction) and (2) the loading direction perpendicular to the foaming direction where the cell are equiaxed (EQ direction). The results show that the compression responses for both EL and EQ directions are isotropy. Micrographs and X-ray micro-computed tomography show that the degree of geometry anisotropy is not strong enough to results in mechanical property anisotropy.Reticulated polyurethane (PU) foams are processed using reaction of chemicals, which are carried along a conveyer belt for continuous production. This is followed by the peeling of parallelepipedic PU foam blocks to obtain a periodic variation of the open-cell structure Metal foams can be manufactured by many methods. Open-cell aluminium foam (e.g. Duocel® and m.pore®) are produced using investment casting with PU foam as a template, while nickel foam (e.g. Incofoam®) uses melt deposition on PU foam For titanium foam, powder metallurgy is the common manufacturing process. Open-cell titanium foam with low to medium porosity can be produced by powder space holder technique Titanium foam can also be fabricated by replica impregnation method. For this manufacturing method, a PU foam is used as a sacrificial template. PU foams are dipped in titanium slurry and subsequently burnt out. Titanium powders were then sintered. Titanium foams should replicate the structure of corresponding PU foams. There is no previous report on the geometry and mechanical property anisotropy of open-cell titanium foam fabricated by replica impregnation method. Since PU foams have both geometry and mechanical property anisotropy, the objective of this work is to investigate if titanium foams retain both geometry and mechanical property anisotropy. Titanium foams with four different cell sizes were produced and monotonic and interrupted compression tests were carried out using titanium foams in two different loading directions. Argon gas atomised commercially pure (CP) titanium powder was used in this work. From SEM observation, the powders were spherical To prepare titanium slurry, PVA and Dolapix, were dissolved in water using magnetic stirrer at 90 Reticulated PU foams as a sacrificial template was submerged into homogenisedly mixed titanium slurry. Four different cell sizes of PU foam, which were 25–40 Compression samples have cylindrical shape with a diameter of 15 Microstructures were investigated using three dimensional optical microscope (3D-OM) and scanning electron microscope (SEM). From 3D-OM micrographs, average cell sizes can be determined using image analysis software. It was done by in a similar way to that which the PU foam manufacturer uses to determine the cell diameter of PU foam. Details of the procedures can be found in  PU foams with four different cell sizes were used in this work and the 3D-OM micrographs are shown in  The degree of anisotropy in titanium foams could be quantified by the results from X-ray micro-computed tomography (μCT). X-ray μCT was performed at a spatial resolution of 5.16    Titanium foams with four different cell sizes were produced using the replica impregnation method. Compression samples were wire cut from titanium foams in two directions so that (1) elongated cells were in the loading direction (EL direction) and (2) equiaxed cells were in the loading direction (EQ direction). From both monotonic and interrupted compression tests, the compression responses in both directions are similar. There is no mechanical property anisotropy observed in titanium foam fabricated using the replica impregnation method. From the microstructural observations, it could be observed that the geometry anisotropy was less pronounced in sintered titanium foam comparing to the corresponding PU foam. This is the result of the impregnation where titanium slurry tended to accumulate where struts meet. In addition, the X-ray micro-computed tomography results showed that the average aspect ratio of pores was 1.16 and the average angle that the major axis inclined to the compression was 20.4° for titanium foams fabricated using 35 The authors would like to thank the