The aim of our research was to apply Box–Behnken experimental design and response surface methodology for modeling of some Turkish coals. As a base for this study, standard Bond grindability tests were initially done and Bond work indexes (W
                     
                        i
                     ) values were calculated for three Turkish coals. The Box–Behnken experimental design was used to provide data for modeling and the variables of model were Bond work index, grinding time and ball diameter of mill. Coal grinding tests were performed changing these three variables for three size fractions of coals (−3350+1700μm, −1700+710μm and −710μm).
                  Using these sets of experimental data obtained by mathematical software package (MATLAB 7.1), mathematical models were then developed to show the effect of each parameter and their interactions on product 80% passing size (d
                     80). Predicted values of d
                     80 obtained using model equations were in good agreement with the experimental values of d
                     80 (R
                     2 value of 0.96 for −3350+1700μm, R
                     2 value of 0.98 for −1700+710μm and R
                     2 value of 0.94 for −710μm). This study proved that Box–Behnken design and response surface methodology could efficiently be applied for modeling of grinding of some Turkish coals.Grinding has a significant impact on economical ore dressing and processing, therefore the development of the grinding process and the dimensioning of the mills has an outstanding role. In the usual case, the dimensioning of mills for ore processing is primarily based on the determination of the Bond work index The grindability of coal is also an important practical and economical property to coal handling and utilization aspects. Thus, engineering experimenters wish to find the grinding conditions under which a certain process attains the optimal results. That is, they want to determine the levels of the design parameters at which the response reaches its optimum. The optimum could be either a maximum or a minimum of a function of the design parameters. One of methodologies for obtaining the optimum is response surface technique It is essential that experimental design methodology is a very economic way for extracting the maximum amount of complex information, a significant experimental time saving factor and moreover, it saves the material used for analyses and personal costs as well The objectives of this study are to establish the functional relationships between the some grinding variables (Bond work index, grinding time and ball diameter of mill) on product 80% passing size ( In the following sections, the requirements for the Box–Behnken with response surface method and their applications to the design of experiments and modeling the effects of Bond work index, grinding time and ball diameter of mill were described for some Turkish coals. Response surface methodology is a collection of statistical and mathematical methods that are useful for the modeling and analyzing engineering problems. In this technique, the main objective is to optimize the response surface that is influenced by various process parameters. Response surface methodology also quantifies the relationship between the controllable input parameters and the obtained response surfaces The design procedure of response surface methodology is as follows Designing of a series of experiments for adequate and reliable measurement of the response of interest. Developing a mathematical model of the second order response surface with the best fittings. Finding the optimal set of experimental parameters that produce a maximum or minimum value of response. Representing the direct and interactive effects of process parameters through two and three dimensional plots. If all variables are assumed to be measurable, the response surface can be expressed as follows: The goal is to optimize the response variable Both Bond grindability tests and batch-grinding tests were carried out with three different kinds of Turkish coals (Alpagut, Divrigi and Tunçbilek). In grinding of the coal samples, jaw and roll type crushers were used and particles of sizes less than 3350 For grinding tests, three different size ball diameters (25 As a base for this study, standard Bond grindability tests were initially done and Bond work indexes ( The standard Bond grindability test is a closed-cycle dry grinding and screening process, which is carried out until steady state condition is obtained. This test has been described as follows The material is packed to 700 The products of the total final three cycles are combined to form the equilibrium rest product. Sieve analysis is carried out on the material and the results are plotted, to find the 80% passing size of the product ( In this study, the samples are crushed in a laboratory scale jaw crusher and roll crusher, and then the standard Bond grindability tests were performed. The Bond work index values ( Experimental design is widely used for controlling the effects of parameters in many processes. Its usage decreases number of experiments, using time and material resources. Furthermore, the analysis performed on the results is easily realized and experimental errors are minimized. Statistical methods measures the effects of change in operating variables and their mutual interactions on process through experimental design way In this study, the Box–Behnken experimental design was chosen for finding out the relationship between the response functions ( Box–Behnken design Box–Behnken design requires an experiment number according to For the three-level three-factorial Box–Behnken experimental design, a total of 15 experimental runs, shown in The model is of the following form The coefficients, i.e. the main effect ( A three-factor three-coded level Box–Behnken design was used to determine the response ( Using the relationships in From the experimental results listed in For −3350 The actual and predicted values of In order to gain a better understanding of the results, the predicted models are presented in    In this study, the application of response surface methodology and Box–Behnken design from the point of view grinding tests was discussed. The three-level three-factorial Box–Behnken experimental design was applied in the study. Variables of model investigated in this study were: ball diameter ( Predicted values of In order to gain a better understanding of the effect of the variables on product 80% passing size, the predicted models are presented in as the 3D response surface graphs. This study proved that Box–Behnken design and response surface methodology could efficiently be applied for modeling of some Turkish coals grinding circuits and that it is economical way of obtaining the maximum amount of information in a short period of time and with the fewest number of experiments.