The formation of biogenic coalbed methane is stoichiometrically limited by relative deficiency of hydrogen in coal. As straw is rich in hydrogen and can be easily degraded by microorganisms, it is suggested that the co-degradation of coal and straw to produce biogenic methane can overcome these limitations. However, the factors affecting methane production in co-degradation of coal and straw were unclear. Here, the type and part of straw and the particle size of coal and straw were evaluated with respect to methane production from Qinshui Basin coal. The results showed that the biomethane yields in co-degradations of coal and different types of straw were all higher than that in degradation of only coal or only straw with the yield from rice and coal 25.36 times greater, the yield from sweet sorghum and coal 22.70 times greater, the yield from wheat and coal 19.90 times greater, and the yield from corn and coal 1.74 times greater. The co-degradation of coal and stems also showed a better enhancing effect than that of coal and roots and coal and leaves based on biogenic methane production. With respect to particle size, the coal had a greater influence on biomethane production than the straw. The highest methane production was obtained in the co-degradation with 0.125–0.150 mm of coal and 5 mm of rice straw. The affects were also shown to not correlate well with the additional of hydrogen. Therefore, it is more likely that the enhanced methane production is a result of stimulating the microbial biodegradation of coal. Further efforts would be made to find the specific compounds in straw which interact with coal directly, in order to better understand the mechanism of co-degradation between coal and straw, and make it simpler to improve biomethane production.Biogenic coalbed methane (CBM) is an important component of CBM and it has even been identified as the primary source of CBM in some basins The application of MECoM and formation of biogenic CBM shared the same mechanisms. Both performed by anaerobically biodegrading coal. It has been demonstrated that a variety of anaerobic microorganisms However, coal is a complex organic compound which is hard for microorganisms to degrade. And hydrogen is limited in coal with a carbon to hydrogen ratio of approximately 25:1 compared with 1:4 ratio required for biogenic methane formation. So, several pretreating methods have been proposed to improve the coal structure to facilitate microbial degradation, e.g. microbial pretreatment, chemical pretreatment. Haider et al. successfully increased biomethane production after pretreating coal samples using aerobic fungi and bacteria Thus, several factors affecting methane production from anthracite (high rank coal) in Qinshui Basin were analyzed in this paper. The CBM in Qinshui Basin is now commercially exploited. And biogenic CBM and functional microorganisms have been found in the basin The anthracite sample was obtained from the No. 3 coal seam located in southern Qinshui Basin, China (see the location map in Guo et al. 2014 The rice, corn, wheat, and sweet sorghum straw samples were cut, crushed, and sieved through a 60 mesh screen (<0.250 mm). Part of rice straw sample was manually divided into stem, leaf, and root, and then cut into 5 mm length. Some of the rice stem samples were cut into 10 mm length and some was further crushed and sieved to obtain a particle size of <0.250 mm. The ultimate analyses of rice straw samples were conducted on a Vario MICRO Cube analyzer (Elementar Company, Germany) following the Standards ISO 17247-2013. The total solids (TS) and volatile solids (VS) of rice straw samples were determined according to the standard methods The methanogenic microflora was derived from produced water from active CBM wells in southern Qinshui Basin by enrichment using anthracite as the sole carbon source. The maximum methane production of 115.90 μmol/g coal was reached after 29 days of cultivation at 35 °C. The anaerobic culture medium used included 100 ml/L basic medium, 5 ml/L trace element solution, and 5 ml/L vitamin solution. Basic medium is composed of 0.335 g/L KCl, 0.14 g/L CaCl Anthracite (0.125–0.150 mm) and rice, corn, wheat, and sweet sorghum (<0.250 mm) were used in the co-degradation experiments. The co-degradations of rice and anthracite, corn and anthracite, wheat and anthracite, sweet sorghum and anthracite were respectively named by RA, CA, WA, and SA (the initial of straw and coal). And the cultivations with only straw or anthracite were set as the controls which were marked as R0 (rice), C0 (corn), W0 (wheat), S0 (sorghum), and A0 (anthracite), respectively. The rice stem, rice leaf, and rice root (5 mm) with anthracite (0.125–0.150 mm) were also used in the co-degradation experiments (named by RSA, RLA, and RRA, respectively) while the cultivations with only rice stem, leaf, root, or anthracite set as the controls which were named by RS0 (rice stem), RL0 (rice leaf), RR0 (rice root), and A0 (anthracite), respectively. The co-degradation experiments with different straw/coal particle sizes were performed using rice stem and anthracite as substrates. The interaction effects are found out only by the use of statistical techniques. A two factors and three level [L The anaerobic cultivation experiments were carried out in triplicate with 140 ml serum bottles containing 30 ml of medium and 3 ml of anaerobic microflora inoculum with the control bottles containing either 0.6 g straw or only 1 g anthracite substrate and inoculum. All the bottles were cultivated at 35 °C without shaking. Methane and hydrogen gas produced during the cultivation were measured each week. The morphological changes in rice straw and coal caused by degradation were assessed using thermal field emission scanning electron microscopy (SEM, JSM-7001F, Japan). The acceleration voltage of SEM is 1 kV, the resolution is 3.0 nm, and the magnification is 10–50 times. Following cultivations the anthracite and rice straw were separated using a 100 mesh (0.150 mm) screen, rinsed with deionized water to ensure no residue of culture medium and microorganism, and dried at 60 °C prior to SEM analysis. The methane productions of the co-degradation experiment with different straws and coal are shown in Methane production in the co-degradation experiment with coal and different parts of rice straw is shown in When just rice straw was added the methane production of root was the largest, followed by leaf, and stem which produced very little methane. Interestingly, the methane yield of co-degradation of coal and root was greater than those of co-degradation of coal and stem, and coal and leaf initially. However, between the 8th and 15th day methane production increased significantly from the coal and stem. They became similar with that produced from coal and root which were all higher than that produced from coal and leaf. Based on the results it appears that straw biodegradation is affected by the characteristics of straw, especially the contents of cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin (see Methane production from rice stem and coal as a function of particle size is shown in These results show that particle size of coal had a great influence on methane production. Generally speaking, smaller the particle size resulted in higher the activity. The maximum methane production for co-degradation occurred with small-sized coal and large-sized straw, and large-sized coal and small-sized straw. For straw, the smaller the particle size, the easier it is to be degraded to produce hydrogen and other substances that stimulate biomethane production. However, under the condition of small particle size coal, the best co-degradation methane production condition was large particle size straw, which goes against previous understanding. It shows that straw not only supplies hydrogen but also has interaction with coal similar as that between microbes and minerals The surface structure of the raw anthracite sample ( As shown in The results confirmed that co-degradation of coal and straw can significantly enhance biomethane production, although type, parts, and particle size were shown to influence the results. Moreover, the interaction effects were found between coal and straw during co-degradation based on the difference of methane production, weight loss and surface morphology of coal and straw between co-degradation and single degradation. The methane yield in the co-degradation was shown to be greater than the sum of methane yield in the single degradation. For example, when rice stem, leaf, roof and coal were co-degraded, the ultimate methane yields in co-degradations were respectively 467.36 µmol/g coal, 227.35 µmol/g coal, and 463.29 µmol/g coal, which were 195.55%, 2.01%, and 42.01% higher than the sum of methane yields in corresponding single degradations (158.13 µmol/g coal, 222.87 µmol/g coal, 326.24 µmol/g coal, respectively) ( Gravimetric analysis further demonstrated that more methane was produced from coal than straw. Consequently, it is likely that the byproduct of straw degradation stimulating the anaerobic degradation of coal, thus enhancing methane production. When higher methane production occurred from co-degradation of coal and stem, coal and root ( It is well known that straw can produce organic matters and hydrogen in the process of degradation In fact, the phenomenon that the biodegradation of complex compounds can be enhanced by interacting with other simple organics has already been found in soil remediation. A higher efficiency of biodegrading bensulfuron-methyl was obtained after adding sodium lactate which interacted with bensulfuron-methyl Biomethane yields in co-degradations of rice, sweet sorghum, wheat, and corn straw with coal were all higher than yields for the single degradations. The co-degradation of coal and rice stem showed better enhancing effects than that of coal and root, coal and leaf. Particle size of coal also had a significant influence on methane production compared with the particle size of rice straw. The larger the particle size of coal, the less methane was produced. Optimum particle size of anthracite was 0.125–0.150 mm and rice straw was 5 mm. The weight changes before and after degradation and the SEM results showed that there was an interaction between straw and coal in the process of co-degradation. The results of hydrogen production in co-degradation and single degradation suggest that enhanced methane production in co-degradation with coal is more likely due to enhanced coal biodegradation, than the additional hydrogen. The exact organic compounds in straw which stimulate coal biodegradation are essential to understand the interaction relationship between straw and coal in co-degradation. Further analysis would be performed to determine these functional organics in order to promote the formation of biomethane from coal. This work was supported by the