The objective of this work was to evaluate the efficiency of the photocatalytic process in the vinasse treatment using solar radiation. The degradation tests were carried out during 5 days consecutive with solar irradiation from 8:00 a.m. to 17:00 p.m. TiO2, Nb2O5–TiO2 and immobilized TiO2 in glass beads (TiO2/beads) were used as photocatalysts. The characterization results showed that the catalysts presented distinct textural, structural and morphologic properties, conferring distinct photocatalytic behavior to them. The degradation results showed that photolysis was not efficient in the vinasse mineralization and that Nb2O5–TiO2 was the most photoactive material. TiO2/beads presented activity higher than the suspended TiO2, indicating a positive interaction between TiO2 and glass beads. The vinasse toxicity was evaluated using bioassays with Artemia saline and it verified significant reduction in the vinasse toxicity after photocatalytic treatment, mainly with Nb2O5–TiO2 and TiO2/beads. Evidencing that photocatalysis under sunlight was efficient in the vinasse treatment and that the Nb2O5–TiO2 is an excellent option as photocatalyst.The phenolic compounds presence in the alcohol distillery wastewater (vinasse) become difficult the degradation this effluent, since the traditional treatments methods do not obtain to eliminate them completely or at least to transform them into less toxic species. The research for a non-pollutant and beneficial treatment and/or disposal of vinasse is a serious concern for many developed countries. A variety of treatment method and strategies like use of vinasse in the manufacture of animal ration However, doubts still remain concerning the practical adequacy of the point of view of the natural resources protection in long period, since the direct discharges of vinasse in the soil can cause its salification, metal leaching presents in the soil in direction to the groundwater, alterations in soil quality as unbalance of nutrients and reduction of alkalinity, phytoxicity and odor nuisance Thus, there is an urgent need to assure a complete treatment of industrial effluents. One method that remains unexplored for the distillery wastewater treatment is the heterogeneous photocatalysis using solar radiation, providing a vinasse with low toxic load, which can be used in the farming without great ambient damages and with little additional cost. Therefore, the objective of this work was to evaluate the efficiency of the photocatalytic process in the vinasse treatment using solar radiation and some suspended and immobilized semiconductors, aiming at the reduction of its toxic load. The photocatalysts used in the present study were TiO In the preparation of the immobilized catalyst, initially the glass beads (diameter between 1.68 and 2.38 The textural analysis of the catalysts was carried out from nitrogen at 77 The distillery wastewater was produced by Destilarias Improvements Melhoramentos S/A plant. The vinasse sample was collected in the bottom of distillation column (≈100 The series of slurries of vinasse without and with catalyst were mixed using magnetic stirrers in open Pyrex batch reactor with diameter of 30 Total organic carbon removal was measured by Shimadzu TOC-5000A and absorbance reduction was monitored by Shimadzu UV-1601PC spectrophotometer. Vinasse pH was monitored to each collection using Instrutherm PH-710 pH meter.  For toxicity testing, samples of nauplii (6–11 each) were added to 1 The textural analysis showed that TiO The crystalline phases of the TiO TiO The analysis in optic microscope showed that the basic treatment provoked certain rough in the beads surface and that the immobilization process did not generate beads with homogeneous covering and yes, regions with finer layers of TiO The tests of degradation of vinasse were carried out in unstable days and the vinasse temperature varied during the reaction period, it was 27 Photolysis was not efficient in the vinasse mineralization; it presented only 4% of TOC reduction. Therefore, photolysis must occur with all organic material present, including that material responsible by coloring, on which the solar light must not have acted. Evidencing the necessity of the catalyst presence so that the mineralization process occurs. The test with TiO The test using immobilized TiO Practically, it did not have variation of vinasse pH, except a light increase (from 3.7 to 4.1) in the 2nd day of irradiation for the test without catalyst, returning to the initial value in the 5th day of treatment. For the tests using TiO The irradiation is essential in that to the mineralization process occurs. The results showed that during the night when the reactor remained in the dark (15  The less levels of toxicity were observed for the tests using Nb  The characterization analyses showed that the catalysts present distinct textural, structural and morphologic characteristics, which conferred differentiated photocatalytic behavior to them. TiO Artificial light sources need high power and this factor place a limitation on the application of photocatalysis, but the use of solar radiation can be a solution to this problem. The results of this study showed that really the sunlight can be utilized in the industrial wastewaters treatment with satisfactory results. The vinasse degradation results under solar radiation showed that the TiO Thus, heterogeneous photocatalysis can be considered efficient in the treatment of vinasse as well as the possibility of solar radiation application is advantageous, because it reduces the process costs. Nb The authors thank the CAPES for its financial support, to the DEQ/UFSCAR by the XRD analyses, to the DQI/UEM by the SEM analysis, to the Degussa by TiO