Due to similar clinical presentations, avulsion fractures are frequently missed on initial exam and categorically treated as "sprain" not otherwise specified. However, delays in appropriate diagnosis and treatment can result in further injury and long-term disability. This article will review multiple foot avulsion fractures, their respective mechanisms of injury, the clinical and radiographic presentations, and the most appropriate courses of treatment.An avulsion fracture occurs when a fragment of bone is pulled off at a tendinous or ligamentous bony insertion site, typically due to a sudden muscle contraction. The most common fracture of the foot is an avulsion injury of the tuberosity of the fifth proximal metatarsal base, which occurs at the insertion of the lateral band of the plantar aponeurosis and often heals without surgery. Another well-described avulsion injury of the foot is the calcaneal insufficiency avulsion fracture, which typically begins at the posterior calcaneal tuberosity and extends superiorly. While these two types of fractures have been described in recent literature, the various other avulsion fractures within the foot have received less attention. In deference to the multiple tendinous/ligamentous insertions within the foot, this article provides a comprehensive review of the injury mechanisms, clinical and radiographic presentations, and appropriate courses of treatment for common and rarer foot avulsion fractures. The most common fracture of the foot is a fracture of the fifth metatarsal base due to its lateral location and resultant susceptibility to external injuries ( Avulsion fractures of the fifth metatarsal tuberosity are also known as “pseudo-Jones fractures” or “dancers’ fractures.” The mechanism of injury involves inversion of a plantar-flexed foot, with tension on the lateral component of the plantar aponeurosis and peroneus brevis tendon Since tuberosity fractures occur with ankle inversion and symptoms are often mild, patients are often misdiagnosed with sprained ankles. On physical exam, tenderness is elicited at the base of the metatarsal, and swelling and ecchymosis may be seen at the site of maximal tenderness. While walking is usually possible, it is typically painful. Avulsion fractures of the base of the fifth metatarsal are best appreciated on anteroposterior (AP), lateral, and oblique weight-bearing radiographs of the foot. If, however, avulsion fractures are not seen on standard views, an additional AP view of the ankle including the base of the proximal fifth metatarsal should be obtained if clinical findings are suggestive of fracture Nondisplaced or minimally displaced tuberosity avulsion fractures are treated conservatively with a hard-soled shoe or walking boot. Many studies have reported clinical healing at 3 weeks Although cuboid fractures are rare, the most common forms result from either avulsion of ligamentous/capsular insertions Cuboid fractures can present with varying lateral midfoot swelling and deformity. Ecchymosis over the cuboid, direct tenderness to palpation, and difficulty weight bearing raise suspicion for this injury. The cuboid is best evaluated radiographically with an oblique view to better characterize the calcaneocuboid and metatarsocuboid articulations Medial eminence fractures are characterized by avulsion of the navicular median tuberosity at the attachment site of the posterior tibial tendon or spring ligament (calcaneonavicular) complex due to excessive eversion ( Best seen on AP and medial oblique views of the foot in equinus positioning Dorsal navicular avulsion fractures result from excessive plantar flexion or eversion of the midfoot, which causes avulsion of the dorsal navicular cortex by the talonavicular capsule and anterior fibers of the deltoid ligament ( The posterior process of the talus is composed of a lateral process and medial and lateral tubercles. The posterior process forms the undersurface of the posterior one fourth of the subtalar joint Isolated medial tubercle fractures of the posterior talar process are relatively rare and involve avulsion of the insertion of the posterior talotibial aspect of the deltoid ligament upon dorsiflexion and pronation These fractures may only present with slight pain upon ambulation and range-of-motion testing. Patients typically present with swelling and pain posterior to the medial malleolus and anterior to the Achilles tendon. Because these fractures may be subtle and difficult to detect on standard ankle radiographs, oblique views with the foot placed in 40° of external rotation Kim et al. Immobilization and instruction not to bear weight are often sufficient for fracture healing; a neutral position should be used when casting anterior fractures, while 15° of equinus positioning should be used in casting posterior fractures The lateral tubercle of the posterior talar process serves as the attachment of the posterior talocalcaneal and posterior talofibular ligaments. Of note, the common os trigonum (accessory ossicle) located posterior to the lateral tubercle can sometimes be mistaken for this avulsion fracture Clinically, patients with lateral tubercle fractures present with pain and swelling at the posterolateral aspect of the ankle, which is often accentuated with plantar flexion. Tenderness to deep palpation anterior to the Achilles tendon on physical examination is suggestive of this fracture. Lateral radiographs demonstrate a fracture line and irregular cortical surface, which aid in distinguishing a lateral tubercle avulsion fracture from a round, well-corticated os trigonum. Patients are typically treated with non-weight-bearing short leg cast for 4–6 weeks, after which time weight bearing is permitted as tolerated. In cases of persistent symptoms, an additional 4–6 weeks is recommended. If symptoms continue for more than 6 months, fragment excision is indicated and usually curative The talar ridge is located at the mid neck of the talus and serves as the attachment site of the anterior tibiotalar joint capsule. Avulsion fractures of the talar ridge occur from capsular tension or after direct trauma with compressive force on a plantar flexed foot ( Talar avulsion fractures typically result from ankle twisting injuries associated with extreme plantar flexion or dorsiflexion and inversion On initial presentation, 33%–41% of lateral talar process fractures are missed Upon ankle inversion injury, dorsolateral process avulsion fractures occur at the origin of the extensor digitorum brevis on the anterior aspect of the dorsolateral calcaneus ( Commonly misdiagnosed as ankle sprains, fractures of the anterior process of the calcaneus account for approximately 15% of all calcaneal fractures ( Pain from an anterior calcaneal process avulsion fracture may be minimal with standing but is increased substantially upon ambulation. Tenderness over the calcaneocuboid joint that is localized 1 cm inferior and 3–4 cm anterior to the lateral malleolus, just distal to the anterior talofibular ligament insertion, is a highly suggestive clinical finding suggestive of this type of fracture. Careful evaluation of the point of maximal tenderness may aid in the differentiation of an anterior calcaneal process avulsion fracture from a lateral ligament sprain. Fracture of the anterior process of the calcaneus can be seen on both lateral and internal oblique views of the foot. Anterior calcaneal process fractures may be mistaken for the calcaneus secundarius, an accessory ossicle of the anterior facet of the calcaneus, which has been identified in up to 5% of the population during cadaveric studies Posterior calcaneal tuberosity fractures involve the posterosuperior aspect of the calcaneus and are associated with sudden muscular contraction of the Achilles tendon when the heel is flat on the ground ( Lee et al. Most calcaneal tuberosity avulsion fractures are treated conservatively with elevation, immobilization, and early activity, with the ankle casted in plantar flexion in extraarticular cases. The most important outcome of a calcaneal tuberosity avulsion fracture to prevent is that of impaired heel-cord function—in general, the greater the displacement of the avulsed fracture fragment, the greater likelihood of functional loss and increased need for surgical repair. Larger fragments may require open reduction and internal fixation. If large fragments involve the insertion of the Achilles tendon, tendon lengthening may be required in addition to surgical fixation The plantar plate is a strong fibrocartilagenous structure that, along with the plantar fascia, medial and lateral collateral ligaments, phalangeal collateral ligaments, and flexor halluces longus and brevis tendons, reinforces the capsule and provides stability to the first metatarsophalangeal (MTP) joint. The plate originates from the plantar surface of the metatarsal head and inserts onto the plantar base of the proximal phalanx. Injury to the first MTP joint can result in an avulsion fracture from the base of the first proximal phalanx ( Patients typically present with pain over the great toe with weight bearing, tenderness over the MTP joint, and ecchymosis. Anteroposterior, lateral, and oblique stress views of the foot may demonstrate capsular avulsion. According to the Bowers and Martin classification, a grade I fracture involves strain of the proximal attachment of the volar plate from the first metatarsal head, a grade II fracture refers to an avulsion of the volar plate from the first metatarsal head, and a grade III fracture is characterized by an impaction injury to the dorsal surface of the first metatarsal head with or without an avulsion or chip fracture Foot avulsion fractures are frequently missed on initial exam and misdiagnosed as ankle sprains due to their similar clinical presentations involving swelling, ecchymosis, ligamentous laxity, tenderness, and decreased range of motion. It is imperative that these fractures are diagnosed early to guide management, as delays can result in nonunion, reinjury, and long-term disability.