Particle-to-bubble adhesion is important in the areas of anti-foaming, in flotation processes and in multiphase slurry reactors. In the present work we particularly address the latter. The behaviour of fine catalyst particles adhering to gas bubbles in aqueous media is governed by the surface hydrophobicity. This adhesion on its turn influences the G–L mass transfer, bubble coalescence and the particle agglomeration. Existing models for the quantitative description of adhesion of particle to a G–L interface usually assume nonporous, spherical particles with a smooth surface and a well-defined contact angle. As catalyst particles are normally highly porous, have a rough surface, and an irregular shape, we developed a generalised model describing the adhesion of particles to a gas bubble based on maximum adhesive and cohesive forces as the main parameters. This model describes adhesion of: (i) a single spherical particle, (ii) a monolayer of particles, and (iii) a particle agglomerate. The cohesive forces between particles play a key role. For small cohesive forces, the particles can either adhere as a single particle or as a monolayer, while stronger cohesive forces allow multilayer adhesion or adhesion of particle clusters via one or few particles.Three-phase reactors are the workhorses of chemical industry. The presence of solid catalyst particles may influence reactor hydrodynamics through their impact on the apparent viscosity and liquid density, but moreover by its impact on the bubble coalescence and G–L mass transfer. Typical examples of chemical processes carried out via such three-phase reactors are selective hydrogenation and oxidation. G–L mass transfer enhancement was observed when fine solid particles are present at the G–L interface (  The higher G–L mass transfer observed when catalyst particles adhere to the G–L interface may be described in terms of an enhancement factor, defined as the ratio of gas-absorption mass transfer in the presence of solid particles and gas-absorption mass transfer without particles, under similar hydrodynamic conditions ( Clearly, particle to bubble adhesion is affected by particle agglomeration.  The objective of this work is to develop a novel model describing the adhesion of particles to a gas bubble under stagnant conditions, thereby explicitly taking cohesive forces into account, and allowing a superior prediction of the behaviour of hydrophobic particles subject to competitive adhesion and agglomeration. For small cohesive forces, particles adhere to a bubble individually or as a monolayer as shown in A theoretical framework will be developed here to describe adhesion of solid particles to gas bubbles under stagnant conditions, based on the equilibrium of capillary forces, gravity forces and pressure forces. The following four cases can be distinguished: Adhesion of a single particle to a gas bubble Monolayer adhesion for negligible cohesive forces Multilayer adhesion for moderate cohesive forces Adhesion of a cluster of particles for strong cohesive forces The model will initially refer to the simple case of: Spherical particles with identical size and physical properties Homogeneous and smooth particle surface and therefore a well defined contact angle Particle density higher than the liquid density Spherical bubbles Finally, the model will be generalised to the case of porous particles with irregular shape and heterogeneous surface, due to the interest of exploiting particle-to-bubble adhesion in the case of heterogeneously catalysed reactions. A shortcoming of the model based on the contact angle is its applicability to spherical particles. The major problem of modelling particle-to-bubble adhesion is the fractal-like structure of catalyst particles. Three-phase contact angle can be easily and accurately measured on clean, homogeneous and smooth surfaces. In all other cases, the contact angle ranges between two extreme values; the advancing and receding contact angle depending on the measurement technique which makes this parameter even harder to obtain ( The adhesion behaviour depends on the adhesive forces. Therefore, instead of calculating the adhesion forces of a spherical particle from the contact angle, we use the adhesion force as a model parameter. Both two approaches, based on the contact angle or maximum adhesion force, allow us to correlate the structure of particle aggregate adhering to a gas bubble with the particle–particle cohesive and particle–bubble adhesive forces. Solid particles can adhere to a gas bubble if the capillary forces are strong enough to compensate the apparent weight of particles and the gas pressure. Under static conditions, the equation describing the equilibrium forces of a single particle attached at the gas–liquid interface (Fig. For nonporous particles, For a varying penetration angle When   In case (a), hydrophilic particles larger than a critical size do not adhere to the air bubble, as the detachment force The detachment force versus the penetration angle always shows a minimum (Fig.  In the case of particles smaller than The maximum adhesion force of spherical particles depends on the three-phase contact angle. However, the influence of three-phase contact angle on the adhesion behaviour depends on the particle shape. Adhesion of a nonspherical particle to a gas bubble is better characterised by the maximum adhesion force than by the three-phase contact angle only. For large cohesive forces between particles agglomerates may form, and aggregates rather than single particles may adhere to a gas bubble. Let us analyse first the case of an aggregate suspended to a gas bubble through a single particle. All other particles are completely immersed in the liquid and the buoyancy force of these particles becomes The apparent gravity force of a particle completely immersed in liquid and having liquid filled pores will be further denoted by The detachment force for an agglomeration of The total number of particle According to Eq.  We will consider a gas bubble of uniform radius In vertical cross-section, The particles are identical and the packing of particles is homogeneous. Thus, the distance There is a single particle at level The volume fraction  A level may contain a certain number of vacancies. Thus, the number of particles at level Both parameters As in case of a single particle, the equilibrium is based on the forces: The detachment of a solid particle at level One can imagine an iterative method to calculate From Eqs. The detachment force for the particle at level At level After replacement of The bubble is covered with a maximum number of particles at maximum coverage angle  The coverage angle increases by increasing the contact angle By substitution of Eqs. The left hand term is derived from the maximum adhesion force The right side of Eq. The bubble coverage angle The total number of solid particles adhering to a bubble as a monolayer Let us consider an aggregate of particles adhering to a gas bubble through successive layers. The first layer of particles adheres directly to the gas bubble through adhesion forces. The cohesion forces between particles keep the subsequent layers together. As in the case of monolayer adhesion discussed before, the particles of each layer The angle The line connecting the centres of particle and bubble, and the symmetry axis S forms an angle As in the case of monolayer adhesion, all particles at coordinates The particles can be packed in each monolayer according to parameters Hence, overall volumetric fraction of solid becomes: When a particle is suspended below other particle, the minimum cohesive force A single spherical particle is in equilibrium if the sum of forces on radial or tangential direction is equal with zero, described by two below: Eq. The tangential forces from Eq. The radial forces from Eq. Overall aggregate stability depends on the radial forces of first two axi-symmetric particles suspended at the bottom of the bubble. The first particle at If the thickness of particles Eq. These latter equations allow the calculation of maximum coverage angle In the general case, the total number of particles In particular, if the thickness of particles   The second curve in The adhesion of small particles to gas bubbles under stagnant conditions was described by a generalised model. The model correlates the maximum particle–bubble adhesion force and the intraparticle cohesive forces to the bubble coverage angle and aggregate thickness, explaining mono- and multilayer adhesion. For known geometries e.g. spherical particles with smooth, homogeneous and clean surfaces, the maximum adhesion force can be directly computed from three-phase contact angle. However, the use of the maximum adhesion force instead of the three-phase contact angle reduces the number of model parameters and extends the model applicability to porous particles. Particles adhere to gas bubbles as a monolayer only when the particle–particle cohesion forces are negligible as compared to the apparent weight of a single particle immersed in the liquid. When this is not the case, particles may adhere as an aggregate or multilayer. Higher adhesive forces result in higher bubble coverage with particles and higher number of particles adhering to a bubble. An increase in the cohesion forces between particles results in higher aggregate thickness but lower bubble coverage. If the cohesion forces exceed the adhesion forces, the particles may form large aggregates, unable to adhere to gas bubbles due to their apparent weight. The model developed in this work also explains the influence of agglomeration on the gas-liquid mass transfer in slurry bubble reactors. Thus, an increase of the intra-particle cohesive forces produces the particle agglomeration, resulting in lower bubble coverage and lower gas-liquid mass transfer, in agreement with the conclusion of  This research is supported by the Technology Foundation STW, applied science division of NWO and the technology program of the Ministry of Economic Affairs. The authors also gratefully acknowledge Akzo-Nobel, DSM Research B.V., Shell Global Solutions, Engelhard B.V., Promeks ASA, Norit B.V. and Sasol for their financial support.