Deck screen design parameters e.g. material of construction, deck angle of inclination, the feed throughputs, and physicochemical properties of the particles, are critical factors to consider in solids classification. Two significant and easily manipulated parameters that greatly affect screen performance are the feed rate and design geometry configuration. In this work we apply statistical analysis of variance (ANOVA) and nonlinear least squares optimization with parameter estimation concepts, first, to assess the significance of the two factors and, second to formulate flow prediction models that optimize the feed rate and classification efficiency. Experiments were conducted on a prototype screen of 556.28cm2 effective area, (1380cm2 total area). For glass beads of sizes 0.75, 1, 2, and 3mm, with 16 feed batches of 10g to 160g, and six inclination angles 5, 10, 12.5, 15, 17.5, and 20°, a maximum efficiency of 66.7% was achieved with a screen loading of 86.5g, and an inclination angle of 17.5°. These results were then subjected to nonlinear least squares optimization, which showed that a maximum efficiency of 93.2% can be achieved at batch loading as low as 36g. There was a favorable performance at the range of angles 12.5≤
                     θ
                     ≤17.5°, but poor performance outside this range. The screening efficiency did not respond significantly to changes in screen loading, although loading had a significant effect on the screening capacity. Confirmation tests conducted at selected optimum parameters achieved a maximum efficiency of 72% (at 12.5° with 49.6g batch load), and a maximum rate of 27g/s at 17.5° with 104g.Solids–solids separation is the process of segregating particles in terms of desired criteria or properties tied to the solids, using an applied force. The properties of the separated particles are dictated by downstream unit operations or end use. In general, the fundamental aim of classification is to separate the behavior of the solids into definite regimes of class patterns To underscore the significance of bulk solids classification in mineral processing for instance, research over the last decade has pointed out that the most energy intensive stage is comminution In general, particles classification by screening has a long and exceptional history, with some research citing that it is probably the oldest When dealing with particles classification, a number of factors determine the extent of both capacity and efficiency that can be achieved. Although it is commonly presumed that if a process has been in use for many years, its controlling factors and optimum operating parameters will have been found, this unfortunately is not the case with gravity separation. The reasons being: (i) There are countless materials on earth, each with its own unique properties; (ii) the materials are not treated individually, but as bulk matter with diverse properties; and (iii) the material handling equipment also introduces complexities because of the varied materials and configurations used. The complex of interrelated factors thus makes a supposedly simple process highly complicated. Here is an example where this complexity can be found: in powder material science, flowability can be easily defined as “the ability of granular solids and powders to flow” Solid separators, e.g. deck screens, spiral concentrators, and Reichert cones, are some of the many types of materials handling equipment in use, and such equipment requires immense compromise as regards design and day to day operations. Bearing in mind the numerous materials constituting the bulk properties of solids, the critical factors to consider when using gravity force for solids separation can be classified into intrinsic, extrinsic, and other factors. 1. Intrinsic factors: These factors are easily manipulated by adjusting the mechanical design, e.g., overall configuration of the screen, feed rate, deck angle of inclination, aperture sizes, screen material, feed throughputs, and mesh size. 2. Extrinsic factors: These factors are seldom varied by the user, either because it is not possible, or because manipulating them negatively affects the overall product quality. Such extrinsic factors are: particle sizes, moisture content, shape, densities, purity, relative motion of particles to that of the screen surface, the physicochemical properties of the solids etc. 3. Others: This group of factors accounts for those unknown or known factors that demand great effort in their determination or manipulation, either qualitatively or quantitatively. Examples include the many factors linked to hydro, thermo, electro or even aerodynamic variables. The number and diversity of the different factors involved underscore the difficulty of identifying an optimal combination of design and operating parameter values. However, it is possible to fit a mathematical function to most of the processes and thus try to understand the whole as a combination of its parts. The chief limitation of most models today is they are based on capacity, rather than the efficiency. For instance the screen is designed based on the amount of material presented to the screen rather than the yield. Realistic models base the design of screens on the actual amount of particles transmitted to the underflow. An example of such a model was formulated by V. Karra back in 1979. The Karra model while it is still useful in designing current processes, it can further be improved by extending it to quantify both undersized and oversize, together with the material loses involved Material throughput and screen deck inclination are particularly significant and easily manipulated operational parameters that affect both the screening capacity (rate) and efficiency. Operating with a large feed throughput makes the screen susceptible to blinding, gives poor flowability and causes an overall reduction in the underflow. Low feed rates, while they increase the efficiency as observed in The objective of this research paper is to conduct a mass balance around a lab scale screen for different sizes and batch masses of glass bead samples, The numeric data used for this research paper were adapted from Using the results as design matrices, analysis of variance (ANOVA) was carried out to assess the significance of the changes in inclinations and the feed quantities on the classification rates and efficiencies. Based on the analysis, the null hypothesis may then be accepted or rejected. Analyses of Variance constitute a very important tool in statistical quality control and optimization in engineering. Its main application is to provide guided decision making by comparing the variations caused by certain changes in the factors affecting the process, without making assumptions of pre-existing conditions. It is based on the null hypothesis that a certain group of factors do not have significant effect on the resulting observation. In this case, for both increase in feed batch masses and inclinations, the null hypothesis is that the two have no effect on the rates and efficiencies observed in The final stage is to formulate an optimization strategy to determine which deck angles and feed rates are sufficient to operate the screening process at optimum performance. The optimization is done keeping in mind that very high throughputs are detrimental to the efficiencies, as high deck angles; while low inclinations do not provide sufficient force to cause adequate classification. Nonlinear least squares regression (NLSR) was chosen for this study, since the overflows need to be minimized, while maximizing underflows. The total batch mass, The overflow can also be expressed as a function of stage efficiency, making it possible to compute the overflow fraction with the function: The implication of Eq. Coincidentally, this set of equations (in (3)) resembles those used by Guldberg–Waage over a century ago to describe the formation of the desired We then model the process using the analogy of a parallel first order chemical reaction, yielding the desired product; undersized, The most important outcome for using the above analogy is, it immediately transforms the process into an optimization scheme. Eq. Overdetermined Eq. Where parameters   Generally, nonlinear least square solutions are of the form: In which Confirmation tests were conducted on the new selected optimum parameters (randomly picked values from the highest contours on  The same information is conveyed by the ANOVA box plots in The nonlinear models in Eq. The study covered most critical issues related to gravity classification, its importance, and in research and development progress. With the help of statistical analysis (ANOVA), the significance of two key parameters, feed rate Ψ and deck inclination, The Authors wish to acknowledge the  Model coefficients Overow, Fraction of oversize to total batch mass, dimensionless Statistical probability distribution, dimensionless Constant related to increase in underflow Constant related to increase overflow Material loss, Batchwise mass, Mass of oversize particles, Mass of undersized, Masses of particles collected on 1, 2, 3 and 4 Classification rate, Runtime taken by the batch mass, Undersized, Design matrix with the results expected from the model Separation efficiency, dimensionless Deck angle of the screens, degrees Normalized loading coefficient, dimensionless  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at