Purpose
                  Direct location of the “safe zone” on a CT axial view is impossible because the radial head is circular in shape. Previous “safe zone” location methods are not appropriate if the physician is unable to visualize the actual radial head. This study aims to introduce a new method to locate the “safe zone” on CT.
               
                  Methods
                  CT scans were performed on 20 intact cadaveric upper limbs from 20 different corpses in full pronation and supination. The DICOM-format raw data were then re-sliced and analyzed in Mimics 17.0 (Materialise, Belgium). The radial interosseous border (IB) is shaped like a droplet on the axial view; its axis was selected as our reference line (RL). A parallel line in the radial head axial slice was created, and its position relative to the “safe zone” was studied. Deviation in RL direction was evaluated.
               
                  Results
                  Safe-zone scope was 114.41°±11.99. The rotation angle from the RL to the safe-zone's anterior and posterior border was 215.03°±5.99 and 100.62°±8.12, respectively. Rotation direction (clockwise or anti-clockwise) depended on relative radius-ulna position. The safe zone was located by determining these two borders. The reference line's direction was stable in the upper half of the IB; its distance to the radial head fovea was 77.33° mm±6.24.
               
                  Conclusions
                  The radial head “safe zone” can be located on CT axial view based on the upper half of the IB using this new method. The method is clinically applicable to determine whether postoperative elbow malrotation results from plate impingement. computed tomography interosseous border reference line son reference line pronation anterior line supination posterior line open reduction internal fixation Radial head fracture is a common injury, with an incidence of 30 per 100,000 persons per year Because the radial head is shaped like a circle on axial views, the general strategy to locate the safe zone was to set a reference mark and then study the positional relationship. Smith The present study aimed to explore a new method to locate the safe zone on computed tomography (CT) axial views, providing surgeons with a direct impression of the location of the safe zone ahead of surgery and in post-operative follow-up. The study hypothesis was that a reference mark with a stable positional relationship to the safe zone exists and can be used to locate the safe zone. Two CT scans were performed on 20 fresh, intact, fully extended cadaveric arms (forearms and upper arms) with the forearms maximally pronated and supinated. The elbow and wrist joints were covered by the scan. CT DICOM-format raw data (slice thickness: 0.625 The axial slices were realigned in parallel with the joint surface of the radial head. The coronal and sagittal slices were realigned perpendicular to the axial plane ( The radial interosseous border (IB) was found to be shaped like a droplet on the CT axial view, while the ulna was shaped like a triangle, which made them easy to distinguish ( Next, we linked the safe zone to the sRL. First, a circle fitting the radial head was created ( One problem remained when we gauged the PAL angle and SPL angle values by rotating from the sRL; limb side (left or right) and the view-direction of the CT axial slice (viewing from wrist to elbow or from elbow to wrist) were confounding variables for rotation direction (clockwise or counter-clockwise). The anatomical parameters between the left and right limbs showed no statistical difference in previous research Safe Zone Scope The droplet shape lay along the IB axial view; however, how much the droplet tip direction might deviate along the course remained unknown. To evaluate any such deviation, we quartered the whole length of the IB equally with five cutting planes ( All statistical computations were performed using SPSS 21.0 software (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL). Ranges, means and standard deviations were determined by descriptive statistics. The repeated unpaired Student's t-test was used to compare IB direction angles to check deviation in IB direction. The study comprised 20 fresh cadaveric upper limbs: 13 left and 7 right. Safe-zone scope was 114.41° Using We use IB length spread by 31.69 mm The maximum distance from the radial head fovea to the first droplet slice was 86.60 Within the same bone (radius), the position of the radial head relative to the IB did not change with forearm rotation; therefore, the angles anchoring them (PAL The location technique is useful in patients with postoperative forearm malrotation. ORIF treatment will not be replaced in the near future, and elbow malrotation will continue to be a problem. The method described here can clearly determine whether the malrotation results from plate impingement. Preoperatively, if the radial head fracture is split or impacted, without comminution or obvious displacement, it is feasible to use this method to locate the safe zone. If the fracture is severely comminuted and displaced, reducing the fragments in the virtual space with software and then applying the location method may nevertheless help in preoperative planning. However, preoperative applications are limited in our opinion. Firstly, ORIF is becoming an increasingly redundant technique for radial head fractures, which makes the whole “safe zone” concept unimportant. Secondly, for simple split or impacted fractures (Mason type-2), many doctors would now argue that an increasing body of evidence suggests that surgery is not required and, for more complex fractures, there is growing evidence that replacement is superior to ORIF In contrast to previous studies, we used CT-based multi-planar reconstruction and thereby achieved more accurate measurements, even though maximum and minimum PAL and SPL angles showed 12–15° fluctuation around the mean. Therefore, rotations of 215° and 100° should not be too strictly adhered to in practice. In addition, safe-zone scope was slightly greater than reported in previous studies. There may be two reasons for this. One is that direct measurements in the cadavers may not be as precise as CT multi-planar reconstruction measurements. The other is that our sample size was limited. This study also had some shortcomings. Samples were all standardized in the software, whereas in clinical practice patients’ CT axial slice planes may vary with forearm posture and position. Luckily, the radial head is cylindrical. Such a centrosymmetric shape can tolerate some deviation, and the droplet-shaped IB direction was in fact stable, so that our results remain clinically relevant even though the forearm scanning position was slightly inferior. Additionally, our cadavers were all from a Chinese population; extrapolation to other races cannot be confirmed. Our sample size may also limit the reliability of our results. A reference line with a stable positional relationship does exist, and the radial head safe zone can be located based on it. The safe-zone scope in this study was similar to that in previous studies. The reference line direction was stable. CT scanning length should be more than 86 This article does not contain any studies with human participants performed by any of the authors. The cadavers used in the study were from the Anatomy Education & Research Institute of Shanghai Jiaotong University; its cadaver source is one of the most transparent and reliable in China. Consulting our hospital board, we were informed that no ethics statement is needed. No funding was received by any author. YuJie Chen: guarantor of integrity of the entire study; data acquisition. Yu Zhan: study concept and design; drafting the article; analysis and interpretation. CongFeng Luo: revision of critical content. This article does not contain patient data. All authors agree to the article being submitted to Data and materials and methods are available. The authors declare that they have no competing interest. We thank Yukai Wang, Chengfang Hu and Jianping Song for their dedicated assistance in data collection.