The nano-lubricant can largely enhance the tribological property of base oil, while the higher addition will cause a serious aggregation of nanoparticles. In this paper, the hexadecane-based oil (16C) with ultralow concentration of graphene oxide (GO) nanosheets as lubricant additives were successfully prepared by phase transfer method. The tribological behavior of the hexadecane with different concentration of GO has been investigated by subjecting it to macroscopic ball-on-disc friction tests using SRV-4 tribometer. The steady-state coefficients of friction (COF) of 16C with 10 mg/L GO were ca. 0.146. Based on the tribological tests and analysis of the wear scar, a lubrication mechanism was proposed. It is believed that the adsorption of GO nanosheets on the lubricated surfaces of both the ball and disk is the key to reduce friction and wear. The proper addition of GO nanosheets can easily enter into the contact area and efficiently protect the surface of the sample from wear.Friction and wear remain to be the major causes for energy losses and mechanical system failure [ In order to overcome the inherent deficiencies and enhance service performance of the lubricants, the addition of nanoparticles to lubricants has been conducted to be beneficial in reducing the wear rate and friction between two rubbing surfaces. In recent years, the investigations suggested good potential for nanoparticles as novel lubricant additives. 2D nanomaterials were intensively investigated for tribological applications because of their layer structure and low interlayer shear strength [ Graphene as 2-dimensional (2D) carbon nanomaterials, has been extensively utilized in tribological materials as for its two-dimensional and layered structure [ Graphene oxide (GO) with carbon oxygen functional groups which could be dispersed into the water well was first reported by hummer [ To render GO miscible with other hydrophobic oil lubricant, the surface of GO must be converted to an organophilic one through a convenient method, and, the mass of addition of GO must be controlled. As a result, we have prepared the base oil with ultralow concentration of graphene oxide (GO) additives were via a simple phase-transfer method, and investigated their tribological parameter and mechanisms that account for the change in the wear behavior in the presence of GO platelets. GO was purchased from XF Nano, Inc. N-hexadecane which were used as based oil. The GO was modified by oleylamine, which were was purchased from Aladdin Chemical Co., Ltd., Shanghai, China. All other reagents were used without further purification. According to the theory of black phosphorus (BP) nanosheets as lubrication additive [ The tribology performance of the GO dispersion in base oil was evaluated using ball-on-disc reciprocated friction tests (SRV4). The ball with the diameter of 10 mm and disk with the dimension of φ 24 mm × 8 mm were both made of bearing steel (GCr15). Prior to each wear testing, the balls and discs should be cleaned with ethanol in order to remain the surfaces clean. The surface roughness measured by three dimensional white-light interfering profilometer was about 20.4 nm. The hardness of disk was about 65 HRC. The reciprocating frequency and sliding distance are 50 Hz and 2 mm, respectively. The coefficient of friction (COF) was recorded automatically by the test machine. The wear rate was calculated according to Eq. The XRD measurements of GO were performed using a Bruker D8 Advance X-ray diffractometer and a Cu target (λ = 1.540 Å). The scan rate was 4 The structural characteristics of graphene is very important for improving lubricate ability of base oil. As shown in SEM image ( The tribological properties of 16C (16C presents hexadecane) and 16C with 10 mg/L GO (GO-16C) were investigated under high loads ranging from 50 to 250 N, as shown in It also found that the stable COFs of 16C are decreased as the load increased, which is similar with that of GO-16C. This phenomenon can be easily explained by the Hertz theory. The tribological behavior of GO-16C lubricant was investigated by macroscopic sphere-on-disc friction tests. Sphere contact as object, contact stress and distortion formula of Hertz are deduced theoretically from the contact model of elastic spheres and disc, as shown in The relation between semi-major axis (a) of ellipse and load (F) was calculated according to Eq. The optical morphologies of the worn surfaces of the balls using 16C and GO dispersion in the base oil of 16C are presented in Wear rate is the major characteristic to evaluate the tribological properties. Based on the results in The samples of 16C with 5 mg/L, 25 mg/L, 100 mg/L, and 1000 mg/L were selected to examine the surface morphology of the disk using metallurgical microscope and white light interferometer to extract detailed 2D and 3D surface topographies, respectively, as shown in The molecule of oleylamine has certainly some friction-reducing properties as well. So, the tribological performance of 16C with addition of oleylamine (designated as “OL”) were investigated at the fixed load of 100 N using SRV tester. COFs curves of 16C with different content of OL (16C-OL) ranging from 1 mg/L to 1000 mg/L were shown in In order to further explain the lubrication mechanism of GO-16C, the Raman ( XPS analyses of the GO transfer layers that were formed on the friction disk are presented in Based on above results of Raman ( In this article, few layered graphene oxide nanosheets as hexadecane-based lubricant additives were prepared by a simple method of the phase-transfer. From the results of the tribological experiments, adding ultralow concentration of GO nanosheets into hexadecane could improve the tribological properties. The lubricant contained GO nanosheets has better tribological properties than hexadecane. We have proposed three kinds of antifriction mechanism, which are low intermolecular shear of oleylamine, low flow shear of n-hexadecane, and low interlaminar shear of GO sheets. Among of the mechanisms, formation of the GO nanosheets absorbed on the rubbing surface is the key factor for improving tribological properties. That is because the lubricant with 10 mg/L GO nanomaterials can easily enter into the contact area and efficiently protect the surface of the sample from wear. This work was supported by the fund of the