Objective
                  Reverse shoulder arthroplasty is becoming a useful tool for many diseases of the shoulder. Any severe glenoid bone defect may affect the fixing of the glenoid component. The aim of this paper is to evaluate the medium-term outcomes of reverse shoulder arthroplasty associated with a glenoplasty.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  A retrospective study was conducted on 5 patients from our hospital, selected due to glenoid defects of different aetiology. All of them where treated with reverse shoulder arthroplasty associated with glenoplasty with bone graft.
               
                  Results
                  The minimum follow-up was one year (mean 30.4 months). All grafts were radiologically integrated, with no signs of resorption or necrosis being observed. At 12 months, the Constant score was 66.75 and the mean EVA score was 1.
               
                  Discussion
                  Glenoplasty surgery is technically demanding for restoring original bone size in patients with glenoid structural defects, enabling a reverse shoulder arthroplasty to be implanted. Thus improving both the function and clinical outcomes in selected patients with glenohumeral pathology and providing them with a solution.The indications for anatomical as well as reverse shoulder arthroplasty have increased in number for different pathological processes The aim of this paper is to present an evaluation of the medium-term clinical, radiological and functional results in 5 patients operated using reverse shoulder arthroplasty with associated glenoplasty and also to evaluate the integration of the bone graft used. We performed a transversal retrospective study of 5 patients (2 men and 3 women), with an average age of 72.6 years (range 64–85) operated from December 2009 to February 2013. They all presented important glenoid bone defects with different causes: 2 changes of prosthesis (previous partial prosthesis with wear of the glenoid bone and periprosthetic fracture, and change due to septic mobilisation of the previous reverse prosthesis), anterior dislocation fracture in 4 fragments (a Bankart lesion that could not be synthesised due to excessive comminution) and 2 deep luxations (one anterior and one posterior). Glenoplasty was performed in all of them (3 with a humeral head autograft and 2 with an allograft from the tissue bank) together with a reverse shoulder arthroplasty of the Delta XTEND™ Reverse Shoulder System type (DePuy Orthopaedics Inc, a Johnson & Johnson company, Warsaw, U.S.A.). The minimum follow-up time was 12 months (with an average of 30.4 months). The passive and active mobility of the operated shoulder and homolateral elbow was evaluated using the weighted Constant–Murley test A CT scan was performed on all of the patients to evaluate the osteointegration of the graft. A radiologist specialising in musculoskeletal imaging and an orthopaedic surgeon who were both independent of the study confirmed the absence of resorption, radiotransparent lines or graft descent. Subjective evaluation used the visual analogue scale (VAS score) and a personal satisfaction test. All of the patients were operated under general anaesthesia in the beach chair position with a deltopectoral approach to the shoulder. After this the graft was prepared following the technique of Iannotti et al. A small jigsaw was used for this together with a cylindrical rasp. The graft was then placed on the area of the defect to be covered and affixed using 2.4 When implanting these screws the positions that the central lug and the metaglene fixing screws will occupy must be taken into account, while locating the graft-fixing screws in the space between them. Once the glenoplasty has been completed the neoglene is rasped and the hole is drilled for the metaglene lug (in our series a long lug in one case), putting it into place and impacting it immediately afterwards. The screws, which are all mixed compression and locking screws, are inserted, making sure that they pass through the graft and anchor in the shoulder blade ( The glenosphere is then put into place. Once the glenoid component is ready the humeral component is prepared, rasping the channel and impacting the rod (cemented in all cases and long in one case) with placement of the corresponding polyethylene. After surgery the arm was protected by a sling during 4 weeks. As a general rule the elbow and wrist were allowed to move freely immediately after the operation. The patient was told to exercise passively after 48 The main results are shown in Radiological reports on the CT scans performed state that all of the grafts, auto – as well as alografts, are integrated. No resorption or collapse in them was detected, and no complications arose during the postoperative period ( The average VAS score was 1 at 12 months (zero in 3 patients), and all of them except one stated that they were highly satisfied with the surgery. The patient operated due to septic mobilisation expressed moderate satisfaction. Glenoid bone defects reduce the area for fixing screws and therefore make defective implantation more probable. Glenoid defects are sometimes frequently found in patients with glenohumeral problems (osteoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis, posttraumatic arthritis …) as well as in those with prosthetic replacements. We have several options when addressing these defects that may be used alone or in combination. In primary prostheses the most indicated procedure according to the bibliography is to use humeral head autograft In cases of major glenoid defects the aim of all arthroplasty is to create a stable base that makes it possible to implant the components securely, thereby improving their function and shoulder pain. Although using a bone graft to cover large defects is a hardly used technique it is very useful as it even permits the implantation of a reverse prosthesis, increasing the area of the cavity and, in cases where the defect is total, lateralising the centre of rotation of the joint. Many authors consider that lateralising the centre of rotation offers major advantages such as improved internal and external rotation (as more anterior and posterior deltoid fibres are recruited), retensing the remains of the rotator cuff that increases stability as well as increasing humeral projection or offset, making it possible to reduce the rate of infrascapular notching. Some authors state that this lateralisation of the centre of rotation may also have drawbacks, given that it increases the stress forces on the bone-prosthesis interface, increasing the risk of the implant loosening and failing. Our reverse arthroplasty technique and glenoplasty with a graft makes this lateralisation possible in total defects secondary to revision of the prosthesis, thereby recovering the original surface area and position of the cavity. Nevertheless, once the graft has integrated with the native bone these forces fall considerably, contrary to the lateralisation which occurs in anatomical prostheses. Until enlarged implants develop and prove themselves to be effective glenoplasty with a graft will continue to be the recommended technique recommended by many authors Although the most suitable technique for implanting the graft has yet to be established, some authors state that while good anchoring is ensured (and thereby bone integration too) there are no contraindications for reverse arthroplasty in these cases. Our glenoplasty technique and results are similar to those which appear in the most recent publications. The authors declare that the procedures followed were in accordance with the regulations of the responsible Clinical Research Ethics Committee and in accordance with those of the World Medical Association and the Helsinki Declaration. The authors declare that they have followed the protocols of their work centre on the publication of patient data. The authors must have obtained the informed consent of the patients and/or subjects mentioned in the article. The author for correspondence must be in possession of this document. The authors would like to thank Dr. Rafael Montero Pérez-Barquero, specialist musculoskeletal radiologist, for his selfless collaboration in this work. We would also like to thank Dr. María Teresa Urbano Luque for her statistical recommendations and support during the whole scientific and editing process.