The presence of natural organic matter (NOM) poses several challenges to the commercial practice of UV/H2O2 process for micropollutant removal. During the commercial application of UV/H2O2 advanced oxidation treatment, NOM is broken down into smaller species potentially affecting biostability by increasing Assimilable Organic Carbon (AOC) and Biodegradable Organic Carbon (BDOC) of water. This work investigated the potential impact of UV/H2O2 treatment on the molecular weight distribution of NOM and biostability of different water sources. A recently developed flow cytometric method for enumeration of bacteria was utilized to assess biological stability of the treated water at various stages through measurement of AOC. BDOC was also assessed for comparison and to better study the biostability of water. Both AOC and BDOC increased by about 3–4 times over the course of treatment, indicating the reduction of biological stability. Initial TOC and the source of NOM were found to be influencing the biostability profile of the treated water. Using high performance size exclusion chromatography, a wide range of organic molecule weights were found responsible for AOC increase; however, low molecular weight organics seemed to contribute more. Positive and meaningful correlations were observed between BDOC and AOC of different waters that underwent different treatments.The presence of natural organic matter (NOM) poses several challenges to the commercial practice of UV/H Two different raw waters from Capilano Reservoir (CR: TOC∼1.45 mg C L The initial H Waters used in this study contained very little amount of particulates and hence very close values were measured for total organic carbon (TOC) and dissolved organic carbon (DOC). Therefore, it was preferred to measure TOC in all the stages of the experiment. TOC was measured using Shimadzu TOC-VCPH analyzer. All spectrophotometric measurements (e.g., UV AOC measurement was different from the conventionally applied bioassay (SM 9217, BDOC measurements were performed at Ecole Polytechnique de Montreal, Center for Water Treatment Technologies and Processes (CREDEAU). Samples were prepared and quenched of H Any residual H Sodium bicarbonate (50 and 150 mg/L eq. CaCO  Reduction trends observed for both UV The presence of alkalinity (mostly carbonate species) competes with NOM in scavenging OH radicals ( The original HPSEC chromatogram of raw CR water ( Quantitative results demonstrated in For the case of AMW of BI NOM, the highest reduction was observed for the portion related to molecular weights of 1000–1500 Da ( HPSEC chromatograms obtained for SR water (5 ppm TOC, For both CR and BI waters, AOC level increased as UV/H  The effect of initial TOC on AOC profile for the SR water is demonstrated in Despite the similarities between initial SUVA values of the CR and SR waters they did not show similar fractional AOC/TOC increases after undergoing UV/H For a given level of UV/H A direct and statistically significant correlation between AOC and BDOC was observed for the raw waters (i.e., CR and BI) that underwent UV/H Similar to the data obtained for UV/H  This research investigated the impact of UV/H Application of UV/H It is apparent that concentration, molecular weight distribution, and characteristics (i.e., source and aromaticity measured as SUVA) of NOM can influence its fate under UV/H The presence of alkalinity competed with NOM in scavenging OH radicals hence diminished the production of smaller molecules, consequently AOC. Positive and meaningful correlations were observed between BDOC and AOC for different waters that underwent different treatments. However, the correlations obtained in this study were shown to be source water specific, and further data is required to understand the origins of this difference. Andy Johnson at the biomedical research centre of UBC is acknowledged for his help and training on the FACS machine.