Electrokinetic and flotation studies were carried out on single particles of bastnaesite and monazite to develop a flotation scheme for selectively removing monazite in the rare earth bulk concentrate from the Baiyunebo mine, in China (60.7% rare earth oxides or REO, 75% as bastnaesite and 25% as monazite). Low additions of potassium alum were found to efficiently depress monazite at pH 5 without affecting the flotability of bastnaesite with the collector benzoic acid. The bulk concentrate was treated through this scheme, and 85% of the bastnaesite was recovered in a concentrate that assayed 69.5% REO and contained 97% bastnaesite. The depressing effect of potassium alum appeared to be due to the preferential adsorption of hydrolyzed aluminum species on monazite in comparison to bastnaesite.Bastnaesite ((Ce, La) CO Bastnaesite theoretically contains about 75% combined rare earth oxides (REO) and only minor amounts of yttrium. Flotation concentrates of bastnaesite (usually containing 60% REO) can be upgraded to 70% REO by acid leaching to remove calcite and to 85% by a combination of acid leaching and calcining, which removes carbon dioxide from the carbonate. Monazite theoretically can contain 70% REO including about 2% yttrium oxide, but most concentrates contain about 55–65% REO. Of the two minerals, bastnaesite is referred as the principal source of REO because it has high percentages of the light rare earth elements or the cerium group, namely elements having atomic numbers 57 through 63. With bastnaesite, processors do not have to contend with problems associated with handling the radioactive material thorium, which is contained in monazite and is recovered as a byproduct, needed to be stockpiled when produced in excess ( The commercial bastnaesite deposit in Mountain Pass, California, USA is processed by flotation using a mixture of tall oil and lignin sulfonate at elevated temperature to selectively float bastnaesite from calcite and barite ( Not only effective collectors, but also efficient depressants play an important role in the flotation of rare earth minerals ( This paper shows the results on the applicability of potassium alum as a depressant in the selective flotation of bastnaesite from monazite in a rare earth bulk concentrate using benzoic acid as a collector. In addition, the methodology used to establish the flotation scheme for the separation process through studies on flotability and electrokinetic of single particles of both bastnaesite and monazite is presented. The mineral samples of bastnaesite and monazite used in this work were obtained from the Haoniuping mine and Southern rare earth mine, in China, respectively. The samples were first crushed, then cleaned using a concentrating table and a hand magnet. By sieving, 37×100 μm size particles were obtained for flotation tests, and −37 μm size particles for zeta potential measurements. Through this procedure, the purity of the bastnaesite and monazite samples were 96.5% and 95.0%, respectively. A bastnaesite and monazite bulk concentrate, assaying 60.7% total REO, 4.3% CaO, 4.0% F and 11.5% P Benzoic acid used in this work was prepared in our laboratory and found to have 90.2% purity. Potassium alum (KAl(SO Flotation studies on single minerals were carried out in a 250-ml cell for 5 min using distilled water at 30°C. Prior to flotation, the slurry at 4% solid was conditioned for 5 min with pH-regulating agents, depressant, collector and frother. Flotation tests on the bulk concentrate were conducted in a 1-l cell using tap water. Electrokinetic studies were performed using a Mark DXD-1 electrophoretic meter, made by the Shanghai Instruments, in China. Mineral suspensions at 0.05% solids were first conditioned for 5 min with pH-regulating agent in the presence or absence of potassium alum. The slurry was then transferred to the electrophoresis cell for measurement. The electrophoretic mobility of over 20 particles was determined, and the average value was then transformed to zeta potential using the Smoluchowski equation ( The effect of pH on the flotability of single particles of both bastnaesite and monazite using benzoic acid as a collector in the presence and absence of potassium alum is shown in The effect of potassium alum addition on the flotability of both bastnaesite and monazite with benzoic acid at pH 5 is shown in Potassium alum dissociates into K  The zeta potential of bastnaesite and monazite as a function of pH in the presence and absence of potassium alum is shown in The foregoing concepts were tested as possible means for separating bastnaesite and monazite from the Baiyunebo bastnaesite–monazite bulk concentrate. Rougher flotation tests were carried out with slurries at 35% solid for 4 min. The results given in The bulk concentrate was then treated using the flowsheet given in A flotation scheme has been presented for separating bastnaesite and monazite using potassium alum as depressant and benzoic acid as collector in weakly acidic slurries. The process was tested on a bastnaesite and monazite bulk concentrate from the Baiyunebo mine, in China (60.7% REO, 75% as bastnaesite and 25% as monazite). From this process, a bastnaesite concentrate was produced assaying 69.5% REO with 97.2% bastnaesite. The recovery of bastnaesite was 84.7%. The depressing effect of potassium alum in the flotation separation of bastnaesite and monazite appeared to be due to the preferential adsorption of hydrolyzed aluminum ions on monazite in comparison to bastnaesite.