Most adult vertebrate animals have bony skeletons, with cartilage mostly restricted to joints and flexible structures. In contrast, the Chondrichthyes (sharks, batoids, and chimaeras) have endoskeletons made entirely of cartilage. Moreover, in sharks and batoids, most of the skeletal cartilage is tessellated, covered with mineralized, subperichondral blocks called tesserae. There are several other forms of cartilage found in the bodies of these fishes that likely serve distinct functional and metabolic roles. The structure and development of chimaeroid cartilage is essentially unknown. Growth by accretion of tissue at the margins (contrast with interstitial growth). A weblike form of calcified cartilage found only in the vertebral centra in elasmobranch fishes (cf. tessellated cartilage). The two forms of calcified cartilage proposed to comprise tesserae: the prismatic cap is dense and on the perichondral surface, whereas the globular body is found on the underside of tesserae and comprised of coalesced blobs of calcification. Bone with and without cells, respectively. Acellular bone is much more common in fishes than in mammals. Cell type in cartilage that produces extracellular cartilage matrix. Cartilage type found in our epiglottis and ear cartilage that has a high resilience due to its constituent elastin fibers. The skeletal system formed by all skeletal elements that are nondermal in developmental origin. External support structure of an organism; mineralized exoskeletons were common and extensive in extinct fishes. A species or clade, etc., that is still in existence. A species or clade, etc., that is no longer in existence and typically studied only from fossil forms. The polysaccharide- and fiber-rich material that surrounds cells in animal tissues and provides structural support. In hyaline cartilage, the ECM is the glassy, gel-like material that makes up the bulk of the tissue. An intermediate between hyaline cartilage and dense fibrous tissue found in the annulus fibrosus of our intervertebral disks. Fibrocartilage is rich in collagen bundles but has smaller amounts of extracellular matrix. The most widespread of the three primary cartilage types in mammals, has a comparatively low fibrous- and high matrix-content, and acts most notably as a bearing surface in joints. Growth from within a tissue, typically characteristic of nonrigid tissues (contrast with appositional growth). Collagenous fibers that connect adjacent tesserae. Small space/pit in mineralized/unmineralized matrix in which cartilage/bone cells lie. Lacunae in tesserae are connected by tiny canals called canaliculi. A clade of cartilaginous fishes that includes extant sharks and batoids, but not chimaeroids. A collar of bony tissue that forms in the outer fibrous layer of cartilage (the perichondrium) in animals with bony skeletons. An individual portion in a cartilaginous skeleton, analogous to individual bones in the skeleton of a bony vertebrate. Extra layers of tesserae beneath the subperichondal layer; common in large sharks and species that eat hard prey. Hyaline-like cartilage tiled (tessellated) on the outside with tesserae; a feature of the Elasmobranchii (cf. areolar cartilage). Mineralized and mostly hexagonal blocks, forming the outer crust of tessellated cartilage. Chondrichthyan fishes – the sharks, rays, and chimaeras – often are described as an evolutionary success story. The group evolved over 400 million years ago and although extant chondrichthyans are not as speciose as bony fishes, they have diverse morphologies and ecologies. The skeletons of chondrichthyans changed tremendously from the earliest-known Paleozoic species to today’s extant species. One of the most significant changes is in the material that builds the skeleton: in contrast to extinct forms, all modern chondrichthyan fishes possess endoskeletons fashioned almost entirely of cartilage. This is so characteristic of the group that sharks, rays, and chimaeras are known as the Chondrichthyes or cartilaginous fishes. Scientists have recognized the gross differences in skeletal material between the Chondrichthyes and other vertebrates for more than two centuries and yet we have made only short in-roads into answering the most basic questions surrounding the evolution and predominance of cartilage in the skeletons of these fishes. How does chondrichthyan cartilage differ from the cartilage of other vertebrates? How many types of cartilage are found in the Chondrichthyes? How do the skeletons of sharks, rays, and chimaeras differ? Are cartilaginous fish skeletons only cartilaginous? Here, we examine chondrichthyan skeletal tissues, consolidating what is currently known about what it means to have a cartilaginous skeleton and also pinpointing topics demanding further study. This article’s focus on cartilage only is a reflection of our scant knowledge of other chondricthyan skeletal tissues; although ligaments and tendons are typically also considered skeletal tissues, little is known of these materials in cartilaginous fishes. The Chondrichthyes are considered cartilaginous fishes because the long endoskeletal elements called bones in other vertebrates are made of cartilage instead. We are familiar with the distinction between cartilage and bone if we have ever eaten chicken and wrestled with the gristle (cartilage) at the ends of the long bones. The textural difference between these two tissues and the comparatively small amount of cartilage in the adult chicken skeleton is characteristic of nonchondrichthyan vertebrates. Most vertebrates with bony skeletons begin life with uncalcified, comparatively soft cartilaginous skeletons, scaffolds on which their bony version will be patterned. Much of the skeletal cartilage in embryos is systematically invaded by blood vessels, calcified, and then degraded as it is replaced by bone (a process called endochondral ossification). When most vertebrates reach adulthood, endoskeletal uncalcified cartilage typically persists only as articular surfaces in joints and as contour fillers (eg, in our noses and ears). In this respect, cartilaginous fishes are impressive at the very least for the huge amount of cartilage that persists in the adult skeleton. A natural question at this point is whether the Chondrichthyes ever possessed bone in their skeletons, and the answer is yes. Early Paleozoic sharks possessed osteonal dentine and acellular bone in association with dorsal spines and other dermal or exoskeletal elements. (The exoskeletal distinction here is important because early chondrichthyans and many other fishes possessed extensive dermal armors that are almost completely absent from the variety of extant groups.) Prismatic cartilage (see below) was preceded by perichondral bone in the endoskeleton, but it appears that by the time the hallmarks of the extant elasmobranch skeleton arose 400 million years ago, most of the bone in the skeleton was gone. Although many authors debate the presence of bone in the extant chondrichthyan endoskeleton, it is largely accepted that the base of chondrichthyan placoid scales and teeth is comprised of acellular bone. However, no cellular bone has ever been found in any chondrichthyan fish. Another key distinction between chondrichthyan skeletal cartilage and that of other vertebrates is in the forms that the cartilage takes. Cartilage, in general, is a stiff, gel-like tissue formed by cartilage cells (chondrocytes). The chondrocytes secrete an extracellular matrix rich in proteoglycans (macromolecules with hydrophobic domains that ensure the turgidity of cartilage) and type II collagen, which acts as the tissue’s tensile component. Compared with bone, cartilage has a much lower metabolic rate and essentially no blood supply, meaning that cartilage grows slowly and cannot repair itself. In mammals, several primary types of cartilage are recognized, for example, hyaline, elastic, and fibrocartilage. These represent a gradient in the type and proportion of fibrous tissue they contain. Whereas elasmobranch cartilage shares some features with mammalian cartilages, there are several distinct, clade-specific tissue morphologies, which will be described in turn below. In elasmobranch fishes (sharks, rays, and relatives) the majority of skeletal elements are made mostly of an uncalcified, hyaline-like cartilage. The proteoglycan, collagen, and water levels in this cartilage are roughly comparable to those of mammalian cartilage, although relative proportions of these components vary with species. In all elements except the vertebral centra ( There are hardly any published data on elasmobranch skeletal material properties, so it is difficult to assess the functional advantages and disadvantages of cartilaginous versus bony skeletons. However, three-dimensional computer models of the jaws of whiteshark ( Cells are distributed throughout all phases of the tissue, scattered throughout the unmineralized cartilage, linearly arrayed between the tufts of intertesseral fibers, and housed in lacunar spaces in the tesserae themselves. Until recently, it was unclear how the intra­ tesseral chondrocytes entombed within tesserae were able to remain alive. High-resolution synchrotron X-ray imaging has revealed a network of tiny canaliculi connecting lacunae, that likely help distribute nutrients to cells. It is suspected that tesseral cells play a role in mineralization and tesseral growth; materials involved in mineralization may be somehow passed through the canalicular network to tesseral margins, which would explain how tesserae increase in size as animals age. It is important to note that unlike bone, tessellated cartilage cannot repair itself and, unlike mammalian calcified cartilage, elasmobranch calcified cartilage is apparently not ever resorbed. As a result, the mineral that is put into place is there to stay and tesserae can only grow appositionally (ie, interstitial growth is not possible). The mechanisms of initiation and regulation of the mineralization process in tessellated cartilage are entirely unknown, although there is evidence that uncalcified matrix proteoglycans are degraded and the enzyme alkaline phosphatase (which also is involved in mammalian cartilage mineralization) is upregulated in areas where tesserae are forming. It was suggested that tesserae are formed in two pieces: an outer cap portion made of very dense prismatic cartilage and an inner body formed by the coalescence of blobs of globular calcified cartilage. Based on these morphological differences and because the cap tends to stain red (like bone) and the body blue (like cartilage) when elasmobranch fishes are cleared and double stained, some authors posit that tesserae are actually blocks of calcified cartilage surmounted by a thin veneer of bone. This concept grew, in part, out of decades of fierce debate over whether elasmobranchs have retained any bone in their endoskeletons. If this bi-partite tesserae theory is correct, we might expect to see the tiles organized around two different types of collagen, as bone and cartilage are characteristically patterned on type I and type II fibers, respectively. However, the few studies to attempt to type and label elasmobranch collagen have given conflicting results and the answer remains a mystery. These inconsistencies are likely due, in part, to researchers investigating cartilage from different regions of the skeleton; available evidence from numerous techniques suggests that tessellated cartilage in the neural arch of the backbone exhibits distinct structural differences from tessellated tissue elsewhere in the body and may contain a mineralized bone-like (type I-based) tissue (see below). Immunohistochemical studies localizing and comparing elasmobranch collagens in vertebral and nonvertebral elasmobranch cartilage would be a very useful next step. To the best of our knowledge, all calcified endoskeletal elements in elasmobranchs are tessellated with the exception of the centra in the vertebral column, which are comprised of areolar calcified cartilage ( Areolar cartilage is even less well described than tessellated cartilage. Despite the potential overlap in interests between morphological studies and aging studies (both consider vertebral micro-anatomy), no interdisciplinary study has investigated the ultrastructure of ontogenetic stages in areolar calcified cartilage or the mechanism by which layers are deposited. Morphological work shows areolar calcified cartilage – like the tesserae in tessellated cartilage – to be highly cellular, containing entombed cells in lacunae connected by short canalicular passageways. Cells are arranged concentrically about the centrum’s center (where the notochord is found in developing animals) creating laminated cellular rings, with each layer and the cells within layers separated by thin widths of calcified material. The persistent description of areolar cartilage as a “web-like calcification” likely arose from inorganic sample preparations that destroyed interstitial cells, leaving only this latticework of calcified tissue. Areolar and tessellated cartilage are the primary cartilages found in the skeleton of elasmobranchs, but anecdotes and results from many studies provide evidence that there may be other types or subtypes. This would hardly be surprising given that vertebrates, and especially fishes, tend to exhibit many intermediate tissues that do not fit easily into the categories of cartilage and bone. Some options that warrant further organized investigation are as follows: The cartilage of the neural arch (a skeletal arch on the dorsal side of vertebrae, arching over the spinal cord; Cartilage is described as essentially avascular because it contains considerably fewer vessels than bone, and yet cartilage often does contain some blood vessels ( The demonstration in cownose rays ( Tessellated cartilage can be reinforced in at least two ways: by adding additional layers of tesserae (supernumerary tesseral layers; The second type of tessellated cartilage reinforcement, trabecular cartilage, was first observed in the jaws of myliobatid stingrays, supporting the tissue directly beneath the flat tooth plates that are used to crush mollusks ( It should be reiterated that the types of calcification mentioned above have been described or noted only in elasmobranchs. By comparison, almost nothing is known of the morphology or formation of calcified endoskeletal material in chimaeroids, sister group to the sharks and rays. As far as has been reported, holocephalans (chimaeroids) are the only nontessellated group among the extant Chondrichthyes. One study describes chimaeroid tissue mineralization as “continuous cartilage calcification” comprised of smooth surface sheets of mineral, but this has, to the best of our knowledge, never been figured in a published article. It is reasonable, however, to assume that the endoskeletons of chimaeroids are much less mineralized than those of elasmobranchs: in CT scans of several species, the only cartilages that appear reinforced are those associated with the jaw joint, the tooth plates, and the occipital joint. Examinations of chimaeroid mineralization and skeletal reinforcement would provide integral knowledge to understand the evolution of chondrichthyan skeletons.