Cyclic deformation and low-cycle fatigue properties of extruded ZK60 magnesium alloy were experimentally investigated by carrying out fully reversed strain-controlled uniaxial tension–compression fatigue experiments along the extrusion direction. The material shows significant yielding asymmetry under monotonic tension and compression. Marginal cyclic hardening is manifested at all the strain amplitudes tested. The shape of the stress–strain hysteresis loop and the mean stress strongly depend on the strain amplitude. When the strain amplitude is higher than 0.52%, asymmetric shape of the stress–strain hysteresis loop and significant tensile mean stress develop. With intermediate strain amplitudes (0.45–0.52%), the stress–strain hysteresis loop evolves from an asymmetric shape at the initial loading cycles to a symmetric shape after approximately 10% fatigue life, accompanied by moderate saturated mean tensile stresses. Symmetric stress–strain hysteresis loop with zero mean stress is observed for the strain amplitudes lower than 0.45%. It is suggested that the twinning–detwinning process plays a dominant role for the deformation at high strain amplitudes while dislocation slip dominates at the low strain amplitudes. The strain–life fatigue curve shows a kinking plateau in the vicinity of 0.52% strain amplitude. Different crack initiation mechanisms are proposed in the two strain amplitude ranges divided by the plateau in the strain–life curve. The material displays a tensile cracking growth behavior and the Smith, Watson, and Topper (SWT) fatigue parameter is appropriate for the description of the fatigue life. The residual twins after fatigue were examined by light microscopy and the fracture surfaces were observed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Distinctive features were observed depending strongly on the strain amplitudes. The observed microscopic features are discussed with respect to possible crack initiation and propagation mechanisms.Magnesium (Mg) alloys have attracted a great attention in aircraft and automobile industries due to their high specific strength Magnesium alloys are usually classified into cast and wrought (rolled, extruded, and forged) forms. Significant difference in the cyclic deformation and fatigue property has been found between these two groups. Studies of crack initiation mechanisms have revealed that cast Mg alloys contain casting pores and inclusions that are deleterious to fatigue strength Magnesium and its alloys have a hexagonal close packed (HCP) structure with the In the last decade, common characteristics of cyclic deformation for wrought Mg alloys have been studied through fully reversed total strain-controlled (or plastic strain-controlled) fatigue experiments under uniaxial tension–compression. These Mg alloys include extruded AZ31 Explorations of microstructural evolution during cyclic deformation for Mg alloys were carried out by Brown et al. Fatigue of Mg alloys is usually characterized using the strain–life fatigue curve. Earlier studies for wrought Mg alloys frequently reported that the strain–life curves exhibited a smooth transition from the low cycle fatigue regime to the high cycle fatigue regime and the strain–life curves can be described well by the Basquin (stress–life curve) and Manson–Coffin (plastic strain–life curve) equations Due to the existence of mean stress in the stress–strain hysteresis loops for Mg alloys, the capability of the conventional fatigue models to account for the twinning–detwinning induced mean stress effect on life prediction was of particular interest. Hasegawa et al. Wrought ZK60 is one of the high strength commercial magnesium alloys which have potential applications in the cyclic load-bearing components. However, most of the existing work has been concentrated on the study of high-cycle fatigue properties Round solid extruded ZK60 magnesium (Mg) alloy bar with a diameter of 46 Dog-bone plate specimens with a rectangular cross section of 5.0  All the monotonic and cyclic loading experiments were conducted using a uniaxial servohydraulic load frame at room temperature. The load capacity of the load frame is ±25 Monotonic tension and compression tests were conducted at a strain rate of 1.0 In order to characterize the macroscopic fatigue crack profiles after mechanical experiments, low magnification SEM images were taken on the overall fractured surfaces for the fatigued specimens. High magnification SEM images were also used to characterize the fractographic features of the crack initiation and propagation regions. Additionally, residual twins in the regions near the fatigue crack and 5  From Beyond point Under tension beyond point It is noticed that only marginal difference exists in the deformation data and fatigue results between specimens of layer I and layer II. Therefore, the results from layer II specimens are presented for the deformation while the fatigue data from both groups are presented.  At the strain amplitude of 1% ( For the subsequent unloading and tensile reloading, an even stronger Bauschinger effect with a linear elastic limit of only 20 The Bauschinger effect of the compressive reversal in the second loading cycle is the same as that in the first cycle. However, the plastic flowing curve tends to deviate from its initial high-hardening portion earlier and transits to a low-hardening portion followed by a much shorter plateau than that in the first cycle. The stress of the compressive peak in the second loading cycle is similar to that in the first cycle. However, With a strain amplitude of 0.5%, the initial tension quarter cycle reaches a tensile peak stress of 202 The stress–strain hysteresis loops throughout the whole fatigue life at a 0.35% strain amplitude show a symmetric shape and zero mean stress due to the absence of twinning–detwinning process. Since a compressive stress peak of −154  For the strain amplitudes above 0.55% and below 1%, the compressive peak stress increases faster than the tensile peak stress till approximately 10% fatigue life. In the remaining cycles, the tensile peak stress increases fast and continuously, while the compressive peak stress increases slowly and approaches a saturated value at 50% fatigue life. As a result, the mean stresses decreases with increasing loading cycles till approximately 10% fatigue life and then increases slightly in the remaining life. For the strain amplitudes ranging from 0.45% to 0.52%, both directions show hardening in the proceeding cycles of 10% fatigue life and tend to be saturated in the remaining cycles. However, in the cycle of first 10% fatigue life, the hardening magnitude in the tensile peak stress appears to be higher than that in the compressive peak stress, resulting in a continuous increase of the mean stress. The constant mean stress in the remaining cycles suggests not only the exhaustion of new tension twin formulation but also the exhaustion of the twinning–detwinning process. This implication can further be supported by the symmetric stabilized hysteresis loop as presented in the next section. It is deserved to point out that the evolution of the mean stress under the strain amplitude of 0.55% behaves as a watershed between the above two strain amplitude regions, experiencing a near continuous increase throughout the entire fatigue life. Both the tensile and compressive peak stresses under the strain amplitudes below 0.45% harden slightly in a symmetrical manner, producing almost zero mean stress (refer to  Unlike fcc or bcc metallic materials, extruded ZK60 under fully reversed strain-controlled low-cycle fatigue experiment exhibits a strain-amplitude dependent mean stress effect which indicates the degree of the involvement of twinning–detwinning process.  The fatigue data for extruded ZK60 obtained from the fully reversed strain-controlled tension–compression tests along the extrusion direction are tabulated in  A single Eq. The existence of the dividing plateau at the strain amplitude of 0.52% can demarcate the strain amplitudes into two regions. Coincidentally, the two strain amplitude regions exhibit different cyclic deformation behavior and mean stress effects, as shown in Due to different cyclic deformation mechanisms underlying in the two strain amplitude regions divided by a plateau at a strain amplitude of 0.52%, the strain–life curve for extruded ZK60 cannot be described by a single smooth curve using Eq.  The plateau in the strain–life curve ( A single fitting curve using the SWT parameter for extruded ZK60 suggests that the SWT model has a potential capability to account for the mean stress effect introduced by the twinning–detwinning process. Additionally, since the SWT parameter was originally developed to consider only tensile cracking under uniaxial loading, a single-curve description implies that extruded ZK60 might exhibit tensile cracking in the whole strain amplitude range under current investigation. A detailed examination of the macroscopic fatigue crack profiles for extruded ZK60 experimentally confirms this prediction of cracking behavior. Macroscopic fatigue crack profiles of all fractured specimens were examined. Different shapes of the fatigue crack profiles can be grouped into two regions of strain amplitudes demarcated by the plateau of 0.52% strain amplitude. When the strain amplitudes are higher than 0.52% (   In the regions away (about 5 The residual twin observations were also conducted by Yin et al. As a preliminary experimental endeavor to study the cyclic deformation behavior and fatigue property of extruded magnesium alloy ZK60, fully reserved tension–compression fatigue experiments were conducted on plate specimens along the extrusion direction under total strain control with the strain amplitudes ranging from 0.2% to 1.5%. Several conclusions are reached: Due to the pole nature of twinning and the initial basal texture, extruded ZK60 exhibits significant yielding asymmetry under monotonic tension and compression. Under cyclic loading, marginal cyclic hardening occurs at all strain amplitudes. The stress–strain hysteresis loops under large strain amplitudes (>0.52%) show asymmetric shapes and significant tensile mean stresses throughout the fatigue lives. Under intermediate strain amplitudes between 0.45% and 0.52%, the asymmetric shape disappears after approximately 10% of the fatigue life, followed by symmetric stress–strain hysteresis loops with intermediate saturated mean stresses. At small strain amplitudes lower than 0.45%, symmetric stress–strain hysteresis loops and zero mean stresses persist throughout the whole fatigue lives. The strain–life fatigue curve for extruded ZK60 shows a clear dividing plateau approximately at the strain amplitude of 0.52%. Two three-parameter fitting curves can be used to describe the experimental data above and below the plateau. A single relationship between the Smith–Watson–Topper (SWT) parameter and the fatigue life can be obtained to account for the mean stress effect in the whole range of strain amplitudes from 0.2% to 1.5%. Tensile cracking is suggested by the SWT parameter and further confirmed by the SEM images of the overall macroscopic fatigue fracture surface profiles. Twinning activity accompanies with the crack propagation at all the investigated strain amplitudes. Fatigue crack initiation mechanisms are deduced based on the observations of residual twins far away from the fatigue crack. Twinning–detwinning process plays a dominating role in crack initiation under high strain amplitudes above the plateau in the strain–life curve. Dislocation slips or interaction between dislocation slips and residual twins might contribute to the crack initiation under low strain amplitudes below the plateau in the strain–life curve. This research was financially supported by the