Shape and misorientation of each grain boundary that surrounds the growing Goss grain is analyzed using OIM (Orientation Image Microscopy) of partially secondary recrystallized silicon steel specimens. Shape is characterized by two novel parameters called Grain Chord Length (GCL) and Grain Bulge Height (GBH) that are explained in detail in this paper. The results suggest that 20°–45° misoriented boundaries migrate faster than the low (<20°) and high (>45°) angle boundaries that surround the growing Goss grains. The island grains observed inside the growing Goss grains mainly have either low (<20°), high (>45°), or CSL (Coincident Site Lattice) misorientations. This also confirms the higher migration rate of 20°–45° misoriented boundaries during secondary recrystallization.Deciding what types of boundaries are responsible for the growth of Goss grains in Fe-Si steels is one of the most controversial subjects in this field. At present there are two different theories. Firstly CSL theory The other theory Both models of texture development were recently discussed by Morawiec In this work, using a novel method, OIM micrographs were analyzed. The calculated statistical information was analyzed and conclusions are presented in detail. These results support the later theory, which assumes high mobility to high-energy boundaries. Terminology used in this work can best be described by considering the schematic micrographs of partially secondary recrystallized silicon steel presented in In principle, if the mobility and the driving pressure were isotropic the abnormally growing Goss grain would grow as a circle in the 2-dimensional microstructure. Even though the Goss grain exhibits circular shape at the growing front, there is always a small fluctuation at the microscopic level. (Mostly elongated grains with moving circular fronts are observed in reality. This is either because of the existence of two or more growing Goss grains or due to limited specimen width). If the mobility of the grain boundary of a particular grain is lower than that of other boundaries (that separate the rest of each matrix grains from the growing Goss) adjacent to it, then the grain becomes a Methodology behind this work is based on the observation of the fluctuation that exits in the grain boundary of growing Goss grain. In In this manuscript, GBH/GCL ratio is used to characterize various boundaries that bound the growing Goss grain. The results are analyzed and a detailed explanation is presented in the section on results and discussion. High permeability silicon steel specimens were used for this analysis. After primary recrystallization, the specimen was subjected to secondary recrystallization at 1000° C. Microstructures of partially recrystallized specimens are then analyzed for their microstructure. Suitable portion of the specimen is then prepared for OIM analysis. OIM micrographs where taken in various places. Once such micrograph is shown in The orientations of the three large abnormally growing Goss grains analyzed in this work are The histogram shown in In this work, the orientations of the island grains were analyzed separately. The results are presented in From the OIM micrographs, a simple geometrical parameter namely the ratio between