High-voltage pulse crushing technology combined with sieving and dense medium separation was applied to a photovoltaic panel for selective separation and recovery of materials. The panel was first separated into glass and back sheet layers by high-voltage pulse crushing through microexplosions or shock waves transmitted in the Al electrode and Si substrate (primary crushing step). Then the glass and bus-bar electrode could be separated from the encapsulant by high-voltage pulse crushing of the glass layer. The bus-bar electrode of the back sheet layer could also be separated by further high-voltage pulse crushing. After sieving the products obtained from the secondary crushing step of the glass layer, glass was mainly distributed in the size fraction range of 45–850 μm with a small amount of Si powder. However, purification of the glass (removal of Si powder) could be achieved by dense medium separation at a specific gravity of 2.4. Base metals, such as Cu, Sn, and Pb could be recovered in the large size fraction (1.0–8.0 mm). Ag used in the finger and bus-bar electrodes was highly condensed in the sieved product fraction with sizes of less than 20 μm, 2.0–4.0, and 4.0–8.0 mm, and its content exceeded 3000 mg/kg. However, the amount of Ag in these fractions represented only 33.2% of the total amount of Ag in the panel. Thus, to increase the Ag recovery ratio, other separation methods will be needed. We confirmed that dense medium separation at a specific gravity of 3.0 could achieve Ag condensation from the Si and glass, and that this represents a promising option for enhanced Ag recovery from crushed products.Photovoltaic power generation does not emit CO Recycling technologies for photovoltaic panel have been developing in recent years. There are three main approaches to recycling: mechanical ( In this study, we apply high-voltage pulse crushing technology to photovoltaic panel crushing, combined with sieving and dense medium separation. The objective of this study was to establish a method for selective separation and recovery of materials in photovoltaic panels. The subject of this study was recycling of a polycrystalline silicon photovoltaic panel. An end-of-life photovoltaic panel (1650 mm × 988 mm × 45 mm, 18.54 kg, 250 W) from a recycler was used for the experiments (  High-voltage pulse crushing experiments were performed with a SELFRAG Lab S2.0 instrument (SELFRAG AG, Switzerland). After a piece of the cut panel was put on the bottom electrode in the vessel, the crushing experiments were conducted under the conditions listed in The panels were separated into two layers in the primary crushing step, as described below. To elucidate the separation mechanism of the panel into two layers, we observed fracture surfaces after the primary crushing step, under the optimal conditions, by scanning electron microscope (SEM; VE-9800, Keyence, Japan) and energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX; EDAX Genesis, Ametek, Inc., Berwyn, PA, US). Each layer was then crushed under the conditions summarized in The product obtained by crushing under the optimal conditions was sieved through 11 different sieves (20, 45, 90, 150, 300, 500, and 850 μm, and 1.0, 2.0, 4.0, and 8.0 mm). The concentrations of Ag, Al, Ca, Cu, Mg, Na, Pb, Si, and Sn in each particle size range were determined by ICP-AES after dissolution by acid (HNO Solutions for dense medium separation (2.4 and 3.0 g/cm      We investigated dense medium separation as a method to purify glass and concentrate Ag to increase the recovery rates. This method uses density rather than particle size to separate components. Dense medium separation of the 300–500 μm sieved product fraction at a specific gravity of 2.4 was conducted to purify glass (2.5g/cm Dense medium separation of the sieved product fraction with a size of less than 20 μm at a specific gravity of 3.0 was performed to concentrate Ag (10.5g/cm The process cost was evaluated from the monitored discharge energy used in the high-voltage pulse crushing under the optimal conditions. The optimal conditions were determined as the following discharge voltage and pulse number: primary crushing step, 110 kV for 20 pulses; secondary crushing step of the glass layer, 90 kV for 250 pulses; secondary crushing step of the back sheet layer, 90 kV for 200 pulses. The sum of discharge energies under the optimal conditions was 21.2 kJ. The cost was evaluated assuming an electricity cost of 13.5 Japanese yen (JPY)/kWh (about 0.123 USD/kWh) and scaled in relation to the relative sizes of the experimental samples and real panel. As a result of the evaluation, the processing cost of high-voltage pulse crushing was estimated to be 0.21 JPY/W (about 0.0019 USD/W). This estimated cost was low and suggests promise because the targeted process cost suggested by the New Energy and Industrial Technology Development Organization (NEDO) is 5 JPY/W (about 0.045 USD/W) ( In this study, we crushed a photovoltaic panel by high-voltage pulse crushing and then separated the products by sieving and dense medium separation with the aim of selective separation and recovery of various materials in the panel. The panel was separated into glass and back sheet layers by high-voltage pulse crushing of the Al electrode and Si substrate. The optimal conditions for separation of the panel into two layers (primary crushing step) were 110 kV for 20 pulses because the layers retained their form. We conducted a secondary crushing step of the glass layer after initial crushing under the optimal conditions. The optimal conditions of the secondary crushing step for the glass layer were 90 kV for 250 pulses because the encapsulant was mostly retained, and the bus-bar electrode was separated from the encapsulant effectively. The obtained products were then separated by sieving. Glass was mainly distributed in the 45–850 μm size fraction with small content of Si powder. Base metals, such as Cu, Sn, and Pb could be recovered in the larger size fraction (1.0–8.0 mm). The Ag concentration of the sieved product fractions was over 3000 mg/kg, in size factions of less than 20 μm, 2.0–4.0, and 4.0–8.0 mm. We also attempted dense medium separation to increase the Ag recovery and glass purity. Purification of glass by dense medium separation at a specific gravity of 2.4 could be achieved, where the Ag was much condensed in the light product. Through Ag condensation by dense medium separation at a specific gravity of 3.0, the Ag concentration in the heavy product was over 30 times higher than that before separation. Overall, these results suggest that a combination of high-voltage pulse crushing and physical separation is a promising approach for recycling photovoltaic panels. Furthermore, processing costs in the high-voltage pulse crushing were estimated to be 0.21 JPY/W (about 0.0019 USD/W), which shows potential for commercial viability. This research was supported by the