This study determined the effect on the voluntary feed intake (VFI), in vivo digestibility and nitrogen (N) retention in sheep of feeding grass silage or pea–wheat bi-crop forages differing in maturity at harvest and pea to wheat ratio. Two bi-crops drilled at pea to wheat ratios of 25:75 (low pea; LP) or 75:25 (high pea; HP) on a dry matter (DM) basis were grown on each half of 6.5 and 3.5ha fields and harvested after either 13 (cut 1; C1) or 15 (cut 2; C2) weeks of growth. The four resulting forages were ensiled in separate 40 t clamp silos and evaluated against a perennial ryegrass (PRG) silage, as a control, in an in vivo digestibility trial. Each forage was fed with 7g of mineral/vitamin supplement daily to four Lleyns wether sheep for a 14-day adaptation period and a 10-day balance period. Daily forage intake and total faecal and urine output were measured and N balance was estimated. The mean DM contents at C1 and C2 were 301 and 333g/kg while the mean proportions of peas in the LP and HP treatments were 402 and 729g/kg DM, respectively. C2 bi-crops had higher crude protein (CP) (P<0.05), starch (P<0.001) and neutral detergent fibre (NDF; P<0.01) contents than C1 bi-crops while the HP treatment gave higher pea to wheat ratios at harvest (P<0.001) in vivo digestibility values and CP contents (P<0.01) than the LP treatment. Nevertheless, there were significant interactions between pea to wheat ratio and maturity. The LP C2 bi-crop silage had the highest (P<0.05), DM, water-soluble carbohydrate (WSC), starch and NDF contents and metabolisable energy (ME) value and gave the highest, DM, digestible DM and ME intakes, N retention and N balance. Compared to the PRG silage which was moderate in quality, the bi-crops had higher (P<0.05), CP, starch and WSC contents and gave higher DM, digestible DM and ME intakes, and better N retention and N balance. This study shows that the LP C2 had similar nutritive to the other bi-crops value but gave better animal performance. The work also suggests that pea–wheat bi-crops can be fed to livestock instead of average quality grass silage.Feeding intercrops of cereals and legumes to ruminants is an established practice in countries like Denmark ( Two bi-crops contrasting in pea to wheat ratio were produced from inter-cropped spring wheat ( The in vivo study was carried out at ADAS Nutritional Sciences Research Unit, Stratford-upon-Avon, UK. Twenty mature Lleyn wether sheep, each initially weighing approximately 74 Representative sub-samples of the pre-conserved bi-crops and the conserved PRG and bi-crop silages were analyzed for DM, total ash and total N (Kjeldahl method) according to The Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food ( The effects of pea to wheat ratio and maturity at harvest of the bi-crops on chemical composition, in vivo digestibility and N utilization were analyzed using a 2×2 factorial design. A completely randomized design was also used to compare the chemical composition, in vivo digestibility and N utilization data of the bi-crops to the corresponding values for the PRG silage. The statistical analyses were conducted using the analysis of variance function of Minitab ( The pea to wheat ratio achieved at harvest and chemical composition of the pre-conserved bi-crops are presented in     The effect of pea to wheat ratio and maturity at harvest in the bi-crops on N intake and utilization is presented in  The CP content and in vivo DM and OM digestibility of the HP bi-crops were consistently higher than corresponding values in the LP bi-crops, and they were also higher than values for similar bi-crops with less than 200 g pea per kg DM at harvest ( The maturity-related increases in DM, starch and NDF contents support previous findings in bi-crops ( Effective conservation of legumes is often inhibited by their low WSC content and high buffering capacity ( Unlike the digestibility, the chemical composition of the PRG silage was worse than those of the bi-crops. The nutritive value of the PRG silage was moderate as it had slightly lower CP and WSC contents and higher DM, NH A notable advantage of feeding bi-crops is the high VFI, which compensates for their moderate digestibility, thus ensuring relatively higher digestible nutrient intakes. Compared to intakes of grass silage, the higher intakes of the bi-crops observed in sheep are consistent with findings in dairy cows fed similar bi-crop silages ( Previous work has shown that relative to estimates at maintenance, digestibility results can be underestimated if animals are fed ad libitum especially with mature forages ( The higher N intake observed when the bi-crops were fed is largely a reflection of their higher DM intake and N content. The higher N balance and N retention in the bi-crops can be partly adduced to an increased supply of non-ammonium N to the abomasum and small intestine ( The results presented here clearly demonstrate the potential of pea–wheat bi-crops as forage for ruminants. The bi-crops gave better DM, N and ME intakes, and N retention than the grass silage studied. A complimentary study is currently validating these findings in dairy cows using grass silages and pea–wheat bi-crops with higher nutritive values. The LP C2 bi-crop seemed to be the best bi-crop as it had a high nutritive value that was comparable to those of the other bi-crops and gave the best animal performance. It is therefore concluded that of the treatments tested, the best combination for optimizing nutritive value and animal performance is to aim for a bi-crop with 400 The funding of this work by the Milk Development Council is gratefully acknowledged.