In the last decades mechanized tunnelling with Tunnel Boring Machines (TBMs) has spread, due to the sensible technological developments, allowing for higher advancement rates, huge excavation diameters (up to 17m) and lower excavation costs.
                  Methane inflows from gassy rock masses may represent a serious hazard in underground excavations and could cause expensive delays and, at worst, tragic accidents to workers. Consequently, if methane-air mixtures may be present, a safety engineering system should be designed and set up before starting the excavation works in order to prevent fires or explosions.
                  Due to the impossibility to prevent the contemporary presence of explosive gas-air mixtures and ignition sources, TBMs have never been adopted for tunnelling in gassy rock masses until 2011 (excluding the tunnels excavated with TBM, where methane gas hazard was underestimated, consequently producing delays and unpredicted expenses).
                  The paper describes the safety engineering system developed for the excavation of the Sparvo twin tunnels (Italy) with EPB–TBM. The machine (Herrenknecht S-574) was specifically designed to prevent the risk of having explosive gas-air mixtures and ignition sources in the same place and at the same time, hydraulically confining the volumes inside the machine. After a brief description of the case study, the paper illustrates the design criteria, the technological solutions adopted for the construction of the Herrenknecht S-574 and the operating procedures. Then, the paper focuses on examining and interpreting the methane monitoring results during Sparvo tunnel construction, that highlight the presence of huge volumes of methane. The developed safety engineering system allowed tunnelling without interruptions even with sensible gas flows. Current limits and possible improvements to the safety system described are also discussed.Despite the limited scientific literature on tunnelling in gassy rock masses ( Nevertheless, in the underground civil engineering, the methane explosion hazard has been generally underestimated, at least in the past, and there are very few attempts to transfer the great experience gained in underground coal mining ( The Italian High Speed Train (TAV) and the Valico Variant (VAV) projects between Bologna and Florence, mostly developed into underground, involved geological formations of the Tuscan-Emilian Apennine, which were known to host methane gas caps and geostructures which could have given rise to emissions. Since the early stages of the tunnels construction in TAV and VAV projects, a comprehensive program of studies and researches was started, in order to define the operating methodologies for tunnelling safety in gassy rock masses and to develop new standard procedures. The research was conducted jointly by the Mining Research Group of Bologna University (Department of Civil, Chemical, Environmental and Materials Engineering, DICAM), the Emilia Romagna and Tuscany Regions, the Prevention and Safety operational units of AUSL Bologna and Florence, and Collins Srl. A careful analysis of the existing international standard procedures and a study of gas emissions from rock masses led to a complete revision of the approach to safety in underground gassy rock masses excavation. The new approach introduced a dynamic safety engineering system consisting of innovative design solutions, measures and safety procedures which were defined according to the interaction between the rock mass and tunnelling, taking into account the tunnel size, the underground work organization and the excavation method and technique. The attention was focused on large section tunnels (larger than 70 m Complex and integrated systems for safe tunnelling were defined and applied after a long and meticulous in situ testing, which lasted several years, to validate the proposed methodology as a standard of practice for tunnel excavation in Italy. Indeed, the research results were applied to approximately 160 The present paper describes the safety engineering system developed for safe excavation of large section tunnel with EPB–TBM, focusing, as a case study, on the Sparvo twin tunnels, the first one of the VAV line realized with mechanized excavation method. Indeed, the need to reduce the excavation time of Sparvo tunnels led Autostrade per l'Italia SpA (Client) to promote specific studies, aimed at investigating the possibility of adopting mechanized excavation in rock masses with confirmed presence of methane on the whole track. SPEA Engineering SpA (VAV Work Supervisor, hereinafter SPEA) and Autostrade per l'Italia SpA promoted the design and construction of such an innovative TBM, within a framework of innovation actions aiming at developing new technologies for tunnelling. The Mining Research Group of DICAM developed the design choices that allow the safe excavation of gassy rock masses using an EPB–TBM, considering the reservoir physics ( After a brief description of the Sparvo tunnel, the paper presents the developed safety system, describing the design criteria, the technological solutions adopted for the construction of Herrenknecht S-574 and the operating procedures. Lastly, the methane monitoring results during Sparvo tunnel construction are examined and discussed in relation to the involved rock masses. Sparvo consists of twin tunnels identified, in the present paper, as “North tunnel” (for the traffic towards Bologna) and “South tunnel” (for the traffic towards Florence) ( The tunnels were originally planned to be realized with the full-face method using traditional techniques. In 2010, to reduce the excavation time, it was decided to use an EPB–TBM, 15.615 The use of a TBM allowed achieving high advance rates compared to the traditional excavation technique, despite the complex geomorphological and geomechanical site conditions. Indeed, the hill crossed by the Sparvo tunnels is affected by several landslides, some of which are very wide, mainly dormant and locally active. The first tunnel to be excavated was the North one where tunnelling started in August 2011 and finished in July 2012 advancing towards North, with an average excavation rate of 16 From a geomechanical point of view, the tunnels pass through the following structurally complex formations (      These formations rarely outcrop in the investigated area, as the overburden mainly consists of active and dormant landslide deposits ( The hydraulic conditions in the rock mass are markedly affected by the rock mass heterogeneity and the permeability is mainly secondary, related to the fracturing degree, with the exception of the landslide deposits characterized by a primary permeability. The different formations have generally a medium–low to very low permeability ( On the basis of the geological reconstruction, along the tunnel route several geological structures classified as potential hydrocarbons traps, which may contain methane gas, were recognized. Such permeable portions of the rock mass, surrounded by impermeable rocks, could allow for gas accumulation and migration due to the morphological and hydraulic setting (presence of anticlines and faults, and intense fracturing of the rock mass). The evaluations about the presence of gas within the geological formations crossed by the tunnels were based upon: (i) natural or induced gas flow data recorded in the Tuscan – Emilian Apennine nearby the investigated area ( The investigations conducted in 2004 ( In 2011, once decided to use a TBM-EPB, for the machine design the Contractor carried out new surveys ( To ensure high safety levels during tunnelling, maintaining the methane gas concentration below the lower explosive limit (LEL), an integrated and structured system of safety precautions was adopted, which consisted of: (i) a properly designed forced ventilation system, to dilute the volume of explosive mixtures; (ii) the presence of a reliable gas monitoring and alarm system, to operate a systematic control of methane level in the air; (iii) the use of explosion-proof plants and equipment; (iv) specific operating procedures during excavation, maintenance and specific activities, such as access to excavation chamber for maintenance and drilling operations at the tunnel face; (v) TBM compartmentalization solutions for a safe excavation of the gassy rock masses. Indeed, it is not possible to use mechanized excavation in gassy rock masses, unless neutralizing potential ignition sources, mostly the frictional ones. This condition is met only if the machine is fully explosion-proof, and this is technically and economically hard to realize. The Herrenknecht S-574 EPB-TBM is not completely explosion-proof, but it was specifically designed to safely excavate gassy rock masses thanks to the implementation of technological solutions and safety procedures that completely avoid exploding mixtures and ignition sources ( After a detailed technical analysis of the TBM architecture, equipment and working phases, the following homogeneous volumes inside the TBM were identified: (i) excavation chamber and screw conveyor (volume 1, coloured in yellow in During excavation, methane gas flows within volume 1, trapped within the pores of the shredded material and of the clasts. Methane concentration is close to 100% in volume, but can be reduced due to the use of foams or for air filtration reaching values within the range 5–15% in volume. Such levels are allowed within this volume, although potential ignition sources are present (e.g. cutting tools hitting the rock, friction between screw conveyor and pipe wall, friction between rock and cutting/crushing tools within the excavation chamber and the screw conveyor, etc.), as long as the excavation chamber and the screw conveyor pipe are constantly filled with a mixture of muck, water and foaming agent (excavation in “closed mode”). In order to ensure this condition, it is necessary to determine the optimal soil conditioning parameters for EPB application ( During maintenance operations, the working chamber unavoidably needs to be partially emptied. Consequently, the presence of potential exploding mixtures must be prevented, since it is not possible to exclude the presence of ignition sources of various nature. In particular, the safety procedures include methane concentration measurements in the excavation chamber (through manual and automatic monitoring systems) and eventually ventilation of the chamber to reduce the methane concentration. The personnel can enter into the excavation chamber only if the automatic monitoring (during the emptying of the excavation chamber) does not register methane concentrations above the instrument sensitivity. Systematic measurements with portable instrumentation, suitable to operate in explosive atmosphere, must be performed in the excavation chamber during maintenance operations. Moreover, investigations for methane through drill holes at the tunnel face are performed. During the drilling phase, the excavation must be halted and the power supply must be stopped to all ordinary (not explosion-proof) TBM electrical plants. The drilling probe equipment must be explosion-proof and prevent methane inflows into the volume 2 (blowout preventer). At the end of the drilling operations, before the voltage recovery to the ordinary electrical systems, it is necessary to verify the absence of methane in the whole volume 2 and the seal tightness of the borehole heads must be assured. Within volume 2 the gas-proofing from volume 3 is ensured by the gas-tight double-walled housing of the conveyor belt, provided with a hollow pressurized to 40 In volume 3 there must not be ignition sources and only explosion-proof equipment (Group I, cat. M2 according to The TBM is equipped with two independent primary ventilation systems, each providing a flow rate of 45 m Temperature is monitored during excavation to verify that the surface temperatures of the TBM components is lower than the methane ignition temperature. The methane monitoring system allows to detect high concentrations before the potentially explosive mixture can reach the standard equipment. These measures are essential in the TBM design together with the ventilation system to reduce methane concentration. The methane concentration measurements were carried out with an automatic system supported by manual monitoring, to be performed in areas not covered by the fixed sensors, in zones of possible gas accumulation and near the sealing elements. The automatic system was designed considering the TBM compartmentalization and consists of a huge number of properly arranged catalytic sensors, displaced in specific measurement points ( Except for the excavation chamber, sensors amount is redundant. There are two active sensors for each measurement point, so that if one is not properly working the measure is provided by the other one. Such solution avoids power line segmentation, unless both sensors are not working at the same time. Abruptly stopping power supply to all TBM equipment at once, without following the shutdown sequence defined by the standard procedures, some components could be damaged and affect TBM proper functioning. The automatic monitoring system controls optical and acoustic alarms and acts on the TBM if the methane concentration exceeds the threshold limits, whether they are recorded on the machine or along the finished tunnel. The alarms are activated if one of the two sensors in each measurement point detects methane concentrations above the threshold. There is therefore a direct link between the monitoring system and the machine, whose advancement rate directly depends on the information received by the monitoring system. Five conditions are defined for each volume, according to the methane concentration value ( The methane volumetric concentration in air (methane/air volume ratio) measured in the different volumes (from 1 to 4) determines the actions to be taken according to the occurring activities and to the characteristics of the electrical equipment. In particular, in volume 2 activities may be carried out until a methane concentration of 0.15%. For higher values, the following levels are activated: early warning for methane concentration into the range 0.15 and 0.35% and underground evacuation over 0.35%. In volume 3 normal operations are allowed for methane levels less than 0.35%, passing to attention and early warning for concentrations ranging from 0.35 and 3.00% and between 3.00 and 4.00%, respectively; over 4.00% it is required to evacuate the underground. In the finished tunnel (volume 4), the following levels are activated: attention for methane level into the range 0.30–0.70%, early warning between 0.70% and 1.00% and underground evacuation over 1.00%. The excavation must be stopped as soon as the early warning threshold in volume 2 (0.15%) and volume 3 (3.00%) and the warning threshold in volume 4 (1.00%) are reached. In volume 3 already at the attention threshold (methane concentration of 0.35%) the TBM advancement rate is automatically reduced. At the warning level threshold, the power supply must be abruptly stopped to all standard (not explosion-proof) TBM equipment and the workers must be evacuated. Attained a concentration of 5.00%, in all volumes the release of the power supply of even the explosion-proof equipment occurs. Methane concentrations measured by two couples of sensors located within the conveyor tunnel (volume 3, The gas trapped in the rock mass has a level in volume close to saturation (100%). Once crushed by the TBM, the rock and the gas flow within the excavation chamber and then into the screw conveyor up to the conveyor tunnel, where the methane concentration decreases for the air flow released by the ventilation circuit through the bypass tunnel. The results of manual and automatic gas monitoring data analysis point out that methane was always confined within the conveyor tunnel, since no gas was detected within the other volumes, during excavation and lining arrangement. Consequently, gas levels recorded by the sensors in the conveyor tunnel are representative of gas presence within the rock mass. However, it is worthy to say that the volumetric concentrations measured by the four sensors are influenced by various aspects related, for instance, to the excavation speed, the transportation within the screw conveyor and the ventilation system.   Data analysis allows for the following considerations on the emitted volumes and emission modalities: (i) the highest methane volumes were released by the polygenic clayey breccias, which are intensely fractured, and in the Palombini Shales; (ii) in Palombini shales, due to their low permeability, gas is hardly released from micro pores and most probably related to the presence of intensely fractured ophiolitic lenses or to an increase in the rock mass secondary permeability; (iii) in the Scabiazza sandstones isolated peaks of methane concentration were recorded, most probably associated to arenaceous inclusions where gas is trapped into pores; (iv) structural discontinuities and faults could be the sources of isolated peak levels of gas. Comparing The continuous methane monitoring over about 5 All the safety system regarding methane was managed by a supervisor, expert engineer, and a team of expert, one for shift. Collaboration between these and pilot and chief engineer is one of the most important parameter of the safety system. Nonetheless, the analysis highlighted the need for further studies, in order to prevent the risk of gas flow through the concrete segmental linings joints and through the shield-concrete segmental linings contact surface. In fact, as concerns the former point, several drippings along the lining lead to consider that the grout injected between the rock mass and the lining rings does not provide a complete tunnel insulation, and, with regards to the latter, the brushes represent the weakest elements of the safety system. With respect to the brushes, even if an additional line (compared to the brushes lines amount in standard TBM) has been installed, the hydraulic insulation between the shield and the rock mass could be interrupted at the brushes. Thus, the lines should be increased and the control system of their efficiency should be improved. It is worth remembering that the developed approach can be exclusively applied to excavation with EPB–TBM with diameter larger than 10 The research was carried out at the Department of Civil, Chemical, Environmental and Materials Engineering (DICAM, University of Bologna) from 2011 to 2015. The authors acknowledge TOTO General Constructions SpA for having provided technical support and monitoring data. We are also grateful to Eng. Marco Guglielmo and Eng. Lucia Sancini for assisting in processing the methane monitoring data.