Enargite leaching is investigated in chloride media with and without Activated Carbon (AC), and Lanxess Lewatit® AF 5 (abbreviated as AF 5), a novel carbon based catalyst. Moreover, single and synergistic effects of different parameters on copper dissolution rate are studied. Both catalysts were found to be very effective in facilitating the enargite leaching process and improved the copper recovery rate from 65% to 92% (AC) and 96% (AF 5) after 96h. The best leaching condition was found to be: ferric and cupric concentrations greater than 5g/L, concentrate to catalyst ratio of 1:2, at 90°C working temperature. Most of the dissolved copper was oxidized to cupric by the AC or AF 5 in the solution. An elemental sulfur coating was not observed on the surface of the partially leached mineral particles with catalysts, which is known to cover the surface of the minerals during leaching in acidic solutions without the catalysts.Enargite, one of the most refractory copper mineral ( In order to enhance the leaching rate in atmospheric leaching processes, a variety of different lixiviants, oxidants and catalysts have been used for chalcopyrite and enargite leaching ( Chloride media has some advantages over sulfate media including the higher dissolution rate of metals, smaller scale of operation, and the ability to form stable bonds with copper ( Atmospheric leaching of enargite is a very slow process regardless of the acid type. Enhancement of reaction rate requires using a stronger oxidising agent, such as iodine, which is not practical due to its high operating cost. A variety of catalysts have been exploited in atmospheric leaching experiments. The addition of silver has a positive effect on the leaching of copper sulfide minerals. Three different models have been proposed to explain the mechanism of this phenomena (   In summary, previous studies have shown that one of the most effective media for atmospheric leaching of enargite is ferric-cupric chloride media. However, the recovery of this method cannot compete with the industrial processes such as high pressure–high temperature autoclave leaching. The aim of this study is to investigate the effect of different parameters on the copper recovery rate of enargite leaching without a catalyst, with AC, and with a novel carbon based catalyst Lanxess Lewatit® AF 5, which in this paper is shortened to AF 5. Flotation enargite concentrate containing 24.4% copper, 39.0% sulfur, 20.1% iron and 8.5% arsenic was used as raw material in the kinetics experiments. The head assay (ICP analysis) of the enargite sample is shown in P In the leaching tests hydrated cupric chloride (Acros Organics, 99%) was used as a source of cupric ions, hexahydrate ferric chloride (sigma Aldrich, 98%) as a source of ferric ions and sodium chloride (Fisher chemicals, 99%) as a source of chloride ions in the solution. In the experiments with sulfate addition, proper proportions of Fe Atmospheric leaching experiments were systematically carried out in a 2 In order to carry out the enargite leaching tests, 1 15 The first set of experiments were performed with three different mixing rates of 800, 1000 and 1200 Without the use of a catalyst the dissolution rate of enargite is slow ( Carbon-based catalysts are believed to play two important roles in the enargite leaching reaction: (1) oxidizing ferrous to ferric (oxidant regeneration); and (2) oxidizing the enargite directly by in-situ hydrogen peroxide production. The oxidation of ferrous by carbon-based catalysts is shown to occur by the in–situ formation of hydrogen peroxide generated via reactions with the carbon surface ( Eq.  The AC grains used in the experiments varied between 1.7 and 3.35 All the copper recovery results utilizing each catalysts from 60 The results of copper recovery from the leach solution and solid residues (via digestion of the residues and its chemical analysis) are compared in The measured solution ORP values versus time in different leaching conditions are presented in In order to examine the effect of the catalyst concentration on the copper recovery, a series of leaching experiments were performed with different concentrate to catalyst ratios. First, the effect of five different ratios of concentrate to AC were tested in the leaching experiments. The copper recovery results are presented in Three different concentrate to AF 5 ratios of 1:2, 1:1 and 2:1 were examined and the results are depicted in In summary, higher ratios of both AC and AF 5 resulted in higher copper recoveries. AF 5 catalyst showed higher oxidation and dissolution values for the concentrate to catalysts ratio of 1:1 and 1:2. Similar copper recovery values were achieved for the concentrate to AC ratios of 1:2 and 1:4. These results showed that the catalytic effect of AF 5 is better than AC during enargite leaching.  In order to confirm the effect of catalyst to concentrate mass ratio and the type of catalyst on the copper recovery, the copper recovery after 96 To study the effect of ferric concentration on the copper recovery, four leaching experiments with ferric concentrations of 0.1, 1, 5 and 10 Different initial ferric addition of 0, 5, 7.5 and 10 Temperature is one of the most important factors in the leaching experiments. Thermodynamics and kinetic parameters of most reactions are dependent on temperature. To evaluate the effect of temperature on enargite leaching without a catalyst, four experiments were performed at 60, 70, 80 and 90 The same set of experiments of There are two different roles associated for oxygen in the leaching process. First, oxygen can cause direct oxidation of ferrous to ferric, and regenerate the oxidant of the sulfide minerals, i.e. ferric. The direct oxidation of ferrous to ferric is a very slow process, and can be catalyzed by activated carbon and AF 5. Second, oxygen is an indispensable element in the catalytic reaction of carbon-based catalysts. Without oxygen, the catalytic oxidation reactions will stop and catalysts will lose the ability to generate hydrogen peroxide. The oxygen sparging causes the regeneration of surface oxygen groups on the surface of the two catalysts and increases the catalytic activity of carbon-based catalysts. No catalytic effect can be seen in the case of N The effect of oxygen sparging rate was studied in AC assisted leaching tests conducted at 90 In the experiment that oxygen replaced with argon, Increasing oxygen sparging rate in the leaching experiments without catalyst did not have a significant effect on copper recovery rate because the dissolution of gasses, in this case oxygen, is always limited. The concentration of dissolved oxygen in chloride media at 35 To probe the effect of sulfate addition on the copper recovery rate several leaching experiments were performed without a catalyst and in the presence of AC ( The experiments in the presence of AC were carried out at 80 During the atmospheric leaching of copper sulfides, cupric ions act as oxidant and is known to be more effective than the ferric ions ( The regeneration of ferric by cupric ions is unlikely in the present study, because the concentration of chloride ions is 1.5  Pulp density is an important parameter for further process development ( Long leaching residence time for a process is not desirable, because it has direct impact on the capital cost of the plant development. To develop an idea on the effect of retention time on the leaching experiments, a leaching test was carried out for 7 In order to study the effect of leaching process on the surface of the concentrate, a SEM study was performed on the leaching particles after 1 The SEM and EDS analysis of the cross section of an AF 5 bead after two days of leaching is presented in This study has focused on the chloride leaching of enargite with and without a catalyst in the presence of ferric and cuprous ions. Both catalysts enhanced the process rate effectively. The copper recovery rate increased from 65% in the experiment without a catalyst to 92% and 96% in the presence of AC and AF 5 respectively. The difference in the catalytic effect of these two catalysts is due to their different surface properties and surface areas. The ratio of concentrate to catalyst was found to be an effective parameter and the best results were achieved with the ratio of higher than 1:2 for AC and higher than 1:1 for AF 5. The higher ferric concentrations increase the copper recovery in the presence of a catalyst. Copper recovery of 94 to 96% was achieved with the addition of 0 to 10