For this study, Zn
                        x
                     Fe3−
                     
                        x
                     C (0 < x ≤ 1) MNPS were synthesized using sol-gel technique followed by calcination at 700 °C in N2 atmosphere. The phase was confirmed by X-ray diffraction, electron diffraction and Mössbauer spectroscopy whereas the morphology by transmission electron microscope. The presence of Fe, Zn and C was indicated by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. The saturation magnetization value for x = 0.1 sample was 58 Am2/kg which decreased minutely with increased Zn substitutions. The maximum specific absorption rate and intrinsic loss power values, were 85 W/g and 1.9 nHm2/kg for the sample x = 0.7, at 25 mT external magnetic field. The cytotoxicity of these MNPS was examined with human lung adenocarcinoma (A549) cells using SRB assay. The cells were viable up to ~88% after a treatment with 2 mg/mL of each of Zn0.5F2.5C and ZnFe2C nanoparticles after 48 h. Fluorescence microscopy showed unaltered morphology for the cells treated with 1 mg/mL of Zn0.5Fe2.5C nanoparticles. The preliminary results on these carbides were comparable to their oxide counterparts and deserve further investigations.In the last few decades enormous research have been dedicated to prepare magnetic nanoparticles (MNP Moreover, Pluronics play vital roles in cancer therapy as these can be used as vehicles for delivering anti-cancer drugs to the specified sites like lung, breast, ovarian, gastric and oesophagus tumors There is numerous literature on the above-mentioned bioapplications using iron oxide as MNPs however, there are only a few reports on Fe The iron carbides structures consist of carbon and iron atoms of which the former occupy at the interstices between the closed pack arrangements of the later ones. They are classified according to the location of carbon atoms either in trigonal-prismatic interstices (Fe In this article, we report the structural and magnetic properties of Zn All of the reagents were purchased from SRL India and were used without any additional purification. The stoichiometric amounts of Iron (III) For the preparation of ferrofluid of Zn X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns for Zn The heating profiles of the Zn Additionally, ILP (nH m The cytotoxicity of ferrofluids was determined with human lung adenocarcinoma (A549) cells as supplied by National Centre for Cell Sciences, Pune (India). The Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% v/v fetal bovine serum, kanamycin (0.1 mg/mL), penicillin G (100 µg/mL), and sodium bicarbonate (1.5 mg/mL) was used as medium to grow the cells at 37 °C in a 5% CO Initially, 100 μl of A549 cell suspension made in media was added (5000 cells/well) in each well of 96 wells plate and incubated for 24 h. Then the media containing sterile magnetic ferrofluid replaced the old one. The concentration of MNP The image of the cells treated with the MNP The structural analysis of as-synthesized Zn The variations in the lattice parameter and the unit cell volume for the samples are shown in The synthesis of Zn TEM micrograph for the sample x = 0.1, is shown in The size distribution for the x = 0.1 sample was estimated from its 200 particles using ImageJ software, and the histogram is shown as The TEM micrograph for the sample x = 1 is shown in The SAED pattern for this sample was indexed with the help of eRing software, and the d spacing values were obtained to be 3.37, 3.02, 2.5, 2.06, 1.639, 1.54, 1.44, and 1.2 Å ( X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy was employed for the identification of oxidation states for Fe, C, Zn and O elements over the surface of the sample. Mössbauer spectroscopy was used to analyze the purity level as well as the magnetic behavior of the Zn The experimental spectrum for the sample x = 0.5 is shown in The field dependent (±2 T) specific magnetization plots at 300 K for Zn The variation of coercivity (H The H The aqueous ferrofluids were prepared using water soluble Pluronic polymer (F127) which acted as a stabilizer. The induction heating behavior for all the ferrofluids prepared using MNPs of Zn The specific absorption rate (SAR), the index of heating performance of MNP  The biocompatibility of the Zn In summary, a successful synthesis of Zn  The authors declared that there is no conflict of interest.