Giant reed was the first time used for photo-fermentative hydrogen production with HAU-M1 bacteria. Effects of NaOH and Ca(OH)2 pretreatments of giant reed on structural changes, enzymatic digestibility, hydrogen production, and energy conversion efficiency were evaluated. Compared to Ca(OH)2 pretreatment, NaOH pretreatment removed more dry matter and lignin at the same loading. The highest glucose yield (44.9%) of NaOH pretreatment was 1.74-fold higher than that of Ca(OH)2 pretreatment. 20% NaOH pretreated giant reed biomass achieved the highest hydrogen yield (98.3 mL/g TS), which was 20% and 70% higher than the highest level of Ca(OH)2 pretreated (20% Ca(OH)2) and untreated giant reed, respectively. Only giant reed biomass pretreated with 20% NaOH resulted in a significant (p < 0.05) increase (25%) in energy conversion efficiency.As an energy carrier, hydrogen is accepted as a potential alternative and clean pathway to solve the energy crisis and environmental problems in the future ( Lignocellulosic biomass is the most abundant renewable biological resource on the earth, including agricultural, forestry and food processing residues, energy crops, aquatic plants and algae ( Giant reed ( Although giant reed has a lot of advantages as feedstock, its complex and rigid structure makes it recalcitrant to enzyme and subsequent bacteria attack ( The objectives of this study were to evaluate the NaOH and Ca(OH) Giant reed was harvested in November 2015 at the Ohio State University (OSU) research farm (Columbus, OH, USA). The giant reed biomass was ground to through a 1/2 in. sieve by using a shredder-chipper (Mighty Mac, Mackissic Inc., Parker Ford, PA, USA), and then stored in an airtight container at room temperature prior to use. The cellulose, xylan, lignin contents of the giant reed biomass were 32.45%, 13.87%, and 23.90%, respectively. The photosynthetic bacteria used for photo-fermentation was HAU-M1, supplied by Henan Agricultural University. NaOH and Ca(OH) Enzymatic hydrolysis was conducted according to the Laboratory Analysis Procedure reported by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) ( Photo-fermentative hydrogen production was carried out in a 150-mL flask, each containing 5 g untreated and treated giant reed biomass (dry mass) and 20 FPU/g solid of enzyme, 50 mL of fermentation medium, 100 mL of citrate butter (pH 4.8), and about 1.0 g of HAU-M1 bacteria (dry mass). The flask was then sealed by a stopper with an outlet connected to a 300-mL Tedlar gas bag (Hede Technology LTD., Dalian, China) for gas collection. The reactor was incubated in a walk-in incubator at 30 ± 1 °C with an illumination of 2000 Lux for 72 h. Gas volume and hydrogen content were measured every 12 h. And every 12 h, about 5 mL liquid culture was taken to test pH, VFAs, and sugar. Triplicate reactors were run for each pretreatment condition. Total solids (TS), volatile solids (VS), and the pH of samples were tested according to the Standard Methods for Examination of Water and Wastewater ( The light intensity (Lux) was decided by using a digital Luxmeter. Cell concentration was determined by following the method mentioned in our previous study ( Total sugar yield in the fermentation culture samples were measured by dinitro salicylic (DNS) colorimetric method according to Laboratory Analytical Procedure (LAP) of National Renewable Energy Laboratory ( The volatile matter (VM) and ash (Ash) content of untreated and alkali treated giant reed biomass were determined according to methods ( The carbon (C), hydrogen (H), nitrogen (N), and sulfur (S) contents of untreated and alkali treated giant reed biomass were detected by using an elemental analyzer (Vario EL/cube, Germany), the O content was calculated by Eq. The higher heating value (HHV) of all samples were determined according to ultimate analysis using Eq. The energy conversion efficiency of the photo-fermentative hydrogen production from alkali treated and untreated giant reed was determined by using the following Eq. Statistical analysis was performed by analysis of variance (ANOVA) (α = 0.05) using Mintab (Version 17, Minitab, Inc., State College, PA, USA). The moisture contents in untreated and alkali pretreated giant reed biomass were in a narrow range from 2.51% to 4.65% (  The initial pH and final pH of leachate obtained during NaOH pretreatment were about 12.0, except for 2% and 5% NaOH pretreatments which showed pH values of 10.3 and 11.3, respectively ( NaOH pretreatment with different loadings (2–20%) led to higher cellulose contents (33.3–37.6%) compared to Ca(OH) Effects of NaOH and Ca(OH) As shown in Both NaOH and Ca(OH) The effects of NaOH and Ca(OH) Photo-fermentative hydrogen production of different biomass with different pretreatment methods in literatures are compared with this study. Acid pretreatment of During the photo-fermentation process, the pH value decreased dramatically from 6.5 to about 5.5 in the first 24 h, which indicates acids accumulation accompanied by quick enzymatic hydrolysis (  Concentrations of two main soluble metabolites (acetate acid and butyric acid) in liquid culture during photo-fermentation of 10–20% NaOH and Ca(OH) 20% NaOH pretreatment obtained the highest final concentration of actate acid (0.92 mg/mL), which was significant (p < 0.05) higher (27.8–35.3%) than other conditions ( Effects of NaOH and Ca(OH) It should be noted that energy conversion efficiencies obtained in this study were still low for commercial applications. It was suggested that integration of different system is a feasible strategy for cost-effective biohydrogen production with high efficiency ( NaOH pretreatment recovered more glucan and removed more lignin from giant reed biomass than Ca(OH) We declare that we have no conflicts of interest to this work. We declare that we do not have any commercial or associative interest that represents a conflict of interest in connection with the work submitted. This project was supported by