In this work, it is studied the electrolysis with diamond anodes of three different ionic liquids (ILs): 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium chloride (BmimCl), 1-hexyl-3-methylimidazolium chloride (HmimCl) and 1-decyl-3-methylimidazolium chloride (DmimCl), which differ only in the length of the aliphatic carbon chain attached to the imidazolium group. In addition, the effect of the presence of sulfate in the electrolyte is also evaluated. Results confirmed that this type of ILs can be completely transformed into carbon dioxide, nitrates, ammonium (the imidazolium cation) and perchlorate and chloramines (the chloride anion) during the electrolysis of the synthetic waste containing sulfate. The electrolysis of wastes without sulfate anions leads to a much less efficient process, with the same final products in the case of the BminCl and HminCl ILs and with the formation of a polymer as the main final product in the case of the DmimCl. These results are of a paramount significance from a mechanistic point of view since, because of the high conductivity of the ILs, there is not a necessity of salt addition and they inform about the pure removal of these compounds by electrolysis with BDD, pointing out the important influence of peroxodisulfate on the electrolyses with diamond of organic wastes.Ionic liquids (ILs) are salts that exhibit high thermal stability and low melting point Despite of the large number of potential applications, recently, ILs have been identified as persistent pollutants, because of their stability towards biological degradation Advanced Oxidation Processes (AOPs) can be considered as suitable technologies for the treatment of wastewater polluted with ILs. AOPs are based on the production of large amounts of hydroxyl radicals by different technologies, which significantly contribute to the degradation of the pollutants present in the effluents One of the electrodes that has awakened great interest in the recent years is boron doped diamond (BDD) Opposite to those results, other works focused on the degradation of species different of ILs indicate that peroxocompounds formed during the electrolysis with BDD may behave as the most important species to explain the mineralization processes Analytical grade BmimCl (1-Buthyl-3-methlyimidazolium chloride), HmimCl (1-Hexyl-3-methylimidazolium chloride), DmimCl (1-Decyl-3-methylimidazolium chloride) and sulfuric acid were used as received. Double deionized water (Millipore Milli-Q system, resistivity: 18.2 The concentration of ILs was measured by chromatography using an Agilent 1100 series chromatograph equipped with a UV detector and a Synergy 4 Total Organic Carbon (TOC) was monitored using a Multi N/C 3100 Analytik Jena analyzer. Inorganic ions were measured by ion chromatography using a Metrohm 930 Compact IC Flex coupled to a conductivity detector. A Metrosep A Supp 7 column was used to determine the anions and a Metrosep A Supp 4 column was used to analyze the cations. The mobile phase consisted of 85:15 The molecular weight of the polymer formed was measured by Gel Permeation Chromatography (GPC) using a Viscotek chromatograph equipped with a Styragel HR2 column and a Styragel HR0.5 column. The system was operated at 35 Electrolyses were carried out in a single compartment electrochemical flow cell operating in recirculation mode (50 Synthetic wastewater consisted of a solution (1.0  In every case, the concentration of ILs decreases down to almost zero, indicating that total depletion of these imidazolium ILs can be attained from the synthetic wastes using this electrochemical technology, regardless the molecular weight of the cation and the presence of sulfate anions in the electrolyte. Even so, degradation results are not overlapped but, just on the contrary, significant differences can be observed in the removal of the ILs, depending on the length of the carbon chain attached to the imidazolium ring and the electrolyte used. As indicated in the introductory section of this work, in the electrolysis of solutions without sulfate, only oxidation mediated by chlorine or by hydroxyl radicals (Eq. A second important remark that should be pointed out is the higher efficiency observed in the degradation of the DmimCl polluted solution as compared to the results of the other two ILs. Thus, during the electrolysis tests of solutions without sulfate, the concentration of Bmim Another important observation which can be drawn from The trend observed in Bmim Effect observed on the degradation of DminCl is the opposite of that observed for BminCl and HminCl in presence of sulfates. Thus, the concentration of Dmin To evaluate the significance of the formation of peroxodisulfate during the electrolysis of ILs with BDD anodes, its concentration was measured. It is important to note that, the concentration of peroxodisulfate measured corresponds to that which has not reacted with the ILs or reaction intermediates and, hence, that higher concentrations may be produced, because the observed concentration is the balance between the production and the consumption of this oxidant. As it can be observed, peroxodisulfate increases with the applied electric charge for all the tests carried out. However, different behaviors can be seen depending on the particular ionic liquid treated. In the case of Bmim For comparison purposes, the ILs decay was fitted to a first order kinetics and the removal rate constants are presented in As it can be observed, the kinetic constants for Bmim As for many other pollutants, the electrolysis of ionic liquids may lead to the formation of other intermediate organic compounds and/or to a complete mineralization of the organic matter to carbon dioxide. Intermediates can be more harmful than the initial pollutants and, hence, they should be removed from wastewater. In this context, to provide information about the evolution of the organic matter, the concentration of TOC was monitored during the treatment. It is important to take in mind that this parameter informs only about the complete mineralization of the organic matter (conversion of organic carbon into carbon dioxide) and not about the progress of the oxidation. Results obtained are shown in As it can be seen, TOC concentration decreases very importantly with the applied electric charge for all the tests carried out. However, it is not possible to attain a complete mineralization of the organic matter within the current charges applied (30 The presence of sulfate leads to a more efficient TOC removal. In this context, a final percentage removal of 93.8 and 76.2% were obtained for BmimCl and HmimCl, respectively, whereas only 83.7 and 69.8% were achieved for both ionic liquids in absence of sulfate anions at the same electric current charges applied. This agrees with the results previously obtained for the removal of the ILs molecules ( On the other hand, the case of the DmimCl is different because of the polymerization observed in electrolyses of electrolytes without sulfate. Thus, the formation of polymer leads to an initial higher efficiency in the absence of sulfate, but this situation reverses at higher charges passed and the final percentage removal of TOC was 87.6% in wastes without sulfate and 92.5% when using sulfate as supporting electrolyte (polymer formation was not observed). The intermediates detected by HPLC–MS are reported in As can be observed, the electrolysis of Dmim The three ILs salts studied in this work contained a chloride anion. This anion is known to be oxidized during the electrolysis with BDD anodes, favoring the production of other chlorine compounds in higher oxidation state In addition, chloride can also react with hydroxyl radicals, favoring the production of chlorine compounds in higher oxidation state including perchlorate (Eqs. Several of these chlorinated species can contribute to the degradation of the ILs (chlorine, hypochlorite and hypochlorous acid) due to their high oxidant capacity, whereas other such as chlorate and perchlorate do not contribute, because the oxidation carried out by them is not favored kinetically at room temperature. As it can be observed, large amounts of chlorates and perchlorates are produced during the treatment, resulting in almost total conversion of the initial chloride contained in the solutions. Chlorate shows the typical behavior of an intermediate: there is an initial increase associated to the disproportionation of hypochlorite (or its electro-oxidation) followed by a later decrease until reaching zero values. The decrease observed corresponds to the increase in the concentration of perchlorate. This species, which behaves as final product, reaches a maximum value, from which it remains constant. The three ILs studied follow the same behavior during chlorine speciation. However, the total production of perchlorate decreases in the sequence BminCl > HminCl > DmimCl, suggesting that other final products are formed in the case of the Hmin A last important piece of information regarding the degradation of the ILs can be obtained from the nitrogen contained in the three imidazolium cations degraded. This species can be degraded during the electrolysis with BDD anodes, favoring the formation of inorganic nitrogen compounds  As it can be observed, nitrite presents the lower concentration in comparison with nitrate and ammonium for all the ionic liquids studied. This reveals the potential oxidation of nitrite to nitrate during the electrolysis with BDD anodes. The higher nitrite concentration was obtained for HmimCl. Regarding the evolution of nitrate, its maximum concentration is reached during the treatment of BmimCl whereas the minimum is obtained for DmimCl (in which the oxidation of the imidazolium group competes with the polymerization). Likewise, the maximum concentration of ammonium is also lower for this ionic liquid. This means that ammonium may be consumed by other way. At this point, it is important to highlight that the presence of chlorine compounds in high oxidation state can promote its reaction with ammonium. Specifically, hypochlorite can react with ammonium, favoring the production of inorganic chloramines (Eqs. This is consistent with the previous chlorine speciation observed in From this work, the following conclusions can be drawn: Ionic liquids based on imidazolium group can be completely removed by electrolysis with diamond anodes. Despite an applied electric charge of 30 Presence of sulfate in the waste electrolyzed improve the efficiency of the oxidation process, clearly pointing out that the contribution of peroxosulfate and sulfate radicals in the electrolysis with diamond anodes of ILs is very important. The electrolysis of solutions containing 1 Chloride is mainly oxidized to chlorate and perchlorate during the electrolysis of the three ILs. Chloramines are also formed by the combination of the ammonium released from the imidazolium group with hypochlorite. Authors gratefully appreciate financial support from the