Quantitative risk analysis (QRA) has been widely used to conduct the assessment of offshore accidental risks. However, the accuracy and validity of QRA is significantly affected by uncertainties when subjective judgments are involved. Therefore, it is unrealistic to determine the probability of a hazardous event by using one single explicit value when safety experts have a relatively low confidence level in their judgments. This paper proposes a new methodology for incorporating uncertainties into conventional QRA using the concept of confidence level. Offshore hydrocarbon release hazards are focused on and a barrier and operational risk analysis (BORA-Release) method is selected as the basic model to illustrate the proposed methodology. A left–right (L–R) bell-shaped fuzzy number is employed and its membership curve is able to control its shape to represent different confidence levels. As to the complex geometry of the bell-shaped fuzzy number, an α-cut operation is introduced to conduct the arithmetic operations of the fuzzy number, and a defuzzification method with total integral value is chosen to match the α-cut operations and acquire complete information for the fuzzy numbers. In the meantime, an optimism index is used to describe the attitude of the decision-maker. One case study is provided in this paper to demonstrate the implementation of this method.In order to assess the risks of offshore facilities, several methods have been widely used during the last few decades such as hazard and operability study (HAZOP) ( QRA is a quantitative assessment methodology to evaluate the risks of hazardous activities systematically in order to assist the decision-making process ( However, during the quantitative analysis process, uncertainties form some of the main limitations of QRA. The uncertainties mainly come from two aspects for offshore QRA ( Since QRA was proposed, research has been conducted in order to quantify the uncertainties. Three of the most common approaches for representing and reasoning with uncertainties are Monte-Carlo simulation ( Several existing methods take fuzzy set theory into consideration for conventional decision-making and reasoning methods. This paper proposes a fuzzy set theory-based confidence level method to deal with the uncertainties in accordance with experts' subjective judgments by incorporating confidence levels into the traditional QRA framework. Since it is unrealistic to estimate the frequency of an accidental risk precisely using one definite probability when safety experts are uncertain about the accuracy of their risk evaluation due to uncertainties, it is assumed that the proposed confidence level method may be beneficial for mitigating the influence of uncertainties and improving the reliability of QRA. Compared to previous methods, this proposed method focuses on subjective judgments and divides the expert's confidence into five levels by introducing a new form of fuzzy member function. This new L–R bell-shaped fuzzy number can be pictured as a group of modified fuzzy membership curves that represent different confidence levels of the experience-based judgments. Hydrocarbon release-related risks will be the focus of this study because hydrocarbon release plays a critical role in major accident risks on offshore oil and gas production platforms ( The BORA-Release method has been proposed to analyze the hydrocarbon release risks of offshore structures from a set of hydrocarbon release scenarios based on the combined used of event trees, barrier block diagrams, fault trees, and risk influence diagrams ( In comparison with the normal QRA method, the BORA-Release method allows risk analysis experts to describe the specific conditions of offshore platforms from technical, human, and operational, as well as organizational RIFs. The performance of the initial events and barriers will be affected by the RIFs. Based on the evaluation of RIFs, a relatively more realistic frequency/probability can be achieved because the platform specific conditions are considered. However, there exist some uncertainties during the analysis of the BORA method. First, uncertainties are unavoidable during the scoring and weighting process of RIFs because the process is conducted mainly based on subjective judgments of risk analysis experts according to their previous experience. Second, It is illustrated in this study that a confidence level-based methodology can be effectively used to incorporate the uncertainties into the QRA model. A simple illustrative schematic capturing the framework that needs to be followed in the implementation of the proposed method is depicted in As mentioned in Section Analysis using an L–R bell-shaped fuzzy number. First, the adjusted results from the BORA method need to be applied to an L–R bell-shaped fuzzy number, which can be pictured as a group of modified fuzzy membership curves to represent different confidence levels of the experience-based judgments. The fuzzy number is defined by a triplet To form the triplets for the BORA models, the RIF-revised probability can take the value of Fuzzy calculations. Initiating event and safety barriers in the BORA event tree are analyzed separately using the L–R bell-shaped fuzzy number in the second step. Then, a total fuzzy number is derived using When multiple events require modification according to the confidence-based bell-shaped fuzzy number, the Defining the confidence level of the RIF scoring process. The confidence levels are classified into five categories. The values of the fuzzification factors are given in In general, safety experts can define the confidence level of judgments based on the degree of uncertainties from four aspects ( Deciding the degree of optimism and defuzzifying the final fuzzy number. In order to match the When The degree of optimism is also classified into five categories and the values of the optimism factor, For the practical implementation of the proposed method, the following assumptions need to be noted: The proposed method is assumed to be useful for dealing with uncertainties that are related to subjective judgments. The proposed fuzzy membership function is assumed to be formed by a triplet The confidence and optimism levels in this study are assumed to be divided into five levels. However, the number of the levels and the specific values of confidence and optimism factors can be decided by the specific conditions of real projects. The memberships of two bounds, For a better understanding of the application using the suggested procedure, a typical case study is described here as an illustration based on the case study of risk scenario B from the work of     From From Sensitivity analysis is performed for the optimism factor to observe the influence of different attitudes on the final results of risk evaluations. Therefore, it can be concluded that the attitude of safety experts will have more effect on the final risk estimates when the confidence level is lower. For example, in the risk analysis of scenario B, if the experts are very confident about their risk assessments, it is unnecessary for them to decide the optimism factor because the final result will remain the same, at 0.0039. However, when the experts are very unconfident, the modified probability may change to 0.047 rather than 0.034 from the lowest confidence level in In conclusion, QRA plays an increasingly important role in offshore risk analysis. However, the accuracy and validity of QRA are significantly affected by uncertainties. This paper proposed a new methodology for incorporating uncertainties using confidence levels into conventional QRA. It also introduced a new form of the bell-shaped fuzzy number, designed to consider the degree of uncertainties that are represented by the concept of confidence levels, since it is unrealistic to define the probability of an event by one single explicit value. As mentioned in the results discussion, it can be seen that the influence of the uncertainties has been reduced by approximately 10 times. Therefore, based on the results from the case study, it is concluded that the proposed confidence level methodology can be very helpful for offshore safety experts to improve the validity of risk evaluations by reducing the impact of subjective judgment-related uncertainties. In addition, it also provides a useful tool for safety experts to make more realistic and accurate risk estimates based on the confidence level evaluations of their risk assessments. When large-scale process systems are considered, the final risk may increase significantly if the experts are very unconfident about their risk assessments at every step or most steps of the large-scale process. Otherwise, if they are only unconfident about a few steps of the whole process, the final risk estimates should not show large difference from the initial results. However, whichever condition occurs, the proposed method should be able to provide a more realistic result because the differences are dominated by the uncertainties and larger quantities of uncertainties cause larger differences. Furthermore, since it can effectively deal with uncertainties related to experts’ judgments for the BORA method, it is expected that the proposed methodology has the ability to be successfully applied to various type of QRA with only minor modifications of specific characteristics for each QRA. However, it needs to be clarified that the category of the confidence level factors presented in this paper is only an illustrative example. It barely considers any practical conditions of actual offshore hydrocarbon release risk analysis. Thus, future work will focus on the establishment of a detailed confidence level category in accordance with real situations for hydrocarbon release QRA in order to provide the risk analyst with a more applicable and operable methodology.