Effects of WC particle size and volume fraction on the magnitude and distribution of thermal residual stresses (TRS) in WC–Ni cemented carbide composites were studied by neutron powder diffraction. Samples of high (0.3) and low (0.1) Ni volume fraction and coarse (1.7μm) and fine (0.5μm) WC particle size were employed. Thermal residual strain and stress values were obtained at temperatures between 100 and 900K. The magnitude of the mean (compressive) WC stress increased as WC fraction decreased, while the mean (tensile) Ni stress did the opposite. For both phases, stresses were highest for fine WC particles, reaching over 3GPa in Ni. Elastic strain distributions, due to the sharp edges and corners of WC particles, were characterized by analyzing diffraction peak widths. The range of stress increased with the magnitude of the TRS. Even though the mean TRS is compressive in WC, regions of tension exist, and, for Ni, regions of compression are present.The difference in thermal expansion coefficients of the carbide and binder phases in cemented carbide composites leads to substantial thermal residual stresses (TRS). A prior study of stress and stress distribution in WC–Ni with Ni volume fraction Analytical treatments of TRS in WC-based composites have been carried out using various assumptions Other experimental and analytical work has dealt with the The use of neutron diffraction for the study of composite materials is well-established The samples were prepared by the Multi-Metals Division of Vermont American Corp. in the form of 6.35 Measurements to investigate directionality of the stresses were made at the Missouri University Research Reactor (MURR). Measurements for both the composites and WC reference powder were made using tilts All measurements of mean strain and strain distribution were performed using the general purpose powder diffractometer (GPPD) at the intense pulsed neutron source (IPNS) at Argonne National Laboratory. The diffraction spectra were measured using the detector banks at 2 Strain measurements using the GPPD were made in the radial direction. The presence of non-directional (diffraction hydrostatic) stress states in the samples was confirmed by measurements at MURR. Measurements of Mean strains were calculated from the cell parameters obtained by Rietveld profile refinement It has been shown The mean diffraction hydrostatic stress, The very high values for the binder cannot be understood in terms of uniaxial yield stress values for the bulk form of the material. They are made possible through the extreme constraint imposed by the WC particles. The in situ yield stress of cemented carbide binder phases has been considered by Sigl and Exner The TRS values determined for WC are presented versus temperature in The full-width at half-maximum (FWHM) values of peak width were obtained from analysis of single peaks for the WC and Ni phases. Peaks measured on GPPD are fit as the convolution of leading and lagging exponential tails with a Gaussian central portion. The FWHM values reported herein are those for the Gaussian portion of the peaks. Results for the WC 201 and Ni 311 peaks of the HC sample are shown in Peak broadening in WC-based cemented carbide systems is substantially due to elastic strain (stress) distributions arising from the angular morphology of the WC, not from dislocation or particle size effects The widths of WC diffraction peaks also vary with crystallographic orientation of the diffracting planes in the WC phase. As stated above, the WC particles are (hexagonal) single crystal plates with faces normal to the The elastic strain distributions cannot be simply converted to corresponding stress distributions. However, bounds can be set that range from pure deviatoric to pure hydrostatic stress states A recent study of WC–Ni composites for which the deviatoric and hydrostatic limiting cases were compared to a detailed finite element analysis Thermal residual strains and stresses were determined in a series of WC–Ni composites with Ni volume fractions of about 0.1 and 0.3, and WC particle sizes of about 0.5 and 1.7 Elastic strain distributions were determined from peak widths. The widths were reversible with temperature and attributed only to local elastic strain variations, especially in the WC, because of the small role played by dislocations and particle size effects in this phase. For both the WC and Ni binder phases, the strain distribution increases with increasing mean TRS. In samples with lower binder content, the strain distribution of the WC phase is broader in the samples with finer WC particles. However, in high binder samples, there seems to be little effect of WC particle size. For the Ni binder, the samples with smaller WC show a broader range of strain distribution than the larger ones. The strain distributions cannot be converted into stress distribution directly, and were modeled at the deviatoric and hydrostatic limits. Even at the low (deviatoric) limit, significant fractions of the WC would be under tension. The authors acknowledge Prof. R.A. Winholtz and Dr. F.K. Ross, University of Missouri-Columbia. This work has benefitted from the use of the Intense Pulsed Neutron Source at Argonne National Laboratory which is funded by the U.S. Department of Energy, BES-Materials Science, under Contract No. W-31-109-ENG-38.