In analogy to the technology balance of payments, in this paper we propose a possible way to set up a “balance of knowledge flows” (BKF), recording world flows of knowledge within the scientific community. Adopting a pure bibliometric approach, the “knowledge” traced in the BKF is that produced and exchanged by the scientific community by means of publications and relevant citations. A description of the theoretical foundation of such a tool is presented together with its empirical testing over the scientific production of four different countries. The BKF can be part of yearly reports of science and technology indicators, aimed at informing research policy.A country’s balance of payments (BoP) records all economic transactions between the residents of the country and the rest of the world in a particular period. A country’s BoP data may reveal, among others, its potential as a business partner for the rest of the world, and the performance of the country in international economic competition. The technology balance of payments (TBP), a sub-division of the BoP, registers the commercial transactions related to international technology and know-how transfers. It consists of money paid or received for the use of patents, licenses, know-how, trademarks, patterns, designs, technical services (including technical assistance) and for industrial research and development (R&D) carried out or sold abroad. Although TBP data should be considered as only partial measures of international technology flows, they tend to reflect a country’s ability to sell its technology abroad and its use of foreign technologies. On the relevance of the issue, almost half a century ago Mansfield claimed that “interchange of technical knowledge among nations importantly affects the pattern of world trade and influences economic growth rates” ( TBP data are provided, among others, for OECD member countries and seven non-member economies in a biannual publication by OECD, “Main Science and Technology Indicators”. In the realm of Science, currently we lack similarly constructed data on the world flows of knowledge. The aim of this work is to propose a possible way to set up a country’s “balance of knowledge flows” (BKF) which records the outflows of knowledge produced in a country to other countries, and the inflows of knowledge produced by other countries in a country. A country’s BKF shows a surplus when the difference between knowledge outflows and inflows is positive, a deficit when the opposite is true. In a sense, TBP embeds knowledge flows, but only knowledge embodied in the technologies exchanged among countries. Three main questions need to be answered to design a BKF. First, how the scientific knowledge, object of the exchange, is measured. Second, how the country of production, the “made in” country, is identified. Third, how to certify that such knowledge has been used by the country of production itself and/or other countries. In answering the above mentioned questions, we also discuss the limits, assumptions, conventions, and caveats embedded in the construction of a BKF. Scientific knowledge is encoded and spreads through scientific and technical literature, seminars, conferences, etc. Part of the new knowledge produced remains unavoidably tacit and can only be conveyed through personal communication between researchers. Bibliographic repertories, such as Web of Science (WoS) and Scopus, index publications of thousands of peer-reviewed scientific journals, and their coverage is continuously expanding. Either one of them can be a reliable source of the knowledge exchanged, as embodied in different publication types (articles, review articles, letters, conference proceedings, etc.). The limits are that: i) publications are not representative of all knowledge produced; ii) bibliographic repertories do not index all journals and consequently do not cover all publications. Because of increasing international research collaboration, identifying the country of production of a publication may result not so straightforward. The U.S. National Science Foundation’s annual report on Science and Engineering (S&E) Indicators provides an exhaustive compendium of bibliometric data on research collaboration. The latest edition ( In the case of internationally co-authored publications, a question needs to be answered: is it the nationality of the authors or the geographic location of the institutions they are affiliated to, which determines the country of production? Generally the second option is adopted (among others, The third question is how to identify users of knowledge. According to the Mertonian, normative conception of what citations signify and how they function ( The ultimate goal of this paper is to show that measuring BKF is feasible, paralleling the measurement of TBP, and can be part of yearly reports of science and technology indicators. In the next section we review the scarce literature on the subject. Section Knowledge flows across disciplines, more commonly termed as knowledge trade, has been largely studied in the literature ( Very few studies instead delve into the geographic flows of scientific knowledge. This work intends to contribute to fill in the gap. The work lays its foundations on a recent study by the As for the three main questions presented in the introduction to be answered to construct a country’s BKF: We use a bibliometric approach assuming that new knowledge produced is measured by publications indexed in bibliographic repertories; By convention, we define a publication as “made in” a source country if at least 50% of the institutions authoring it belong to that country. To exemplify, if a publication is co-authored by three institutions, two of which located in country X, then we say that the publication is made in country X. If only one institution is located in country X, then the publication is not made in country X. The adopted convention is open to discussion; We assume that knowledge flows are represented by “citations”. In fact, when a publication is cited it has had an impact on scientific advancement because other scholars have drawn on it, more or less heavily, for the further advancement of science. All limitations and assumptions typical of bibliometric analyses then apply. We use the approach detailed in For space reasons and ease of exposition we restrict our analysis to four countries, namely Israel, Italy, New Zealand (NZ), and The Netherlands (NL). As a proxy of knowledge produced in such four countries, we consider WoS indexed publications (articles, reviews, letters, conference proceedings) over a five-year period, 2004–2008. The citing publications are observed up to 10/06/2017. The overall publications, From the Israeli perspective, for example, This latest data has proved particularly significant compared to the other countries under analysis, for which the share of domestic gains is still higher, with the maximum amount registered for Italy accounting for 85.9%. Italy is the largest country in terms of number of publications, benefits and gains: compared to The Netherlands the amount of works containing at least 50% of domestic affiliations is definitely higher (81.8% vs 72.2%) whilst the average benefits per publication are lower by over one point (8.03 vs 9.09). New Zealand is the smallest country: publications, citations/benefits and gains are approximately half as many as those registered for Israel. In this section we analyze the knowledge flows among the four countries under observation, at both overall and field level. The aim is to show the application of our methodology, which can be extended to include all countries in the world.   Needless to say, the matrix may be read by column, in which case it will show an insight into the origin of the knowledge inflows of a country. For example, 4777 (3.7%) out of 128,728 total gains earned by New Zealand, originate from works authored by Israeli institutions, 19,909 (15.5%) from Italian institutions, 18,552 (14.4%) from Dutch institutions and the remaining 66.4% from “in house” publications. To conduct a stratification of the BKF at field level, we use the SCs assigned to the journals hosting the cited publications. We adopt a “full counting” approach, meaning that a publication published in a multi-category journal is fully assigned to each SC associated to the journal. The cited publications of our dataset are distributed over 217 SCs (out of a total 252 SCs), grouped in 13 scientific macro-areas. As an example, When extending the analysis to all areas, SCs with a higher inclination to export (or import) new knowledge may be identified. In the lower section of the table, five SCs falling in Physics (with Astronomy & astrophysics on the top of the list, +5280; Physics, particles & fields, +3334; and Physics, nuclear, +995) and two SCs falling in Earth and Space Sciences stand out from among the SCs with a higher inclination to export. The analysis of knowledge flows may also be carried out on pairs of countries in order to identify the SCs with the highest surplus or deficit.  In this subsection, we present a way to measure the specialization indexes for outflows (export) and inflows (import) of knowledge by a given country. The relevant indicators, are the “knowledge outflows specialization index” (KOSI) and the “knowledge inflows specialization index” (KISI). They measure respectively a country’s capacity to “export” knowledge to other countries, or to “import” knowledge from other countries, as compared to the rest of the world, across all research fields. In simple terms, they measure he extent to which a country's knowledge flows differ from those of the rest of the world or a comparison group of countries. In operational terms, KOSI is calculated here applying the “revealed comparative advantage” (RCA) methodology and, in particular, the and  Data on commercial transactions related to international technology transfers are crucial for many reasons, first and foremost for the study of the determinants of macroeconomic development ( Aim of this work was to fill in the gap, proposing a way to construct a country’s balance of knowledge flows, which records the exchange (inflows and outflows) of knowledge proxied by citations to international scientific literature. The proposed bibliometric approach relies on the assumption that when a publication is cited it has had an impact on scientific advancement, because other scholars have drawn on it, more or less heavily, for the further advancement of science. In this paper we have shown how the BKF can be constructed, at both overall and field level, and how the interchange of knowledge between countries can be analysed. We also showed how citation analysis can provide additional useful information to the policy maker, such as the share of domestic vs foreign gains generated by a country’s research system, by field and as compared to other countries. A very high domestic share is expected in those fields where research is context specific or mainly oriented towards domestic needs. The knowledge outflows and inflows comparative advantage analysis can inform national research strategies, and be particularly pertinent concerning bilateral research collaboration agreements. As it regards the BKF, i) the larger a country in terms of number of researchers and resources devoted to research; ii) the more productive its research system; and iii) the more scientifically advanced in terms of domestic stock and level of accumulated knowledge, as compared to other countries, the higher the chances that the new knowledge produced stems from domestic research rather than foreign. A country’s BKF then should show a surplus in those fields where the country is research-leader (frontier research). The opposite occurs in those fields where it is a follower (gap-filling research). Needless to underline that no conclusion may be reached on the countries analysed in this paper, as the world represented therein is limited to only four countries. Additionally, the conventions adopted, such as the way to identify the country of production of internationally authored publications, are open to discussion. Finally, all limitations and assumptions embedded in bibliometric analysis apply and caution is recommended in interpreting BKF. The measurement of the balance of knowledge flows for all countries, paralleling the measurement of technology balance of payments, can give rise to interesting comparative analyses, and be ultimately part of yearly reports of science and technology indicators. Giovanni Abramo: Concieved and designed the analysis; Collected the data; Contributed data or analysis tool; Performed the analysis; Wrote the paper. Ciriaco Andrea D’Angelo: Concieved and designed the analysis; Collected the data; Contributed data or analysis tool; Performed the analysis; Wrote the paper. Massimiliano Carloni: Collected the data; Contributed data or analysis tool; Performed the analysis.