A laboratory process based on a simple and environmentally friendly operation, aimed to recycle spent Li/MnO2 batteries, is described in this study. This process involves roasting batteries under reduced pressure at 650°C, selective leaching of Li2CO3 from calcined electrode material in distilled water at ambient temperature and controlled crystallization of pure Li2CO3 from the aqueous solution.Lithium-containing batteries are extensively used as electrochemical power sources in electronic cameras, cellular phones, computers or in medical implants due to their favourable characteristics. High-power lithium batteries are devoted to military application, aerospace and electric vehicles. Because lithium batteries are increasingly substituting other batteries, their consumption is constantly expanding. Although spent lithium batteries are not generally classified as dangerous waste, their safe disposal may become a serious problem due to the presence of flammable and toxic elements or compounds ( Primary lithium batteries represent approximately 70 wt.% of all lithium batteries collected in the Czech Republic ( Although primary lithium batteries contain no toxic metal, their disposal is risky. The presence of a residual voltage means that lithium metal remains and this is very reactive towards water and air constituting a fire hazard. For this reason low temperature recycling methods are utilised for processing Li-metal batteries ( The processing of spent Li/MnO The aim of this study was to determine the optimum roasting temperature for spent Li/MnO The Li/MnO Leaching of calcines was performed in a 2 L closed, stirred glass reaction vessel, samples were withdrawn at selected time intervals to determine the reaction rate with lithium concentration determined by AAS. The leach residues were filtered, dried, weighed and subjected to chemical and XRD analysis. Leaching conditions were as follows: distilled water, liquid-to-solid ratio was 25:1, laboratory temperature, leaching time of 1–3 h. Leaching temperature and liquid–solid ratios were determined from published data for Li Li The effect of temperature on the composition of the solids can be seen in XRD of the calcines showed two major phases, MnO and Li The lithium solubilization as a function of roasting temperature is shown in The extent of lithium extraction passed through an apparent maximum of ∼ The leach solutions were heated to induce Li From the results it is obvious that only Li Lithium carbonate can be readily recovered from primary lithium batteries by a simple two stage process. The batteries were heated under reduced pressure which split the casings and deactivated the batteries by reduction of LiMnO The work was supported by the research project FF-P2/057 of the Czech Ministry of Industry and Trade and by the research intention MSM No. 223100002.