Introduction
                  Dentinogenesis, odontoblast dentin formation, includes dentinal growth, mineralization and dentinal tubule formation. Odontoblasts synthesize collagen resulting in collagen apposition contributing to dentinogenesis. Furthermore, within the tubule, they express non-collagenous proteins, such as dentin phosphoprotein (DPP), associated with hydroxyapatite crystal formation and growth. The aim of this work was to determine patterns of growth and dentin formation and quantification of its mineralization. Findings from our work are relevant to endodontics for future regenerative treatment.
               
                  Methods
                  We formulated a 3D domain mathematical model, which recreates the events that lead to dentinal tubule mineralization. As reference we used collagen apposition and DPP activity.
               
                  Results
                  We obtained a model depicting predentin's mineralization distribution during dentin development. Furthermore, we verified different DPP diffusion coefficients to test the model's sensitivity.
               
                  Conclusions
                  We present a model to shed light on the process of dentin and dentinal tubule formation, and its relation to diffusion and mineralization processes.Tooth formation is a developmental process regulated by epithelial–mesenchymal interactions. Its morphogenesis results from mesenchymal cell differentiation into odontoblasts and epithelial differentiation into ameloblasts at the epithelial–mesenchymal interface to form dentin and enamel respectively Among the proteins required for mineralization dentin sialophosphoprotein (DSSP) is a large precursor synthesized by odontoblasts, that when proteolytically processed at its amino-end gives rise to dentin sialoprotein (DSP) and a proteoglycan form DSP-PG. If cleaved at its carboxy-end dentin phosphoprotein (DPP) is produced Previous work carried-out by our group has reported use of a reaction diffusion model to determine the geometrical pattern of dentin tubule location as a result of odontoblast differentiation The aim of this work was to determine the patterns of growth and dentin formation and its mineralization. This work is highly relevant among dentists, clinicians, and biologist who wish to quantify and determine dentin's growth pattern and mineralization. Our results can aid in establishing models predicting regeneration, in particular endodontics can benefit from understanding hard tissue formation on an affected dental pulp. Furthermore, it can support in determining dentin's revascularization patterns to help repair necrotic dental pulp tissue resulting from dentoalveolar abscess, iatrogenic procedures or deep cavities. The mathematical model here described is based on dentinogenesis biological findings, solved by using finite element analysis. For this purpose we used a time dependent dynamic model type backward Euler. Results have been qualitatively evaluated and agree with experimental observations. Our work is based on the hypothesis that mesenchymal cells differentiate into odontoblasts by the action of BMP2 Dentinal papilla releasing BMP2 induce mesenchymal cell differentiation The process described in These associations ( Mesenchymal cell differentiation into odontoblasts determines dentin tubule formation in the prospective dentin. Dentin and tubule formation is accomplished by proteins secreted from odontoblasts into the extracellular space. These events are followed by mineralization After dentin tubule spatial location, collagen production allows predentin growth. Collagen's apposition was modeled using the variable Additionally, growth is unidirectional where odontoblast collagen deposition occurs solely in the direction of growth direction “ At the same time predentin grows tissue mineralization occurs at an apical location, resulting in mature dentin. These events are explained as follows. This work assumed DPP was released by the odontoblastic process and deposited within the dentinal fluid, located in the dentinal tubule. To carry-out mineralization DPP diffuses into predentin's collagen established network. We assume a constant DPP tubule concentration. Then DPP diffuses though predentin's collagen network described by the following equation: Aforementioned equations describe two stages: first, presumptive dentin tubule formation and location. Second, dentin's growth and maturation. At first we describe computer implementation of reaction-diffusion equations. Then we describe the solution of remaining equations. For solving the first Given Eqs. Using the method of weighted residuals equation system Defining null flux conditions for boundary conditions, terms related with boundary conditions are cancelled out, thus the residue is expressed as: For finite element discrete form solution we used approximation functions written as a lineal combination of orthogonal functions as shown in Eq. Substituting Using Crank–Nicolson time discretization, Eq. Using Eq.  To solve DPP concentration we used finite element method, following a similar procedure as previously described. Eq. Using weighted residual method equations Defining null flux conditions for the boundary, terms related with equations boundary conditions Substituting we obtain: Using temporal time discretization based on backward Euler we obtain: Odontoblast differentiation equations and predentin's mineralization are as follows: These two equations can be written as: A represents odontoblast concentration and mineralization (unknown variable). Computational simulation was carried-out by using an increasing iterative scheme that permits to solve molecular factor concentration To solve the set of implemented equations we used FORTRAN (The Portland Group, Inc., Lake Oswego, OR, USA). Proposed examples were performed in a 4096 MB laptop computer with an 800 Model results are shown in  In this work we developed a mathematical model to simulate the process of dentin formation and mineralization. Mathematical models can help establish patterns predicting tissue regeneration. This preliminary work is valuable for biologists and clinicians in decreasing the gap between bench and clinic. Disciplines such as tissue engineering are working towards providing solutions to regenerate tissues. Tissue engineering includes the study of biochemical factors and their action on cell biology to allow differentiation and tissue formation We assumed a simplified domain around a dentinal tubule with symmetry characteristics, based on tubule frequency distribution. Growth process of this domain was given in a space 4 In addition, we obtained the distribution of DPP's concentration and mineralization profile inducing predentin to become dentin. Results from this work suggest diffusion coefficient determines mineralization profile. Low diffusion coefficient ( Even though are results are encouraging, there are inherent limitations to the proposed model: We must validate experimentally the computationally calculated coefficient. In addition, the simplified law of DPP degradation (half-life) must be verified experimentally. Furthermore, our work presents a simplified model, where mineralization depended solely on DPP concentration, yet it is known other proteins The hypotheses proposed in this work suggest DPP exists at a constant concentration in dentinal fluid released by the odontoblastic process, where it diffuses into predentin's collagen network. These hypotheses should be validated by experimentation, because DPP distributions may vary inside the tubule, determining other mineralization profiles. In conclusion, mathematical models of biological processes are useful tools to simulate possible events associated with tissue regeneration. For specific areas such as endodontics, it will be of great use to determine appropriate treatments to recuperate necrotic dental pulp, quantify revascularization time, and reconstruct hard tissue. This work can be the foundation to quantify and predict events occurring in complex processes such as dentin formation, regeneration, and dentin tissue replacement. None declared. None. Not required. We thank Marta Calle, D.D.S. for providing dentin's photomicrographs at Universidad Nacional de Colombia.