Anode slime and its processing residue contains a variety of valuable elements, which are the main source of tellurium and bismuth. A systematic study on the extraction of tellurium and bismuth from processing residue of zinc anode slime and electrodeposition to obtain high purity bismuth was carried out. Sulfation roasting thermodynamics, leaching thermodynamics, and reduction potential involved in the extraction were calculated and used as theoretical guidance for the experiment. In the process of extracting tellurium and bismuth: the minimum amount of sulfuric acid and the appropriate low temperature of sulfation roasting conditions for processing residue of zinc anode slime are explained that the ratio of sulfuric acid to anode slime was 0.54:1, and the temperature was 435 °C. The leaching process of the roasting product was optimized. The optimal water leaching conditions were a liquid to solid ratio of 6:1 and a reaction time of 0.5 h at 25 °C. The optimal alkali leaching condition is 10% NaOH liquid to solid ratio of 6:1 and reaction time of 0.5 h at 25 °C. Tellurium and bismuth were separated, and tellurium was enriched from a low content of anode slime raw materials. The recovery rate of tellurium and bismuth were 84.9% and 97.1%, respectively. The reduced deposition process of bismuth ions on the cathode was characterized by cyclic voltammetry in the nitric acid. In the stable deposition state, electrodeposition overpotential of the bismuth ion on the titanium plate was 0.1068 V. Tributyl phosphate (TBP) was used as extraction solvent and nitric acid solution was used as stripping solution to purify the impurities in the basic bismuth sulfate. After extraction process, the removal rates of tellurium (Te), arsenic (As), copper (Cu), and antimony (Sb) were 96.5%, 93.3%, 99.1% and 100%, respectively. The content of other impurity elements also reduced greatly. The electrical separation process further reduced the content of impurities in the electrolyte, in which the concentration of tellurium was reduced to less than 1 ppm. A standard-compliant high purity elemental bismuth was obtained by electrodeposition from purified electrolyte.Tellurium and bismuth are important valuable elements, which are widely used for catalysts, energy materials, industrial additives, pharmaceuticals, etc. Most of tellurium and bismuth derived from anode slime and other by-products in hydrometallurgy ( Sulfation roasting is a common pyrometallurgical method, which is widely used in metal recovery. The purpose of sulfation roasting is to convert complex compounds in the raw materials into sulfates or oxides. After roasting, the water-soluble sulfate will be easily separated from roasting slag through leaching, which is convenient for subsequent recovery of valuable metals by hydrometallurgy( The crude product can separated and extracted from the anode slime by roasting and leaching. Further conversion of crude bismuth compound to high purity bismuth could be more economical. High purity bismuth is an important commodity, most of which is produced in china and it is generally obtained by electrodeposition ( The separation or impurity removal of elements from intermediate product has always been an essential problem in hydrometallurgy. Solvent extraction utilizes the differences in the solubility or partition coefficients of various metal elements into two mutually incompatible solvents to drive the elements from one solvent to another. Compared with the precipitation and ion exchange methods, the liquid-liquid contact during the extraction process not only makes the extraction operation simple, but also has good separation effect and low energy consumption. Extraction separation has been used in hydrometallurgy for many years and it is one of the most efficient methods ( Electrical separation is also an effective method for removing impurities ( In this research, pyrometallurgy and hydrometallurgy were combined to separate and extract tellurium and bismuth, and the high purity elemental bismuth product was obtained by electrodeposition. The sulfation roasting thermodynamics, leaching thermodynamics, and reduction potential involved in the extraction were calculated and used as theoretical guidance for the experiment. According to the thermodynamic analysis and the thermogravimetric test, the amount of sulfuric acid and the roasting temperature were lowered, thereby reducing the energy consumption and environmental pollution during the sulfation roasting process. The suitable leaching method was selected according to the leaching thermodynamics, and the water leaching and alkali leaching processes were optimized. The method of combination of solvent extraction and electrical separation was used to deeply purify the basic bismuth sulfate. The high purity elemental bismuth conforming to the standard was obtained by potentiostatic electrodeposition in a nitric acid solution in three-electrode system. The experimental procedure for extraction of tellurium and high purity bismuth consist of three main parts: sulfation roasting, leaching and electrodeposition. Raw material in this study was processing residue of zinc anode slime in which gold, silver and indium had been removed. Raw material was provided by Dongshun Zinc Company Co., Ltd., Sichuan Province. Multiple batches raw material was mixed and dried at 120 °C for 12 h in oven. The dried raw material was smashed and ball milled to 150 μm. Sulfuric acid (AR), Sodium hydroxide (AR), Tributyl phosphate (AR), Hydrochloric acid (GR) and Nitric acid (GR) used in study were obtained from chron chemicals, Chengdu. Composition of materials in each stage were analyzed using energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX, BRUKER), inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES, Thermofisher Scientific) and X-ray diffraction (XRD, DX-2000). Thermogravimetric analysis (TG, NETZSCH) carried out to evaluate the amount of sulfuric acid and the temperature during sulfation roasting. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM, TESCAN) used to characterize the microscopic morphology of materials. Electrochemical workstation (CHI760C, Chenhua) used for electrochemical testing and electrodeposition. Before sulfation roasting, thermodynamic calculation based on the composition of raw materials and TG analysis were employed, in order to minimize the amount of sulfuric acid used and reduce the temperature in roasting process. In addition, the relationships of each element total concentration and the change of each element chemical species with pH were researched by leaching thermodynamic analysis. It's a theoretical guide for the simple and low-cost leaching process. Critical to leaching thermodynamic analysis was taken to study the total concentration of each element in and chemical species of each element change with pH in solution, which is used for a theoretical guide for the simple and low-cost leaching process. Tellurium and bismuth were separated in leaching stage. Crude TeO 7.5 g dried raw materials were mixed with different weights of sulfuric acid (98%) and stirred into a paste. A small amount of water was added to assist in case of sulfuric acid is too less to infiltrate the raw materials. About 30 mg mixture was placed in a crucible of instrument. Testing temperature ranges from room temperature to 800 °C with a rate of 10 k/ min in air atmosphere. 200 g - 300 g mixture of raw materials and sulfuric acid was placed in a porcelain boat and roasted in tube furnace with air atmosphere. The exhaust gas and dust were absorbed by concentrated alkali solution. The leaching experiment includes water leaching stage and alkali leaching stage. In water leaching stage, water-soluble compounds in the roasted products entered the filtrate. Filtered cake that comes from water leaching treated with NaOH solution and filtered to obtained tellurium-containing alkali filtrate. During the leaching experiment, each stage of the filter cake needs to be dried, weighed, and ball milled for calculation of the leaching rate and preparation for the next stage. The calculation formula for the leaching rate is as follows. The alkali leaching cake containing high content of impurity element was dissolved in a nitric acid solution overnight at room temperature, and the insoluble gravel was filtered off. TBP in sulfonated kerosene with 60% by volume was used as extraction reagent( The hydrogen ion concentration in bismuth electrolyte was adjusted to 1 mol·L   Judging the direction and possibility of reaction is one of the research contents of metallurgical thermodynamics. Thermodynamic behavior of major reaction was investigated during the sulfation roasting process. According to the composition of raw materials, the main reaction is as shown in ((a) reaction about tellurium (b) reaction about bismuth (c) reaction about sulfide (d) reaction about oxide (d) decomposition reaction of sulfate) The The TG and DTG curves of mixtures are shown in As it is clear, the samples lose weight firstly because of evaporation of surface water when the temperature rises. When the temperature is between 200 °C and 313 °C, the mixtures lose weight again. It is because that raw material reacts with sulfuric acid and the reaction products (SO When the temperature increased to 375 °C ~ 467 °C, As Sulfation roasting at different temperatures was performed, and the roasting was a mixture of about 29.3 mL of sulfuric acid and 100 g of the raw material (the mass ratio of 0.54:1). The important temperature of weight loss in As can be seen from Sulfation roasting of different durations was also performed at 435 °C. The retention of each element in the roasting product is shown in  In the product after sulfation roasting, tellurium and arsenic exist in the form of TeO Calculated on the basis of each reaction, the total ion concentration of each element (Indicates the maximum solubility of ions) and the distribution coefficient of each element species as a function of pH in the solution were obtained. The calculated results are shown in  The lowest concentration of other elements in aqueous solution is lower than 10 The main purpose of water leaching is to remove water-soluble sulfates, especially the CuSO The main purpose of alkali leaching was to separate the tellurium and bismuth elements. During the alkali leaching process, TeO In the leaching process, leaching rate of each element under different leaching conditions is shown in ((a) L/S = 10:1, 2.5 h (b) 25 °C, 2.5 h (c) L/S = 10:1, 25 °C) As is shown in ((a) 85 °C, L/S = 10:1, 2.5 h (b) 10%, L/S = 10:1, 2.5 h (c) 10%, 85 °C, 2.5 h (d) 10%, 85 °C, L/S = 10:1)  From the above, the best water leaching conditions are a liquid to solid ratio of 6:1 and a reaction time of 0.5 h at 25 °C. The best alkali leaching condition is to use a 10% NaOH solution at a liquid to solid ratio of 6:1 and a reaction time of 0.5 h at 25 °C. Under the optimal leaching conditions, leaching rate of the elements in the process of water leaching and alkali leaching are shown in  The pH of the alkaline leachate was adjusted to 4 to 6, and the white precipitate collected was the crude TeO  About 66 g crude basic bismuth sulfate was dissolved in 200 mL nitric acid solution to prepare a pickling solution. Adjusting the pH of pickling solution to 0 and stirring overnight, undissolved gravel was filtered off. It can be seen from It shows that the reduction potential of tellurium and copper is more positive than that of bismuth. Tellurium and copper will be deposited preferentially than bismuth during the electrodeposition process. The reduction potentials of arsenic and antimony are close to bismuth. As, Sb and Bi may co-deposit during deposition, resulting in reduced purity of elemental bismuth. Therefore, the content of Te, Cu, As, Sb in the pickling solution must be reduced sufficiently. The elements in pickling solution were extracted with TBP solution and were stripped into aqueous phase with nitric acid solution. The changes in the concentration of each element before and after extraction are shown in the Table10.  After extraction, the pH of strip solution was adjusted to 2, and the purified compound was precipitated as Bi As can be seen from the figure, there is no obvious peak in the curve of the reduction reaction section and oxidation reaction section. Because the content of tellurium and other impurities is too low, and the current signal is shielded by the signal caused by bismuth. The reduction reaction started at −0.0932 V on cathode in the first cycle, and refer to Electrical separation was performed by potentiostatic controlled in condition of 45 mV above the starting deposition potential. The impurity concentration in the electrolyte before and after electrical separation is shown in  After electrolytic separation, the pH of the electrolyte was adjusted to 0, and a clean titanium plate was used as the cathode for electrodeposition. The condition for obtaining the elemental bismuth was a constant potential deposition for 24 h at 5 mV below the starting deposition potential. The current density-time curve during electrodeposition is shown in It can be seen from the current density-time curve that as the coverage of elemental bismuth on the titanium plate increases, the current density of electrodeposition increases from 61 A·m The elemental bismuth was peeled off from the titanium plate, ultrasonically washed in deionized water and vacuum dried in an orderly manner. A comparison of the composition and standard limits of the elemental bismuth is shown in It can be seen from the table and the figure that the bismuth can be separated from the processing residue of zinc anode slime by a simple and low-cost process, and the standard high purity elemental bismuth product was obtained by electrodeposition in this study. Since the overpotential was low, the elemental bismuth obtained forms a striped texture. This paper describes a sulfation roasting-leaching-electrodeposition process for separating and obtaining tellurium and high purity bismuth from waste anode slime. This process is simple in operation, low in energy consumption and low in cost. Sulfation roasting was adopted for the complex components in processing residue of zinc anode slime because of its highly adaptability. According to the thermogravimetric data and the thermodynamic analysis of roasting, the elements in raw material can be fully converted into sulfates or oxides at relatively low temperature. The optimum temperature for the sulfation roasting is 435 °C. Loose porous roasting product was obtained due to the volatilization of As TBP as an extraction solvent can greatly reduce the impurity content in the pickling solution at the same time. After extraction process, the removal rates of Te, As, Cu, Sb were 96.5%, 93.3%, 99.1% and 100%, respectively. The content of other impurity elements also reduced greatly. Electrical separation is an effective means to purify the electrolyte. After electrical separation, the concentration of tellurium was reduced to less than 1 ppm. In the nitric acid solution, a constant potential deposition was used to obtain elemental bismuth product. The quality of the cathode bismuth meets the requirements of GB/T 915–2010 and the purity is as high as 99.996%. The authors declare no conflict of interest. This work was supported by the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at