Objective
                  Occlusal curvatures such as the curve of Spee, curve of Wilson and Monsons's sphere exist in the human adult mandibular arch. A previous study showed that human young adults with flatter occlusal curvatures had higher ability of food comminution and mixing. The aim of this study was to clarify functional significance of occlusal curvatures in terms of masticatory movements. This study investigated the association between occlusal curvature and mandibular movements while chewing a variety of food items.
               
                  Design
                  Forty-six young adults with complete dentitions (mean age, 25.0 years) participated in the study. Sphere radius of occlusal curvature was determined by a three-dimensional analysis of the mandibular arch based on the Broadrick flag method. Mandibular movements during unilateral chewing of six test food items (chewing gum, cheese, kamaboko, boiled beef, gummy jelly and raw carrot) until the subjects felt ready to swallow were recorded using a six-degrees-of-freedom mandibular movement recording system, and 11 parameters for masticatory movements of a lower incisal point of the mandible were analysed.
               
                  Results
                  Linear regression analyses identified the sphere radius as a significant predictor for closing velocity in all test food items, occluding/cycle duration in 3 items, opening velocity, closing duration and chewing time in 2 items, and opening duration in 1 item (P
                     <0.01). The results suggest that subjects with larger sphere radius (flatter occlusal curvature) in the mandibular arch could prepare food bolus effectively for swallowing.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Occlusal curvature seems to be associated with masticatory movements in young adults with permanent dentition.Occlusal curvatures are normally observed in the human adult dentition. In sagittal view, the anteroposterior curve that contacts the tips of buccal cusps of mandibular molars and canine, and appears concave, is called the curve of Spee. It is believed that occlusal curvatures are associated with contacts between maxillary and mandibular posterior teeth in eccentric movements. The curve of Spee may permit disclusion of posterior teeth in protrusive mandibular movement Occlusal curvature can be reconstructed by prosthetic restoration. The Broadrick flag (Broadrick Occlusal Plane Analyzer; Teledyne Water Pik, Fort Collins, CO) is utilized for analysing the existing occlusal plane or reconstructing the posterior dentition using Monsons's 4-in. sphere as an ideal occlusal plane for providing harmonious occlusion. However, it is not well known whether occlusal curvature is associated with masticatory function. Recently, cross-sectional studies on human adults showed that occlusal curvatures were associated with masticatory function with respect to bite force, Forty-six subjects (21 females, 25 males, mean age 25.0 years, range 20–32 years), with completely natural dentition and Angle Class I molar relationship, participated in this study. They were recruited from among the students and clinical staff of Tokyo Medical and Dental University and had participated in a previous study. A three-dimensional analysis was performed to determine occlusal curvature using a method validated in a previous study. Test food items with a variety of textures such as chewing gum (Free zone, LOTTE Co., Ltd. Tokyo, Japan), processed cheese (Q.B.B. Cheese, Rokko Butter Co., Ltd., Kobe, Japan), kamaboko (Kibun Foods Inc., Tokyo, Japan), boiled shank beef (80 Subjective (perceptive) hardness of the test foods was examined using a method applied in a previous study. A six-degrees-of-freedom opto-electronic system (Gnatho-hexagraph System Ver. 1.31, Ono Sokki Co., Kanagawa, Japan) was used to measure three-dimensional movements of an arbitrary point on the mandible. Subjects were seated comfortably in an upright position in a dental chair in an electrically shielded room. A piece of test food was placed on the tongue of each subject and subjects were asked to perform maximum intercuspation. This position was recorded as centric occluding (CO) position. Initially, the chewing gum was offered to subjects and it was chewed for 1 The measured data were digitized at 89.4 The following parameters were computed for each chewing stroke. Vertical amplitude was defined as the vertical distance between CO position and the position at the maximum jaw gape of each chewing cycle. The anteroposterior (AP) amplitude was defined as the anteroposterior distance between the most anterior position and the most posterior position of each chewing cycle. The lateral amplitude was defined as the lateral distance between the positions of the maximum lateral displacements to the right and left sides. Velocity was computed with first-order derivative of vertical displacement, and maximum velocities were determined in the opening phase and closing phase for each chewing cycle. These masticatory movement parameters were averaged for all chewing strokes. Chewing time was measured as the total time from the starting of the first chewing cycle to finishing of the last chewing cycle when the subjects felt ready to swallow the food bolus. Number of the chewing strokes was counted as the number from the first to the last chewing cycle. Since subjects were indicated to chew gum for 10 The difference in SR between males and females, and between left and right sides was tested using two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA). The effect of the food type on subjective hardness (VAS score) was tested using repeated measures one-way ANOVA. The effect of the food type on objective hardness was tested using one-way ANOVA. Tukey's test was used for post hoc multiple comparisons in VAS score and objective hardness between the test foods. The effects of the food type and chewing side on masticatory movement parameters were tested using repeated measures two-way ANOVA. Linear regression models were constructed to test association between SR and each masticatory movement parameter for each test food. The null hypothesis in this study was that SR was not associated with any parameters of masticatory movements. In regression analyses, masticatory movement parameters for each test food were included in the model as outcome measures. SR, gender and chewing side were considered as possible predictors for the masticatory movement parameters. SPSS 11.5 The median SR was 112 Mean (SD) VAS score and objective hardness of the test foods are presented in Means (SD) of mandibular movements during chewing the test foods are presented in The results of the regression analyses are shown in Supplementary material related to this article found, in the online version, at  The results in this study showed that spherical radius was significantly related to some parameters of masticatory movements such as opening/closing velocity and closing/occluding/cycle duration independent of gender difference, which indicates that subjects with flatter occlusal curvature chewed test foods with a faster chewing cycle. These results support our hypothesis that occlusal curvature is associated with masticatory movements. SR was significantly related to closing velocity in all food items. Previous studies have shown that faster closing velocity of mandibular movement during chewing test foods was related to better food comminuting and mixing ability. It is well known that masticatory movements are modulated with physical properties of foods. In the regression analyses, male subjects demonstrated significantly greater vertical amplitude, faster opening/closing velocity and shorter opening/closing/cycle duration, chewing time and less number of chewing strokes. These gender differences agree with previous studies. Monson's 4-in. sphere has been referred as an ideal occlusal curvature in prosthetic rehabilitation. In this study, a clutch was attached to mandibular incisors for recording of masticatory movements. Although subjects performed gum chewing with the clutch for adaptation, it may have hindered normal masticatory movements. In addition, subjects were asked to chew test foods unilaterally. The unilateral chewing is different from free-side (natural) chewing and concerns a minority of subjects. However, if free-side chewing is performed in this study, it would be difficult to interpret the effect of occlusal curvature of left and right side arch respectively on masticatory movement. This study focused on mandibular movement in respect of masticatory function and it can be concluded that flatter occlusal curvature is useful for chewing foods efficiently with faster mandibular motion. However, it is unclear how the subjects with flatter occlusal curvature demonstrated faster masticatory movement pattern and greater chewing ability. It has been shown that masticatory muscle activity during chewing is related to food comminuting ability and food mixing ability. None. None declared. Prior to beginning the study, approval of the Ethics Committee of Tokyo Medical and Dental University had been obtained (no. 474). The authors would like to thank Drs. K. Kagaya and K. Shoi for their kind assistance with data collection and analyses.