In this paper a viscoplastic constitutive model for unsaturated geomaterials is presented. The constitutive laws for the description of the time-dependent mechanical behaviour of saturated and unsaturated geomaterials generalise the isotach approach proposed by Šuklje [52] to the elastoplastic strain hardening based constitutive laws for unsaturated soils. The formulation encompasses strain rate effects and allows the description of the coupled effect of strain rate and suction on the viscoplastic behaviour of geomaterials. The model has been used to simulate tests involving variable stress and/or strain rate conditions, including creep phases and soaking tests. Numerical results demonstrate its reliability in reproducing the general features of the rate-dependent behaviour together with the dependency upon suction. Further tests are currently under consideration to extend model verification to others saturated and unsaturated geomaterials.Viscous behaviour of geomaterials has been extensively documented in clays (e.g. Although often identified exclusively with creep phenomena (secondary consolidation), it is now well accepted that viscous behaviour of soils is more generally the result of strain rate dependency of the material. In fact, time effects influence soils behaviour both in compression and shear by modifying material strength Various approaches have been proposed for the constitutive modelling of time-dependent behaviour of geomaterials. A rather large variety of models are based on Perzyna’s theory of elasto-viscoplasticity Various models have been formulated adopting Bjerrum’s notion of equivalent (or reference) time (e.g. Finally, other models used the concept of the Non-Stationary Flow Surface (NSFS) theory or extended elastoplasticity (e.g. While quite a large number of contributions have been devoted to the description of the mechanical time-dependent behaviour of saturated geomaterials, few contributions have tackled the problem of the time-dependent behaviour of unsaturated geomaterials. Actually, unsaturated states are quite common situations encountered in current practice since geomaterials are recurrently submitted to natural or man-induced saturation-desaturation cycles. A few examples may be cited. In conventional geotechnical engineering, such situations are encountered for earth structures subjected to interactions with the atmosphere. In the case of mining engineering, excavation of galleries to exploit chalk for instance induces the desaturation of the rock close to the rooms and pillars. In the case of radioactive waste disposals, engineered barriers made of unsaturated compacted clay material are considered. Geological storage of carbon dioxide (CO De Gennaro et al. to show how the isotach approach can be encompassed in the theoretical framework of elastoplasticity; to extend the isotach approach to unsaturated states to account for suction effects; to extend the formulation of RASTRA model to deviatoric loading conditions; to validate the proposed constitutive approach against available experimental data. The isotach approach proposed by Šuklje The validity of Eq. To the authors’ knowledge, very few studies consider both unsaturation and time (or strain rate) effects on the compression behaviour of geomaterials. In this paper, a study on partially saturated chalks (see e.g. Eq. The rate dependent model RASTRA (RAte of STRAin) has been developed adopting the “isotach” or “reference time” models proposed by Šuklje The Barcelona Basic Model (BBM) proposed by Alonso et al. The BBM is formulated in the framework of hardening elastoplasticity and extends the features of the modified Cam-clay model to suction dependent stress states. Two independent stress variables are used to describe the mechanical behaviour of unsaturated soils: the net stress The deformation increment d In triaxial stress space, the stresses are described by the mean net stress The yield surface is defined by the following expression: The position of the LC locus is controlled by the irreversible volumetric deformations generated during hydro-mechanical loadings, according to the following hardening law: In order to incorporate the viscoplastic coupling into the original formulation of the BBM the extended elastoplasticity framework has been considered (e.g. The dependency of the yield condition in In A new deformation partition is now assumed, admitting that The additional parameters In order to complete the formulation of the model the expression of In comparison with the single hardening variable elastoplastic formulation the introduction of Substitution of Owing to the last term in the viscoplastic strain given by Available experimental test on unsaturated chalks have been simulated in order to verify RASTRA model formulation. Further tests are currently under consideration to extend model verification to others saturated and unsaturated geomaterials. Several features of the constitutive modelling proposed with RASTRA have been considered and verified, namely: the isotach behaviour, suction effects on yielding and creep (in the case of normally consolidated material) and the influence of stress path. The set of parameters used for these simulations is given in It is worth noting that the analysis of the dependency of The first series of simulations present the isotach behaviour response of Estreux chalk predicted using RASTRA model. Results are shown in The next series of simulations is intended to assess RASTRA model capability to reproduce the influence of suction on the evolution of creep (under normally consolidated states). Three virtual Constant Rate of Strain isotropic compressions (ensuring the material reaches its yield limit) followed by creep stages at three distinct suctions were simulated. Material parameters used in these simulations correspond to Lixhe outcrop chalk and are summarised in The effect of suction on chalk yielding and compressibility can be easily depicted from the results of the simulations shown in The third series of simulations has been performed in order to compare the isotropic behaviour predicted by RASTRA model with existing experimental results on chalks subjected to isotropic loading and including creep phases. Two isotropic triaxial compression tests conducted under variable imposed loading rates on Lixhe outcrop chalk have been considered The first test was conducted under rapid loading at a constant rate of isotropic stress The parameters used for these simulations are summarised in Simulations are now performed for illustrating the performance of the model along deviatoric stress paths. First, an oedomoter compression test on dry Estreux chalk has been considered The material parameters corresponding to the elastoplastic part of RASTRA (that is those related to BBM) have been published by Nguyen et al. Finally, a last series of virtual simulations of triaxial compressions has been performed. In this paper a rate dependent model for unsaturated geomaterials has been presented and numerical simulations have been compared to available experimental data. The model, called RASTRA has been developed adopting the isotach model proposed by Šuklje The model has been used to simulate tests involving variable stress and/or strain rate conditions, including creep phases and soaking tests. Numerical results demonstrate the reliability of the model in reproducing the general features of the rate-dependent behaviour together with its dependency upon suction. Further tests are currently under consideration to extend model verification to other saturated and unsaturated geomaterials. This work has been supported by the French Research National Agency (ANR) through “Captage et stockage du CO2” program (project INTERFACE ANR-08-PCO2-006).