Background
                  Vitamin D influences the formation and mineralization of teeth.
               
                  Objective
                  To investigate the association of maternal and neonatal vitamin D concentrations with the dental development of 10-y-old children, in a population-based prospective cohort study among 3,770 mothers and children in the Netherlands.
               
                  Methods
                  Maternal venous blood samples were collected in the second trimester (median 20.4 weeks of gestation; range: 18.5–23.2 wk) whereas umbilical cord blood samples were collected immediately after delivery (median 40.1 weeks of gestation; range 35.9–42.3 wk). Dental development was defined using the Demirjian method. Multivariate regression models were built to analyze the studied associations.
               
                  Results
                  High concentrations of 25-hydroxyvitamin D [25(OH)D] during midpregnancy (β: −0.04; 95% CI: −0.08, −0.01) and at birth (β: −0.06; 95% CI: −0.10, −0.02) were associated with a lower dental age in children. The children of mothers with severe vitamin D deficiency [25(OH)D <25.0 nmol/L] during midpregnancy exhibited a higher dental age (β: 0.14; 95% CI: 0.03, 0.24) and higher developmental stages of the mandibular first premolar (β: 0.32; 95% CI: 0.04, 0.60) compared with the children of mothers with optimal values of 25(OH)D (≥75.0 nmol/L). Children with vitamin D deficiency [25(OH)D 25.0–49.9 nmol/L] at birth exhibited a higher dental age (β: 0.11; 95% CI: 0.01, 0.20), higher developmental stages of the mandibular second premolar (β: 0.27; 95% CI: 0.02, 0.51), and higher developmental stages of the mandibular second molar (β: 0.24; 95% CI: 0.00, 0.48) compared with children with sufficient-to-optimal values of 25(OH)D (≥50.0 nmol/L) at birth.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Higher maternal and neonatal 25(OH)D concentrations are associated with decelerated dental development in childhood. The lower the vitamin D level during midpregnancy or at birth, the higher the dental age of children, and the higher the developmental stages of the mandibular teeth.Dental development is influenced by various biomarkers which inhibit or prohibit a cascade of signaling pathways ( Vitamin D plays an important role in calcium and phosphorus homeostasis by increasing their absorption in the intestines ( Vitamin D (representing D2 and/or D3) in circulation is bound to the vitamin D binding protein which transports it to the liver, where vitamin D is converted to 25(OH)D and is the major circulating form used to determine vitamin D status ( Therefore, in a population-based prospective cohort study involving 3,770 mothers and their children in the Netherlands, we investigated the associations of maternal and neonatal 25(OH)D concentrations with the timing of dental development of 10-y-old children. This study was embedded in the Generation R Study, a population-based prospective cohort study from fetal life onward in Rotterdam, the Netherlands ( Second-trimester 25(OH)D concentrations were measured in 7,934 mothers. For the present study, we excluded pregnancies that led to twin births ( Maternal venous blood samples were collected in the second trimester (median 20.4 weeks of gestation; range: 18.5–23.2 wk) whereas umbilical cord blood samples were collected immediately after delivery (median 40.1 weeks of gestation; range 35.9–42.3 wk). Measurements of 25(OH)D concentrations were conducted at the Eyles Laboratory of the Queensland Brain Institute, University of Queensland, Australia, in 2014. Total 25(OH)D concentrations were calculated as the sum of 25-hydroxyvitamin D2[25(OH)D2] and 25-hydroxyvitamin D3[25(OH)D3] measured in plasma, as previously described ( Dental development was defined using the Demirjian method based on the available DPRs of 10-y-old children. According to the Demirjian method, the calculation of dental age is derived from the developmental stages of the teeth present in the lower left quadrant ( Information on sex and gestational age at birth was available from medical records and hospital registries. The date of blood sampling was categorized into summer, fall, winter, and spring, based on the European seasons. We obtained information on maternal age at intake, ethnicity, educational level, alcohol use, and folic acid and vitamin supplementation during pregnancy using questionnaires ( Measurements of the 25(OH)D concentration of children were assessed at a median age of 6 y (95% range, 5.6–7.9 y). Blood samples were drawn by antecubital venipuncture and stored at −80°C until analysis at the Endocrine Laboratory of the VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, as previously described ( We calculated the intra-class correlation (ICC) to test the agreement between two independent examiners who assessed stages of development (1 to 8) for each of the seven left mandibular teeth in a random subsample of 100 DPRs from the study population. The ICC for the scored teeth ranged between 0.65–0.80 which is considered to be in substantial agreement according to the conventional criteria ( To study the associations of maternal and neonatal vitamin D with the dental age of the children, we built three multivariate linear regression models. In Model 1, we adjusted for maternal-related confounders including season of blood sampling and season at birth, maternal age at intake, maternal BMI at intake, maternal ethnicity, education, alcohol consumption, folic acid intake, vitamin supplementation, calcium and phosphorus intake during pregnancy, and child-related confounders included age, hypodontia, BMI, and height. To control for confounding bias of vitamin D concentration of children during the 10-y timespan between exposure and outcome measurements, we included the 25(OH)D concentration of children measured at the age-6 assessment in Model 2. To control for any possible influence of jaw compactness in the studied association, we added the head BMD of children measured at the age-6 assessment as a potential confounder in Model 3. Maternal and neonatal 25(OH)D concentrations were analyzed continuously per SD increase in order to present countable values and to easily compare the effect estimates obtained from the multivariate linear regression models. Furthermore, we applied categorization of maternal and neonatal 25(OH)D concentrations based on the recommended clinical cut-offs, to explore the studied associations in more detail. We built three multivariate generalized linear models adjusted for confounders in the same consecutive steps. For neonatal 25(OH)D concentration, groups of optimal and sufficient 25(OH)D were joined to equalize the size of samples, and sufficient-to-optimal concentration of 25(OH)D was used as the reference group in the statistical analysis. One fully adjusted ordinal regression model was built to study the association of maternal and neonatal 25(OH)D concentrations with developmental stages of the mandibular second molar, second premolar, first premolar, and canine. The model was adjusted for maternal-related confounders, child-related confounders, vitamin D status, and head BMD. The mandibular first molar, lateral incisor, and central incisor were in the final stage of calcification at the age of 10 y, hence they were left out of the statistical analysis. We performed a nonresponse analysis by comparing the general characteristics between children with and without measurements of dental development, using the t-test, chi-square test, and Mann-Whitney test. The nonlinear associations were assessed by adding quadratic terms of maternal and neonatal 25(OH)D concentrations to the regression models. We tested for interactions between sex and 25(OH)D concentrations (maternal and neonatal) in relation to the dental age of children. Similarly, the interaction term between ethnicity and 25(OH)D concentrations (maternal and neonatal) in relation to the dental age of children was also tested. Since no interaction term result was statistically significant, we did not perform a stratification analysis. The Markov Chain Monte Carlo imputation method was used to reduce potential bias associated with missing data (0.01–22.8%) ( The general characteristics of the study population are presented in Results from the nonresponse analyses are given in The increase of maternal 25(OH)D concentration was statistically significantly associated with decelerated dental age ( Children of mothers with a severely low 25(OH)D concentration during midpregnancy had a higher dental age compared with the children of mothers with an optimal vitamin D 25(OH)D concentration, as shown in Model 1 (β = 0.14; 95% CI: 0.04, 0.23). The effect estimate changed slightly when either the 25(OH)D concentration of children at the age of 6 y was considered in Model 2 (β = 0.13; 95% CI: 0.03, 0.23), or when head BMD of children at the age of 6 y was included in Model 3 (β = 0.14; 95% CI: 0.03, 0.24). The increase of neonatal 25(OH)D concentration was statistically significantly associated with decelerated dental age ( Children with a deficiency of 25(OH)D concentration at birth had a higher dental age than children with sufficient-to-optimal values of 25(OH)D concentration at birth, as shown in Model 1 (β = 0.11; 95% CI: 0.03, 0.20). The effect estimate changed slightly when either the 25(OH)D concentration of children at the age of 6 y was added in Model 2 (β = 0.10; 95% CI: 0.01, 0.19), or when head BMD of children at the age of 6 y was considered in Model 3 (β = 0.11; 95% CI: 0.01, 0.20).  In comparison with an optimal maternal 25(OH)D concentration, children of mothers with sufficient 25(OH)D concentration during midpregnancy had accelerated developmental stages of the mandibular first premolar (β = 0.22; 95% CI: 0.01, 0.43). Moreover, children of mothers with a severe deficiency of 25(OH)D concentration exhibited accelerated developmental stages of the mandibular first premolar (β = 0.32; 95% CI: 0.04, 0.60). The ordinal regression analysis revealed no statistically significant difference among the categories of maternal 25(OH)D concentration during midpregnancy and developmental stages of the mandibular second premolar and second molar.  In comparison with an optimal-to-sufficient neonatal 25(OH)D concentration, children with a deficiency of 25(OH)D concentration at birth had accelerated developmental stages of the mandibular second molar (β = 0.24; 95% CI: 0.00, 0.48). The ordinal regression analysis revealed no statistically significant difference among the categories of neonatal 25(OH)D concentration and developmental stages of the mandibular canine and first premolar. Results from this large population-based prospective cohort study suggest that maternal and neonatal 25(OH)D concentrations are inversely associated with the timing of childhood dental development. Our hypothesis on the associations of maternal and neonatal 25(OH)D concentrations with the timing of dental development was based on reports that emphasize the role of vitamin D in early cellular proliferation and differentiation, and in tooth mineralization at the beginning of odontogenesis ( Referring to the importance of adequate prenatal vitamin D concentration in decreasing the risk of hypomineralization and decay of dental tissues in children, positive correlations of maternal and neonatal 25(OH) concentrations with the acceleration of dental development in children could be expected from our investigation ( To our knowledge, this is the largest multiethnic population-based prospective cohort study focused on the associations of maternal and neonatal 25(OH)D concentrations with the timing of dental development in children. For mothers with available 25(OH)D concentrations, we had a limited loss to follow-up; therefore, we do not expect biased results from selective follow-up. We used the 25(OH)D concentration, which is the best and most widely used indicator of vitamin D status. Moreover, we analyzed vitamin D concentrations continuously and applied the clinical cut-offs ( In conclusion, the lower the maternal and neonatal vitamin D concentration, the higher the dental age of the children and the higher developmental stages of the mandibular canine, first premolar, second premolar, and second molar. These findings highlight the importance of balanced concentrations of 25(OH)D in the critical time points of tooth formation during pregnancy. The Generation R Study is conducted by the Erasmus University Medical Center in close collaboration with the School of Law and Faculty of Social Sciences of the Erasmus University Rotterdam, the Municipal Health Service Rotterdam area, Rotterdam, the Rotterdam Homecare Foundation, Rotterdam, and the StichtingTrombosedienst and ArtsenlaboratoriumRijnmond (STAR), Rotterdam. We thank participating mothers, general practitioners, hospitals, midwives, and pharmacies in Rotterdam. All authors have read and approved the final manuscript. The authors’ contributions were as follows—BD: contributed to the conception and design of the manuscript, acquisition of data, statistical analysis and interpretation of data, drafting the manuscript, and submitted the final approved version. KM and TV: contributed to the conception and design of the manuscript, acquisition of data, revising it critically for important intellectual content, and gave the final approval of the version to be submitted. HWT and VWVJ: contributed to the conception and design of the manuscript, acquisition of data, revising it critically for important intellectual content, and gave the final approval of the version to be submitted. EBW: contributed to the conception and design of the manuscript, acquisition, revising it critically for important intellectual content, and gave the final approval of the version to be submitted. EMO: contributed to the conception and design of the manuscript, acquisition and interpretation of data, revising it critically for important intellectual content, and gave the final approval of the version to be submitted. 