The utilization of existing metallurgical infrastructure and integration of secondary process streams into primary metals production can provide advantages over separate recycling plants. This paper focuses on the integration of a pregnant leach solution (PLS) into a nickel production plant that contains Ni, Co, Zn, Mn, Fe, Al and Cd ions, derived from a NiMH recycling stream. The solution composition highlights the challenge related to spent battery investigations, as although toxic Cd is not present in NiMH battery chemistries, it ends up into the battery waste collection and prevents direct integration of the battery waste into the primary process. The aim of the study is to remove Zn, Fe, Al, Mn and Cd ions from the PLS, so that the Ni and Co remaining in solution could be integrated into the nickel production process. A two-step solvent extraction process using Di-2-ethylheyxl phosphoric acid (D2EHPA) was developed. In the first step, Zn, Al and Fe were removed at pH 1.5, whereas in the second step Cd and Mn were removed at pH 2.3. Different process parameters (pH, O/A ratio, temperature, extractant concentration, kinetics) were optimized at each step of the solvent extraction. The purified and fully integrable PLS was found to contain Ni ~28 g/L and Co ~3.7 g/L.Primary nickel production is mainly based on sulfide (60%) and laterite (40%) ores, with pentlandite ((Ni,Fe) Typical impurities found in primary Ni production process solutions include Fe, Al, Zn, and Mn with varying concentrations depending on the mineralogy, process used and stage of process ( Increased use of batteries in energy storage applications and the associated End-of-life (EoL) waste requires the development of industrially feasible recycling processes. Nickel metal hydride (NiMH) batteries, for example, are increasingly ubiquitous having been used in applications like phones, laptops, power tools and hybrid electric vehicles [ Globally, only 1% of REEs are recovered and recycled from EoL products [  In the previous study of Porvali et al. [ NiMH battery waste was leached with sulfuric acid (Merck, 96%) and anhydrous sodium sulfate (VWR Chemicals, analytical grade) was used as a precipitating agent for REEs. For solvent extraction experiments, D2EHPA (97%) and TBP (97%) were purchased from Sigma Aldrich and were used directly without purification. Kerosene (≥ 95%) was supplied by Alfa Aesar and used as a diluent in all the experiments. The organic phase comprised of D2EHPA as extractant and TBP (as a phase modifier) in kerosene. The modifier used to improve the phase disengagement and selected based on literature [ Spent crushed NiMH battery waste was provided by an industrial battery recycling operator and sieved with a mesh size of 1.0 mm. After sieving, the resulting underflow was washed with water and dried in an oven at 65 °C. 330 g of this raw material was leached using 2 M sulfuric acid in a 3 L glass reactor with mechanical stirring for 1 h at 50 °C and at a constant solid to liquid (S/L) ratio of 1:10. After S/L separation (vacuum filtration), the recovery of REEs from the PLS was performed in a glass reactor vessel (2 experiments, each 1.6 L). 250 mL of sodium sulfate solution (1.17 M) was added to the PLS for precipitation of REEs as double salts at ambient temperature for 24 h, as described previously [ Solvent extraction experiments, including extraction and stripping stages were carried out in a 100 mL separation funnel. Both leach solution (aqueous phase) and organic phases were mechanically shaken at 250 rotations per minute (rpm) for 15 min to attain equilibrium using a KS 3000i control incubated shaker (IKA, Germany). Funnels were allowed to settle for 5 min to allow for phase disengagement. The aqueous phase (~10 mL) was collected and subsequently analyzed by AAS or ICP-OES. The percent extraction of metal ions were calculated by Eq. The pH of the aqueous phase was adjusted using a few drops of 3 M NaOH solution and was recorded by S210 SevenCompact™ pH meter (Mettler Toledo). Five experimental parameters and their different levels were investigated in preliminary solvent extraction experiments ( After this preliminary study, further batch solvent extraction experiments were carried out to remove Zn, Al, Fe (first step) and Cd, Mn (second step) with experimental conditions optimized for both steps. Under optimized conditions, cross current experiments were carried out to purify the solution in 500 mL separatory funnels. At every stage, a fresh organic phase was introduced to contact with the aqueous solution (raffinate) from previous stage and the loaded organic solution originated from each stage were mixed together before performing stripping experiments. Metal ions loaded into the organic phase were stripped out by contact with an aqueous phase that contained H This experimental study focuses on removal of Cd and other impurities via two solvent extraction steps to integrate the NiMH battery leach solution into primary nickel operation. In all the experiments, real hydrometallurgical leach solution ( Different levels of solvent extraction parameters including contact time, pH, TBP% (  TBP was used as a phase modifier to enhance the phase disengagement after SX and the results in Investigations performed at higher temperature led to an increase in the extraction of Zn, Fe, Al, whereas levels of Mn, Cd, Ni and Co ions detected at pH 2 remained low (<10%) over the entire temperature range studied ( Although the target of the initial process stage is the removal of Zn, Fe and Al from the NiMH battery leach PLS in order to prepare the solution into the Cd removal stage, it can also be used to provide a route for Zn recovery. Based on the initial experimental results, it was concluded that the most suitable SX conditions for the first stage was a mixture of D2EHPA (20%) and TBP (5%), temperature of 50 °C and a 15 min contact time. Notably 50 °C was chosen in preference to 55 °C due to the safety reasons as low aromatic kerosene has a flash point close to 70 °C. Additionally, a pH value of 1.5 was chosen, in order to minimize any extraction of Cd(II) during this step. Laboratory scale, cross–current experiments were employed to investigate Zn(II), Fe(II) and Al(III) removal; three batch experiments carried out and at each of the three stages, the aqueous phase was contacted by a fresh organic phase at unit phase ratio. In addition, at each extraction stage, the pH of the treated PLS solution was readjusted to 1.5 using 3 M NaOH solution prior to the next stage of SX, which induced a slight decrease in the metal ion concentration. Results of the counter current SX are shown in The loaded organic phase obtained from the three-stage cross–current solvent extraction was subjected to a stripping process, which consisted of the organic phase being equilibrated with different H It was also determined that Fe (~99.5%) and Al (~99%) could be effectively stripped from the D2EHPA and TBP mixture using a 4 M H  It should be noted that three stages of cross-current experiments at unit phase ratio require three times more organic solution compared to aqueous solution to extract Zn, Fe and Al completely while counter-current operation at O/A = 2:1, requires two times more amount of organic solution than aqueous solution. Overall, counter-current operation was found to be cost effective technique. The main challenge in the battery waste integration to the primary production is the presence of Cd in the raw material, therefore a dedicated SX stage designed for Cd(II) and Mn(II) removal is required. Complete removal of Cd(II) from the leach solution is desirable as the levels in primary Ni production processes are much lower than that in the PLS (~51 mg/L) and previous research has shown that even as little as 5 mg/L of Cd can make the electrowinning process unfeasible [ The effect of pH on the extraction of metal ions (Mn, Cd, Co and Ni) from the Zn, Fe and Al depleted liquor was investigated by varying the pH from 2 to 4, in order to determine the optimum pH value for Cd(II) and Mn(II) co-extraction and to maximize the separation from Ni(II) and Co(II). As can be seen from Cross–current experiments were employed to remove Mn(II) and Cd(II) from the Zn, Fe and Al depleted leach solution. Five batch experiments were carried out at unit phase ratio and at each stage of extraction the raffinate pH was adjusted back to 2.3 using 3 M NaOH solution prior to the next SX stage. As can be seen from the results (shown in After the second SX stage treatment, the remaining metal ions within the leach liquor were found to be 27.5 g/L Ni and 3.7 g/L Co and 0.015 g/L Mn only. These results suggest, that after two stages of SX, the solution is fully integrable to primary Ni production process. The Mn(II)/Cd(II) loaded organic phase obtained after the five cross–current experiments was stripped using 1 M H McCabe-Thiele diagrams were generated for Mn(II) and Cd(II) extraction by varying O/A ratio from 1:1 to 5:1 and these are shown in The proposed flowsheet allows NiMH battery leach solution, obtained after leaching and REEs precipitation, to be integrated into primary nickel plant unit processes. The development of such a new recycling process may accelerate or allow smaller scale operations to be undertaken as only a relatively straightforward hydrometallurgical pre-treatment is required prior to integration into the existing process. Furthermore, the extraction of Cd contamination from NiMH waste process solution removes a detrimental element that would challenge its use in primary plant operations. Two solvent extraction purification steps (20% D2EHPA, 5% TBP, 75% kerosene) were applied to tailor the solution for integration into primary Ni production. In the first step, Zn, Fe and Al were removed simultaneously from leach solution (pH = 1.5, O/A = 1:1, The authors would like to acknowledge