Objectives
                  Surgical treatment of odontoid fractures is recommended by many surgeons to prevent sudden neurologic injury or progressive myelopathy. Less aggressive approach to the treatment of odontoid fractures has been advocated by some authors especially in the elderly population. Very few reports have followed up patients’ outcomes following conservative treatment of odontoid fractures. Here we evaluate the clinical and radiographic results of patients without myelopathy treated without surgery for an odontoid type fracture.
               
                  Patients and methods
                  101 patients with traumatic odontoid fracture admitted to the Pennsylvania State Hershey Medical Center between 1998 and 2008. Fractures were defined using a CT scan according to the Anderson–D’Alonzo Classification. Conservative treatment was pursued in appropriately selected patients.
               
                  Results
                  Fifty-nine patients were selected to be treated in a cervical collar. Sixteen patients failed using radiographic evidence and continued neck pain. Fourteen patients went on to be surgically stabilized. The other two patients opted to continue with cervical orthosis and regular clinical evaluations. The Forty-three remaining patients had stable imaging studies and with no other complaints. None of the patients developed myelopathy symptoms during the follow-up period.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Our results indicate that a select group of patients with odontoid fracture who are deemed stable on initial evaluation in a cervical orthosis may be effectively managed non-operatively. None of the patients who were managed conservatively had clinical worsening during the period of management. The decision to proceed with surgical treatment was based on failure of resolution of neck pain or worsening or concerning instability on imaging studies. However in many patients, even elderly patients in a surgical risks are greater, many odontoid fractures can be safely managed in a cervical orthosis.Odontoid fractures account for 9–20% of cervical spine fractures On the other hand, the higher incidence of anesthetic risk and diminished bone quality in the elderly, making fusion much more challenging and less likely to be achieved, argues against surgical intervention A retrospective review was performed to identify patients over age 17 at the Hershey Medical Center, Pennsylvania State University, with acute dens fractures. A chart review was performed evaluating records from the period of December 1999 through December of 2008. Exclusion criteria included patients with myelopathic signs and symptoms at the time of diagnosis, previous attempted cervical arthrodesis, or surgical intervention. All living patients were contacted and asked to return for clinical examination and radiographic imaging. At the time of follow up patients were asked to answer specific question about sub-occipital pain or neck pain. Patients were also evaluated for signs or symptoms of myelopathy. The evaluation also included the standard clinical spine evaluation that encompasses a cervical range of motion, extremity strength, sensation, gait, reflex examination, and long-tract signs suggestive of myelopathy i.e. clonus, Hoffman's and Babinski signs. Patients were also asked to undergo cervical spine radiographs which included flexion and extension lateral films. Fatality information was sought from living family members or treating physician at the time of death. All patients who underwent follow up imaging underwent measurement of the minimum space available for the cord (SAC) according to Boden et al. We identified one hundred and one patients with an odontoid fracture on admission. Forty-nine patients were female and 52 were male. The average age was 65.3 years. The range varied between 17 years and to 98 years old with a standard deviation of 26 years and a median of 76 years. Fourteen patients died during initial hospitalization or after discharge secondary to other injuries sustained during the traumatic event. Sixteen patients who were initially treated non-operatively were lost to follow up. Of the 71 remaining patients, 21 patients underwent cervical fusion. Indications for early surgery were early inability to be adequately immobilized by cervical orthosis, active spinal cord compression, or patient request (in one patient who wanted to return to car racing). Seven patients were treated surgically early on in the initial hospitalization. One of the seven patients opted for a surgical intervention after being presented with the available treatment options. Three patients suffered neurologic injury secondary to the initial trauma and were surgically treated. Three other patients were also treated during the initial hospitalization due to continued instability while in cervical orthosis. Instability of the odontoid fragment ranged between 2 and 2.5 The 43 patients treated non-operatively in a cervical collar had an average age of 66.25 Our work shows that in a select group of patients with odontoid fractures, following a thorough evaluation, and close follow up nonsurgical management in a cervical orthosis could be a viable option with minimal morbidity and mortality. Sixteen out of the initial 59 patients treated non-operatively failed this management. Failure was based on persistent neck pain or cervical instability present on follow up imaging. None of the patients suffered any morbidity. These results confirm the lack of consensus in the literature on the management of odontoid fractures since Mixter and Osgood described the first surgical management of odontoid fractures in 1910 Treatment of odontoid fractures includes cervical orthosis, external halo immobilization, and surgical management. The rates of fusion and associated comorbidities vary significantly in literature for each of the above managements. After reviewing his case series of 45 patients, Apuzzo et al. recommended external immobilization for nondisplaced fractures using either halo vests or cervical orthosis. He pointed to a lack of superiority in between these two modalities except for better compliance in the halo group On the other hand, the literature includes more than 50 reported cases of neurologic compromise from late myelopathy in non-union and malunion fractures Multiple reports argued against the use of Halo vests in elderly patients secondary to higher rates of pneumonia, reduction of vital capacity due to respiratory restriction, dorsal kyphosis, difficulty with ambulation, intolerance, cardiac arrest, and increase mortality The Halo vest allows a better compliance although overall comfort and tolerance is poor. This device is also associated with multiple complications that can be catastrophic at times. Morbidity ranges between 5 and 17% Surgical intervention is not without complications. Rates of failed fusion can be as high as 20% In summary, the literature lacks class I or II evidence favoring one treatment option over another. What can be deduced is that younger less displaced fractures seem to have a higher fusion rate. Older patients have higher complication rates when treated surgically or in a Halo vest Our results indicate that a select group of patients with odontoid fracture who are deemed stable on initial evaluation in a cervical orthosis may be effectively managed non-operatively. None of the patients who were managed non-operatively had clinical worsening during the period of management. The decision to proceed with surgical treatment was based on failure of resolution of neck pain or worsening or concerning instability on imaging studies. However in many patients, including elderly patients with higher surgical risks, many odontoid fractures can be safely managed in a cervical orthosis.