Background
                  Pertrochanteric femoral fractures are one of the most common fractures in old patients. However, fixing pertrochanteric fractures properly is clinically challenging. There are also no routine treatments for this facture. Here, we report the clinical trial of pertrochanteric fracture treatment with a proximal femur locking compression plate (PFLCP). By recording and analysing the radiographic and clinical results from patients treated with PFLCP, we found that PFLCP could provide three-dimensional fixation mechanical advantages compared with conventional treatments, even in the case of unstable fractures in the osteoporotic bone.
               
                  Methods
                  The report included a total of 110 patients (72 females and 38 males) with pertrochanteric femoral fractures who were subjected to PFLCP treatment. The mean age of the patients was 75 (48–93) years. Pertrochanteric fracture includes both intertrochanteric and subtrochanteric femoral fractures: intertrochanteric fractures were classified according to Jensen (1980), whereas subtrochanteric fractures were classified according to Zickel (1980). Detailed clinical conditions of all patients, including blood loss, drainage and length of incision, were recorded individually. The duration of image intensification was also monitored. Patients were revisited at 6 weeks, 3 months, 6 months and 1 year after the operation. The progress of healing, as well as the occurrence of complications, was recorded.
               
                  Results
                  Amongst the 110 patients, 108 (98%) were available for follow-up check-up at 6 weeks, 104 (95%) at 3 months, 100 (91%) at 6 months and 94 (85%) at 1 year. The other patients were lost to follow-up because of death. The union rate was 95% (99/104), 98% (98/100) and 100% (94/94) at the 3-month, 6-month and 1-year period during the follow-up check-up, respectively. The patients healed satisfactorily and had no complications, such as cut-out in most cases. However, there was one case of breakage of the implant and one case of non-union at the 3-month period during the follow-up check-up. Amongst all patients, 77 cases were successfully reduced with traction on a fracture table under fluoroscopy; the others were opened to correct the displacement. The average operation time was 35.5min, and the mean bleeding amount was 150ml (including operative blood loss and wound drainage). The mean image intensifier time was 5min and the mean length of incision was 9cm.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The PFLCP can be a feasible alternative to the treatment of pertrochanteric fractures. Treatment with a PFLCP can provide good-to-excellent healing for pertrochanteric fractures, with a limited occurrence of complications.Pertrochanteric femoral fractures are one of the most common fractures in old patients, affecting approximately 300,000 people every year. The locking compression plate was introduced about a decade ago as a new implant that allows angular-stable plating for the treatment of complex comminuted and osteoporotic fractures. Here, we report the results of our clinical trial of pertrochanteric fractures treated with proximal femur locking compression plate (PFLCP) (Trauson or Kanghui, China). In the current study, we tested the efficiency of the PFLCP by assessing its ability to maintain radiographic reduction and evaluating its functional outcome according to time-course measurement after the fracture. A total of 110 patients (72 females and 38 males) with pertrochanteric femoral fractures received surgery treatment with PFLCP in our hospital from May 2007 to October 2009. The mean age of the patients was 75 (48–93) years. Pertrochanteric fracture includes both intertrochanteric and subtrochanteric femoral fractures: intertrochanteric fractures were classified according to Jensen (1980), The PFLCP is a contact-limited, angular-stable plate designed for the treatment of complex, comminuted pertrochanteric fractures. The plate is anatomically precontoured to the metaphyseal zone of the proximal femur. The preoperational planning of fracture reduction and the selection of an appropriate implant length were performed with specific templates. A lateral longitudinal incision of about 6.0 After the surgery, drain was removed after 48 Amongst all the 110 patients, 108 (98%) were available for follow-up check-up at 6 weeks, 104 (95%) at 3 months, 100 (91%) at 6 months and 94 (85%) at 1 year ( Agreement has been achieved on the significance of restoring stability and early mobilisation during the treatment of pertrochanteric fractures. The successful restoration of stability and early mobilisation reduce the morbidity/mortality rates associated with prolonged immobilisation. Moreover, they can improve functional recovery by avoiding malunion and encouraging mobility. The best treatment for these fractures remains controversial. Although DHS is one of the standard treatments, high failure rates of sliding hip screws in unstable fractures have been reported. We found that the union rate of the PFLCP for pertrochanteric fractures was 95%, 98% and 100% at the 3-month, 6-month and 1-year follow-up check-up. No case showed a cut-out of the femoral head screw. Possibly, the reason is that the PFLCP has mechanical advantages of three-dimensional and angular stable fixations. It also has an implant that is more biomechanically suitable for pertrochanteric fractures, even unstable fractures and fractures associated with osteoporotic bone. ‘Cut-out’ of the femoral head screw, which is the most frequently reported complication leading to implant failure in traditional implants, We report that the PFLCP can be a feasible alternative for the treatment of intertrochanteric and subtrochanteric fractures. The complication rates of the PFLCP implant are lower than most traditional implants described in previous studies. However, we must carefully choose the implant for the treatment of pertrochanteric fracture based on (1) individual patient assessment and (2) experience of the operational team. In addition, according to biomechanical studies on the calcar femorale, the PFLCP is still not an ideal implant for pertrochanteric fractures. Thus, we propose three requirements for an ideal internal fixation for pertrochanteric fracture: (1) femoral neck screw with at least three-dimensional structures of the fixed system; (2) minimal angle between the femoral neck screw axis and the femoral shaft and thus maximum alignment between the angle of normal hip joint weight-bearing line and the femoral graft axis (normally 25°); and (3) ability of the implant to prevent the rotation of the femoral head. Unfortunately, none of the currently used devices can fully meet these three criteria. Future studies should be conducted to determine the optimal implant for the internal fixation of pertrochanteric fractures that can maximally meet the three criteria described above. None of the authors has received or will receive benefits for personal or professional use from a commercial party related directly or indirectly to the subject of this article.