A water quality model was designed to represent longitudinal and vertical concentration variations in narrow, stratified lakes/reservoirs and was applied to the Shimajigawa reservoir in Japan. In order to predict the concentrations of nutrients, DO, iron, and plankton, three models were combined. They consisted of a runoff model, a lake/reservoir flow-transport model, and an ecological model. It is thought that algal growth in reservoirs is increased by the release of phosphorus from the sediment and that both the formation and dissolution of an iron–phosphate complex are key factors controlling the rate at which phosphorus is released. Thus, to understand the dynamics of phosphorus in the lake/reservoir, the iron cycle and related redox reactions in the water and sediment column were taken into consideration. In addition, the processes of phosphorus adsorption/sedimentation under aerobic conditions and phosphorus desorption/release from the sediment were described by modeling the creation and decomposition of the iron-bound phosphate complex.
                  Following the calibration of its parameters, the model was shown to be able to reproduce the actual oxygen profile, the dynamics of iron and nutrients, and algal growth. In particular, by combining the ecological model with the iron-bound phosphate sub-model, we were able to predict changes in PO4-P concentrations in the hypolimnion. This shows that the combination of the iron-bound phosphate sub-model with the ecological model is very useful in understanding the dynamics of phosphorus in a lake/reservoir where a seasonal cycle between aerobic and anaerobic conditions occurs. In addition, the relationship between occasional algal blooms and phosphorus dynamics was investigated using the model. Algal densities in the reservoir were found to be strongly related to the amounts of phosphate transported from the lower layer to the epilimnion when turnover occurred, and were affected by the phosphorus dynamics of the lower layer. In turn, the amount of phosphate transported in this way was found to increase in accordance with the amount released from the sediment, which was found to depend on the development of an anaerobic layer.Managing the quality as well as the quantity of water resources in reservoirs has become crucial with the increasing demand for clean drinking water and for healthy ecosystems within the catchment areas. However, changes to natural river systems resulting from the construction of reservoirs have given rise to water quality problems, such as high turbidity and eutrophication. In the Shimajigawa reservoir, algal blooms, caused mainly by nutrient release from the sediments, have resulted in a deterioration in water quality from winter to spring. Predicting the scale of this phenomenon quantitatively requires information on the dynamics of the nutrients and dissolved oxygen in the water–sediment interface as well as in the water column. The comprehensive use of models in environmental management started early in the 1970s. Today, we have the experience of more than 4000 studies of ecological models, which have moved more and more during the past decade towards coupled biogeochemical models. A number of mathematical models have set out to solve reservoir water quality problems, particularly those connected with eutrophication ( Simple estimates of the chlorophyll Ideally, a dynamic eutrophication model should be used for predicting the reservoir's response to nutrient inputs. There are numerous models dealing with the eutrophication process (e.g. The vertical transport of nutrients and other particulate matter plays a fundamental role in the evolution of the eutrophication process. Also dissolved oxygen in the lake/reservoir is one of the most important water qualities because many physical and biochemical processes are controlled by it. In order to describe the dynamics affecting these substances, ecological models have been developed which incorporate two-dimensional or three-dimensional hydrodynamic treatments (e.g. The bottom sediments have been identified as a potential source of phosphorus to the overlying water. The internal load, i.e. upward flux, of phosphorus from the benthic sediment may play an essential role in the nutrient balance of the water column and be critical to lake ecosystems ( As pointed out above, the internal phosphorus cycle of water bodies is regulated not only by oxygen but also by iron (Fe) concentrations. The concentration of dissolved iron in the deeper layers can be very high, which is a typical feature of meromictic water bodies. Upon reoxygenation, ferrous ions spontaneously oxidize and precipitate as ferric hydroxide.  In this paper, an ecological model, a two-dimensional hydrodynamics model and a model of the runoff of nutrients from the watershed are integrated in order to predict longitudinal and vertical variations in the concentrations of dissolved substances in a narrow, stratified body of water over several years. A new process-oriented model of the water–sediment exchange process for nutrients and other components is developed and incorporated into the ecological model so as to describe the behavior of phosphorus in the hypolimnion. We particularly focus on the dynamics of iron coupled with dissolved oxygen in both the water and the sediments and their effect on the phosphorus cycle, and the circulation of phosphorus in a body of water was investigated by modeling the processes involved in the deposition or dissolution of iron-bound phosphate. The main objective of this model analysis is to obtain a quantitative understanding of the influence of seasonal nutrient turnover and water–sediment interactions in an aquatic ecosystem, and to investigate whether phosphorus is regulated mainly by the iron dynamics, and whether the development/recession of phosphorus release through water–sediment interaction plays a key role in the lake/reservoir ecosystem. Water samples were obtained between 1999 and 2001 from the Simajigawa reservoir, located in the west of Japan ( The catchment area of the reservoir is 32.0 The water column at the deepest portion of the reservoir (M-1) was monitored daily between 9:00 and 10:00 Solar radiation, wind speed, air temperature, humidity, and rainfall were measured hourly at the dam. The downstream discharge and the surface water levels were measured hourly and averaged per day. The amount of inflowing water from the watershed was calculated from the rainfall recorded at the reservoir, the discharge and the surface water levels. These data were used as the boundary conditions for the following models. A water quality model was developed using the ecological model shown in The phosphate, ammonia, nitrite, nitrate, TN and TP, COD, SS loads at the inflow points to the reservoir were calculated using the relationship between the loads and the discharge rates of the inflowing river. In a lake/reservoir where a stable thermocline is formed, the water column is separated into a flow layer and a stagnation layer, since the flow induced by the river inflow is quite weak. Nevertheless, it is necessary to calculate the vertical profile of DO since the dynamics of iron and phosphate depend on its concentration. Therefore, to understand the nutrient dynamics in the Shimajigawa reservoir, it was necessary to use a three-dimensional or two-dimensional model that could predict longitudinal and vertical distributions of substances and water temperature. We used a two-dimensional model to obtain a high level of accuracy for the prediction of flow in a narrow reservoir. The calculation grid used in the flow and ecological models was 100 We used an equation of continuity and momentum equations to calculate the flow. The following assumptions were applied: (1) incompressible fluid, (2) Boussinesq approximation and (3) centripetal acceleration as a minor correction to gravity. The laterally averaged velocities and pressure were expressed as follows: Eq. The dispersion equations for temperature and substances (total 13 variables) were expressed as follows: The temperature of the inflowing river water was known, and that of rainfall was assumed to be the same as air temperature. The boundary condition ( Seven components (algae (two classes: BG, NBG), zooplankton, fish, detritus, DOM, DIN and PO For the algal categories, two types of algae, a blue-green group and non-blue-green group, were distinguished, since in the Shimajigawa reservoir The equation for DO was expressed as follows: The ecological model with linear sedimentation and release sub-models was unable to represent the cycling of phosphorus in the hypolimnion and in the layer of water close to the sediment of the lake/reservoir because sorption and desorption of the substances also affected the processes of sedimentation and release from the bottom ( Seasonal changes in phosphorus concentrations due to sedimentation and release have been simulated by models such as  The oxidation of Fe(II) to Fe(III) occurs via the loss of one electron. With oxygen as the electron acceptor, the overall redox reaction occurs in the aerobic layer: 2FeOOH·H In the aerobic layer, FeOOH(s) is stable. However, as iron-containing particles are transported to the anaerobic layer, ferric hydroxide is thermodynamically unstable and becomes reduced to soluble ferrous iron. One electron is required in the organic matter mineralization process as shown by the following reduction half-reaction: Fe(II) is soluble in sediment pore waters and is released into the water column from the sediment. To predict the concentration of iron in a lake/reservoir with both aerobic and anaerobic layers, modeling of these iron reactions is required. The kinetics of redox reactions in the aerobic and anaerobic layers were described using the following first-order reaction equation based on the method of The water–sediment interactions relating to iron can be expressed by the following model:  The concentration of scavenged phosphate in the anaerobic layer depends on the rates of two opposing processes: diffusion from the sediment interface after the reduction of iron, and sorption on to ferric hydroxide in settling particles. The dominant proportion of phosphorus transported from the epilimnion to the sediment was organic phosphorus contained within algae and detritus. Organic phosphorus changed to PO In order to describe these two processes, the sedimentation rates and release rates in Eq. The release rate of dissolved phosphate ( The scheme for the proposed ecological model incorporating the iron-bound phosphate reaction as described above is shown in As the process-oriented ecological model involving water–sediment interactions is highly non-linear, it is difficult to determine the sets of all non-unique model parameters because of the limited measured data. Therefore, we determined the parameter sets using random sampling and the least squares method ( The input data for the model were reservoir dimensions (water depth, length, and width), hydrological data (inflow, outflow), watershed information (watershed area, nutrient exporting rate), meteorological data (solar radiation, wind velocity, air temperature, humidity, rainfall), and initial conditions (temperature, concentrations of all compartments). In the epilimnion, DO exceeded 5 Nitrogen was distributed with an almost constant concentration from the epilimnion to the SO layer and also in the bottom sediment ( In the upper portion of the reservoir's water column, DO was constant at 10 When cold water flowed into the epilimnion in winter and turnover occurred, the AAE layer became aerobic. Under these conditions, the concentration of iron at the AAE layer decreased ( The relationship between PO  Nitrogen concentrations at the SO layer were influenced by the decomposition of detritus that had descended from the epilimnion, and the flux released from the sediment. The predicted concentrations of inorganic nitrogen in the epilimnion and SO layers were in agreement with observed values (  As an anaerobic layer developed, 36.8 Based on the linear model, the rate of change in the PO On the other hand, in the ecological model combined with the iron-bound phosphate sub-model, a relatively good agreement was obtained between measured and predicted PO Predicted PO In this section, we discuss the changes in DO and PO Chlorophyll The relationship between the amount of phosphate transported from the lower layer and the algal growth rate was investigated using the prepared ecological model combined with the iron-bound phosphate sub-model. The prediction quantitatively described the chlorophyll Based on the above results, it was concluded that the most important factor determining algal densities in the Shimajigawa reservoir was the amount of phosphate transported from the lower layer to the epilimnion. This amount intricately depended on the water depth, the development of an anaerobic layer (vertical distribution of DO), the temperature of the inflowing water during winter, the vertical distribution of the reservoir's water temperature, the amounts of total phosphorous, phosphate and minerals in the bottom sediments and the phosphate concentration in the lower layer. In order to model these processes successfully, it is necessary to be able to describe the vertical distribution of water temperature, the development of an anaerobic layer and the behavior of phosphorus in the lower layer. A water quality simulation model incorporating compartments concerned with two-dimensional flow, the biochemical process and the interaction between iron and phosphate was developed and applied to a reservoir exhibiting an anaerobic layer as a result of thermal stratification. The predicted dynamics of phosphorus in the hypolimnion were in agreement with measured values. An analysis of the results shows that the phosphate dynamics are governed by oxygen and iron in the water column. The model was able to describe occasionally occurring algal blooms, and made it clear that algal growth is affected by the phosphorus dynamics of the lower layer. Thus, in order to make quantitative predictions of changes in the algal dynamics of a lake/reservoir, a biogeochemical model with an iron-bound phosphate sub-model is required, as has been demonstrated in the present study. The proposed model is a useful tool for the quantitative understanding of various processes within water bodies, and of proposed management plans for nutrients. For example, it is expected that the stratification of lakes/reservoirs will be more prolonged in future as a result of the rise in average air temperatures due to global warming. It follows that the development of the anaerobic layer will be extended, which will in turn influence the ecosystems of water bodies. Therefore, it is important that future applications of the model focus on evaluating long-term influences, such as global warming, on the water quality of the lakes/reservoirs. The Ministry of Land, Infrastructure and Transport Government of Japan, Chugoku Regional Development Bureau kindly provided data used for this study. We would like to express thanks to Drs. Nobuhisa Wakisaka and Takako Morie for their invaluable comments to improve this study, and Mr. Oshinobu Ihara for his data arrangement.