In stream sediment geochemical exploration, anomalies can be recognized by ‘undiluting’ concentrations of indicator elements in every stream sediment sample catchment basin (SCB) as a function of topographic, geomorphologic, and geologic factors. However, this SCB modeling, like contour mapping, of stream sediment geochemical anomalies depends on sampling locations and sampling density. These arbitrary aspects of stream sediment sampling can render SCB or contour mapping of stream sediment anomalies inefficient. In this paper, instead of evaluating the relative exploration importance of each sample per SCB, we evaluated the relative exploration importance of samples per natural drainage catchment basin (DCB). Accordingly, we developed a new fuzzy weighting scheme for each DCB based on the distribution of anomalous and background samples in each DCB. In this new approach of weighted drainage catchment basin (WDCB) mapping of stream sediment geochemical anomalies, individual DCBs are given fuzzy weights representing their relative importance for prospecting the deposit-type sought. Hence, a map of WDCB can be used directly as a geochemical evidence layer in fuzzy-based mineral prospectivity mapping. In this regard, we demonstrated that the prediction rate of prospectivity map obtained by using WDCB approach with respect to known mineral deposit occurrences is higher than that of prospectivity map obtained by using a SCB or contour map.Geochemical exploration based on stream sediment data is, traditionally, an efficient method for identifying anomalous areas especially in the preliminary stages of prospecting for undiscovered outcropping or concealed mineral deposits. Analysis of significant anomalies in geochemical landscapes based on stream sediment geochemical data is important for creating and integrating layers of geochemical evidence in mineral potential mapping (MPM) for the deposit-type sought ( Details of processes controlling the downstream variations of stream sediment compositions are poorly understood or unknown because of complex erosion processes, influence of pollutants, and influence of compositions and distributions of regolith and bedrock ( Theoretically, concentrations of indicator elements in stream sediments decrease with increasing distance downstream from an anomaly source (e.g., mineral occurrences). However, in many cases, the gradient of downstream decay of stream sediment chemical compositions is not linear because of non-linear downstream variations of factors that could influence fluvial dispersion of sediments (e.g., However, according to Here, instead of using sampled stream segments to define SCBs, we used main rivers to outline their catchment basins. Catchment basins of main rivers (hereafter referred to as drainage catchment basins or DCBs) rather than SCBs have been used for modeling and studying contamination, erosion, hydrogeochemical dispersion, groundwater migration and sources of sediment (e.g., The improved technique described here is called weighted drainage catchment basin (WDCB), which is a kind of discrete field modeling of geochemical landscapes ( In the WDCB approach, drainage networks are divided into DCBs, which represent the skeleton and infrastructure of a topographic and geomorphologic model of a stream system ( To create a WDCB map, we attributed a weight to the whole area of each DCB based on the notion that stream sediments associated with mineralized DCBs have higher concentrations of elements compared to stream sediments associated with non-mineralized DCBs. To assign a weight to each DCB, element contents or derived geochemical variables of all stream sediment samples within a DCB were used for defining its importance for prospecting mineral deposits. Hence, in mineralized DCBs the mean and/or median of element contents, with respect to all samples (both anomaly and background samples), is generally higher than in non-mineralized DCBs. To demonstrate this statement, we delineated DCBs in the study area (n According to The distributions of Because stream sediment samples in every DCB have different element contents, the weight assigned to each DCB is based on classes of samples. To calculate a score ( For the present study, based on The calculated values of According to The study area is a small part of the Urumieh-Dokhtar Volcanic belt of Iran ( To demonstrate the superior ability of the WDCB mapping approach over SCB modeling or contour mapping for facilitating analysis of complex anomaly patterns in order to vector into mineralized zones to support MPM, we used buffers around intrusive bodies in the study area as indicators of the mineral deposit-type sought. In this study, porphyry-Cu deposits represent the mineral deposit-type sought. For MPM of this deposit-type, a map of distance from contacts of intrusive bodies with other lithologies was generated first. Then, because proximity to intrusive contacts represents favorability for porphyry-Cu mineralization ( Because the map in We used DCBs numbered 12, 15, 37, and 40 with known mineral occurrences for comparing and evaluating the results. In this regard, in DCB number 12 there are anomalous samples immediately downstream of known mineral occurrences. Hence, the resulting prospectivity map ( The foregoing comparison of Stream sediment geochemical anomalies are usually spatially non-coincident with other indicative geological features (e.g., igneous intrusions) because the former represent transported materials whereas the latter are in situ. Accordingly, integration of geochemical evidential maps derived from stream sediment geochemical data with other geo-exploration evidence layers may result in prospectivity maps with poor prediction rate. Hence, in explored regions with complex stream sediment anomaly patterns (e.g., DCBs numbered 15, 37, and 40 in The weighted drainage catchment basin (WDCB) modeling of stream sediment geochemical landscapes is an approach whereby the relative importance of all stream sediment samples and geochemical anomaly classes (here strongly anomalous, moderately anomalous and background) in every drainage catchment basin (DCB) are considered in assigning a weight to each of them for prospecting of mineral deposits. The following advantages of the WDCB modeling approach to geochemical anomaly mapping compared to the sample catchment basin (SCB) modeling approach and a contour mapping method have been demonstrated in this paper: Anomalies mapped in WDCB discrete field models of stream sediment geochemical landscapes exhibit stronger positive spatial associations with other indicative geological features (here intrusive contacts) of the mineral deposit-type sought. In the WDCB approach, DCBs are given fuzzy weights representing their relative importance for prospecting the deposit-type sought. Hence, a map of WDCB can directly be used in fuzzy logic MPM as a weighted geochemical evidence layer. The prediction rate of prospectivity map obtained based on WDCB approach with respect to known mineral deposit occurrences is higher than that in the resulting prospectivity map generated based on SCB model or contour map. Using the WDCB approach avoids the disadvantage of mapping anomalies through SCB modeling or contouring in terms of strong dependence on sample locations and sampling density. Consequently, the WDCB approach is much more useful than SCB modeling or contouring for analysis and mapping stream sediment geochemical anomalies in preliminary exploration stages with relatively low sampling density. However, because sampling density affects SCB modeling, this paper has demonstrated in an area with certain sampling sites and density that the WDCB approach is better than contour and SCB mapping methods to map geochemical anomalies. This is because the former delineates complex anomaly patterns independent of sampling sites while the two latter methods are dependent on sampling sites and density, and, consequently, are inefficient for delineating complex anomaly patterns. This statement is illustrated especially in mineral potential mapping where WDCB map is integrated with other geo-exploration evidential layers. The authors thank Madan Pars Asia (MPA) consulting engineering company, especially Dr. Krimi, and Mr. Sahebzamani for supplying the necessary data to do this research work. The authors express special thanks to Mr. Esfehanipoor, head of exploration department of National Iranian Copper Industries Company (NICICO), for some support. We thank Dr. Antonella Buccianti for her suggestions for improving this paper. We also appreciate the comments of the anonymous reviewers.