Electric arc furnace (EAF) dust, as a typical industrial waste, was often used as absorbents or building materials, which ignored its magnetic properties. In this study, EAF dust was first used as magnetic carrier particles to remove micro-fine particles from suspensions in hydrometallurgical processes. This dust was found to mainly consist of γ-Fe2O3 and 28.6% of it was below 900nm. Even though in fine particle size, the EAF dust still showed an excellent settleability under the combined assistance of polyacrylamide and external magnetic field. As an application example, EAF dust magnetic flocculation process was employed to remove micro-fine particles from oxygen pressure acid leachate of vanadium bearing stone coal, which was difficult to separate. The results revealed a maximum suspended solids (SS) removal rate of 97.72% within 30s. The SEM micrographs showed that SS particles either overlapped on the surface of coarse EAF dust or predominant agglomerated with fine EAF dust due to polymer bridging, forming large and compact SS-loaded magnetic floccules. The zeta potential analysis and DLVO theory calculations confirmed that the charge neutralization and mutual adsorption between micro-fine quartz and EAF dust. This study demonstrated that the EAF dust magnetic flocculation could efficiently remove micro-fine particles from suspensions, which may provide a cost-effective method for solid-liquid separation in hydrometallurgy.Electric arc furnace (EAF) dust, as an industrial waste, is generated in the electric arc steelmaking process, which is also a potential magnetic carrier for magnetic flocculation. During the meltdown of scrap, volatile components are fumed off and are collected with particulate matter in the off-gas cleaning system Magnetic flocculation has been turned out to be a promising method for the removal of magnetic solid particles and nonmagnetic suspended solids in wastewater Micro-fine particles such as gypsum and quartz, have caused serious problems in hydrometallurgy, especially for oxygen pressure acid leachate of vanadium bearing stone coal Magnetic flocculation would be a potential method of removing suspended solids from high solids content solutions including oxygen pressure acid leachate of vanadium bearing stone coal. However, the application of magnetic flocculation was uneconomical. In this procedure, magnetite is used as a magnetic carrier, which was found most useful In this study, EAF dust was first used as a magnetic carrier in magnetic flocculation to remove SS such as micro-fine gypsum and quartz from the oxygen pressure acid leachate of vanadium bearing stone coal, which was an example of removing SS or solid/liquid separation from suspensions in hydrometallurgy. Firstly, EAF dust and SS in leachate were characterized by granulometric analysis, XRD, SEM and settleability analysis. Then the interaction mechanisms between EAF dust and SS particles were examined by zeta potential analysis and DLVO theory calculations. Finally, the cost and influences of EAF dust magnetic flocculation and conventional settling on the subsequent hydrometallurgical process were evaluated. The vanadium bearing stone coal oxygen pressure acid leaching suspension in the experiments was obtained from Shanxi Province, China. The SS among the leachate was filtered and dried for analysis, abbreviated VSS. The electric arc furnace (EAF) dust and the magnetite mineral (Fe All chemicals used in the experiments, such as polyacrylamide (Non-ion, 8–12 A Baird PS-6 ICP-AES (Inductively Coupled Plasma-Atomic Emission Spectrometry, Baird Company, USA) was used to determine the trace element compositions of the solutions. Elemental analysis of the solids was performed using X-ray fluorescence (XRF) spectrometry (PANalytical Axios mAX, Netherlands). The sintering dust size distribution was determined using a Malvern Mastersizer 2000 instrument (Malvern Instruments Ltd., Worcestershire, UK) with a detection range of 0.02–2000 X-ray powder diffraction data were collected on a D8 Advance automatic diffractometer in the Bragg-Brentano geometry and were used to evaluate the mineralogical composition of the treated and untreated suspended solids in the stone coal oxygen pressure acid leaching liquor, EAF dust and the magnetite concentrate. CuKa1 radiation ( The surface charge of the particles was assessed by zeta potential measurements using the Malvern zetasizer Nano ZS (Malvern Instruments, UK) at 25 Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images and energy dispersive X-ray analysis (EDX) spectroscopy were taken on an FEI-quanta 200 scanning electron microscope (FEI Company, Hillsboro, OR, USA) using secondary electrons with an acceleration voltage of 20 Total suspended solids ( In Eq. The suspended solids removal rate ( In Eq. In a typical settling experiment, 10 Suspended solid removing tests were performed with stone coal oxygen pressure acid leaching suspension of about 5 The particle sizes distributions of the examined EAF dust and VSS are given in The chemical composition of the EAF dust used in the study is shown in The X-ray diffraction patterns of the as-received EAF dust and VSS are shown in To analyze the settleability of EAF dust in greater detail, the events occurring in a small-scale experiment conducted batch wise as shown in   By the regression method, the To determine the suspended solid removing efficiency of magnetic flocculation using EAF dust as magnetic particles, it was applied to remove SS from the oxygen pressure acid leachate of vanadium bearing stone coal. The photos of oxygen pressure acid leachate of vanadium bearing stone coal before and after being treated by magnetic flocculation were shown in   It has already been observed that flocculation of charged particles can occur by four mechanisms viz. simple charge neutralization, charge patch neutralization, polymer bridging, and polymer depletion Scanning electron microscopy, with energy dispersive spectrometer, was performed to gain further knowledge of the morphology of settling sludge treated by EAF dust magnetic flocculation. The SEM microphotographs of those samples are presented in As determined by X-ray spectroscopy (EDS), detailed chemical compositions of the settling sludge are presented in To examine the charge neutralization phenomenon between EAF dust and VSS, the zeta potential analysis of EAF dust, VSS and mixture of VSS and EAF dust in 0.01 To determine the particles interaction between EAF dust and VSS in aqueous dispersions, zeta potential distributions of EAF dust, VSS and their mixture at different pH were studied ( The van der Waals attractive and electrostatic repulsive forces play a critical role in determining the interaction of nanosized and submicron-sized particles in water. To examine the interaction between micro-fine quartz or gypsum in VSS and EAF dust, the interaction energies between the EAF dust and micro-fine quartz or gypsum were calculated using the DLVO theory The electrostatic repulsive energy The London-van der Waals attractive energy can be obtained from the following equation: The total interaction energies between EAF dust and VSS particles (quartz and gypsum) were calculated at different pH values as a function of the separation distance in 10 At pH 5.8, the total interaction energy is positive when the separation distance larger than 3 However, the interaction energy of EAF dust-gypsum as a function of separation distance at different pH was much more different ( The removal of micro-fine gypsum may be mainly due to the polymer bridging. It has been proved that the provision of divalent cations in the form of Ca  The cost of coagulation/flocculation process for SS removal is comprised of handling cost and influences in the subsequent process. Therefore, economic interest to use EAF dust for SS removal of leachate was considered from two points of view: (1) significant reductions in present and future SS disposal costs for oxygen pressure acid leachate of vanadium bearing stone coal; (2) providing a relatively high V Often the costs of grinding magnetite for small particle size can account for a significant part of the overall operating expenses of the magnetic flocculation of SS, and they are likely to increase due to increasingly maintenance cost for the mill On the other hand, SS removing by EAF dust magnetic flocculation will provide a relatively high V Fundamentally, such approaches as beneficial reuses offer two distinct advantages, concerning economic savings on overall treatment plant operational costs and environmental sustainability. Therefore, it is reasonable to conclude that EAF dust magnetic flocculation can be used as a low-cost method for the SS removal from the oxygen pressure acid leachate of vanadium bearing stone coal. In this research, the characterization and settleability of a typical industrial waste, namely EAF dust, were studied. The results confirmed that most (nearly 90%) of the EAF dust were below 50 As an example of application, EAF dust magnetic flocculation was employed to remove suspended solids, mainly consisting of micro-fine quartz and gypsum particles, from the oxygen pressure acid leachate of vanadium bearing stone coal. A maximum suspended solids removal rate of 97.72% was obtained under an external magnetic field with an addition of 1% EAF dust and 20 EAF dust magnetic flocculation can be considered as an attractive alternative for removing micro-fine particles, which may provide a cost-effective method for solid-liquid separation in hydrometallurgy. This research was supported by