Graphene/titanium carbide composites were synthesized by means of sol–gel infiltration and spark plasma sintering (SPS). The graphene used in this research was casted into a sponge-like shape, composed of a three-dimensional (3D) network of graphene sheets. The sol–gel infiltration synthesis method allowed the formation of nanostructured ceramics inside the porous structure of graphene networks, thus forming composites. The compositions and microstructures of the Ti–O–C composites changed with the amount of the polymerizable carbon source (i.e. furfuryl alcohol (FA)) in the solution. A high carbon ratio was required to maintain the structure of the graphene network, as the graphene sheets could become a carbon source to react with TiO2 resulting in a lamellar-shaped grain morphology. Samples after SPS showed some toughening effects, such as de-bonding, bridging and formation of microcracks. Vickers hardness, electrical resistivity and thermal conductivity were examined for the composites.Titanium carbide (TiC) is an ultra-high temperature ceramic (UHTC), with a low density (4.93 Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and carbon fibers are often used in the manufacturing of ceramic composites Furthermore, the carbon material used in this work is a three-dimensional (3D) graphene network, like a sponge, instead of the traditional two-dimensional (2D) graphene nanosheets. This continuous 3D network is composed of multi-layer graphene sheets and has a cork-like hierarchical structure ( In order to fabricate ceramic composites using this 3D graphene network, traditional powder metallurgy approach is not practical, because powders have difficulty to gain full access to the micro-sized pores of the graphene network. Therefore, a sol–gel technique was applied in this study. TiC was synthesized by direct carbothermal reduction of titanium–oxygen–carbon (Ti–O–C) precursors. The Ti–O–C precursor is a sol–gel mixture of titanium alkoxide and furfuryl alcohol (FA), which is as the carbon source In the present work, novel graphene/TiC composites featuring uniformly distributed graphene sheets and fine TiC grains (the grain size was less than 100 To synthesis the Ti–O–C precursor, the sol–gel process started with the poly(ethylene oxide)-b-poly(propylene oxide)-b-poly(ethylene oxide) copolymer Pluronic P123 (EO To synthesis the composite precursor, the prepared solution above was then infiltrated into graphene network cells (~5 Several characterization methods were used to examine the samples. X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were recorded from 10° to 80° of the 2 The compositions of the samples after 1450 Theoretically, a carbon to titanium (C/Ti) ratio of 3 is able to fully convert TiO The formation of TiC and Ti The status of carbon in the composites was investigated by Raman spectroscopy. The microstructures of the samples with different C/Ti ratios after 1450 The grains also changed with different amounts of C/Ti ratio in the samples. Samples with a higher C/Ti ratio had a smaller grain size. In the samples with C/Ti ratio of 3.8, 6 and 9, there was only the TiC phase and the grain size was around 50 to 100 This template effect was more obvious in the sample with zero FA, where the only carbon source was the graphene sponge. Some lamellar/plate-shaped TiC and reduced titanium oxides are observed ( Three compositions with a C/Ti ratio of 3.8, 6 and 9 respectively were sintered at 1800 The SPS sintered sample with 3.8C/Ti had larger grains around 1 A bi-model distribution of the grain size is also observed in these SPS sintered samples. Two different sizes of TiC grains were observed in each sample (  The composites had quite different properties compared with the reference TiC samples prepared by sol–gel synthesis and SPS under same conditions. The presence of graphene in the composites not only increased the carbon concentration but also limited the densification of the samples, resulting in significantly reduced density and increased porosity, especially for the sample with C/Ti ratio of 6. This also produced much lower hardness and elastic modulus for the graphene added samples compared with the reference sample. This effect appeared not that significant, however, in the samples with lower or higher C/Ti ratios because the overall carbon concentration in these samples was either too low or too high to cause a significant difference between the reference and the graphene containing samples. Both porosity and preserved graphene influenced the mechanical properties of the samples. Sample G-9C has similar porosity as the reference sample, but shows different hardness and fracture behaviors. The fracture toughness of the SPS sintered G-3.8C specimen was found to be higher than that of the reference sample, but it is difficult to estimate the fracture toughness for other graphene containing samples with higher C/Ti ratios. The impressions of the Vickers hardness indents on SPS sintered samples G-6C and G-9C were examined using SEM. The SEM micrographs of the fracture patterns show no regular cone and radial/median cracks ( Based on the images in In the two samples that have high carbon contents, the carbon derived from PFA protected graphene sheets from reaction with TiO The peeling of graphene sheets in the graphene walls is proven to be an energy comsuming process. The indentation load–displacement curves ( Graphene/TiC composites have been successfully synthesized using a sol–gel infiltration into a novel graphene sponge and spark plasma sintering. Furfurly alcohol (FA) was employed as a carbon source. From the carbothermal reduction point of view, the FA was a more desirable carbon source than the graphene sheets in the sponge as the polymerized FA formed a uniform carbon network around each TiO X. Wang acknowledges the Monash Graduate Scholarship (MGS) and the Faculty of Engineering International Postgraduate Research Scholarship (FEIPRS) from the