The knowledge of the distributed performance of a flotation bank, consisting of a number of cells in series, is a key factor for different purposes such as process design, scale-up, diagnosis, operation, control and optimization. A common practice in plant operation is to develop mass balances around the whole flotation bank in order to characterize the overall recovery, typically in rougher flotation. However, testing to fit flotation rate models are seldom developed on industrial flotation banks because they are high consumers of human labor during sampling, mineral samples preparation and chemical analysis development. In this paper a short-cut method is proposed which allows obtaining the relevant information for flotation rate modeling in a flotation bank with minimum effort and cost, and within a reasonable accuracy (less than 1–2% error in estimating cell recovery along the bank). The procedure considers two mass balances, one around the first cell of the bank and the second is the overall mass balance around the whole flotation bank, with a total of only 5 sampling streams. Examples developed in four rougher flotation banks located in three industrial concentrators illustrate the merit of this procedure.The efficiency of a flotation bank operation depends on several factors related to the mineral nature and treatment (mineralogy, morphology, dissemination, particle size, etc.) and the type of instrumentation and operation of the controlled and manipulated variables (air flowrate, pulp level, reagent dosage, etc.). Thus, each process has its own way of operation according to its particular constraints. In order to estimate the ideal flotation process behavior, batch tests are normally developed at laboratory scale. These results are then scaled-up to plant operation, based on empirical factors, in order to establish the proper operation strategy. Thus, the flotation rate of an industrial flotation bank should be characterized primarily to evaluate the scale-up factors and also for diagnosis purposes. The actual plant flotation rate can be compared with the batch results and sometimes with design parameters, so that potential improvements can be identified. However, this practice requires time and resources which are not commonly available in a day to day plant operation, and its use is rather limited to research studies looking at scale-up parameters and the floatability of minerals along the bank, in order to predict the long term operation. Despite this, there are consensuses between the people involved in plant operation about the relevance of the knowledge of flotation rates. Practical evaluations are not developed periodically because of: Cost of chemical assays: large number of samples and chemical assays. Human labor: a large number of people are required for taking samples and samples preparation for chemical assays. Sampling facilities: when plants are designed, including layouts and P&I diagrams, commonly there is little or no special warning about the plant and equipment sampling. A typical problem is that no facilities are available or sometimes no access at all for stream sampling. Time consuming: the large number of samples also takes longer time for preparation and chemical assays development. It has been shown ( A simple procedure is proposed in order to develop a standard and periodic flotation bank testing, which allows for direct evaluation of the flotation rates in an industrial flotation bank. The procedure consists of sampling the first cell of the bank together with sampling the flotation bank as a whole. Thus, a total of only 5 sampling streams are required: fresh feed, first cell concentrate and tail, final concentrate and final tail. From these samples, two mass balances are adjusted, one around the first cell of the bank and the second around the whole flotation bank. The first mass balance typically shows the maximum recovery gradient along the flotation bank, so it represents the best condition to identify the maximum rate constant Experimental data from each sampled stream, considering solid percent and chemical assays for different components, are then used to evaluate the model parameters of the flotation bank. In order to evaluate the merit of the flotation rates prediction using the short-cut method (2 nodes), a comparison was made versus the flotation parameters derived from a complete mass balance adjustment considering the sampling of each cell in a bank (9 nodes). The comparison was firstly made using Eqs. The data analyzed corresponds to rougher flotation banks of different Cu and Mo concentrators ( The sampling data obtained in Laguna Seca concentrator, Minera Escondida, was analyzed for overall solids content and mineral grade. On the other hand, sampling data from Andina and Salvador concentrators, Codelco-Chile, was analyzed for overall solids content and mineral grade, as well as for 3 different particle size classes (S1, S2, S3), shown in    Here, it can be seen that prediction of the maximum recovery, using the 2 nodes approach, showed a mean standard deviation of around 1–1.4%, while the maximum rate constant showed a mean standard deviation of less than 13%. This mean deviation in the rate constant prediction has only a minor effect (less than 2% error) in predicting the recovery of the first cells in a bank. The largest difference between parameters predicted from both methods was observed for the Laguna Seca data from Minera Escondida. It is important to notice that the operational data from Laguna Seca did not converge smoothly to a final plateau value after the total residence time (nine cells). Also the first cell recovery was slightly higher than expected according to the observation of the overall performance of the rougher flotation bank ( The mineral recovery and the enrichment ratio (concentrate grade/feed grade) of the first cell in a flotation bank critically affect the overall performance of the flotation bank. Thus, the knowledge of the mineral recovery and enrichment ratio in the first cell plays a key role in terms of control and optimization of the whole flotation bank.    A flotation bank simulator, which accounts for changes in cell residence time along the bank, was also used for comparison purposes between the short-cut (2 nodes) and the whole bank (9 nodes) sampling methods. The good agreement between these two methods was similar to that observed using Eqs. A short-cut method to characterize the distributed performance of an industrial flotation bank was evaluated. The method consists of using 2 nodes, only 5 sampling streams, for mass balance adjustment in order to fit the model parameters of the whole bank. Results of testing this procedure in three different concentrators showed that recovery of each cell, along the flotation bank, can be predicted with less than 1–2% error. In plant practice, the use of the short-cut method can save significant effort, labor and chemical assays, in obtaining flotation rate parameters. This information, regularly updated, can be very useful to optimize the metallurgical performance of industrial flotation banks, i.e., improving their operating and control strategy. The proposed method is a powerful tool provided the flotation bank is operated under normal and smooth conditions. However, it is recommended to have some redundancy in the plant data, preferably with replicates, for more precise parameter estimation. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial assistance received from CONICYT, project Fondecyt 1040100, and Santa María University, project 270522. From a practical point of view, the overall flotation process is generally well represented by a first order kinetic model ( The simplest For