This investigation is an attempt to understand the expansion behaviour of compacts of nanocrystalline titanium powder during thermal treatments. Entrapped gases cause excessive expansion in the green compacts. The dilatometric study reveals that there is no significant difference in the expansion coefficient of sintered nanocrystalline titanium samples, compared to their micron-size counterpart.The coefficient of thermal expansion (CTE) of the material is reported to be affected greatly when grain size is reduced to nanoscale. The CTE of the nanocrystalline Cu sample with a grain size of 8 nm is reported to be 31 During the powder metallurgy processing of materials, it often needs to determine the exact thermal expansion and shrinkage value in the powder compact during sintering as a function of temperature and time. The release of adsorbed/entrapped gases and residual stresses may cause additional expansion in the compact during heating, which are needed to be separated out from the expansion of the material. There has been no such study on titanium powders and in views of the controversies on the reported CTE values of nanocrystalline materials, this investigation becomes important. In the present investigation efforts have been made to study the thermal expansion behaviour of the compacts of fine and attrition milled nanocrystalline titanium powders. Titanium powder (mTi) of −325 mesh with 99.68% purity was procured from M/S Alfa Aesar (Germany) for the present work. As per the specifications obtained from the manufacturers, the major impurities in the powder are O (∼ Both powders (mTi and nTi) were compacted using 7.95-mm diameter hardened steel die by applying uniaxial single action pressure. Only die wall lubrication (zinc stearate) was employed. The compacts after release from the press were checked visually for defects and their green densities were measured. Samples compacted at 300 MPa were taken, where the green densities of mTi and nTi were of similar values (∼ Dimensional measurements of all the sintered samples were carried out. nTi sample showed small weight loss of about 0.2 to 0.4 wt.%, which is attributed to the loss of residual stearic acid (which was not removed during earlier treatment at 250 °C). Both, mTi and nTi samples yield almost similar density (∼ The CTE values for powder compacts (green) during heating appear to show a large scatter and are consistently higher than those measured for sintered samples and CTE value of bulk titanium (8.9 During heating the average CTE value of nTi compacts (∼ The CTE values obtained for sintered samples of mTi also showed a large scatter and the average CTE value was found to be ∼ When the particles are in fine or nanometric size, they adsorb a large amount of gases and have tendency to agglomerate. The agglomerated particles have small pores located at triple or more particle contact points. When such powders are compacted, it is possible that many of these pores get isolated. These pores are filled with air or gases. Also the compacts have a large amount of residual stresses. The observed thermal expansion in compact during the initial period of heating would be due to thermal expansion of metal, release of internal stresses and expansion of the gases. When temperature increases, the effect of stresses and gases get reduced and then expansion results mainly from thermal expansion of metal. When the compact is heated, the volumes of entrapped gases increase and give rise to pressure inside the pores. With increase in temperature the gas solubility in titanium would also increase drastically. This would tend to decrease the amount of gases present in the pores and thus also the rate of linear expansion, in direct proportion to temperature and time of heating/holding. The release of the gases through the grain boundaries and partial dissolution of gases in titanium is expected at higher temperatures. The contribution of gas in expansion of sample gets reduced with increasing temperature and during isothermal treatment. Thus CTE values of sintered mTi sample tend to reach the normal CTE value of bulk titanium ( Nanocrystalline titanium particles, due to their small size and increased defect concentration and transition element impurities (Fe, Cr, Ni, etc. picked-up during milling) could cause enhanced diffusivities. Onset of densification processes thus can be expected to start at quite low temperature, which in turn could easily compensate the expansion caused during early stages of heating. The number of fine closed pores and amount of gases in compact of nano-powders are relatively more. Excess amount of gases is caused due to the removal of the residual stearic acid (as samples show weight loss of about 0.2–0.4 wt.% during sintering). Thus the average CTE value of nTi compacts during heating was very high (∼ It was noticed that when the compacts were subjected to a second or third cycle of heating and cooling, not only the differences in the CTE decrease, they tend to assume a constant value. This indicates the effect of gases on thermal expansion has been disappeared. It is interesting to note that the CTE values measured in sintered samples (∼ There appears to be a huge difference in the CTE value of powder compacts during heating from those of sintered samples, which can be attributed to the gases. This effect is more prominent in nano-titanium samples. There seems no significant difference in CTE value of sintered sample of micron-size and nano-size titanium powders.