Coal washing plants are usually fed from various sources. Coals include different combinations which should be considered for increasing the plant proficiency. Thus different methods have been used to enrich various coal types. In this study, Alborz-Sharghi coal washing plant was investigated which is fed from five coalmines. The optimum recovery was achieved for all coal types individually through experimental design. The controllable operation parameters in the experiments were collector dosage, frother dosage, solid percent content and particle size. The other parameters such as impeller speed, pH, conditioning time and flotation time were kept constant for all experiments. The optimum combination of coals was also specified. The results show that the optimum recovery for coal blends is 91.2% which shows much improvement relative to the plant conditions.Coal is considered as an important source of energy. Coal preparation to be used as coke in steel industries, needs special mineral processing methods such as flotation practice by with considering appropriate controlled condition. Coal with less than 12% ash content and coke number of more than 7 is usually appropriate for conversion to suitable coke used in steel industries About 150 Firstly at these tests the slurry was mixed and conditioned in the cell for five minute by the impeller (impeller speed was monitored by the tachometer and kept constant as 1000 The main parameters are shown in Firstly, the results for all coal types were investigated individually. To optimize the process and verify creditability the experiments results, a software based design (DX8) was used. Analysis of parameters and interactions were conducted with analysis of variance (ANOVA) for all response values. ANOVA makes it possible to check that the postulated model fits well the experimental points. The model terms retained in the equations, are after elimination as insignificant variable and their interactions. Effects of each factor on the recovery are shows in The empirical models which relate recovery to collector dosage ( Numerical optimization technique of the Design Experts software was used for simultaneous optimization of multiple responses.   As a result, the optimum conditions for control parameters were, collector dosage, 2000 Solid content and particle size had the most significant effect on recovery. Considering that particle size of class I was finer than that of class II, the recovery was increased by decreasing solid content. Considering ANOVA results within 95% confidence interval for Zemestanurt coal, solid content percent and collector had the most and the least effect on recovery respectively; for Tazareh coal almost all control parameter had equal effect on recovery; for Tabas and Vatan coal solid content had the highest effect and frother had the lowest effect on recovery. For Takht coal solid content and frother had the lowest and the most effect on recovery. The desirability of Vatan coal is the minimum of all. Thus by not taking it into account, in flotation part, the compound desirability would be increased. The authors are thankful to director, Alborz-Sharghi coal washing plant and Eng. Naderi for providing the sample and his constant encouragement and interest in the studies.