Conditions that facilitate the study of gibbsite secondary nucleation, agglomeration and growth as separate crystallization processes have been described. The effects of sodium gluconate, one of the strongest inhibitors of gibbsite crystallization from alkaline aluminate solutions, have been studied under the selected conditions. Sodium gluconate was found to promote secondary nucleation, relative to a control, when present at very low concentrations (1–3 mmol L−1); at slightly higher concentrations (4–6 mmol L−1) it suppressed the release of secondary nuclei. Gluconate caused an increase in the induction period, delayed but did not prevent agglomeration, and reduced ordered growth rates significantly. The observed small changes in crystal morphologies, induced by 4–6 mmol L−1 gluconate in solution, should assist in understanding the mechanisms of gibbsite crystallization inhibition because they reflect different deposition rates on specific crystal faces.Within the Bayer process, the precipitation of gibbsite (Al(OH) Detrimental effects of organic impurities include the inhibition of precipitation, increased soda incorporation in gibbsite (and subsequently, the calcined alumina), increased fines content of the gibbsite, and loss of caustic due to the formation of organic salts The seeded precipitation of gibbsite from caustic aluminate solutions is accomplished by a combination of three crystallization processes, secondary nucleation, agglomeration and ordered growth. Secondary nucleation is the generation of new particles in the presence of seed material while agglomeration is the aggregation and cementation by growth of small particles. In the Bayer process, both require there to be a high aluminate supersaturation in the liquors. Ordered growth is the slow deposition of new gibbsite on crystal faces in a manner that heals surface defects, resulting in a smoothing of surfaces. The three processes usually occur together during precipitation but the contribution of each process to the whole is dependent on precipitation conditions. A systematic study was conducted in which the precipitation of gibbsite (rates, yields and particle characteristics) was investigated for a wide range of experimental conditions Results reported here include details of the nucleation, agglomeration and ordered growth of gibbsite under the selected conditions. In each case, time-based precipitation data are complemented by solids characterisation in order to determine that combination of data that best describes a particular process. Although organic compounds are generally detrimental to gibbsite precipitation in the plant, the same inhibitory properties can be used to probe the mechanisms of gibbsite precipitation. In this respect, the selected methods were applied to a study of the effects of sodium gluconate (Na Supersaturated sodium aluminate solutions at industrial concentrations were prepared by dissolving high-purity gibbsite (C31-hydrate — Alcoa Chemicals Division, Arkansas) Isothermal batch precipitation experiments were carried out using 250 mL capacity polypropylene bottles in a temperature-controlled water bath with bottle roller. A 100 mL aliquot of aluminate solution was brought to temperature in the bottle roller before gibbsite seed and the appropriate amount of sodium gluconate was added. Samples were collected at intervals and filtered; the precipitates were washed with hot (60°C) deionised water and then dried at 60°C for 24 h. Precipitate masses were measured and solid samples retained for further characterisation. Experiments were also carried out at 60°C using a 4 L baffled-pitch, batch crystallizer with overhead stirrer. Again, gluconate and seed were added to the solution after the solution had reached the desired temperature in the crystallizer. Conductivity and temperature were logged continuously using a Foxboro Analyser 873EC with a Foxboro electrodeless conductivity probe 871EC-SPO and Labview software. Measurements commenced at the time of seeding and solution samples were withdrawn using a syringe filter for chemical analysis. Caustic, aluminium and carbonate concentrations in solution were determined using a semi-automated titrimetric method based on the chemistry of the Watts and Utley method Gibbsite solubilities in aluminate solutions were determined from below supersaturation by dissolving gibbsite in sodium hydroxide solutions. Bottles containing the required hydroxide solution with a calculated excess of gibbsite were rolled at constant temperature for periods of 3–6 weeks. They were filtered quantitatively and the filtrate analysed for aluminate concentration. The solids were washed, dried and weighed to obtain the mass balance. Particle size distributions and surface areas (m C31-hydrate was used to seed the secondary nucleation and crystal growth experiments and the agglomeration experiments were seeded with Malakoff-hydrate (Malakoff Industries, a subsidiary of Reynolds International) The selected experimental conditions are summarised in The results obtained for solutions without gluconate indicate reasonable success in separating the processes of nucleation, agglomeration and ordered growth by the selection of different precipitation conditions. Gibbsite precipitation (as yield) under different experimental conditions reflects the supersaturation ratio ( Secondary nucleation is the production of new particles in the presence of seed material and is accompanied by a large desupersaturation of aluminium from solution. It is most clearly evidenced by changing cumulative particle size distributions Agglomeration is the aggregation and cementation by growth of small particles and is also accompanied by a large desupersaturation of aluminium from solution. Similarly, the process can be monitored by changes in particle size distributions, in this case the loss of the 3–30 μm particle size range with time Ordered crystal growth results in only small increases in mean agglomerate diameters of about 2–4% without causing significant changes in the particle size distributions. This crystallization process is better monitored using mass increase Each of the processes described causes changes in surface area per unit volume (Malvern Mastersizer). An increase is observed in the case of secondary nucleation (0.34 to 0.89 m While overall precipitation yield is decreased and delayed with increased gluconate concentration in solution Conductivity data were logged for periods up to 10 h to determine the effects of gluconate on the induction period under conditions favouring secondary nucleation (The use of 10 g L The ability of organic compounds at quite low concentrations to block nucleation has serious implications for the Bayer Process which relies heavily on the production of secondary nuclei to initiate the agglomeration and growth phases. Equally, the ability to promote the formation of fine particles that carry over into the final product is also a matter for concern. Because gluconate delays or prevents substantial secondary nucleation under the selected experimental conditions, a seed material (Malakoff-hydrate) containing a significant proportion of small particles was used to test the effects of gluconate on agglomeration. The results indicate that, in addition to reducing the overall precipitation yield relative to that of the control and in the time-frame of the experiment The reductions in gibbsite yield (mass precipitated) give the clearest indication of the effect of gluconate (2–6 mmol L Gibbsite growth rates can be estimated by applying to the experimental precipitation data a modified version of the equation favoured by King When the equation is applied to data obtained in this study Again, SEM observations of precipitates support these data. After 30 h in the presence of 2 mmol gluconate L In respect of using gluconate to probe the mechanisms of inhibition of gibbsite crystallization and, by extension, gain information about the mechanisms of gibbsite crystallization, it is of interest to know the effects of this compound on gibbsite morphology. Changes in morphology are not easily discerned in seeded gibbsite crystallization. Hence, in this work, we have investigated the effects of gluconate on the morphology of gibbsite crystallized homogeneously from aluminate solutions. Gluconate, in the concentration range 1–4 mmol L The gibbsite particles formed in unseeded aluminate solutions, in the absence or presence of gluconate, are remarkably similar. At gluconate concentrations of 1–3 mmol L In addition, the combination of predictive computer molecular modelling techniques with experimental observation should elucidate the mechanisms of attachment of this and other organic compounds at the seed surface. In particular, it could explain the inhibition of the basal and prismatic faces (and the consequent apparent increase in growth rates of the chamfered faces). Our longer-term goals are to describe active growth sites on the gibbsite surfaces and, hence, devise methods of increasing their numbers/activity, with a view to improving gibbsite deposition rates. It has been shown ( The variety of methods tried here makes it possible to study many aspects of gibbsite crystallization and its inhibition by organic compounds. For example, sodium gluconate, a strong gibbsite crystallization inhibitor, is shown to promote secondary nucleation when present in solution at very low concentrations (1–3 mmol L increase the induction period and cause a decrease in subsequent precipitation rates delay but not prevent agglomeration when present in solution at 2–4 mmol L reduce rates of ordered growth by three (at 2 mmol L block primary nucleation Gibbsite crystals precipitated from unseeded supersaturated aluminate solutions in the presence of low gluconate concentrations (4–6 mmol L The methods described can be used to obtain comparative data on the effects of a number of model organic compounds of selected stereochemistries and functional groups as a means of understanding the mechanisms by which such compounds inhibit gibbsite crystallization. We extend particular thanks to C. Vernon and P. Fawell for many useful discussions about the results and for critical review of the manuscript. The financial support of the Australian Federal Government through its Cooperative Research Centres Program is gratefully acknowledged.