The behaviour of cationic amine collectors used in the reverse cationic flotation of quartz from iron oxide minerals appears to change from one mineral system to the other, deviating from theoretical predictions based on the reagent chemistry. The performance of five amine collectors in the flotation of a South African iron ore and a Brazilian iron ore, each with different textural characteristics was investigated using reverse flotation techniques from Brazil. Furthermore, the overall collection efficacy of the five collectors in iron ore reverse flotation was analysed. Batch flotation tests and a mineralogical characterisation of the ore using QEMSCAN was conducted. Mineral liberation heavily influenced the flotation behaviour of the two ores. A well liberated Brazilian iron ore was amenable to reverse cationic flotation, whereas, the texturally complex South African iron ore did not respond well to reverse cationic flotation. Alkyl ether amines proved to be superior to quaternary amine compounds in the flotation of quartz from hematite.As the excessive extraction of high grade iron ore reserves has led to the rapid depletion of these ore bodies, there is a growing need to extract and upgrade low grade iron ores into more economically viable products. The beneficiation of low grade iron ores through the reverse cationic flotation procedure is gradually gaining popularity as a possible processing route for the future of South Africa’s iron industry. Reverse cationic flotation employs a reagent suite consisting of an amine compound which functions as The most commonly employed cationic collectors fall within the class of alkyl ether amines namely, alkyl ether diamines and alky ether monoamines. Alkyl ether monoamines are the product of a reaction between alcohols and acrylonitrile acid. The general molecular formula of alkyl ether monoamines is R–O–(CH A secondary reaction between the alcohol and acrylonitrile acid forms an alkyl ether diamine. Alkyl ether diamines are characterised by the formula R–O–(CH Quaternary ammonium salts have also been employed in reverse cationic flotation due to their high selectivity in the separation of quartz from hematite. These compounds are synthesized from the reaction between a tertiary amine and a halocarbon compound ( Imidazoline quaternary compounds are products of the reaction between fatty acids and diethylenetriamine (DETA). Reacting the imidazoline ring with a dimethyl sulphate produces the quaternary ammonium salt of the imidazoline ( Extensive research into the flotation of quartz using alkyl ether amines has shown that some ores respond to flotation using ether monoamines whilst other ores respond well to flotation using ether diamines.   The necessity of a neutral molecular species in an iron ore flotation system has been emphasized in literature. Co-adsorption of neutral molecular species with amine cations results in a reduction in the electrostatic repulsion between cations subsequently leading to the formation of a densely packed layer of collector on the mineral surface, rendering the surface more hydrophobic ( In addition to the molecular chemistry of reagents used in flotation, the mineralogy of the ore under investigation plays a significant role in flotation performance. The constraints in the beneficiation of BHQ (banded hematite quartz) and BHJ (banded hematite jaspers), arise from the complex interlocking nature of quartz and hematite at both coarse and fine particle size ranges. The inclusion of finely disseminated quartz grains in hematite and vice versa at fine sizes, also results in difficulties in attaining good liberation, making beneficiation difficult. This necessitates the design of more advanced flotation circuits that incorporate finer grinding (  South Africa hosts 1000 Mt (million tonnes) of unprocessed iron ore with an iron content of 650 Mt ( Outside China, Brazil is the world’s largest producer of iron ore. Iron ore reserves in Brazil are situated in the Amazon basin particularly in the state of Para and in the “Iron Quadrangle” in the state of Minas Gerais ( With the increased mining activities, the depletion of high grade ores has necessitated the extraction and upgrading of low grade ores if South Africa is to remain a significant producer of iron ore on the world market. It is against this background that this project was conducted on the use of the collectors to ascertain whether the reverse flotation of a South African iron ore is viable. Brazilian iron ores bear mineralogical similarities to South African iron ores. The similarity lies in that, both ores are composed of hematite and quartz due to their similar genesis through supergene enrichment of banded iron formations (BIFs) ( The South African iron ore used in this study was first crushed and screened in order to separate fine material from coarse material. The crushed ore with top size of 3 Rod mill: A 1 Batch flotation cell: The batch flotation cell used in this study was a Perspex 3 litre Leeds flotation cell. The cell was connected to an air supply and fitted with an impeller. Air supply was controlled using a rotameter and the impeller speed was controlled using a digital tachometer. For a visual description see ( Hybrid flotation cell: The hybrid cell presented in Five different amine collectors from Clariant Chemicals under the Flotigam trade name were supplied in their neutralised state ( Starch from Sigma Aldrich was used as the hematite depressant. Using a previously weighed 150 Batch flotation tests were conducted in the 3 litre modified Leeds flotation cell. A 1 All conditioning with reagents took place at 50% solids concentration in the batch flotation cell, at a rotor speed of 1300 After conditioning, water was added to achieve a pulp density of 25%. Air was fed to the system at a flowrate of 7 A constant froth height was maintained by the addition of water during the flotation procedure. In order to maintain the pH at the desired value, the pH of the water added to maintain the pulp level was also at the system’s desired pH. The batch flotation tests were carried out in duplicate to determine reproducibility. After flotation, the froth concentrate and the sinks were vacuum filtered and dried at 80 Note that, due to confusion that can be created when referring to froth products and pulp products in reverse flotation, these will be referred to as the tails (froth product) and concentrate (pulp product), respectively. The hybrid cell was tested to ascertain whether a deeper froth, with a longer drainage time, would assist in removing the entrained hematite from the froth. A 1 Wash water was introduced at 200 The classical first order kinetic model (Eq. Mineralogical characterisation of the ore was conducted as Using a Field Emission Gun (FEG) QEMSCAN 650F, the Particle Mineral analysis method (PMA) was used to analyse the feed samples. The method was chosen as it gives detailed particle mineralogical information. PMA aims to provide data on liberation, association and locking characteristics of a mineral sample ( A detailed elemental analysis was established by means of chemical assaying by size. Size assaying was achieved using wet screening and XRF techniques were employed to analyse the chemical composition of the ore in the different size fractions. Particle images for selected size fractions in the two ores were analysed and a comparison of the particle false colour images is shown in A quantitative liberation analysis of both ores was conducted and a comparison of the liberation characteristics of the minerals hosted in the two ores is presented. The particles were classified as locked (0–30 area%), low grade middlings (30–60 area%), high grade middlings (60–90 area%) and liberated (>90 area%). The choice of liberation classes is subject to the researcher’s analysis and discretion on the area of particles that they deem to be liberated, a middling or locked. The For the Brazilian iron ore, there was a high degree of quartz liberation. Based on the quantitative liberation data and the QEMSCAN images presented, the Brazilian iron ore had a relatively simple mineral texture whereas the South African ore was complex with disseminated mineral phases. To ensure a finely disseminated ore’s amenability to flotation, a fine grind is necessary if selective separation of quartz from hematite is to be achieved ( Results for the cumulative solids versus the cumulative water recovered in batch flotation tests are shown in A linear relationship between the solids and water recovered is an indicator of the presence of the mechanism of entrainment, which contributed to the total mass of solids recovered in the pulp.  A low quartz recovery, 26%, to the froth product, was obtained when the alkyl ether amine collectors and the collector blend were used in flotation. There was an increase in Fe recovery to the froth product i.e. from 15% to 20% and 24% when the collector was changed from an ether monoamine to ether diamine 1 and the collector blend, respectively. This is due to an increase in froth stability brought about by the use of more surface-active collectors. The stable froth results in an increase in hematite entrainment, leading to more hematite recovery in the froth zone. This was demonstrated by the greater water recoveries for these collectors shown in The results presented in As quartz was not well liberated and occluded within the hematite, starch addition resulted in the depression of the hematite together with the locked quartz. From An operational strategy was developed and tested, whereby a grind size of 80% passing 75 The results for column flotation tests conducted on the finely ground South African iron ore are presented in Batch flotation tests using pure quartz were carried out as Based on the alkyl ether amine chemistry, the ether diamines which naturally have an extra –NH group involved in collector adsorption on the quartz surface, should exhibit higher quartz collection rates than ether monoamines since they have more sites available for adsorption on the mineral surface ( XRF analysis indicated that the quartz sample was 93.6% SiO Interestingly, this section of the study has shown the flotation superiority of branched alkyl ether amines (ether diamine 1 and the ether monoamine) over a linear alkyl ether amine (ether diamine 2) in the flotation of the South African iron ore and pure quartz.  The recovery and grade results of quartz in the froth product are presented in For the same collector dosage used in the flotation of the South African iron ore i.e. (125 In agreement with At the same collector dosage of 125 As has been mentioned, the use of a pure quaternary ammonium salt and imidazoline salt did not yield any significant solids recovery when used alone. Solids recovery was only realised in the presence of a frother. The use of the quaternary ammonium salt at a collector dosage of 250  Although increasing the quaternary ammonium salt dosage to 250 The laboratory flotation test work on the two iron ore samples showed liberation brought about by textural complexities significantly influenced flotation performance. The well liberated Brazilian iron ore was amenable to flotation using the range of amine collectors investigated, whereas, the poor liberation of hematite and quartz in the South African iron ore rendered the ore not amenable to flotation. This was a classic case of differences in mineral dissemination rendering one ore unsuitable for flotation processing, while the other responds well to flotation. Process mineralogy data showed these differences clearly. Ultra-fine grinding to a grind size of 80% passing 25 Differences in collector chemistry in terms of alkyl chain length, degree of branching of the chains and monoamines versus diamines were tested on the South African iron ore, the Brazilian iron ore and a quartz sample. Results were not definitive in terms of a single collector giving the best performance across all three mineral samples. In the flotation of the quartz sample, the branched, C8-C10 ether diamine 1 was clearly the best collector. In the flotation of the Brazilian iron ore this collector was the worst performer. The branched, C8-C10 ether monoamine and the linear, C12-C15 ether diamine 2 were better performers, with the quaternary ammonium salt being an efficient collector at higher dosages of 250 The current studies have concluded that a direct transfer of an effective reagent suite from one ore body to another does not necessarily translate to an equally efficient flotation performance of the same reagent suite on the second ore body. The ether diamine 2 was a poor collector of “pure quartz” however it performed well in the flotation of quartz from the Brazilian iron ore. A reasonable explanation to this observation is the possible differences in quartz crystalline structures for the two ore samples. In addition, the ores could possess different surface chemistries at a particular pH and pH greatly affects the mineral’s zeta potential and abundance of active sites available for binding on the mineral surface. A better understanding of the collector mineral surface interactions would enable the development of a generic test method that allows one to predict a suitable reagent suite from the ore chemistry and mineralogy. It is also recommended that additional samples of the South African iron ore with a simpler texture or better liberation are tested. In addition, a comparison of flotation and dense media separation (DMS) could prove fruitful in assessing which technique is best suited for the South African iron ore reserves. The authors wish to acknowledge the support provided by the following for this study: The South African Minerals to Metals Research Institute (SAMMRI) for funding this project as SAMMRI project S1503. Clariant for financial support as well as the supply of the collectors. Anglo American for support provided during the study.