The nature of hard coal mining in Polish mines makes the extraction and conveyance of coal to the surface every unsteady. Additionally, raw coal is material that needs proper preparation, including the principal process of washing coal of rock refuse. According to Fečko et al. [ Following extraction, raw coal must undergo multiple preparation processes, primarily classification, comminution and washing. Due to the unsteadiness of coal extraction and conveyance to the surface as well as the productivity of each preparation plant, it is necessary to facilitate interim raw coal storage in special buffer containers, silos. All industrial silos for raw coal are utilized in very bad conditions. The structure is exposed to mechanical influences (impacts during loading), chemical aggression and atmospheric conditions. One of the most dangerous factors is coal mine water, which is transported along with coal and contains many aggressive chemical substances including sulphate SO The pH value of the water accompanying coal mining is usually clearly acidic (pH ≅ 2–4), although it can also be neutral (pH ≅ 7), and even alkaline [ Acid water usually results from the oxidation of pyrite, and the neutral water is caused by the presence of calcium compounds, including calcite. Coal mine water, due to its reactivity and a content of various pollutants, shows strong aggression towards concrete and reinforcing bars, leading to intensive corrosion of these two construction materials. In this aspect, the influence of the highly saline coal mine water on reinforced concrete (RC) structures is very similar to the action of sea water, which is widely described in the literature [ This paper presents a history of degradation and successive remedial actions in the raw coal silo located at one of the Silesian mines. This case is interesting because in addition to the typical material destruction of the RC facility, resulting from many years of irresponsible exploitation in bad conditions, local mechanical failure also occurred. For a better explanation of the sequence and scope of the actions taken, they have been presented in successive time intervals, together with analysis and discussion. The silo had been designed and constructed in the mid-1960s as a monolithic reinforced concrete structure in climbing formwork. The facility is circular in section and is 21.60 m in external diameter. The reinforced structure is 35.75 m high, counting from the floor of the section located under the ground (considered as ±0.00 m). The top rim of the silo is located 32.55 m above ground level (+35.75 m). The silo is built on a circular ribbed slab foundation, 26.00 m in diameter and 1.20 m thick in the spaces between ribs. The conical hopper is supported against the silo shell at a height of +11.55 m and its lower section passes into the slab-beam system. The flat bottom section of the hopper is supported by 10 circumferential and 6 interior rectangular cross section, reinforced concrete columns. There are also 6 discharge outlets, each sized 1.50 × 1.50 m. The hopper shell and the bottom slab between the ribs are, respectively, 0.60 m and 0.65 m thick. The silo shell is 0.30 m thick above the hopper and 0.50 m thick below it. In the section below the ground level, the silo shell has rectangular utility penetrations through which belt conveyors, which collected raw coal from the silo and conveyed it for preparation, passed through. The upper edge of the shell is topped with a circumferential ring, which is 2.10 m wide and 0.40 m high at the edges and 1.30 m high at the external face of the wall. A composite steel-reinforced concrete floor is located on the ring and a steel framing structure supported by four steel columns is placed on this floor. It is a multi-story structure with composite steel-reinforced concrete floors, covered with a steel roof. This superstructure provides a direct support for two bridges for the belt conveyors (a double belt conveyor and a single belt conveyor) and coal conveying devices that work with them. The superstructure can be accessed via a steel-framed staircase, in which is the coal conveying shaft also enclosed, fixed to the silo's reinforced concrete shell. The general view of the silo with the characteristic elements highlighted is in The original design called for the construction of three identical raw coal silos, on the grounds that just two of them would suffice to ensure continuity of the conveying process and temporary storage of coal. The third, extra, silo could then be assessed and repaired as needed. Such a design would allow the mine to extract coal on a continuous basis without sacrificing the technical conditions of a silo. The combined nominal capacity of the three silos would be 21,000 tons. In other words, just two of them would suffice to store more than the daily amount of coal extracted there, that is 9000 tons. However, the original design was altered during the construction stage. As a result, only one silo, with the original capacity of 7000 tons, was eventually delivered. From a technological perspective, the silo did meet requirements for an intermediary element between coal extraction (conveying of coal to the surface) and coal preparation except under the following conditions: the silo would work reliably, it would be possible to use its full nominal capacity, and some of the coal would be delivered to the preparation plant on an ongoing basis. Hence, it was not possible to put the silo out of service for even a brief period in the system that was eventually delivered. This situation precluded any interior repairs or even assessments of the condition of the object. Additionally, providing that the daily production would be about 9000 tons, a substantial portion of the material extracted would have to be collected. As a result, the actual condition of the entire structure was unknown. It was only possible to forecast its condition symptomatically, based on damage visible on the exterior surface of the wall. It was obviously possible to repair elements accessible from the outside, though these repairs were always carried out locally and with extremely poor workmanship resulting in doubtful durability of the work. Traces of those actions can be seen to this day throughout the new reinforcement cover ( Early in the silo's life, the area surrounding two of the columns beneath the hopper was locally strengthened with steel profiles. The strengthening solution was necessary because that section featured concrete placed in a highly negligent way, which resulted in dramatically low concrete strength. For dozens of years, the silo had been without any significant repairs, except for the few made locally, ad-hock and from the outside, until a serious failure occurred. The wall became perforated in the west part of the chamber at the level of +19 m, with an area of 1 m In reality, a makeshift patch was delivered in place of the perforation ( Essentially, no effort was made to determine a direct cause of the failure, and the cause continued. As per the original design, raw coal should have fallen from the conveyor belt into a steel chute and then moved down the chute near the silo's axis. For years of operation, the structure of the chute was damaged and coal came pouring out of the silo's conveyor belt at will. Since only one feeder orifice was used throughout the lifetime of the silo and the conveyor belt worked at a uniform speed, the coal coming into the silo always hit the same small spot on the wall, which was not capable of transferring such an impact force. Although the steel patch had been applied, the above phenomenon remained unchanged and the dropping coal continued to impact the wall area directly around the patch. In other words, the critical situation was temporally covered up rather than properly remedied. Interestingly enough, no records of the failure and method of repairing its effects were made. It is not even clear when the failure occurred and when the steel patch was built into the wall. The facility operated in this condition until December 2009, when the authors were commissioned to provide an expert opinion. Beginning in 2009, the structure of the silo was subjected to inspections, studies and monitoring. However, it was not possible to inspect the interior of the facility upon first assessment. During subsequent assessments, carried out from an aerial work platform (the exterior inspection), several defects and damages were found around nearly all structural elements. They are compiled Deterioration of the concrete ( Numerous vertical and horizontal cracks with visible efflorescence caused by calcium salt washed away by water ( Numerous areas of reinforcement cover or previous repair detachment ( Numerous damages of the concrete within silo's top rim ( Variously sized areas of poorly structured concrete (honeycombing, disintegrating fractions of concrete); such defects occurred mostly within the hopper and columns near the discharge outlets on the exterior surface of the hopper; some of those damages showed traces of previous repairs, and the beams with the poorest quality of workmanship had been reinforced with enclosure made of steel elements; Locally high concrete dampness, mostly under belt conveyor bridges and within the underground section of the shell; Very strong corrosion damage to steel structural elements of the superstructure; the most damaged structural elements were the steel beams of the composite floors under the belt conveyors and elements of the ceiling above the silo. Several core holes with a diameter of about 100 mm were taken from the structure to provide a reliable evaluation of the strength parameters of its concrete. Cylinders, each about 100 mm high, were cut out from central parts of the core samples for running destructive strength tests. Surface layers cut out from the samples were used for chemical testing. The strength tests made on the core samples taken from various parts of the structure (the shell, hopper and columns) allowed the determination of the concrete class of shell within the section over and below the hopper as, respectively, C12/15 and C16/20. The concrete of the columns also fit into the above-mentioned concrete classes, except for two elements where concrete did not meet the requirements for the lowest class of structural concrete. As already mentioned, both columns had been strengthened with a steel enclosure (see point 2.2). In the original documentation the silo was designed from a concrete with a strength of R Chemical tests were carried out on thin concrete slices cut from the endings of the core samples. The results are shown in In the chemical laboratory tests, the concentration of sulphate ions in concrete, calculated on the weight of the cement, did not exceed 1.98%. It was thus below the allowable value specified in cement mass terms (3%). The concentration of chloride ions was rather low; in all cases, it was lower than the allowable value of 0.4%. However, it should be noted that all tested structure specimens were not exposed to the direct influence of raw coal including saline water; thus, the results are not completely reliable. Because it was not possible to take some samples from the inside parts of the shell and hopper, it was supposed that in those areas exposed to the direct action of aggressive compounds the content of chloride ions can be significantly higher. Based on destructive tests of samples taken from structural elements, the class of reinforcement steel is identified as 18G2, which was consistent with the single-skew rib structure visible on the surface of rods. Additional non-destructive tests of the arrangement of the reinforcement bars by means of the electromagnetic induction method were carried out. The tests were conducted within selected vertical and horizontal stretches of the silo wall. The results mostly corroborated the data from preserved pieces of design documentation; however, reinforcement in some parts of the shell deviated from the original design. In the comparative analyzes (see point 3.3), the most unfavorable reinforcement distribution was adopted, which means the smallest measured area of reinforcement per 1 m Taking into consideration the local lack of the shell continuity as well as lowering the concrete class a numerical model of the silo structure was made. The model reflected the real situation, and thus the silo in which the perforation was located. As can be predicted, the real area of wall continuity disturbance is larger than the observed hole, so a perforation with dimensions of 1.0 × 4.0 m was provided in the model. Two levels of the silo filling were adopted. The first one was compatible with the original design and assumed a filling level corresponding to a capacity of 7000 tons. In the second situation the maximum material charge was limited to the level of the lower edge of the hole, which corresponded to the capacity of 3500 tons. The whole reinforced concrete structure was spatially modelled and then loaded with the forces determined according to the Eurocode group of standards, especially recommendation [ The results of those two calculations were visualised as maps of internal forces, reinforcement intensity (without the minimum value required by the standard) and deformations of the whole structure. Selected values of internal forces are presented in the figures below. The maps show the part of the silo's shell in full filling situation (on the left) and with limited up to the 3500 tons charge. In The lowering of the capacity has led to a drastic decrease of all values. For example, the maximum bending moments in vertical directions at the edge of the perforation decreased from 96.2 kNm/m to 0.7 kNm/m, in the horizontal direction from 50.7 kNm/m to 10.8 kNm/m. The values of the circumferential forces under the perforation (in the zone of ca. 0.30 m high) decreased from the average value of 4000 kN/m up to ca. 500 kN/m. The effect of the above was a significant reduction of the horizontal reinforcement necessary at the edge of the perforation (on the both sides of the shell) - from the maximum value of about 60 cm The reinforcement results obtained were compared with actual reinforcement intensities, as determined by evaluating the remaining fragments of the original design and based on the results of the magnetic non-destructive tests. The real distribution of the external - vertical and horizontal - reinforcement in the area of the hole was obtained as bars ø22 mm every 150 mm; in the local outcrops the reinforcement diameter and type of used steel (18G2) were confirmed. This gives, as calculated per surface, 25.3 cm Assuming the corrosion damage at the level of 50% of the nominal reinforcement (which was an excessive value) a sufficient load-bearing capacity of the silo was obtained. This assumption concerned the most dangerous area of the structure - the surrounding of the perforation. The expert opinion on the silo delivered by the authors in December 2009 pointed to several major defects and damages, listed earlier in point 3.1. The assessment of the silo made at that time was the first in the many years since it had been commissioned. Unfortunately, it was incomplete as it did not cover the interior of the silo, which was inaccessible due to the need for uninterrupted operation of the silo. At this moment, it was not possible to immediately put the silo out of service (even for a short period) and perform the internal inspection. Due to the risk of coal dust explosion, the regulations require the total removal of coal and dust before the inspection. The proper preparation of the silo's chamber must then be approved by appropriate services. Thus, a seemingly simple inspection requires many days of preparation, usage of specialized equipment and experienced teams. All those actions have to be carefully planned and organized in the object's lifetime cycle of several months. The authors were aware of the fact that the scale of defects and damages to structural elements of the silo found at that time should resulted in a recommendation to put the facility out of service and demolish or comprehensively renovate it. Unfortunately, there was no such a possibility, because the lack of an active storage silo was equivalent to bankruptcy of the mine. Thus, it was necessary to formulate restrictive practical recommendations, which allow for limited exploitation of the silo until the substitute facility was designed and built. Despite the damage described, including the perforation of the shell, the silo was used in subsequent years without any obvious symptoms indicating a risk of a major accident or catastrophe. It was obvious that there was no possibility to put any direct pressure of coal on the steel patch or its surroundings, as it might be destroyed and fall down from the high altitude. Thus, the actual possibility of filling the silo with coal was limited to approximately 3500 tons. Hence, for such a reduction of the capacity the calculation was performed. Based on the calculations, assessment of the real distribution of reinforcement and corrosive losses the analysis showed a huge reserve of capacity expressed by the ratio of reinforcement area used to the computationally required. Due to the importance of the facility it was decided to reduce the capacity of the silo to 2500 tons for a limited period of two years. Such a load was considered safe in light of the computational results, which showed that the ultimate limit state requirements would be fulfilled at a capacity of 3500 tons (the nominal capacity being 7000 tons). The two years of further operation reflected the need to design and deliver a new silo capable of replacing the facility in question. Additionally, the actual load was inspected every 6 h and recorded with special reports. Due to basing the measurement method on the operating time of the conveyor belt, the results were approximate in nature and rounded-off to 100 tons. Of all damage to structural elements, the local wall perforation was the most dangerous to its bearing capacity, as it was there that the principal reinforcement was disrupted. A recommendation was made to design and execute a system for monitoring the concrete strain in that area to investigate the behaviour of the weakened structural area under varying coal loads. Covering the whole silo chamber with a dense net of sensors would be the most effective solution, yet this would be disproportionately costly, in comparison to the technical value of the data output. It was necessary to design a gauging system furnishing reliable, adequate records by using a limited number of gauge sensors; thus, limiting the cost of the gauging system. Based on a test investigating the behaviour of the silo chamber under coal loading, a gauging system with 8 sensors was designed [ Strain readings did not quantitatively correlate with the degree to which the silo was loaded with coal, which we can easily explain by the fact that the gauging was done solely locally. Within each of the two circumferences, the extensometers covered 1.8 m, this makes up 3% of the silo's circumference. Local growth in deformations strongly depended on the system of vertical cracks, and thus strain records were not uniform across the structure's circumference. Nevertheless, a qualitatively-related correlation between wall strain and the degree of silo's coal loading was clearly observed. Sensors mounted within each of two circumferences and those adjacent to the perforation extended by, respectively, no more than 0.12 mm and 0.15 mm, the values did not exceed the allowable width of a single crack. One should obviously bear in mind that the changes observed overlapped with the pre-existing state of deformations and cracks. Nevertheless, the low values of those changes permitted a conclusion that the condition of the structure was safe. Interestingly enough, it was observed that the records provided by sensors mounted right below and above the perforation did not fall below a certain level. After several weeks of monitoring, they stopped showing a drop in strain below certain minimum values (even for the silo almost wholly unloaded). This was interpreted as a permanent rise in the width of cracks, most likely caused by the mechanical interlocking of aggregate grains. As construction of the new silo lingered on, another structural assessment of the silo was needed and performed in Spring 2012. The deteriorating condition of the concrete around the steel patch, observed on the exterior wall surface, was so alarming that the silo user was made to unload the silo and facilitate inspection of its interior. This operation was easier as, due to a fire of the conveyor belt and partial damage to the conveyor bridge, the mine had to operate at reduced capacity and it was possible to empty the silo. Additionally, preliminary cleaning of the shell wall was required. Due to the high risk of a coal dust explosion, the assessment was carried out in cooperation with the Central Mine Rescue Station, which had properly trained staff and appropriate equipment. An inspection of the perforated wall on the interior revealed extensive damage to concrete and reinforcement bars, especially in danger due to the interruption of their continuity ( An external inspection of the silo structure revealed significant deterioration and degradation of the concrete coating, as well as the growing corrosion of the reinforcement. All stated defects and damages clearly showed a growing trend since 2009, especially around the steel patch. Making the interior of the silo available allowed us to take some concrete samples for chemical tests. Their results are presented in Under the circumstances described in point 4, a recommendation was made to design and deliver a solution to strengthen an extensive section of the shell around the perforation area that would transfer loads from the threatened fragment of the shell and from the steel patch to an area whose bearing capacity had not been impacted. Such a reinforcement, in the form of a steel grate stabilized with bolts pasted into it, was designed by the authors and built into the structure in Summer 2012 ( This situation lasted until June 2013, when the new structure was commissioned and the silo in question was put out of service. During the period in question, a decision was made to refrain from repairing the reinforced concrete structure as it would be senseless to do so half-heartedly and a thorough renovation was unjustified as the structure would only be used on a temporary basis. A recommendation was made to remove the pieces of concrete that could fall off and to permanently fence off the area around the silo. Although decommissioned, the silo is yet to see an end to its story. As shown in Under these circumstances, three further scenarios were considered: to deliver a new steel support structure for the bridges and demolish the silo; to renovate the silo to a limited extent and use it only as permanent support for the conveyor bridges; to thoroughly renovate the structure and put the silo back into service while at the same time limiting its allowable capacity according to computational results. The third scenario was implemented. A new load-bearing shell that embraced the original structure (practically treated as lost formwork) was made. The remaining structural elements were renovated or replaced with new ones. To this day the modernized silo is used as an additional facility, partially filled in case of delays in the reception of coal from the new silo. The described case seems to be obvious – there has been significant damage to the industrial structure which was used in very bad condition for about 50 years. An in-depth analysis of the degradation progressing of the silo reveals a number of defects and errors committed at all stages of the work structure. The first, significant error was made at the construction of the object when three silos were designed, but only one was produced. The situation inflicted constant use on the structure, without its temporary outages. As a result, it was not possible to either inspect the interior of the silo or perform any renovation – as was indicated by the visible perforation of the structure. Subsequent errors were made in the technical design of the silo. Although only fragments of the project were retained, the currently conducted static-strength calculations showed a locally insufficient amount of horizontal reinforcement. Additionally, at the execution stage, applied reinforcement had been understated compared to the designs, as was identified by the measurement of the bar arrangements, and the concrete in some structural elements was characterized by a very low strength. However, the biggest negligence occurred during the silo's operation stage. First, the coal chute/slipper was completely destroyed, which resulted in the free discharge of the coal into the silo. As a result, a fragment of the wall had been progressively destroyed, up to its falling down. Instead of reporting the failure, the user made a makeshift steel patch and continued using the silo. In addition, the silo had been operated without any inspections and expertise until 2009, that is for 40 years. Additionally, the fact, that the structure, especially the interior of the facility, was exposed to contact with strong saline mining water was ignored. The actions described above led to the emergency situation disclosed in 2009. Unfortunately, in the next few years, the user delayed the recommended instalment of a new silo. This made it obligatory to repeat the inspection, this time including the interior of the silo, and to design a temporary strengthening solution–since the silo cannot be placed completely out of service. Thus, this is an example of an extremely unfavorable overlapping of the incorrect actions and decisions, and only the real threat of catastrophe forced an in-depth analysis of the problem and its solution. The described silo failure was caused by the quite obvious negligence of the facility's users. However, there was an interesting aspect, which was the lack of possibility to put the silo out of service and therefore the need to use it in an emergency condition for a long period of time. The inability to carry out an internal inspection of the silo, in the first phase of the control, increases the risk of its usage in the absence of accurate data on the state of the internal reinforcement. In this situation the risk analysis was based on two rationales. First one was the fact that the partially damaged silo was exploited a few years under full live loads. The second one was the results of numerical analysis carried out for limited capacity of the silo (amounted to 3500 tons) and tested material properties. This allowed considering the risk of catastrophe to be insignificant, because: the first situation indicated a real reserve in load-bearing capacity of the silo treated as a structural integrity, results obtained from the numerical calculations showed sufficient load-bearing capacity even if an unfavorable assumption of corrosive destruction of 50% of the reinforcement surface was taken, additional charge limitation of the nominal capacity up to the 2500 tons (due to the validity of the structure) was recommended, and additional control of the silo's behavior was recommended by automatic monitoring of the deformation of the shell in the vicinity of the hole and the system of registration of the silo charge. The data available did not allow a close risk assessment, however, the recommendations taken helped to reduce the risk of a catastrophe to almost zero, of course, under untypical operating conditions. In addition, many years of authors' experience gained during testing and assessing the technical condition of industrial structures were at the basis of the decision taken. The history of this RC raw coal silo is, unfortunately, quite typical of civil-engineering structures within industrial plants. Although necessary in production processes, civil-engineering structures are frequently not thought of as direct tools. Therefore, any expenditure on their maintenance or renovation is viewed as a financial encumbrance that impacts plant's profitability since outlays of this kind do not translate directly into an output increase as opposed to expenditures on new machines or technological lines. Consequently, any repair or renovation is likely to be put off and people making efforts to raise funds for them, dealt with as bothersome petitioners. This situation obviously changes when a risk of failure or catastrophe looms large or if either of them actually happens. Any previous savings prove illusory as the complete renovation of a worn-out or damaged civil-engineering structure is usually more costly than preventive or corrective actions throughout the facility's life, the most costly being the production stoppage when the damaged structure has to be out of service. This simple truth does not always make it to the consciousness of those responsible for the proper technical state of the plant, usually associated strictly with the condition of the production facilities proper. The awareness of how important the proper technical condition of a civil-engineering structure is for the continuity and safety of production might not occur until a failure or catastrophe occurs. The presentation of this article (ICEFA VIII, Budapest 2018) was financed by the research project