The major loss of base metals in beneficiation of the Merensky Reef ore occurs during the separation of the siliceous gangue from the platinum group and base metal sulphides by selective flotation. The paper examines the use of amine complexes in managing inadvertent activation of pyroxene in a pentlandite-pyroxene flotation system at pH 9. Zeta potential, time of flight secondary ion mass spectrometry and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy data have shown that pyroxene becomes copper activated in the presence of copper sulphate. When xanthate ions are added to the copper activated mineral system, true flotation of pyroxene occurs. Furthermore, the flotation and surface analysis data revealed that pyroxene could also be inadvertently activated by Ni(II) ions, which would result in a higher pyroxene recovery and thus lower selectivity. In the presence of ethylenediamine (EDA) the concentration of copper(II) and nickel(II) ions found on pyroxene and pentlandite surfaces was significantly reduced, although the effect was significantly more predominant on pyroxene. The mechanism for the removal of the activating ions from the mineral surfaces involves the formation of soluble stable metal-EDA chelates, which are removed into solution.The Merensky ore is found in a platinum group mineral (PGM) bearing reef in the Bushveld Igneous Complex in South Africa. Flotation is used to separate the valuable minerals from the siliceous gangue, with selective separation achieved by the adsorption of a collector onto the surface of the PGM and sulphide minerals. The predominant gangue minerals reporting to the flotation concentrate are pyroxene and feldspar. It is believed that pyroxene and feldspar are naturally hydrophilic and thus when liberated should report to the concentrate only by entrainment and entrapment. It is highly unlikely that xanthate collectors exhibit any affinity for siliceous gangue minerals to cause flotation. Therefore it is likely that activation of the mineral surface by metal ions is occurring, prior to xanthate adsorption ( In terms of sulphide minerals, pentlandite is the most valuable base metal sulphide mineral in the Merensky Reef and there is scope for an improvement of pentlandite recovery at operating circuits treating Merensky Reef ore. A high percentage of gangue minerals particularly pyroxene, report to the concentrate, which has an adverse effect on smelting. The aim of this paper is to explain what can be done to minimize the percentage pyroxene reporting to the concentrate, and simultaneously maximize pentlandite recovery with the use of amine complexing agents. Amine complexing agents have been recognised as potential reagents in mineral flotation for many decades. For example, it has been reported that DETA will remove oxide and hydroxide layers from the mineral surfaces and reduce the concentration of copper and nickel ions that cause inadvertent activation of pyrrhotite mineral surfaces due to a chelating mechanism ( This paper presents the results of a study examining the effect of the addition of complexing agents, diethylenetriamine (DETA), ethylenediamine (EDA), triethylenetetramine (TETA) and ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), to pentlandite-pyroxene systems with a view to exploring the extent to which metal ion activation occurs and influences flotation and how this can be managed so as to increase the separation of pentlandite from pyroxene at pH 9. Specifically, the effect of sodium isobutyl xanthate (SIBX), copper sulphate, DETA, EDA, TETA and EDTA on pentlandite and pyroxene was evaluated. The mineral surface alteration was investigated using zeta potential, time of flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (ToF-SIMS) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) techniques. Natural pyroxene from the Merensky Reef in the Northern Province, South Africa, was crushed to 2 mm and selected by hand-picking. Chemical analysis indicated that the pyroxene contained 13.2% Mg, 11.0% Fe, 3.7% Ca, 2.7% Al, 25.1% Si. Pentlandite was synthesised at Anglo Platinum Research Centre using a method developed by Johnson Matthey, Sonning. After hydrogen desorption, reduced iron (11.0 g) and reduced nickel (11.86 g) were mixed with sulphur flake (11.41 g) and transferred to a quartz ampoule. The evacuated, sealed ampoule was heated in a furnace to 1150 °C then cooled to ambient temperature. All mineral samples were stored under argon in a freezer and freshly ground in an agate mortar just prior to each experiment. The products were screened to obtain size fractions of −25 μm for zeta potential determinations and +38–106 μm for microflotation tests. Using the BET method, the surface area of (+38–106 μm) fractions of the pyroxene and pentlandite was found to be 0.59 and 0.30 m Purified SIBX was provided by SENMIN. Other chemicals were of analytical grade quality. Sodium carbonate (0.1 M) and hydrochloric acid (0.1 M) were used for pH adjustment. Copper sulphate was used as activator; DETA, EDA, TETA and EDTA were used as complexing agents. Water, with a specific conductance of 0.7 μS Zeta potential determinations were carried out on dilute dispersions of the individual minerals studied using a Malvern Zetasizer 4. The instrument gives the electrophoretic mobility from which the zeta potential was calculated using the Smoluchowski equation, since Surface analysis of minerals was carried out using a PHI TRIFT II ToF-SIMS instrument operating in the static SIMS regime. A pulsed primary ion beam bombards the sample surface, causing the emission of atomic and molecular secondary ions. A small percentage of the secondary ions are charged and can therefore be extracted by an electric field into a mass spectrometer. The mass spectra are recorded by measuring the time difference between pulsing the primary ion gun and the arrival of secondary ions on a fast dual microchannelplate detector at the spectrometer, by means of a multistop time-to-digital converter. Pentlandite-pyroxene mixtures were conditioned in synthetic water in the presence of the desired reagents for 20 min. The samples were filtered and washed with water (conductivity 0.7 μmS Surface analysis by XPS was carried out using a PHI Quantum 2000 instrument. The technique involves irradiating a solid in vacuo with monoenergetic soft X-rays and analysing the emitted electrons by energy. The spectrum is obtained as a plot of the number of detected electrons per energy interval versus their kinetic energy. Each element has a unique spectrum. The spectrum from a mixture of elements is approximately the sum of the peaks of the individual constituents. Because the mean free path of electrons in solids is very small, the detected electrons originate from only the top few atomic layers. Quantitative analysis can be obtained from peak heights or peak area, and identification of chemical states often can be made from the exact measurement of peak positions and separations, as well as from certain spectral features ( A microflotation cell (volume 250 cm Zeta potential studies were carried out to investigate the effect of copper sulphate, xanthate, amine complexes and various combinations of these reagent regimes on the surface charge. In the case of pentlandite, a small decrease in the zeta potential was observed at pH 6 in the presence of the complexing agents compared to the value observed in the case of copper sulphate alone ( The results for pyroxene ( ToF-SIMS analysis is a well-established technique in determining the occurrence of atomic/molecular species on the surface of mineral samples. It must be noted that the ToF-SIMS values are relative and not absolute. The surface coverage of copper and nickel on pyroxene mineral surfaces is shown in A comparison of pentlandite and pyroxene surfaces with the addition of CuSO No significant results were obtained with respect to identifying the nature of the copper species present. With respect to removal of these species it was shown in the case of pentlandite, that EDA and EDTA removes around 55% and 27% of the copper present on the mineral surface, respectively. In the case of pyroxene, the equivalent values were 75% and 11%, respectively. Optimal dosages were determined for each amine complexing agent at pH 9 and the dosages chosen were based on the best selectivity obtained between pentlandite and pyroxene without significantly reducing the pentlandite recovery below 80%. In a pentlandite-pyroxene mixture, addition of CuSO Additional microflotation trials were performed to evaluate the effect of varying the sequence of EDA, before copper sulphate and after xanthate addition, on selectivity and floatability. When the sequence of addition of reagents was studied it was very clear that the greatest effect was observed when the EDA was added immediately after the CuSO One of the key objectives of this study was to investigate the extent to which inadvertent activation of pyroxene is occurring by either copper species originating from copper sulphate added as an activating agent and/or nickel species emanating from pentlandite present in the system. The ToF-SIMS and XPS analyses and zeta potential determinations obtained during this study have indeed clearly demonstrated that pyroxene surfaces are activated by Cu(II) ions as well as various positively charged copper hydroxide species (CuOH With respect to the role of xanthate in the pentlandite-pyroxene system it has been observed that SIBX on its own readily adsorbs onto the pentlandite surfaces between pH 5 and 9 ( In order to minimize the activating effect of the copper species on pyroxene, a series of amine complexing agents were investigated with respect to their potential for removing copper and nickel species. At the same time, it is self evident that the investigation will seek to minimize the role of the amine complexes in reducing the hydrophobicity of pentlandite. The zeta potential results for copper activated pentlandite and pyroxene mineral surfaces in the presence of these complexing agents show that at pH 4 the complexing agents adsorb onto the mineral surfaces forming positive copper(II) chelates. At pH 6 the change in zeta potential for pentlandite surfaces is minor due to the nature of the copper(II) ions bonded onto the mineral surfaces. Most of the copper(II) ions would bond to sulphur forming a strong CuS bond, which the amine complexing agent would not be able to break ( The ToF-SIMS data has also revealed that pyroxene is inadvertently activated by Ni(II) ions as a result of pentlandite dissolution due to superficial oxidation ( Further testwork investigated the effect xanthate has on copper activated mineral surfaces in the presence and absence of the amine complexing agents. For both pentlandite and pyroxene, the results show that where copper was adsorbed on mineral surfaces, xanthate would also adsorb which is indicated by the shift in zeta potential to more negative values ( A comparison of the microflotation results carried out in the presence of the complexing agents ( Further microflotation trials were performed to evaluate the effect of varying the sequence of EDA addition on selectivity and floatability. The results indicated that when the EDA addition point was before copper sulphate and after xanthate addition; this negatively affected the pentlandite recovery as well as selectivity over pyroxene. The decrease in pentlandite and pyroxene recovery is mainly due to a lower degree of xanthate adsorption which is attributed to either EDA deactivating the pentlandite and pyroxene surfaces by sequestering the copper(II) and nickel(II) oxide and hydroxide as well as weakly attached copper hydroxy xanthate species into solution and/or blocking of nickel sites by the complexation of EDA onto the pentlandite mineral surface, thereby resulting in fewer sites being available for xanthate adsorption and a consequent reduction in floatability. The results of the present investigation have provided evidence of the different surface species that are present in the pentlandite-pyroxene system. The decrease in pentlandite recovery to 92% compared to that obtained for the copper sulphate and xanthate trial (viz. 95%, The present study has examined the role of amine complexing agents in pentlandite-pyroxene flotation. Zeta potential, ToF-SIMS and XPS data have shown that pyroxene becomes copper activated in the presence of copper sulphate. Pyroxene is also inadvertently activated by Ni(II), which would result in a higher pyroxene recovery. When xanthate ions are added to the copper and nickel activated mineral system, true flotation of pyroxene occurs. In the presence of EDA, the concentration of copper(II) and nickel(II) ions found on pyroxene and pentlandite surfaces was significantly reduced, although the effect was significantly more predominant on pyroxene. A proposal has been made about the surface reactions taking place. The mechanism for the removal of the activating ions from the mineral surfaces involves the formation of soluble stable metal-EDA chelates, which are removed into solution. The authors would like to thank Anglo Platinum management for support during the study and for permission to publish this paper.