This study pertains to alkali leaching of a high surface area synthetic boehmite prepared by thermal decomposition of gibbsite. Synthesised boehmite particles are found to be agglomerates of platelets. These particles are characterised by a monomodal size distribution with a median size of 110μm and high specific surface area (~264m2/g). Leaching studies, in the temperature range 70 to 90°C, have been carried out in NaOH solutions of Na2O concentration, CNa2O
                     =100 and 180g/l. Significant dissolution of this boehmite is seen to occur in NaOH solutions, unlike in many other studies, owing to the high surface area. Both alkali concentration and temperature have influenced the dissolution. Reduced time plot analysis indicates that the shrinking core with surface reaction model (R3) describes the initial stages of the dissolution process reasonably well. Particle size analysis data complemented the results of the reduced time analysis. The value of apparent activation energy for the initial stages of dissolution is evaluated to be around 65kJ/mol.
                  Deviation from shrinking core model R3 is observed in the later stages. Besides the shrinking of size due to dissolution, particle size reduction is also identified due to the detachment of platelets from the agglomerates of particles. Detailed characterisation of the leach residues involving morphological and particle size analyses has established such detachment of platelets and ensuing particle size reduction. Deviation from shrinking core model in the later stages of leaching has been attributed to particle fragmentation arising from platelet separation.More than 90% of global alumina production comes from the Bayer process. Digestion of bauxite ore, a blend of various aluminium hydroxides and other associated minerals such as clay minerals, oxides of iron, titanium, silicon etc., in hot concentrated sodium hydroxide (caustic) solution is the primary step in this process. In the digestion stage, typical aluminium hydroxide minerals in bauxite ores viz. gibbsite [γ-Al(OH) The above solid–liquid reaction between boehmite and aqueous sodium hydroxide is of interest to the processing of nuclear wastes ( Conversion of monohydrate bauxite to a more beneficial state which requires lower temperatures and less caustic for its digestion has been identified as a priority R&D need of the alumina industry ( The boehmite used in this study has been prepared by thermal decomposition of a coarse grained gibbsite (median size, d Particle size distributions of boehmite and leach residues obtained after leaching for different time intervals have been determined using a laser diffraction particle size analyzer (Model: Mastersizer, Malvern, UK). For dispersing particles, a dispersant, sodium hexametaphosphate has been added in small quantities to the suspension of particles being analysed. Subsequently ultrasonic vibration has been applied to the suspension to ensure particle dispersion. The size data is output in terms of volume distribution. BET specific surface area and pore size distribution of boehmite and residues have been estimated from the amount of high purity N Leaching experiments have been carried out in a thermostatically controlled continuously stirred cylindrical glass vessel in atmospheric pressure condition with sodium hydroxide solution (Na The leaching data, expressed in terms of g/l of Al where, k represents the rate constant. The analytical integral forms of G(α), which depend on the prevailing reaction mechanism, are presented in Mathematical analysis of the leaching data using Eq. If t Combining Eqs. The activation energy, E For an in-depth understanding of the progress of leaching reaction, the leach residues collected at different time intervals have been characterised with respect to particle size, surface area and pore size distribution, morphology, and the phases present. XRD pattern of the as synthesised sample presented in Particle size distribution (PSD) of boehmite in terms of frequency distribution and cumulative undersize is shown in The results presented and discussed in this section include α–t plots obtained from experimental leaching data, selection of the best fit kinetic equation, and estimation of the rate constant and kinetic parameters. Characterisation of the leach residues collected at different time intervals of leaching has also been presented and discussed. The α–t plots for leaching of unmilled boehmite in caustic solution at Na  As described earlier ( Experimental reduced time plots for boehmite leaching at various temperatures in alkali solutions having Na The G(α) vs. time, t for the shrinking core model with surface reaction R3, i.e. 1 The rate constant, k corresponding to the initial stages of leaching for each of the temperatures has been estimated from the slope of linear fit of Finally, the rate constant values extracted from G( This figure shows that the values of ln k for each of the concentrations are found to be a linear function of 1/T with a correlation coefficient R Size distribution of boehmite particles continually changes as dissolution progresses. The following observations are made from this figure: Volume mean diameter, D Particle size analysis shows primarily a monomodal distribution upto 20 For leaching time of 30 BET specific surface area and cumulative pore volume of leach residues (leached at 80  The changes in the morphological features of the residue (undissolved boehmite) with leaching time are evident in these micrographs. Blunting of the edges and corners observed for the residue of 5  Widely different results have been reported on leaching behaviour of boehmite. One group of researchers has reported low dissolution of boehmite in alkali solution at atmospheric pressure ( Specific surface area of boehmite used by Microtopographical features, such as kinks, steps, and terraces on mineral surfaces are reported to increase the degrees of freedom available for the metal ions for their transport into the solution phase; as a result, the activation energy requirement for leaching decreases ( Thus, the enhanced specific surface energy and increase in surface site density arising from the large surface area together with the microtopographic features make the leaching of boehmite used in the present study easier and faster than that reported in earlier studies ( It is to be noted that boehmite is metastable in the temperature regime under consideration (70–90 Boehmite dissolution data up to about 30 It is already mentioned that the leaching kinetics of boehmite used in the present study follows the shrinking core model with surface reaction for spherical particles (R3). The appropriateness of the shrinking core model, obtained from the reduced time plot analysis, has been verified using the particle size data of the leach residues as presented in G(α), both in terms of the fraction reacted [1 The apparent activation energy value (~ Alkali leaching of a high surface area synthetic boehmite shows significantly high dissolution rate, unlike in many other previous studies. Both the alkali concentration and the operating temperature influence the dissolution rate significantly. Kinetics data analysis using reduced time plots indicate that the shrinking core model with surface reaction model (R3) describes the dissolution process reasonably well for the initial stages of leaching. This has been further verified through particle size analysis data. The activation energy value for the leaching process has been evaluated to be around 65 Authors would like to acknowledge Dr. S. Srikanth, Director,