Crushing and grinding process in mineral processing industry is high energy consuming but it is essential for generating required sized ore with improved liberation, which enhances the process efficiency of physical cleaning of ore. Due to the presence of various minerals in lump of ore, breakage mechanism plays a major role in liberation of different materials, which is solely depends on the type of force applied for crushing and grinding. In conventional crushing and grinding equipment, high impact and attrition forces are applied on the ore lump, which breaks the grain mixture homogeneously, but mineral cleaning enhances when there is a breakage through grain boundaries and not through the grains.
                  Coal is a carbonaceous ore contains maceral and minerals with different properties. Due to the presence of high mineral content, the mineral beneficiation process is adopted where the liberation of inorganic minerals plays key role. As coal is a soft material, use of impact mills generates coal with homogeneous distribution of minerals. In this paper, Autogenous grinding method explored for coal to study the effect on liberation of coal and it was observed that, autogenous grinding helps in improving the liberation of minerals. Experiments also revealed that, the autogenous grinding produces clean coal fines with low ash percentage(16.5% ash clean coal from 24.4% ash feed coals) directly without washing. It was also observed from petrographic study that liberation of coal improved in comparison with conventional grinding process. This is due to the breakage of the coal particles through the coal and mineral boundary.Crushing and Grinding is one of the important unit operations prior to mineral dressing, where the transformation of energy leads to different size distribution of ore. The process of ore comminution includes crushing and grinding stages, which helps in reducing the ore particle size to a level suitable for feeding the physical separation units for segregation of the required materials from the ore. The most important role of comminution in minerals processing industry is not only to reduce particle size, but to liberate minerals from each other. The process of ore comminution is an energy intensive process and it was reported that, it accounts almost half of the operating cost [ Coal is a carbonaceous mineral, consisting of organic macerals and inorganic minerals. Organic macerals are considered as the combustible materials and the inorganic minerals remains as ash after combustion. For metallurgical application, coal is the basic raw material, which accounts almost 60% of the total cost of production. Quality of the coal, mainly ash content, plays a major role in determining coke strength, which directly impacts blast furnace operation for producing molten iron [ As the materials present in the coal i.e. minerals and macerals, shows completely different properties especially hard groove index, which gives a nod to check the effect of variable quantity of forces for selective grinding of materials present in the coal. In coal, Organic part occurs in different petrographic types like vitrinite, liptinite and inertinite, is softer in nature and inorganic part occurs due to the presence of various minerals, is a harder in nature [ The grinding of solid matter occurs under exposure of mechanical forces that trench the structure by overcoming of the interior bonding forces. Selective grinding technique depends on the nature of the materials present in the mixture, size of materials and the physical bonds between the materials in the ore. In conventional coal grinding process, coal is grinded mainly using the hammer mills, where due to the high impact force, the maceral and minerals homogenously due to breakage function [ Autogenous grinding mechanism is proposed in this paper to have a grinding where the grinding media is itself. In this process, the harder fraction of coal is not grinded and this will enhance the breakage through grain boundaries due to bond strength [ The objective of achieving good liberation will be possible by giving limited force to the particle. Autogenous grinding technique is one of the methods, where limited impact force is applied to the material by itself. In this paper we are trying to check the effect of autogenous grinding process on coal ash and liberation of ash bearing minerals. Autogenous grinding is the process in which, the ore is grounded itself without any grinding media. As the grinding media is harder than the ore, there is always high impact force applied to the ore, which leads to the breakage throughout the materials but not through the interfaces between the materials present in ore [ 10 kg of coal lumps were fed to ball mill having a capacity of 20 kg. The feed opening of ball mill was then closed without feeding grinding media. Ball mill was operated for different speed and time and then, product was collected. After grinding process, product coal was collected and separated using sieve analysis. For the comparative analysis, conventional ball milling test conducted with same quantity of raw material (10 kg of coal) using spherical steel balls and the grounded material was collected for the similar analysis. The typical process flowsheet is mentioned in Sieves having an average diameter of 15 mm used as top size and the analysis carried out up to 0.074 mm (−200 mesh of BS standard) size coal. Different fractions obtained in the sieve analysis were separated and weighed. After sieving, three different samples prepared from each size fraction by coning and quartering method and proximate analysis is carried out. Average of all three sample results was calculated and reported. Feed and the product coals were analyzed for size analysis to study grinding performance and size wise-ash analysis to study the effect of grinding on the macerals separation. Standard ash analysis technique was used for finding out the ash in the coal fractions. Primary objective of the grinding process is to improve the liberation of the minerals. Thus liberation analysis was carried out by using petrographic analysis. Different feed coals (Coal-A and Coal-B) grinded in ball mill with and without balls referred as type I and type II respectively in the present study. Crushed samples were subjected to size analysis. Each coal sample with different size fraction was studied under oil immersion reflected light microscope (Leica DM6000M) for its liberation characteristics under 200× and 500× magnification. Using PETROG and Leica QWIN software, point count analysis and image analysis were done respectively to do the liberation studies of individual fractions obtained from both type I and type II techniques. In order to check the breakage characteristics of coal in autogenous grinding mills, different coals were tested. Coal-A is grounded at 60 rpm for 1 h and the grounded coal is screened for further analysis. The test is repeated for two times for checking the repeatability. Mean value of the ash from both the tests is calculated to avoid the manual error. The results of autogenous grinding of Coal-A was mentioned in Sequential grinding of coal using autogenous grinding mechanism was also tested to check the characteristics of coarse coal after autogenous grinding. Initially the product of autogenously grounded coal at 60 rpm and for 1 h; then it was collected and screened. The oversized coal was considered as coarse coal. To check the quality and grinding behavior of coarse fraction after separation of the fines fraction, the coarser particles (>15 mm) from product of autogenous grinding of Coal-A was again fed to the ball mill and the mill was operated autogenously without any grinding media. Coarse coal grounded at same operating conditions (for 1 h at 60 rpm) and the product was collected. Collected Product from sequential grinding was separated into different size fractions using standard sieve analysis and fraction collected below 15 mm size were weighed and analyzed. Results of sieve analysis and ash analysis were mentioned in In order to recheck the mechanism of autogenous grinding methodology for different coals, experiments have been conducted for raw coal (Coal-B) having high ash content (Feed ash is 35.2%). Initially experiments conducted to check the difference between conventional ball mill grinding and autogenous grinding for separation of low ash coal fraction. Conventional ball milling performed at 30% ball mill loading along with same raw coal input. The coal grinding conducted for autogenous grinding and conventional ball milling at similar grinding conditions i.e. 30 min grinding time and 60 rpm drum speed. The resultant product is separated into different size fractions and checked for ash content. The results of comparative study are depicted in Downstream operation of coal beneficiation includes different physical cleaning operations in presence of water and other reagents like magnetite, flotation reagents etc. This causes several process issues like handling of high cost reagents, removal of moisture from the product, cost of logistics due to high moisture product and energy loss due to the evaporation of moisture etc. Hence, the present study is focused on the generation of low ash clean coal product to avoid the wet cleaning methods used in downstream process of low ash clean coal generation. In this paper, production efficiency of the autogenous grinding is not compared with respect to conventional grinding. However, literature for different minerals is showing the advantage of autogenous mills and SAG mills over conventional mills showing the fact that, the production efficiency is better in autogenous mills due to the reason that, autogenous mills can handle more throughput. To support the observations obtained by size and size wise ash analysis, liberation study is being carried out [ Liberation study has been conducted at different size levels of autogenous ground coal. It has been found that the products obtained from two different grinding techniques, vary in size distribution due to the variation in the mode of force applied [ Detailed liberation analysis ( Study has been carried out to optimize the operating conditions for autogenous grinding process for producing low ash clean coal without beneficiation process. Coal-B has been taken for doing the optimization study. Grinding time is varied from 0.5 h to 1.5 h to check the variation in the ash percentage of fine coal. Results of the experiments were shown in Comminution is very critical operation in mineral processing industries, which is used to liberate the useful mineral from the gangue materials. Coal is a carbonaceous material with different minerals present in it, presence of which reduces the quality and calorific value of the coal. Conventional grinding of the coal reduces the size of the material by breaking the coal and minerals simultaneously. This leads to the finer distribution of minerals in coal and due to which the efficiency of coal cleaning process reduces. Autogenous grinding of coal has been carried out for producing fine coal with excellent liberation characteristics. The run of mine coals, the soft organic macerals in the coal are grounded by itself to generate low ash coal by keeping mineral part aside, due to the limited energy available for grinding. It was also observed that, autogenous grinding process produces low ash (16.5% ash) clean coal fines from 24.4% ash feed coals for the size of <1 mm and for higher ash coals (34.2% ash), the fraction −1 + 0.5 mm obtained from autogenous grinding has 17.44% less ash compared with conventionally grounded coal. The petrographic analysis revealed that, the free maceral content improved for all the fractions of autogenously grinded coals, which is not observed for conventionally grounded coals. The free maceral content increased by 8% for fine fraction of coals grounded by autogenous grinding technique. This proves that, the liberation of minerals is improved by the application of mild impact forces by autogenous grinding. The major grinding takes place due to attrition and minor due to impact.