Thermal energy storage (TES) is recognised as a key technology for the implementation of renewable energy sources in buildings and, therefore, to their contribution to climate change mitigation. Phase change materials are the materials used in latent TES, but they present corrosion to metals when encapsulated in these materials. In this study, four commercial PCMs are tested against three commonly used metals, to evaluate the corrosion of each pair. Results show that stainless steel is resistant to the PCMs tested under the experimental conditions used. Aluminium is recommended to be used with the tested organic PCMs (RT-21 and RT-25), should be used with caution with HS-24P, and it is not recommended with SP-21E. Finally, copper is also recommended with the tested organic PCMs, but it should be used with caution with the inorganic ones.Solar energy is considered one of the main and more promising sources of renewable energy due to its abundance and free availability Thermal energy storage (TES) systems are fundamental to determine the success of solar energy applications, such as cold storage systems, solar power plants, or comfort building services Nevertheless, despite all desirable PCM properties, there is one of them that can drastically affect the loading and unloading time, this property is the low thermal conductivity of most PCM Metals are the main candidates for PCM encapsulation, this due to properties such as material resistance, heat conductivity, durability, resistance to abrasion, malleability, and ductility On this matter, several research studies of corrosive effect had been carried out using salt hydrates, known as PCM for low temperature applications. Cabeza et al., studied short-term and long-term immersion corrosion test with several inorganic PCM and metals (aluminium, brass, copper, steel and stainless steel) in the temperature ranges of 24–29 ºC On this concern, Vasu et al. Commercial PCM are not widely studied in terms of their corrosive effect on metals, compared to non-commercial PCMs Oró et al. Even though, commercial PCM cover a wide temperature range from – 40 to 120 °C, only the compatibility of nine commercial PCM has been studied with metals/metals alloys. PCM E-21 and C-18 for performance improvement in cold storage The main novelty of this investigation is the creation of a selection criteria for chemical compatibility of commercial PCMs exposed to different container materials, never studied before using this approach. The aim of this study is contributing to the generation of new knowledge and an expansion of PCMs use in building applications, which will make possible the selection of the appropriate metal as an encapsulation materials. For this reason, PCMs were selected according to their melting points, in a desirable range of 20–25 ºC. Thus, the corrosive effect of four commercial PCM (two organic and two inorganic) in contact with three different metals (aluminium, copper, and stainless steel 316 L) were studied. Finally, the compatibility recommendations were established for each PCM-Metal pair studied. The PCMs in this study were selected according to its possible subsequent use in building applications, which is why its selection was according to their melting point, in a desirable range between 20 and 25 ºC. Thus, four commercial PCMs were selected to carry out this research. Two of them of organic origin PCM, RT-21 and RT-25, both commercialized by the company Rubitherm GmBH, and two of inorganic origin PCM, SP-21E marketed by the company Rubitherm GmBH and HS-24P produced by the company Rgees LLC. The composition, properties and price of each of the PCMs used is shown in As in previous research In this study, the methodology previously established by Ushak et al. The PCMs were placed in glass borosilicate containers, the amount of PCM used was that necessary to fill the glass containers in approximately 2 cm. The metal samples were placed in the borosilicate glass container in such a way that approximately 50% of its surface was submerged in the PCM solution ( Corrosion tests were performed as follows: the samples were removed from the oven at different times, sample No. 1 (250 h), sample No. 2 (500 h), sample No. 3 (1000 h), and finally sample No. 4 (1500 h) Each of the copper, aluminium and stainless steel metal sheets subjected to oxidation was observed under an optical microscope, Axio Lab.A1 of reflected light brand Zeiss, to verify physical changes in the metal. For this, a 5x objective lens and AxioVision LE software were used. From the samples assessed it was possible to observe that none of the metal sheets studied present corrosion at naked eye after immersion into PCM1 (RT-21) and PCM2 (RT-25) (organic PCM) during the entire experimental period ( The metal sheets were also tested using PCM based on inorganic salts, PCM3 (SP-21E) and PCM4 (HS-24P) ( In this case, the aluminium, copper and stainless steel submerged in the salts hydrates presented corrosion. However, most metal sheets retained their structural integrity during the entire experimental period. The qualitative analysis shows green/blue formation, an effect related to the presence of the chlorinated compound and corroded copper after exposure to both PCM. Similar evidence was observed in stainless steel with typical deterioration (brown spots) related to the corrosion process. In the case of aluminium, the physical effects of wear are shown with clear signs of detachment, which are more evident when exposed to PCM3 (SP-21E) than to PCM4 (HS-24P) ( Mass loss from metal sheets was a quantitative variable to evaluate due to the corrosive effect of the PCMs on aluminium, copper, and stainless steel. Within the metal assessed, the copper sheets were the metal most affected by the corrosive effect of PCM1 (RT-21) and PCM2 (RT-25) showing a mass loss close to 0.01% in both cases. Moreover, the copper shows a mass loss tendency when immersed PCM3 (SP-21E) and PCM4 (HS-24P) ( Aluminium was the metal that presented the higher mass loss attributed to corrosive process, showing a reduction of 2.7% when exposed to PCM3 (SP-21E) and 0.6% with PCM4 (HS-24P). On the other hand, when aluminium sheets were immersed into PCM1 (RT-21) and PCM2 (RT-25) a slightly mass loss was observed 0.002% and 0.005% respectively ( Even though the mass loss was detected when aluminium was exposed to PCM3 (SP-21E) and PCM4 (HS-24P), it is also possible to appreciate different patterns of corrosion. In the case of the PCM3 (SP-21E), this showed a significant loss after 500 h inwards and producing the fragmentation of the aluminium sheet by the end of the experiment. PCM4 (HS-24P) showed an increased and constant mass loss even before the 500 h of exposure ( Stainless steel is the metal that shows the lowest mass loss in all cases tested, with a percentage of mass loss of 4.3E-04% for treatment with PCM1 (RT-21), 2.1E-04% against PCM2 (RT-25) and 1.6E-03% and 1.3E-03% against to PCM3 (SP-21E) and PCM4 (HS-24P) respectively ( Corrosion rate is essential to determine the useful life of structures (e.g. buried sewer pipes). It's an instrumental tool used by numerous researchers to determine the ideal choice of materials for different settings and the types of corrosion inhibitors to be applied (if necessary). The corrosion rate is also used in the development of maintenance programs for various types of structures.   The behaviour of the three sheets studied against immersion in the PCM3 (SP-21E) are shown in  Once the experiments were performed and the CR values determined for each of the metal sheets exposed to these four different PCM types, a recommendation on combinations (PCM-metal) table was made according to the corrosion mass loss guide used in the industry ( Stainless steel is the metal with the highest strength under the conditions of corrosion tests. The CR values for the stainless steel sheet versus all the PCMs in question were between the range of 0.3 and 9.9 mg/cm Likewise, the copper foil maintained its CR values within the range of 0.3 and 9.9 mg/cm However, aluminium foil was the most affected by PCM3 (SP-21E), with CR values between 100 and 999 mg/cm As described in previous studies In The metallic sheets treated with organic PCM (PCM1 (RT-21) and PCM2 (RT-25)), do not show evident signs of corrosion, and under microscopic observation, these remain unchanged compared to the control sheets.   Due to the fact that the aluminium sheet presented the greatest physical wear due to corrosion, it was used to analyse the progress of corrosion over time. The results for the aluminium sheets after the 250 and 1500 h of treatment are shown in After 500 h of treatment, a partial break in the interface of the aluminium sheet could be observed when exposed to PCM3 (SP-21E). However, corrosion products appeared on the surface of the sheet at both 250 and 1500 h for both PCMs ( The behaviour of the metallic sheets, when exposed to the PCM of organic origin, agrees with previous investigations The presence of impurities in the copper foil in the presence of the PCMs of inorganic origin may produce the passivation of the metal This investigation has been carried out within the context of the necessity of a better understanding regarding material behaviour when exposed to different types of PCMs, in this case, focusing on commercial PCMs. As it has been highlighted throughout this research, phenomena like corrosion play a critical role when talking about the lifespan of a particular PCM application. The published data indicate that there is a lack of corrosion studies on the effects of commercial PCMs on metals. In The main distinction presented to analyse the corrosive behaviour of PCM focuses on the chemical composition of these products: organic and inorganic PCM. In this summary, most of the compatibility studies are performed with PCMs of inorganic origin. However, in this study, compounds of organic origin are also incorporated to corroborate their corrosive effect on metals of different nature. In In the summary presented, it has been shown that all salts are compatible with stainless steel. However, the studies conducted by Cabeza et al. While some data on the compatibility of these PCMs with metals can be found in the literature, the composition of the PCM is often not well documented or has been modified through time by manufacturers. If the correct information is not available, a compatibility test is necessary to evaluate its application in subsequent studies Corrosion experiments were carried out amongst three metals used to contain four different PCMs, two of organic origin and two of inorganic origin. The degradation phenomena were controlled qualitatively and quantitatively after the immersion of the metallic sheets in PCMs during 1500 h. As expected, stainless steel is the most resistant metal to all the PCM studied, under the experimental conditions tested, showing a mass loss between 2.1E-04% – 1.6E-03% and corrosion rate values within the range of 0.3 and 9.9 mg/cm Aluminium does not present major signs of corrosion or deterioration compared to PCMs of organic origin (PCM1 (RT-21) and PCM2 (RT-25)) with mass losses of 0.002% and 0.005% respectively, and a corrosion rate within the range of 0.3 and 9.9 mg/cm Copper was corroded by PCM3 (SP-21E) and PCM4 (HS-24P) in a similar range, showing low mass losses of 0.3% and 0.1% respectively. Due to the observations and a corrosion rate within the range of 10 and 49 mg/cm  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. the authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. Authors acknowledge to ANID/FONDAP Nº 15110019, CONICYT/PCI/REDES Nº170131 and CONICYT/FONDECYT/REGULAR/ N° 1170675 projects. P. Marín thanks fellowship CONICYT-PCHA/Doctorado Nacional/2015. Folio21151359. The work is partially funded by the Spanish government (RTI2018–093849-B-C31 - MCIU/AEI/FEDER, UE). This work is partially supported by ICREA under the ICREA Academia programme. GREiA is certified agent TECNIO in the category of technology developers from the Government of Catalonia. The authors at the University of Lleida would like to thank the Catalan Government for the quality accreditation given to their research group (2017 SGR 1537).