The current study reports on the manufacturing by rapid prototyping technique of three-dimensional (3D) scaffolds based on silicon substituted hydroxyapatite with Elastin-like Recombinamers (ELRs) functionalized surfaces. Silicon doped hydroxyapatite (Si-HA), with Ca10(PO4)5.7(SiO4)0.3(OH)1.7h0.3 nominal formula, was surface functionalized with two different types of polymers designed by genetic engineering: ELR-RGD that contain cell attachment specific sequences and ELR-SNA15/RGD with both hydroxyapatite and cells domains that interact with the inorganic phase and with the cells, respectively. These hybrid materials were subjected to in vitro assays in order to clarify if the ELRs coating improved the well-known biocompatible and bone regeneration properties of calcium phosphates materials. The in vitro tests showed that there was a total and homogeneous colonization of the 3D scaffolds by Bone marrow Mesenchymal Stromal Cells (BMSCs). In addition, the BMSCs were viable and able to proliferate and differentiate into osteoblasts.
               
                  Statement of Significance
                  Bone tissue engineering is an area of increasing interest because its main applications are directly related to the rising life expectancy of the population, which promotes higher rates of several bone pathologies, so innovative strategies are needed for bone tissue regeneration therapies. Here we use the rapid prototyping technology to allow moulding ceramic 3D scaffolds and we use different bio-polymers for the functionalization of their surfaces in order to enhance the biological response. Combining the ceramic material (silicon doped hydroxyapatite, Si-HA) and the Elastin like Recombinamers (ELRs) polymers with the presence of the integrin-mediate adhesion domain alone or in combination with SNA15 peptide that possess high affinity for hydroxyapatite, provided an improved Bone marrow Mesenchymal Stromal Cells (BMSCs) differentiation into osteoblastic linkage.The 3-D printing technology has given an extra boost to the world of biomaterials in the field of Tissue Engineering, to enable the design and manufacture of prostheses “ad hoc” for each patient. These new manufacturing techniques of biomaterials for clinical use, also give us the ability to toggle various compounds and proteins in the manufacturing process itself and to modify the surfaces of classic biomaterials in a controlled manner. 3D rapid prototyping technique is an emerging method in the scaffold design. It is based on the direct, layer by layer, slow deposition of a ceramic ink to form a three dimensional scaffold. The 3D-plotter used to prepare 3D scaffolds moves along the three directions in space while depositing ink strings over a plate. The plotter movements are controlled by a computer which makes possible to plot very complex 3D structures. This technique has shown that it is possible to prepare 3D scaffolds made of different materials suitable for tissue engineering, for example, chitosan-HA or polylactic acid and polycaprolactone-HA or polyacrylate-HA A wide application of these materials is based in their ability to induce bone regeneration. The use of grafts is a common technique for filling in bone defects, when it is not possible to use native bone, and they are usually based on hydroxyapatite (HA). Thus, Vallet et al. have designed a biomaterial (HA) for use in bone regeneration cavitary defects in tibia of research animals When hydroxyapatite is implanted as bone substitute, the model of wound healing involves the activation of periostium connective tissue which is responsible for the formation of the fibrous capsule surrounding the biomaterial. This capsule does not permit the join between healthy bone ends of the defect. The hydroxyapatite action would cause that surrounding connective tissue became in osteoid tissue, probably due to the action of osteoblasts from healthy areas that colonizing the fibrous capsule and they perform their osteoinductive function onto the fibrous material This means, that the performance of these 3-D biomaterials, when implanted in living tissue, is variable depending on the nature of peptides that are functionalized with. The use of Elastin-like Recombinamers (ELRs) for functionalizing surfaces is a novel advance that has been recently proposed ELRs are based on repeated sequences, namely “elastomeric domains”, found in an extracellular matrix (ECM) protein, the natural elastin Several researchers are studying the role of the chemotactic and adhesive RGD peptide, the action appears to induce migration and adhesion of osteoblasts on the surface of the biomaterial implanted in the defect area, producing a clear improvement of the bone regeneration process In this sense, there is an increasing use of small peptides with antimicrobial properties that enhance the ability of the biomaterials to induce bone regeneration, while preventing the infection caused by their use In this paper, we present the possibility of exploiting the ability of certain peptides to enhance bone regeneration process when they are decorated onto 3D scaffolds. We expect this solution to favor the three dimensional cell colonization of the entire scaffold helping the osteointegration of the scaffolds when used in bone reconstructions application. For this purpose, the biomaterials are functionalized with chemotactic and adhesive peptides with features such as RGD peptide and the peptide comprising the 15 N-terminal residues of statherin (SN Nanocrystalline silicon-substituted hydroxyapatite (Si-HA) with the nominal formula Ca Below are shown the two amino-acid sequences of the ELRs utilized in this work.   ELR genes were constructed by standard genetic engineering techniques. The recombinamer biosynthesis was carried out using The purity and molecular weight of ELRs were analysed by FTIR, SDS-PAGE and mass spectroscopy (MALDI-TOF/MS) while, the correctness of sequence was checked by amino-acid analysis and 3-D periodic macroporous scaffolds were prepared via direct write assembly of a Si-HA slurry, using 3-D rapid prototyping printing equipment (envisionTEC 3D Bioplotter™). The slurry was formed by the method described in Ref. Si-HA scaffolds were coated by immersion with two different polymers. An elastin-like polymer contained cell attachment specific sequences (RGD domain), samples named Si-HA-RGD. And an elastin-like polymer designed specifically with both hydroxyapatite binding and cell adhesion domains (HAp adhesion ones; SN Solutions of both polymers were prepared in a 1x Phosphate Buffer Solution (PBS). In both cases 10 The structure and composition of Si-HA scaffolds, undecorated and decorated with Elastin-like Recombinamers, were determined by X-rad diffraction (XRD), using a Phillips Pw-1800 diffractometer and Cu K Rat Bone marrow Mesenchymal Stromal Cells (rBMSCs) were obtained and processed as described elsewhere 50,000 rBMSCs transfected with the green fluorescent protein (GFP) were seeded on Si-HA, Si-HA-RGD and Si-HA-SN The alkaline phosphatase (ALP) is a very well-known bone marker involve in the process of bone mineralization. The ALP activity, it was measured by means of the Sensolyte pNPP Alkaline Phosphatase Kit from ANESPEC. Same cellular supernatants obtained in the As well as ALP, Osteocalcin (OC) plays an important role in bone mineralization, and is a widely known marker for osteoblasts. In order to reveal the differentiation of 50,000 rat BMSCs cultured on TCPS, Si-HA, Si-HA-RGD and Si-HA-SN All The efficiency of production and purification were verified through chemical characterizations of the biosynthesized ELRs. FTIR, The utility of Si-doped hydroxyapatite (Si-HA) as an excellent material in the field of bone tissue regeneration has been previously showed due to its biocompatibility, bioactivity and osteoconductivity The first recombinamer used shows a simpler composition. Its bioactivity and potential for biofunctionalization relies on the presence of the RGD cell adhesion integrin-mediate domain, derived from human fibronectin. The benefits of such surface treatment on the ceramic compound are evident. The promotion of early osteoblast addition, induced by the presence of RGD domains on the ceramic surface, would speed the 3D colonization and osseointegration of the implant. However, this simple approach is not free of certain risks of lack of efficiency. As the surface functionalization relies on the passive adsorption of the ELR-RGD, two complications might arise. The first one being an insufficient degree of adsorption of the ELR-RGD on the ceramic surface, limiting so its final ability for cell adhesion and rapid and homogeneous osseointegration. Other complication that might take place is due to the highly charged feature of the RGD domain. It could be the case that adsorption on the polar ceramic might preferentially take place by those RGD domains, preventing them to be readily available for cell adhesion and decreasing so their efficiency. To avoid those two potential complications, a new ELR has been designed and used in this work; namely ELR-SN According to that, the ELR-SN  Results from the LDH assay demonstrated that the proliferation rates of rBMSCs cultured on Si-HA, Si-HA-RGD or Si-HA-SN The colonization test was performed in order to clarify if rBMSCs are able to colonize the entire scaffold or the cell attachment is limited to the most external layers. Particularly, in In order to evaluate the osteoblast differentiation of rBMSCs it was measured the functional expression of two well-known osteoblast markers (OC and ALP). The In summary, we have developed an innovative scaffold for bone tissue regeneration. Rapid prototyped Si-HA scaffolds have been biofunctionalized by the absorption of the bioactive protein polymers ELRs and the cell-material interaction of mesenchymal stem cells has been studied. The presence of the integrin-mediate adhesion domain alone or in combination with SN Authors would like to thank the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 