Background
                  The purpose of this study was to investigate clinical characteristics and surgical management of Type III Wagstaffe fracture.
               
                  Methods
                  From August 2012 to July 2015, 13 patients with Type III Wagstaffe fractures were surgically treated. During operation, the cartilage of joint surface was explored. Wagstaffe fragment was fixed with cannulated screw or suture, Chaput fragment was fixed with cannulated screw or plate, and Cotton test was performed to evaluate the stability of syndesmosis during the operation. All the patients were followed up for 14.3 months in average. Clinical outcome was assessed with Olerud–Molander score and American Orthopedic Foot and Ankle Society (AOFAS) score. The traumatic arthritis was evaluated with osteoarthritis-score (OA-score).
               
                  Results
                  During the operation, chondral injury was found on the lateral top of the talus in 8 cases, as “kissing lesion” of Chaput fragment. The fractures healed uneventfully and all the patients recovered satisfactorily except two had moderate restriction in ankle movement. The average Olerud–Molander score and AOFAS score were 82.3 and 86.1, respectively.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Type III Wagstaffe is a rare and often missed fracture. 61% are associated with a chondral lesion on the lateral top of the talus. Anatomical reduction and rigid fixation of both fragments are mandatory to obtain ankle stability and good results.Ankle joint fracture is common and accounts for up to 9% of all fractures in adults Wagstaffe fracture is classified into 3 types: Type I, displaced avulsion fracture at the distal end of the fibula; Type II, fracture at the anterior spike of the proximal fibular fragment; Type III, fractures at the anterior tubercles from both the tibia and fibula Type III is rare as compared to Type II, the most common type of Wagstaffe fracture This study has been approved by the Ethics Committee of Pu-Ai Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology and the Affiliated Sixth People’s Hospital of Shanghai Jiaotong University. Written consents were obtained from each patient before study. From August 2012 to July 2015, 485 consecutive patients with ankle fractures were surgically treated in the Affiliated Sixth People’s Hospital of Shanghai Jiaotong University, of whom 13 with Type III Wagstaffe fractures were retrospectively reviewed. All of the 13 patients were admitted into our emergency department within one day after injury, and anteroposterior and lateral radiography was regularly performed. Two senior orthopedists assessed the radiographs independently. If the fracture was detectable or suspected, computerized tomography (CT) was applied routinely. Ankle fractures were classified according to the Lauge–Hansen classification All the 13 patients were treated with open reduction and internal fixation. During the operation, the cartilage of joint surface was explored in each case. Once the osteochondral lesion happened, it was localized using the anatomical grid scheme as described by Elias et al. After the anatomical reduction, Wagstaffe fragment was fixed with cannulated screw or suture, and Chaput fragment was fixed with cannulated screw or plate according to the distribution of fracture fragments. Then, Cotton test was performed to evaluate the stability of the syndesmosis, especially in the case that the distal tibiofibular diastasis was diagnosed preoperatively according to the radiographs. If more than 2 All the patients were followed up for a mean of 14.3 months (range, 11–24 months), and complications were recorded. An ankle orthosis was used to limit the movement of the ankle joint for 3 weeks postoperatively, followed by partial weight-bearing for another 3 weeks. Full weight-bearing was allowed for about 6 weeks subsequently. Because of the injury of the AITFL, the ankle rotation was not encouraged in the first 6 weeks. Each patient was followed up at 1, 2, 3, 6 and 12 months after surgery. The anteroposteior and lateral X-ray of ankle joint was taken regularly. CT scan was performed postoperatively only when the recovery was unsatisfying at follow-up. The clinical outcome was assessed with Olerud–Molander score Among 485 patients with ankle fractures diagnosed in about 3 years, 13 were diagnosed with Type III Wagstaffe fracture with the incidence of about 2.7%. Patients’ characteristics are summarized in The diagnosis of Type III Wagstaffe fractures in 13 patients was confirmed by CT scan. On X-ray, both Wagstaffe and Chaput fragments were observed only in three patients, while the Chaput fragment was overlooked in remaining 10 patients (77%) ( All patients were treated with open reduction and internal fixation. The median time from injury to surgery was 3.4 During the operation, the chondral injury was found in 8 patients on the lateral top of the talus, the corresponding position of Chaput fragment, as so-called “kissing lesion” of Chaput fragment ( For all the 13 patients, the incision healed uneventfully, and the fractures were united in 6–8 weeks without loss of reduction of fragments or the position of the talus in the mortise. 10–12 weeks later, the syndesmosis screw was removed. Infection and other complications were not observed. At the end of follow-up, the mean OA-score was 0.5 (range, 0–2), and the mean Olerud–Molander score and AOFAS score was 82.3 (range, 65–95) and 86.1 (range, 74–90), respectively ( In 1875, Wagstaffe first described a type of avulsion fracture of the AITFL, which was named Wagstaffe fracture According to the classification of the Wagstaffe fracture It has been accepted that the distal tibiofibular syndesmosis has great contribution to the stability of the ankle joint. It is composed of the anterior inferior tibiofibular ligament, posterior inferior tibiofibular and inferior transverse tibiofibular ligaments and the interosseous membrane Based on the CT scan, 2 patients suffered from posttraumatic arthritis of the tibiotalar joint at about one year postoperatively, whose OA-scores were both 2. In those two patients, the anterolateral impingement of the ankle joint was obvious, which might be derived from scar formation and fibrosis after injury to the synovium, joint capsule and ligament. Liu et al. Arthroscopy-assisted open reduction-internal fixation (AORIF) is an effective method in the evaluation of the concomitant injuries in ankle fracture, especially the intra-articular injuries. Chen et al. However there are limitations in this study. Firstly, the incidence of Type III Wagstaffe fracture was relative low, which may limit the generalization of our results. Secondly, it is a retrospective study. Thirdly, the radiographs of mortise view were unavailable at the initial visit and the follow-up visit, which may lead a higher missed diagnosis rate of chaput fragment fracture. Meanwhile, it may also influence the accuracy of the preoperative diagnosis of the distal tibiofibular diastasis according to the criteria of Amendola. Fourthly, two patients were followed up for only 11 months, which is too short. In conclusion, Type III Wagstaffe fracture is rare and often missed on X-ray. We speculate on a modified injury mechanism. In SER type ankle fracture, Wagstaffe fragment is avulsed by AITFL. Then, the talus continues to rotate externally and impacts the anteriorlateral edge of distal tibial, which results in the fracture of Chaput fragment. Sometimes, there is concomitant chondral injury on the corresponding articular surface. During the operation, Chaput and Wagstaffe fragments should be anatomically reduced and rigidly fixed. The stability of the distal tibiofibular syndesmosis should be reconstructed. The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.