Ethnopharmacological relevance
                  Ayurveda, derives from the Sanskrit words Ayus (life) and Veda (knowledge) is the most ancient system of traditional medicine of the world. It has been practiced in Indian peninsula since 5000 BC to offer natural ways to treat diseases and to promote healthcare.
               
                  Methodology
                  We reviewed the literature on the history, principles and current status of Ayurveda. The data have been presented systematically including the initiatives from Government of India. Several aspects of administrative management, education, teaching and related aspects for promotion and development of Ayurveda and other Indian systems of traditional medicine have been discussed.
               
                  Results
                  This paper reviews on different aspects of development of Ayurveda. Presently, there are 2420 hospitals with about 42271 beds, 15017 dispensaries, 429246 registered practitioners, more than 320 educational institutions, 7699 drug-manufacturing units to promote Ayurveda into the health care delivery system in the country. Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India is the official document for single Ayurvedic drugs (540 monographs) and different formulations (152 monographs). Several aspects in this regard for development of Ayurveda have been discussed.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Considering the widespread use and popularity of Ayurveda worldwide, administrative management and infrastructure facilities, indigenous practices and standards for quality control and it’s evaluation have been highlighted. In India, all such efforts for integration of Ayurveda provide potential role in the health care benefits.As per WHO estimates, traditional, complementary, alternative, or non-conventional medicines are used by 70–95% of global population particularly in developing countries for their healthcare ( India is one of the 12 mega bio-diversity zone covering 2.4% of world’s area but with 8% of global biodiversity. It includes 15 agro-climatic zones containing about 47,000 plant species including nearly 15,000 medicinal plants ( Several traditional healthcare systems exist in India from centuries and out of all the traditional practices, Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homeopathy are the official traditional systems of medicine. These systems are collectively known as Indian Systems of Medicine (ISM), and are currently called as an acronym for Ayurveda, Yoga & Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy ( The word Ayurveda is derived from the Sanskrit word ‘Ayus’ (all aspects of life from birth to death) and ‘Veda’ (knowledge or science) science of long life ( Scientific studies on Ayurvedic medicaments unveil the cause and effect relationship of many plant based treatment in last few decades. Reserpine, an alkaloid from This review aimed to highlight about Ayurveda and its basic principle in the changing scenario for their promotion and development through various initiatives of the Indian government. In the Vedic time (5000 BC), curing of disease was dealt by specific person(s) called as ascetic people and later on, this enriched knowledge base was transferred to the next generations through scriptures, of two categories: Ayurvedic text are much respected in India and neighboring countries and has been translated into Greek (300 BC), Tibetan and Chinese (300 AD), Persian and Arabic (700 AD) and several other languages ( The roots of Ayurveda can be traced to the beginning of cosmic creation. In Universe, everything is composed of matter, and according to Ayurveda, all matters consist of five basic elements ( For the treatment, there are two components in Ayurveda. First one is preventive, which includes personal hygiene, a regular daily routine, social behavior and use of rejuvenating materials. The other one is curative, consisting of drugs ( Indian people have a tremendous passion for medicinal plants and they use them for a wide range of health related applications from common colds to improve the memory, and from infection to the enhancement of general immunity. The ISM covers both the systems, which originated in India and abroad, or got adopted in India in course of time ( The encouraging features of Ayurveda includes its accessibility and affordability, broad acceptance, comparatively low cost, low level of technological input and growing economic value ( The Department of Indian Systems of Medicines and Homeopathy (ISM&H) was established in March, 1995 as a separate department in the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Govt. of India. It was re-named as Department of Ayurveda, Yoga & Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy (AYUSH) in November, 2003 with a vision to provide quality control and standardization of traditional drugs, to make separate national policy and to generate awareness about these systems by upgrading educational standards at national and international levels. This department consists of: Five central research councils, namely Central Council for Research in Ayurveda Science (CCRAS), New Delhi; Central Council for Research in Siddha (CCRS), New Delhi; Central Council for Research in Unani Medicines (CCRUM), New Delhi; Central Council for Research in Homoeopathy (CCRH), New Delhi; Central Council for Research in Yoga & Naturopathy (CCRYN), New Delhi. Two statutory regulatory bodies, namely Central Council of Indian Medicine (CCIM) and Central Council of Homoeopathy (CCH). Two laboratories known as Pharmacopoeial Laboratory for Indian Medicine (PLIM) and Homoeopathy Pharmacopoeia Laboratory (HPL). Eleven national institutes for education. One drug-manufacturing unit namely as Pharmacopoeial Laboratories, Indian Medicines Pharmaceutical Corporation Limited (IMPCL). They govern regulation, development and growth of AYUSH systems in the country and abroad. The department of AYUSH addresses the key issues relating to upgradation of the educational standards, strengthening the existing research institutions and ensuring a time-bound research program on identified diseases. Several schemes for promotion, cultivation and regeneration of medicinal plants have been made and also to develop pharmacopoeial standards. This department also takes all initiatives to ensure the status of Ayurvedic system in respect of policy support, infrastructure, legislation and regulation, research and development, courses of study, quality control and standardization at national and international levels. Central Council for Research in Ayurveda Science (CCRAS), an autonomous organization registered on March, 1978 under the Societies Registration Act, XXI of 1860 has started numerous schemes for the promotion of Ayurveda. Drug Control Cell is working in the AYUSH department to deal with the matters pertaining to quality control and the regulation of Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani drugs under the provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and Rules, 1945 ( In early time of India, Indian education system, culture and traditional knowledge were much systematized. Taxila (UNESCO World Heritage Centre) was considered to be the most respected place of higher learning and education in India from 700 BC to 300 AD ( In 1970, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, Government of India, established the pharmacopoeial laboratory for Indian medicine (PLIM) at Ghaziabad (Uttar Pradesh) under the Drugs and Cosmetic Act, 1940. This approved laboratory monitors the pharmacopoeial standards, testing and quality control of Ayurveda, Unani and Siddha (ASU) drugs. They published monographs of single drugs as ‘Part I’ and compound formulations as ‘Part II’ in Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India (API). So far, the seven volumes of ‘Part I’ consisting of 540 monographs on single drugs have been published, Out of them, 418 (80, 78, 100, 68, and 92) were published as first five volumes during 1990–2006. The sixth volume of Part I consisting of 101 monographs was published in 2008 while the seventh volume comprises the 21 minerals and metals in single drugs. The diseases that affect worldwide have been systematically enlisted in Sanskrit language ( The Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 was enacted in India and rules were made under this Act known as Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945. It is a central legislature which regulates the import, manufacture, distribution and sale of drugs and cosmetics. The Ayurvedic system of medicine was kept out of the preview of this legislation. This exemption continued upto 1964, when the act was amended as the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Act, 1964 (13 of 1964) effective from 15-9-1964, by which a definition of Ayurvedic drug and all necessary provisions for its control were introduced in chapter IV-A ( Traditional knowledge digital library (TKDL) for Ayurveda, Unani, Siddha and Yoga is a collaborative project between CSIR, Ministry of Science and Technology and Department of AYUSH, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. TKDL is an original proprietary database, which is fully protected under national and international law of intellectual property rights. About 2,12,000 medicinal formulations (Ayurveda: 82,900; Unani: 1,15,300; Siddha: 12,950) are documented in a patent compatible format in five international languages including English, French, German, Spanish and Japanese ( Department of AYUSH in its annual foreign trade report showed that the export of AYUSH products has increased from 22756.4 millions of Indian rupees (INR) in 2007–08 to 28870.1 million (INR) in 2009–10, with an average annual growth rate of 12.63%. In respect with total export of AYUSH products in 2009–10, 1184.6 and 5744.1 million (INR) of Ayurvedic products export was recorded for retail and without retail sale, respectively. The import of AYUSH products have increased 14.99% annually, from 2618.2 million (INR) in 2007–08 to 3462.2 million (INR) in 2009–10, in which the share of Ayurvedic products amounting to 187.6 and 125.7 million (INR) for retail and without retail sale, respectively ( In traditional system of medicine, assessment of quality, safety and efficacy is most important. These issues have been considered by the ‘ Apart from marker analysis, different chromatographic techniques such as thin layer chromatography (TLC), high-performance thin layer chromatography (HPTLC), high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), gas chromatography (GC) etc. are most frequently used for the identification and quantifying the phyto-chemicals present in complex herbal mixtures. Ayurvedic pharmacopoeia of India has specified several quality evaluation parameters for natural products, which includes morphological study, determination of quantitative data including extractive values, foreign matter, etc.; limit tests, and different physical tests including boiling range, refractive index, pH, etc ( In order to reinforce traditional medicine in line with the modern medicine, various strategic areas in plant drug research are well thought-out in India. Indian systems of medicine are considering new methodology for development of existing traditional drugs such as pharmacokinetic properties of Ayurvedic formulations can be changed through novel drug delivery systems similar to polymeric nanoparticles, nanocapsules, liposomes, phytosomes, nanoemulsions, microsphere, transferosomes, and ethosomes etc. These are remarkable formulations over conventional systems, for e.g. the curcumin–phospholipid complex is a novel formulation, developed to overcome the limitation of absorption of free curcumin and to enhance its bioavailability in systemic circulation of the human body ( The Central Drugs Standard Control Organization (CDSCO) in collaboration with Indian Pharmacopeia Commission under control of Govt. of India has initiated a nation wide pharmacovigilance program for protecting the health of the patients. This program is to assure safety of drugs including herbals, which gives information on some specific criteria like detection of serious adverse reactions, quantification of their incidence, and identification of contributive or modifying factors ( Ayurveda practice continues today to treat human diseases and provides positive health benefits to the people. Considering the widespread use and popularity of Ayurveda, proper standardization and validation method are being developed for promoting Ayurvedic drugs. Documentation of their safety profiles and pharmacovigilance study are major areas to develop the standard procedures for Ayurvedic products. The existing knowledge of Ayurveda and ethnic medicines are being validated through newer guidelines of standardization, manufacture, quality control and modern techniques. In India, such efforts including administrative management and infrastructure facilities of AYUSH, standards for quality control and indigenous practices for integration of Ayurveda provide potential role in health care of the people. The authors wish to thank