A novel procedure, Gravity Release Analysis (GRA), is introduced for performance prediction of continuous centrifugal concentration, using lab-scale batch tests. Also, linked with the GRA, the Gravity Release Index (GRI) was developed for ranking the ore amenability to centrifugal gravity concentration. Ore samples from the flotation circuit of Myra Falls concentrator were subjected to Multi Pass Test and Gravity Amenability Test for comparison with GRA. Recovery kinetics of batch centrifugal concentration was analysed to establish the Gravity Release Index (GRI). Both Gravity Amenability Test and Multi Pass Test failed to cover the broader mass yield range of continuous centrifugal concentration and this was the main drawback in performance prediction of larger units from lab-scale data. GRA covered a wider mass yield range, yielding better performance prediction of larger continuous units. From the gravity recovery kinetics of the batch unit, varying GRI values for Au, Fe, Zn, Fe and S were obtained, with Au having the highest- GRI and amenability to centrifugal gravity concentration. Varying amenabilities for different Au forms (free Au particles, Au bearing sulphides) to centrifugal gravity concentration could also be distinguished. SEM analysis on recovered gold entities justified the prediction by the GRI. Overall, GRA could effectively predict continuous centrifugal concentration using small amounts of feed with lab-scale batch units. Determination of the GRI for targeted metals would provide further precision for bench-marking and scaling-up of continuous centrifugal concentration.Knelson Continuous Variable Discharge concentrator Energy Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy Gravity Amenability Test Gravity Release Analysis Gravity Recoverable Gold Gravity Recoverable Gold bearing sulphides Gravity Release Index Laboratory scale 3-in. Knelson batch concentrator Scanning Electron Microscopy Continuous discharge centrifugal concentrators, introduced in the 1990′s, brought a niche application for gravity concentration which could not be realized with the low mass yield batch or semi-continuous concentrators. A typical use of these units is scavenging Au-associated sulphides from flotation tails. This application increases productivity by reducing gold losses and lowering grinding costs by using a coarser grind size ( Gravity recovery by centrifugal concentration is a probabilistic process dependent on several factors including specific gravity, degree of liberation, particle morphology, particle size and machine parameters. Like floatability, amenability to gravity concentration is not an intrinsic property. The best case of centrifugal separation is what is achievable as separation stages are increased, i.e. for a given ore sample the more the number of batch testing cycles, the sample undergoes the higher the gravity recovery, such that by running an infinite number of batch cycles the maximum gravity recoverability can be determined. Evaluation of ore amenability to concentration precedes application of the technology and availability of reliable techniques capable of determining maximum recoverability is crucial for bench-marking process performance. For determining the amenability of a given ore to gravity concentration sink-and-float test is mostly used. Several laboratory procedures were developed for assessing the ore amenability to centrifugal concentration and to evaluate the process. For testing of centrifugal gravity concentration in lab-scale, using small-batch units is universal, since there are no lab-scale continuous centrifugal concentrators. Batch Knelson MD3 is particularly suited and widely-accepted for characterizing centrifugal gravity concentration ( In addition to the GRG method, procedures such as the Multi Pass Test ( Also, the well-known GRG procedure can distinguish gravity recoverable and non-recoverable gold. However, there is no technique to quantify the extent of liability to gravity concentration from one mineral type to the next. While many minerals are gravity-recoverable, ease of recovery depends on the machine characteristics, density, mineralogy, liberation degree, particle size and shape, and no two mineral particles have exactly the same response to gravity. Unlike in flotation, where the rate constant can be quantified based on lab-testing and used in process design, no strategy to quantitatively measure mineral amenability to gravity concentration exists. This work investigates the suitability of the batch Knelson MD3 unit for predicting CVD applications; assesses suitability of existing lab procedures for predicting CVD performance; and aims at developing a new lab procedure for predicting CVD performance. Linked with these, a novel procedure code, Gravity Release Analysis (GRA) was presented. GRA was developed from Dell's flotation release analysis ( Synthetic quartz/magnetite ore mixture and polymetallic ore from an operating mill were used for the test program. For the synthetic ore mixture, sized silica (LM # 20–30 and LM # 70) from Lane Mountain was blended in the ratio 1:3 and mixed with sized magnetite to constitute a 5% magnetite content. The magnetite used was passed through Davis Tube instrument to entirely remove non-magnetic impurities. The silica and magnetite in the synthetic mixture had similar particle size distributions, as presented in Polymetallic ore samples, collected from Copper rougher tails, zinc concentrate and tailings streams of the flotation circuit at the mill of Myra Falls operation, Victoria, BC, Canada, were subjected to the same test conditions as the synthetic ore. The samples were riffled into one 2 For ore characterization, X-ray diffraction of representative ore samples with phase quantification using the Rietveld Topas 4.2 program was completed at the Earth, Ocean & Atmospheric Sciences, UBC. Scanning electron microscopy was also used to identify the gold species and gold associations recovered by the centrifugal gravity concentration tests. A Hitachi S3000 A single pass variable mass yield procedure in Samples weighing 5, 2, 1 and 0.5 In order to assess the adequacy of available procedures for predicting CVD application, the Multi Pass Test ( To improve on the deficiencies of existing methodologies for high yield applications, the Gravity Release Analysis (GRA) procedure in For the MD3, increasing bowl speed favours recovery and leads to dilution of concentrates by lower density species ( The laboratory scale results were compared to industrial scale results obtained using full- and pilot-scale CVD units. The industrial scale results were acquired from a rigorous optimisation study on the CVD units, including statistical experimental design and simulation optimisation to generate an operating curve. A more thorough description of this optimisation study is given elsewhere ( For batch gravity recovery, a first order process is assumed. Accordingly, for gravity recoverable solid particles at a concentration of C Three forms of the equation can be derived based on the GRA procedure. In Eq.  In order to assess the adequacy of existing laboratory procedures for predicting full-scale CVD applications, results obtained from the Multi Pass Test and GAT test were plotted to generate cumulative recovery vs. cumulative grade curves. These were then compared to the CVD operating line obtained through pilot scale testing and optimization at Myra Falls copper rougher tailings stream. It was seen that both bench scale tests, i.e. the Gravity Amenability Test (GAT) and Multi Pass Test do not cover the broader feasible mass yield range typical of CVD applications. The Multi Pass Test better predicted CVD performance than the GAT procedure. Furthermore the bench scale test results overestimate CVD performance and therefore provide an upper limit for CVD performance. The GAT predicts way above CVD performance and the Multi Pass Test, which has cleaning stages, better predicts CVD performance at low mass yield. Although a higher concentrate grade at the same mass yield would have been expected for the Multi Pass Test, results were just the opposite. The lower grades obtained for Multi Pass Tests indicates that some of the gold gets deported to the pan tails due to operator dependent panning procedure. Thus, the approach is unsuitable for characterizing fundamental response of centrifugal gravity concentrators, since it uses a different separation mechanism, as proposed by Results obtained for the GRA procedure for Myra Falls final tailings are shown in A model was developed to study the effect of mineralogy on the Au grade/recovery relationships and presented in Model 1 represents recovery of Gravity Recoverable Gold (GRG) for an ore consisting mainly of GRG and gangue. Model 2 represents recovery of gold existing as mineral type A and B; Mineral A has a very high gravity recovery rate and high gold content representing GRG and mineral B represents gravity recoverable gold bearing sulphides (GRGS). Model 3, which best tracks the gold results, shows gold distributed in all four species. Species A represents GRG, B represents GRGS, C represents particles with negligible gold and very low recovery rate which accounts for gold associated with gangue and D represents particles with high gold grade, and very low recovery rate accounting for non-GRG (rendered unrecoverable by gravity due to overgrinding). Selective gold recovery was achieved by gravity concentration on the Myra Falls flotation tailings sample. A high grade gold containing product was obtained in the first gravity concentration cycle. The gold grade decreases greatly after the first cycle due to the recovery of the low-grade mineral fraction. The results show that the gold in Myra Falls tailings is mainly non-GRG and there is very low GRG and significant GRGS. The model results are helpful to understand the bench scale tests. The results indicate that gold lost to the final tailings at Myra Falls is partly recoverable by centrifugal concentration. Based on characterization of the gold by particle size, only 30% of the gold in final tailings is above 38 The weight remaining in tails can be plotted against concentration cycle, time or weight recovery. Gold has the highest amenability to gravity concentration followed by iron then sulphur and lastly zinc, as expected. This shows the effect of specific gravity on centrifugal separation, where the highest density particles are more susceptible to gravity concentration. The shape of the gold line shows that there are at least two gold particle species being recovered, based on the two distinct gradients of the curve. From this plot, the relative proportions of the easily recoverable and more difficult to recover species can be quantified. For the flotation tails at Myra Falls, the gold species more amenable to gravity accounts for GRG whilst the less amenable species are gold bearing sulphides. Quantification of relative abundance of the species is useful to decide on whether to use batch or continuous concentrators for recovering the gold. When the gold bearing sulphides are more than the liberated gold species the CVD would be selected. The proportion of species is obtained from the y-intercept of the tangent to the low GRI species. In this case, it is estimated that above 90% of the gold in Myra Falls flotation tailings is associated with sulphides or rendered non-gravity recoverable. To characterize the mineral species recoverable by the CVD concentrators, a Knelson CVD6 was integrated to treat the cyclone underflow at Myra Falls. Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) analysis was performed to identify the gold species recovered by the CVD. The results are shown in The SEM results show that gold exists as liberated electrum and un-liberated and associated with base metal sulphides. This validates the two gold species predicted by the Gravity Release Index. Galena is the main constituent of the gravity concentrate from cyclone underflow because galena particles were still coarse enough to be recovered by gravity. Some of the liberated gold particles exhibit rod like shape, suggesting over grinding. The Gravity Release Analysis procedure can predict CVD application by determining the maximum release of gold bearing sulphides from a representative small sample. By providing a measure of maximum gravity recoverable gold bearing sulphides, the procedure also provides a basis for bench-marking operating CVDs. The procedure is anticipated to be applicable for other continuous centrifugal concentrators. It is a useful tool for process design and when applied it can boost application of the technology in mineral processing. Based on this iterative procedure the Gravity Release Index can be determined and used to predict the number of gravity recoverable particle species for gold and how amenable each particle type is to gravity recovery. With additional tests from other operations and calibration, the Gravity Release Index can be the basis of predicting potential applications for continuous centrifugal concentration by CVD devices. The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support from