Soils in New Caledonia are particularly rich in metals among which Fe and Ni are intensively exploited. Due to important natural erosion in tropical latitudes and to mining activities, coastal waters are enriched in Co, Cr, Fe and Ni. In deeper waters lives a cephalopod species which is considered as a living fossil, the nautilus Nautilus macromphalus. In this study, 12 trace elements were analysed in the tissues of 4 nautilus specimens. Results showed high metal concentrations compared to data available for cephalopods from temperate waters. These concentrations were often in the same order as those encountered in bivalves or gastropods from contaminated areas. Relatively high concentrations of Ni and Cr in the haemolymph strongly suggest a high exposure of N. macromphalus to these metals. Among the tissues, the digestive gland has the highest concentrations of Cd, Co, Fe, V and Zn while for Ag, Al, As, Cr and Ni, renal and pericardial appendages exhibited the highest values. Despite this, the digestive gland contained the largest quantities of all metals with the exception of As and Mn which were mainly found in the body muscular remains. These results highlighted the major role of digestive gland and excreting organs in the metabolism of metals in these cephalopod species.Cephalopods play a key role in many marine ecosystems Present cephalopods comprise two subclasses: the Coleoidae, with ca 650 species and the Nautiloidae with a single genus ( Among the nautilus species, For these reasons, levels of trace elements in the tissues of Two male and two female Tissue samples were dried for several days at 80°C to constant weight. Two aliquots of approx. 300 mg of each homogenized dry sample were digested with 4 ml of 65% HNO Cadmium, copper and zinc were determined both by atomic absorption spectrophotometry (AAS) and by induced coupled plasma mass spectrophotometry (ICP-MS). Other elements (Ag, As, Al, Co, Cr, Fe, Mn, Ni and V) were analysed only by ICP-MS. Appliances used for metal determination were a Varian spectrophotometer Vectra 250 Plus with Deuterium background correction and a Varian ICP-MS Ultra Mass 700. Reference tissues, dogfish liver DOLT-2 (NRCC), Orchard-Leaves (NBS) and MA-A-2 fish-flesh standard (IAEA), were treated and analysed in the same way as the samples. The results for the standard reference materials ( Metal concentrations in the organs of nautilus are reported in Mean metal concentrations in whole In the four sampled nautilus, the digestive gland was the major site of concentration for Cd, Co, Fe, V and Zn with 28.2–60.5 μg Cd g Ag, Al, As, Cr and Ni concentrations were also remarkable in excreting tissues, i.e. renal and pericardial appendages, which exhibited the highest concentrations for these metals. In fact, Ni concentrations ranged from 5.6 to 40.0 μg g Muscles exhibited generally the lowest concentration for all metals except for As which exhibited the highest concentration in this tissue (203–354 μg As g With the exception of As and Mn which were mainly found in the body muscular remains (50 Although the concentration of some metals was high in the renal and pericardial appendages, these tissues contain in fact low amounts of metals because of their small mass ( The variability of metal concentration was relatively small among the four studied individuals. Low variation coefficients for toxic metals such as Ag, Cd or V (26%, 41% and 34%, respectively) are noteworthy. Nevertheless, coefficients of variation for Cd are similar to those found in two octopus species from the Southern Indian Ocean, High metal concentrations might reflect the ambient life conditions of nautilus. Mineral extraction activity, mainly Ni, is important in New Caledonia Concerning Fe,  Ag, Cd, Co, Cr, Ni and V levels in the digestive gland of Globally, concentrations of the toxic elements in the digestive gland of In the Coleoidae species, branchial hearts have been reported to concentrate essential elements such as Fe and Cu High concentrations of trace elements (Ag, Al, As, Cr, Fe, Ni and Mn) were found in organs concerned with excretion, i.e. the pericardial and renal appendages ( The other tissues store trace element in much lower amounts than the digestive gland, the renal and the pericardial appendages. Nevertheless, muscles which generally exhibit the lowest metal concentrations, showed the highest As concentrations. This could be due to high consumption of crustaceans which are particularly rich in As. Investigations on trace element concentrations in the tissues have highlighted the key role of the digestive gland of nautilus in the metabolism of metals, as is also the case in Coleoidae. This organ is indeed the major site of concentration of Cd, Co, Fe, V and Zn and, compared to other tissues, it shows also high levels of Ag, As, Cr, Cu and Ni ( Previous studies have demonstrated the ability of cephalopods to concentrate many trace elements. Data from nautilus species were particularly interesting on an evolutionary point of view. Indeed, as several elements are considered to be toxic for biota, marine animals would evolve to counteract their toxicity. It seems to be the case in cephalopods as they are able to grow and reproduce with very high metal concentrations. In their case, detoxification strategy involves storage mechanisms of these elements. This strategy appears to be efficient, and probably applied to minimize energetic cost, and is common among Nautilidae and Coleoidae cephalopods. Enrichment of metals in New Caledonian waters appears to not be limited to coastal waters. Indeed, contamination by Co, Cr and Ni is supported: (1) by high levels in whole animals which are of the same order of magnitude than in bivalves and gastropods from contaminated areas, (2) by relatively high levels in excretory organs and in haemolymph that indicate a high exposure to these metals, (3) by higher ratios between concentrations in the muscle and in the digestive gland that show an enrichment in this organ. Further studies are needed to evaluate the scale of the contamination by these metals and possible effects on the ecosystems. We thank Pascale Joannot, director of the Nouméa Aquarium, the ORSTOM Center of Nouméa and the crew of the O.V. Dawa for providing the nautilus specimen. This work was supported financially by the “Conseil Régional Poitou-Charentes” and Rhodia (Rhône-Poulenc).