Engineering rock mass classification, based on empirical relations between rock mass parameters and engineering applications, is commonly used in rock engineering and forms the basis for designing rock structures. The basic data required may be obtained from visual observation and laboratory or field tests. However, owing to the discontinuous and variable nature of rock masses, it is difficult for rock engineers to directly obtain the specific design parameters needed. As an alternative, the use of geophysical methods in geomechanics such as seismography may largely address this problem. In this study, 25 seismic profiles with the total length of 543 m have been scanned to determine the geomechanical properties of the rock mass in blocks I, III and IV-2 of the Choghart iron mine. Moreover, rock joint measurements and sampling for laboratory tests were conducted. The results show that the rock mass rating (RMR) and Q values have a close relation with P-wave velocity parameters, including P-wave velocity in field (V
                     PF), P-wave velocity in the laboratory (V
                     PL) and the ratio of V
                     PF to V
                     PL (i.e. K
                     P = V
                     PF/V
                     PL). However, Q value, totally, has greater correlation coefficient and less error than the RMR. In addition, rock mass parameters including rock quality designation (RQD), uniaxial compressive strength (UCS), joint roughness coefficient (JRC) and Schmidt number (RN) show close relationship with P-wave velocity. An equation based on these parameters was obtained to estimate the P-wave velocity in the rock mass with a correlation coefficient of 91%. The velocities in two orthogonal directions and the results of joint study show that the wave velocity anisotropy in rock mass may be used as an efficient tool to assess the strong and weak directions in rock mass.Rock mass classification is one of the most efficient tools used in rock mechanics and an essential element of feasibility studies prior to any excavation or disturbances made to rock. In most cases, rock mass is so complex and heterogeneous that its qualifications are hard to be discerned by conventional tests. In these cases, geophysical methods such as seismography may be useful for estimating the properties of rock mass. Generally, the transmission velocity of the seismic waves in the rock mass depends on the parameters such as density and rock strength, water condition, stress, orientation, spacing, separation, roughness, weathering and type of filling material for discontinuities. So all of the parameters involved in a classification system such as Q and rock mass rating (RMR) affect the seismic wave velocity as well. Therefore, it is possible to obtain the variations of Q and RMR as a function of the seismic wave velocity parameters. Very useful studies have been conducted in this field. For example, The primary objective of this study is to obtain equations to calculate the RMR and Q at level 1150 of block I, level 1110 of block III and levels 1130 and 1140 of block IV-2 in Choghart iron mine ( To investigate the relation between Q and RMR classification systems and P-wave velocity in rock mass, first of all, the required parameters of these two classification systems are measured in the field. Then, the two systems are calculated for the 5-m pieces of the surfaces by multivariate regressions among Q, RMR and P-wave velocities in rock mass and intact rock. In addition, some relations are obtained to calculate the values of Q and RMR in the blocks of studied area. The relations between parameters of rock mass and intact rock and P-wave velocity are also focused on. Since block III was extremely fractured, it was not possible to prepare standard cylindrical samples of the intact rock. The RN reflected on 5-m pieces of the surfaces was measured and the UCS values were estimated by the graph as shown in The strength of intact rock was measured by uniaxial compression test on rock cores. A loading rate of 1 kN/s was adopted, and the ratio of length to diameter of samples was approximately 2.5. The results are shown in The P-wave velocity in intact rock was measured by putting the ultrasonic transducers on either side of the rock core. It was calculated by dividing the core length by transmission time. The results for different cores are shown in In order to determine the density of blocks ( The rating and values of the parameters of the RMR and Q systems depend on the characteristics of rock mass, such as RQD, discontinuity conditions and spacing. Joint study of blocks I, III and IV-2 was carried out to measure the required parameters such as RMR, RQD, joint spacing (SP), number of joint set, joint orientation and degree of weathering and roughness by image processing of surfaces, Schmidt hammer, compass and Barton profile meter. The results are shown in In this study, 25 seismic profiles with a total length of 543 m were studied. To investigate the influence of discontinuity orientation on P-wave velocity at blocks I and III, the seismic profiles are set perpendicular to each other. Therefore, one longitudinal profile and several transverse profiles were taken for each step. The number of transverse profiles depends on the anisotropy of discontinuities in the studied area. The number of geophones for each study was 6 or 12. In long benches, the longitudinal profiles were studied in several steps to avoid wave attenuation. Based on the wave attenuation in the field, the space between geophones varied from 2 m to 5 m, and 6 shots per profile were recorded. Data analysis was performed using the zoned software ST2D. This software is portable and free, which can recognize non-standard or bad data. It determines the velocity changes relative to depth and length. The results for different blocks are illustrated in The topographic analysis results of blocks I and III show that the velocities along the length and width of benches are not equal in some profiles. This phenomenon is mostly attributed to the anisotropy of joint orientations in the benches because the rock is of the same type across the width of the bench. In all analyses, the highest and lowest velocities were 1.1 km/s and 0.7 km/s, respectively. In this section, the relations between the P-wave velocity and some important parameters of rock mass, such as the RQD, intact rock strength, and even orientation of discontinuities, have been studied. In addition, the research seeks to estimate the P-wave velocity in the rock mass by multivariate regression between P-wave velocity and parameters such as UCS, JRC, RN and RQD. One of the most important parameters in some of classification systems such as RMR is the UCS of intact rock. In this regard, many researchers studied the relation between P-wave velocity and UCS. For instance, Here, only the results of uniaxial test (not point load test) are analyzed. As mentioned previously, the intact rock properties affect the P-wave velocity. However, since the rocks in the studied area are not the same, in order to eliminate the effect of intact rock texture, the P-wave velocity is divided by the P-wave velocity in intact rock, and a coefficient defined as the P-wave velocity index is obtained: To estimate RQD using the wave velocity, regression analysis was conducted, resulting in the following equation ( Since In In this study, the seismic profiles in blocks I and III are perpendicular to each other. According to the impact of discontinuity orientation on P-wave velocity, it is possible to estimate the joint orientation by the difference in two orthogonal velocities. According to According to the rose diagram of discontinuity orientations at level 1150 of block I, comparing this with velocity variations, it is observed that the velocity in direction parallel to joints is larger than that in the perpendicular direction. The joint study in block III was carried out somehow to avoid studying random joints as far as possible. However, four joint sets with a number of random joints were identified. As noted before, the transmitting velocity of seismic wave through the rock mass depends on some parameters such as density, intact rock strength, water condition and tension, joint frequency, orientation, separation, roughness, alteration and type of filling material of discontinuity. In this section, the relation between The values of parameters UCS, RQD, JRC and RN are 0, 0.003, 0.004 and 0, respectively. It is shown that In this section, the engineering rock mass classification in Choghart iron mine is based on Q and RMR systems. As the ranges of rating in RMR system for some parameters such as UCS, RQD, and SP are large ( Rating for other parameters, such as roughness, is determined directly from the RMR table.  Tectonic block I of Choghart iron mine has three joint sets as described in To classify the block based on Q system, it is required to rate six parameters, including RQD, joint set number In this bench, similar to the level 1150 of block I, rock mass classification by RMR and Q systems was carried out in every 5 m on the basis of joint study and image processing data ( The rock mass quality of this block is also classified by Q system. According to Rock mass classification in the block IV-2 is carried out at two levels. This block is located on the north of Choghart pit and has 3 joint sets as described in In order to classify the rock mass by Q system, as shown in As discussed in previous sections, important parameters involved in classification are well related to P-wave velocities in rock mass and intact rock. Therefore, some equations for estimating The equations for single blocks have less errors and greater correlation coefficients than those calculated together. Using Q system, there is totally a better correlation among the variables. Using In the cases where In Also, “sig” in A strong laboratory database for mechanical and engineering properties of rocks is very useful for site characterization and mining engineering applications. In cases where the condition of rock mass is very complex or there is no possibility of data record, it is difficult for rock engineers to directly obtain the specific design parameters. As an alternative, the use of geophysical methods in geomechanics such as seismography may largely overcome this limitation. In this paper, the practical possibility of using seismography methods to estimate rock mass quality at Choghart iron mine is studied based on the results as follows: In order to estimate RMR and In the equations obtained, The equations for single blocks have less errors and higher correlation coefficients than those calculated together. It is possible to predict discontinuities orientation of blocks I and III by velocity differences in orthogonal directions; however, more precision is achievable by increasing the number of radial profiles. Using linear multivariate regression, an equation was proposed for estimating the P-wave velocity by the values of JRC, UCS, RQD and RN with correlation coefficient of 91% and standard deviation of 0.057%. This equation may be useful for the cases where measuring the P-wave velocity is not possible. The results show that the larger the roughness of discontinuities is, the lower the P-wave velocity in rock mass would be. The authors wish to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome.