In firing systems of cement production plants and coal-fired power plants, regular fossil fuels are increasingly substituted by alternative fuels. Rising energy prices and ambitious CO2-reduction goals promote the use of alternative fuels as a significant contribution to efficient energy recovery. One possibility to protect energy resources are refuse-derived fuels (RDF), which are produced during the treatment of municipal solid, commercial and industrial waste. The waste fractions suitable for RDF have a high calorific value and are often not suitable for material recycling. With current treatment processes, RDF still contains components which impede the utilization in firing systems or limit the degree of substitution. The content of these undesired components may amount to 4wt%. These, in most cases incombustible particles which consist of mineral, ceramic and metallic materials can cause damages in the conveying systems (e. g. rotary feeder) or result in contaminations of the products (e. g. cement, chalk). Up-to-date separation processes (sieve machine, magnet separator or air classifier) have individual weaknesses that could hamper a secure separation of these particles.
                  This article describes a new technology for the separation of impurities from refuse derived fuels based on a rotating fluidized bed. In this concept a rotating motion of the particle bed is obtained by the tangential injection of the fluidization gas in a static geometry. The RDF-particles experience a centrifugal force which fluidized the bed radially. The technical principle allows tearing up of particle clusters to single particles. Radially inwards the vertical velocity is much lower thus particles of every description can fall down there. For the subsequent separation of the particles by form and density an additionally cone shaped plate was installed in the centre. Impurities have a higher density and a compact form compared to combustible particles and can be separated with a high efficiency. The new technology was experimentally investigated and proven using model-RDF, actual-RDF and impurities of different densities. In addition, numerical simulations were also done. The fluidization chamber was operated in batch mode. The article describes experiences and difficulties in using rotating fluidized bed systems.area (m diameter (m) gravitational force (m/s height of the bed (m) angular momentum (kg/(m share of bed acting on distributor mass (kg) air mass flow rate (kg/s) moment (kg/(m number of particles pressure drop (kg/(m radius (m) velocity (m/s) volume (m volume flow (m centrifugal force (kg/(m angular velocity (rad/s) friction coefficient density (kg/m particle specific coefficient, describing the pressure drop in rotating state bed cone device expanded state lateral surface annular gap inlet bed in packet state particle particles wetting on the wall number of particles per unit length number of particles per unit length in expanded state wall distributor The continuously decreasing availability of fossil fuels leads inevitably to increasing prices and bottlenecks in the supply of conventional energy. The first symptoms of this trend can already be seen today. In that light, the aspect of energy recovery from waste and refuse-derived fuels becomes more important all over Europe. The use of these alternative fuels protects fossil resources and represents an important step towards a sustainable energy economy ( The primary goal is to avoid any landfilling of untreated waste. Therefore, mechanical, biological and thermal treatment plants are well-known processes to achieve a secure and environmentally-friendly disposal. For example, in Germany, 47% of municipal waste (6.4 Two energy recovery possibilities are of importance concerning the incineration of waste: on the one hand, the direct combustion of waste without any pre-treatment in mono-incineration plants (municipal solid waste incineration MSWI); on the other hand, the removal of fractions with a high calorific value from the waste during a specific treatment process (mechanical treatment of waste) and the separate combustion of these fractions. The latter are the so-called refuse-derived fuels (RDF). RDF incineration is performed in mono-incineration plants as well as in co-combustion processes, where regular fuels can be substituted. Important fields of application are the cement industry (co-combustion in rotary kilns) and coal-fired power plants. In the last years, the amount of RDF used as a substitute for fossil fuels in the cement industry has increased. In 2010, RDF represented 60% of the total fuel use in the German cement industry, as shown in Compared to fossil fuels, RDF varies in quality and composition due to the original waste composition and the preliminarily waste-treatment processes. The sketch in The variation in lower and upper calorific value and transport properties controlling the particle trajectories are technical challenges but also necessary parameters to forecast and steer the firing system. The current quality of RDF does not meet the specifications, which are required for a high substitution rate in cement kilns. As Another challenge is the amount of impurities contained in RDF. These impurities could lead to significant problems in the firing system (corrosion) and to a lower quality of products (incomplete combustion of – low quality RDF-particles ( In Germany, the Act on closed substance-cycle waste management provides the foundation for the protection of resources and for an environmentally-friendly recovery of wastes. Avoiding waste generation has the highest priority, followed by material recovery and recycling of waste. Waste fractions not suitable for material recycling are recovered energetically. In the case of homogeneous industrial wastes, it might be sufficient to use several comminution steps to achieve the correct particle size for RDF. Increasing heterogeneity of waste demands a higher complexity of the treatment process. In addition to several comminution steps it is necessary to apply different sorting and sieving techniques. The first step in a waste treatment plant is often a pre-sorting process. In this step, contraries are removed from the waste by a clamshell or manually. Then the waste is shredded and sieved to prepare the waste stream for the subsequent sorting techniques (average particle size, removal of fine fraction). Afterwards the waste stream is divided into a higher- and a lower-calorific fraction. Techniques for this sorting step are air classifiers/wind sifters or ballistic separators. Subsequently, chloric materials are removed from the waste stream by near-infrared detection and ejection. Further sorting devices are magnetic separators. At several positions of the treatment process, ferrous and non-ferrous metals are removed from the waste stream. After the sorting processes, a milling step reduces the particle size of the RDF to the required particle size ( In spite of these specialised treatment technologies, the RDF produced still contains impeding components and impurities. The produced RDF is a mixture of different materials. This mixture can have a high moisture content which promotes inter-particle cohesion. As the composition of the RDF is significant for the use of RDF in industrial applications the next chapter presents the results of sorting analyses of real RDF. The composition of RDF was analysed in previous projects. In a joint project of Fraunhofer UMSICHT and the Department of Energy Plant Technology (LEAT) at the Ruhr-Universität Bochum the sorting of an RDF sample was performed manually based on visible material properties. First, it was essential to create a representative sample of the RDF. This was done by a series of quartering and reducing steps of the original RDF sample. The moisture content of the analysed RDF amounted to 16% by mass. Subsequent to the determination of the moisture content, the RDF sample was sorted by visually detectable material properties for more detailed information please refer to ( The content of impeding components in the analysed RDF sample amounted to 4.7%. One example for a metal-impurity is shown in A good separation into the single-material fractions as well as an efficient removal of impurities is required to achieve a high substitution rate of fossil fuels and to ensure an efficient material recovery. In Section A lot of different mechanical processing technologies exist for the treatment of waste. According to Timmel ( Wind sifters are utilised in waste treatment processes in order to remove impurities or to achieve a better quality of RDF. It is also possible to use wind sifters ahead of other devices such as milling machines to protect these machines. In these cases, inert or metallic impurities are removed before the milling step and the risk of abrasion or other damages is reduced. Despite the advantages listed above, wind sifters often only achieve fair separation results. One reason can be found in the feeding system of the process chamber. If this lacks a sufficient spatial separation of the particles, the particles tend to cohere. The cohesive properties often lead to a clustering of particles, which are then fed to the wind sifter. The clusters behave in the air flow according to the properties of the cluster and not like single particles. Furthermore, the particles have different densities and different forms resulting from the crushing of the original waste material. This leads to a difference in momentum of the single particles and modifies the trajectories, resulting in poor separation. The company Remondis conducted trials in a cross-flow wind sifter with the aim of recording the trajectories of the particles. For this purpose, high-speed cameras were positioned between the feeding system and the air nozzle ( Although the particles used in the trials had an equal density, the trials show a significant spread of the trajectories due to the different geometries of the particles. One opportunity to improve the separation lies in a larger distance between vertex and air nozzle. This possibility has the disadvantage of a higher share of lighter particles in the heavy fraction. The result is an impurity of the heavy fraction leading to problems in subsequent processes. To optimise the separation the following aspects have to be solved: Single-particle separation during the feed-into ensure an undisturbed sifting process determined by the air stream. Similar particle orientation in the sifting area to avoid spreading. Enlargement of the sifting area to minimize time-dependent effects. Shorter dimensions of the equipment (the material has a low density and a high volume, so larger devices are generally required). Higher economic efficiency of the sifting device. Zigzag sifters are in compliance with these requirements. To achieve a throughput of eight tons RDF per hour, a zigzag sifter with four steps is needed. Such sifters have a sifting channel dimension of 1 Against this background, a new and innovative process based on the principle of a fluidized bed was developed. A vertical air flow passes through an initially packed bed of particles. The point when the flow velocity is sufficiently large to move the particles is called the fluidized state. The term ‘fluidized’ means that the packed bed has similar transport properties of a fluid. Objects with a higher density sink in a fluidized bed to the ground, and lighter objects move to the surface. As it is only possible to fluidize a bed of sufficiently spherical particles with common fluidization technology, constructive changes were necessary to separate RDF particles with a fluidized bed. Initial experiments in a cylindrical fluidized-bed device had shown that a stable homogenous vertical flow cannot be maintained in fluidizing RDF. The fluidization was investigated in two devices: one with a diameter of 140 Plug formation could be avoided by a cone-shaped design of the device in the upper part. However, large instabilities in the fluidization are also observed. As a consequence, a novel kind of air distributor was developed, ( Due to this, the high horizontal flow forces were able to break the vertical channels and a stable fluidized bed of RDF in the device was obtained. To evaluate the fluidization process, the circulate movement of the bed was carried out by optical observation and determination of the pressure drop across the bed. Unlike a conventional fluidized bed the rotating bed or so called swirling bed has four flow regimes and exhibits a completely different bed pressure drop. In a swirling bed, the pressure drop increases with the inlet velocity due to the wall friction of the rotating bed. The proper ratio between flow rate and inlet velocity has to be chosen according to the properties of the bulk material. For example, if the flow rate is too low but the velocity is very high, due to a small cross-section, spiral channels appear at the wall and complicate the fluidization. On the other hand, the static bed height is limited to a maximum. If this limit is passed, the lower part of the bulk material is fluidized whilst the upper part lifts as a plug. This limit is specific for the cross-section of the riser and the properties of the bulk material. In a 0.4 This fluidized-bed separator at Fraunhofer UMSICHT is illustrated in The raw material, for example RDF, is fed in at side (C). During operation, small particles and particles of low density were collected in a small container (D). Particles of high density sink to the bottom (G) of the riser tube. This part of the device can be closed by a slide gate valve (H). Hence it is possible to remove the heavy particles easily by opening the slide during fluidization. This experimental device does not operate continuously. Rather, an experiment represents a short time slice during continuous operation. The experiments were performed with model RDF consisting of paper (20% The batch experiments were conducted with 5–8 The separation process is determined by flight characteristics of the particles and the flow rate settings. Therefore information about the particles used is necessary. RDF originates from crushed and conditioned waste. As a result, RDF consists of large, flat particles and has a very heterogeneous composition regarding material, particle geometry and aerodynamic properties. These depend on the physical properties (size, geometry and mass) and strongly differ from spherical objects and vary because of their heterogeneous composition. This makes it difficult to predict and control the separation processes. Therefore, further investigations to characterize the aerodynamic properties of RDF were necessary and have been undertaken ( In order to improve this situation, a camera-equipped vertical drop shaft was developed at Fraunhofer UMSICHT in cooperation with the Department of Energy Plant Technology (LEAT) at the Ruhr-Universität Bochum ( The movement of particles, particularly the relative velocity, depends on size, geometry and mass. Due to this, the analysis consists of two steps. The first step includes an analysis of the physical properties, where a combination of the weighing and imaging is used by the photo scale to receive the geometric characteristics. In a second step, the trajectories of falling RDF particles are recorded in the drop shaft using two cameras, which are mounted at the top of the drop shaft. In both systems, the particles are detected automatically from the brightness in the images. Due to the positioning of the cameras, the actual position of the particle is calculated. This leads to a time-resolved velocity calculation of the movement for each particle (Krüger, 2011b). In Accordingly, the stationary settling velocity was determined for the impurities and the tracer particles with the method described above (drop shaft and photo scale). Many of the measured particles were still in acceleration and the average of the last settling velocity, which was calculated, was above 7.5 The difference in the settling velocity of the components in the RDF, between the valuable components and the impurities is sufficient for the separation process in a fluidized bed. In order to properly evaluate the experiments, a fixed number of tracer particles were added to the model-RDF. As tracer particles for the impurities, model-particles were designed and added to the RDF, in a higher share than necessary, to facilitate the interpretation of the tests. A rectangular-shaped geometry was chosen, as this shape shows lower fluctuations in velocity than shapes of real particles. Hereby, the influence of the particle orientation on the separation results could be minimized at the beginning of the tests. To take the different settling velocities of real particles into account, different materials with the same shape (approximate surface area of 20 After initial attempts, there was no acceptable separation success despite variations of the flow rate and the swirl velocity. In addition to the impurities, there were always 0.5–1 An analysis of these separated particles showed that independent of form, mass and density, the particles move to the bottom of the device. To solve this problem and to improve the separation result, additional numerical flow simulations have been conducted and a very detailed analysis of RDF particles in the drop shaft was performed. First, to understand the modifications at the rotating fluidized bed device, this chapter describes some exemplary results of numerical simulations. Afterwards separation results are shown with both substances: model-RDF and real RDF. In conclusion the influences of the pressure drop are explained and how these influences can be described in a further developed simulation tool. For an effective separation a separation stage at a fixed position inside the device was required. To achieve an effective air classification, the separation stage must have a homogeneous velocity in the cross-sectional area. If, in this zone, the stationary settling velocity of the particles is higher than the vertical approach velocity, the particles will be separated. In the other case the particles will be conveyed to the outlet of low-density particles (D). The stationary settling velocity of all kinds of particles can be measured in the drop shaft. In order to obtain a profile of the vertical velocity, numerical simulations have been conducted. The geometric data (see Section Close to the walls, the vertical velocity, approximately 10 To obtain a clear separation, the separation stage must have a homogeneous vertical velocity. To achieve this, a plate or a cone had to be installed slightly above the nozzles to avoid the recirculation of the flow For the development of size and form of the plate (cone), a database of the aerodynamic properties of the particles representing the bulk material, specifically the settling velocity, is required. According to the measured settling velocities in the drop shaft the vertical velocity in the angular gap of the separator must be higher than 7.5 On the basis of particle simulations considering the fluctuations in the velocity of RDF particles, as measured in the drop shaft, good results were obtained starting with a vertical velocity of 8 Detailed experimental results varying the volume rate and the size of the angular gap were provided in the next subsection. These tests were conducted with two different impact/baffle plates with 300 In initial experiments, screws or small stones were separated from model RDF. In these cases, the separation efficiency was close to 100%, due to the fairly spherical geometry and the high density of the heavy particles. In relation to RDF, which has a density of approximately 300 In the next steps more detailed experiments were performed using model impurities. The rotating fluidized bed was fed with 6 The abscissa shows the superficial velocity of the single experiments. The experiments demonstrate that already low velocities are sufficient for a good separation result. More than 80% of the model impurities could be separated with the rotating fluidized bed. Non-separated tracer particles were found in the device and not in the separated light fraction. The light fraction did not contain any impurities after the separation step. The amount of light fraction separated with the heavy fraction was constantly low at 20 In further separation experiments with actual RDF, a large number of preliminarily separated impeding particles were added. This was done in order to evaluate the separation efficiency. These heavy particles consisted of metals, mineral particles, nails, wires and some hard plastics. Before conducting the tests, the RDF was analysed by the procedures described in Section Due to this, it is possible to adjust the quality of the RDF which is needed in furnaces. Besides the dimensions of a mechanical device the scale-up of the process requires further parameters to choose an adequate air blower for the rotating fluidized bed. One parameter is the necessary volume flow of the gaseous medium (usually air). Another parameter is the overall pressure drop across the whole device. This can be overcome by the air blower ensuring, at the same time, the required pneumatic transport. A high pressure drop does not automatically require an air blower of larger dimensions. It could also be necessary to use another type of air blower. As the pressure drop is significant for the dimensioning of the device in the following chapter a method for calculating the pressure drop is given. A simple model for the prediction of the bed pressure drop in swirling regimes was developed by Sreenivasan and Raghavan ( According to this model, the magnitude of the weight force and the centrifugal weight of the bed must be known in order to obtain the pressure drop at any flow rate. Therefore, the angular velocity of the bed depending on the mass flow has to be calculated. In order to achieve this objective two principal assumptions were used. The bed is a single swirling mass of uniform angular velocity. The angular velocity of gas at the free surface of the bed is approximately equal to the mean angular velocity of the bed, Due to the ratio of the change of angular momentum of the gas  For the specific device the temporal difference of the angular momentum is given by The loss of the moment due to wall friction is given by The loss of the moment due to the distributor friction depends on the actual weight of the bed acting on the distributor. The moment can be calculated by Thus The first part of the equation is the lateral surface, By solving and substituting the Eqs. The dynamic friction coefficients were obtained experimentally. With the calculated angular velocity the bed pressure drop Δ The first part of the expression denotes the theoretical pressure drop at fluidization. The second part denotes the increase of the pressure drop due to the friction of the swirling bed.  For the constant With the Eq. The constant Hence the constant depends on The dotted line represents the pressure drop in the packed bed calculated by using the equation of Ergun ( For RDF particles the experimental investigation is much more complex. On the basis of this, a wide range of experiments were performed and the measured data in This behaviour arises for RFD and model-RDF like tetra-pack-particles. An individual particle in the swirling bed is affected by the weight force and the centrifugal force. The resultant force can be calculated by The integration results in Accordingly If the volume of the parabola is larger than the actual volume, the bed is assumed as a hollow cylinder with the wall thickness of the used particle diameter. The height h of this cylinder is used for the Eq. With   For all experimental data, good results in the pressure drop were obtained by the model presented. The methods described for the separation of impeding heavy particles from RDF offer, contrary to existing methods, the potential to increase quality of RDF or similar bulky material. Further design improvements have to be done to ensure satisfactory separation efficiency. In addition, the separation experiments were only performed in a batch type mode, thus particle residence times associated with the separation (operation range and mass flow) could not be obtained and unpredictable complications during continuous operation of the device may occur. This will be addressed in future projects. Furthermore, as the pressure drop is significant for the dimensioning of the device, a method for calculating the pressure drop of non-spherical particles in swirling fluidized beds was given. The Authors wish to thank the