The saturation magnetization of composites of carbon nanotubes and CoFe2O4 (CFO) magnetic nanoparticles synthesized through a novel one-step process in the presence of a surfactant (sodium dodecyl-benzene-sulfonate) show significant increase, to 208 emu/g. This value of saturation magnetization of the composite is a factor of 3.3 higher than pristine CFO nanoparticles. This is the first time such a remarkable magnetic behavior of CFO/ carbon nanotubes composite is presented. The increased magnetism is attributed to the proximity effect between uniformly distributed ferromagnetic CFO nanoparticles on the surface of carbon nanotubes and hybridization of the 
                        
                           π
                        
                     -electronic states of carbon and the 3d-bands of CFO. Scanning electron microscopy images confirm uniform and dense distribution of CFO nanoparticles on carbon nanotubes. Magnetic force microscopy images confirm the formation of uniformly distributed magnetic stripe domains. The sample was characterized at ambient using X-ray diffraction, Raman Spectroscopy, atomic force microscopy, scanning electron microscopy, scanning transmission electron microscopy, and high-resolution transmission electron microscopy. Magnetic properties were characterized by magnetic force microscopy and magnetometry using vibrating sample magnetometer.Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) are well known for an extraordinary structural, thermal, chemical and electrical performance CFO NPs are becoming an intense research topic for their unique properties and various magnetic applications Sample preparation of CFO/CNTs composite processed by a single-step process of ultra sonification, Branson Digital Sonifier Model 102C at 25 W to 30 W power, as described elsewhere The XRD patterns of CFO and CFO/ CNTs samples are shown in   As shown in Magnetization (M) vs. magnetic field (H) hysteresis measurement at room temperature for H ramped up to The sample as synthesized’ consists of surfactant SDBS, CFO, and CNTs as discussed in the sample preparation section. The quantitative ratio of CFO to the total mass of the sample is 1:18. The hysteresis loops in  CFO/CNTs nanocomposites’ XRD depicts all the prominent peaks of CFO in and the two well established carbon peaks which are in good agreement with JCPDS data. The sharpness of CFO peaks in the composite indicate good crystallinity of CFO NPs. The SEM image of CFO/CNTs nanocomposites in The increased magnetism especially the saturation magnetization by a factor of 3.3 is attributed to the proximity effect between uniformly distributed magnetic nanoparticles of CFO on the surface of CNTs as shown in It is important to also note that the amount of CNTs in the nanocomposite will also affect the concentration of the Co The characteristic Raman peaks for CNTs appears at D-band (1350 cm It is important to point out the role of the defects on CNT wall on observed properties. Although, for many applications, such as electrical conduction and mechanical structures high-quality, defect-free CNTs are essential. However, these high-quality CNTs do not easily lend themselves to functionalization. The defects, often generated by intermediate processes, such as sonication used to separate entangled CNTs and enhance dispersibility, allow new bond formation with desired functional groups and or metal NPs. In the present study, the low value of ID/IG ratio demonstrate the robustness of solvent approach to maintain the purity of the starting samples. However, since the defects also serve as a favorable site for attaching CFO NPs, their low value in the present study means lack of sites availability for the CFO NPs to attach with CNTs. This could be one of the reasons, for a rather low measured value of Ms. for the present CFO/CNTs nanocomposite compared to that of the CFO/MLG (multi-layer graphene) nanocomposite In CFO nanocomposite only 5 are Raman active which are the characteristics of 1A The tuned magnetic property for CNTs in the proximity of CFO NPs. CNTs have shown enhanced magnetic behavior in the proximity of iron oxide and cobalt oxide NPs however, this work establishes CFO NPs as a better ferromagnetic material to coat CNTs for higher enhancement in magnetic properties of the composite. Seventy-fold increase in the saturation magnetization of CNTs in the proximity with CFO NPs as compared to the pristine CNTs is useful in several nano-magnetic applications. Raman spectra confirmed the presence of SWCNTs and MWCNTs in the CFO/CNTs nanocomposite sample. The HR-TEM image showed lattice separation of CNTs and CFO NPs within the nanocomposites. The low value of ID/IG establishes the sonication process and time used in sample synthesis. The enhanced magnetic property is perhaps due to the random relocation of Co2 + ions in the tetrahedral and octahedral sites within cubic inverse spinel structure of CFO NPs. This is the first time, this remarkable magnetic behavior of CFO/CNTs nanocomposite has been observed. The results presented here suggest CFO/CNTs composite as a novel magnetic material which can find important applications in various nano-electro-magneto-mechanical applications. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. One of the authors DS would like to acknowledge the support by the