The mineral industry is constantly searching for new and sustainable innovations, in order to improve its results and processes. In this context, sorghum (Sorghum bicolor (L.) Moench), a widely farmed crop, was characterized and tested as an alternative depressant in mineral flotation. Starch was extracted from sorghum flour produced with grains cultivated in Brazil, resulting in an extraction yield of approximately 26%. Under polarized light microscopy, starch showed Maltese crosses, indicating that the isolation method used produced intact starch granules. SEM images indicated that the starch granules were oval or semi-spherical, with the occasional presence of broken granules and surface pores. Granule size distribution ranged from 5.5 to 30μm with average size of 15.5μm. With 25.5% of amylose content and relative crystallinity around 26%, the sorghum starch was classified as medium size A-type starch. FTIR spectroscopy results confirmed the presence of polysaccharide characteristic peaks, as expected. Thermal properties were measured by DCS, with results similar to cornstarch. Rheological characterization indicated a pasting temperature of 67.1°C and viscosity peak of 2596cP. The characterization results indicate a high potential for sorghum as depressant in mineral flotation being a feasible option for cornstarch.In Brazil, cornstarch is the most widely used depressant, mainly because its effectiveness in different types of minerals. According to Geller Being the fifth most important cereal grain, sorghum ( The aim of this study was to evaluate the efficiency of a new depressant for mineral flotation, as an alternative for cornstarch. In this first article, the production and characterization of sorghum flour and starch are presented. Microflotation tests with high purity samples of quartz and hematite were performed with a modified Hallimond tube in order to confirm the sorghum potential as a depressant. The depressant preparation methodology (alkaline gelatinization with NaOH) and the flotation results are presented in the article “Sorghum starch as depressant in mineral flotation: Part 2 – Flotation tests”. Graniferous sorghum grains were farmed in Ipameri, Goiás, Brazil and kindly provided by the Brazilian company, Agroceres. Straw residues and other impurities were removed by dry sieving. Grains were then oven dried at 35 Granules morphology was analyzed using a SEM JEOL JSM-6610 at the laboratory Labmic from Federal University of Goiás (UFG). Samples were fixed with carbon tape on aluminium supports and then metallized with a thin gold layer (350 Sorghum starch birefringence was analyzed under polarized light at three different temperatures (25, 50, and 70 A Shimadzu XRD-6000 X-ray diffractometer with Cu-K radiation tube (40 Sorghum starch thermal properties were measured using a Perkin Elmer DSC-7 analyzer and the properties measured were: the gelatinization enthalpy, onset temperature, gelatinization endothermic peak temperature, and final temperature of gelatinization. Samples were weighted directly in aluminium pans (2.0 The extracted sorghum starch was an inodorous white powder. The extraction yield was 25.82  Starch is a polysaccharide carbohydrate mainly composed by amylopectin and amylose, with an average amylose/amylopectin ratio of 0.33 in yellow corn varieties Lipids present in the starch are harmful in mineral flotation, since they can act as an anti-froth agent. The lipid content in sorghum starch (0.495 The protein amount in sorghum starch (0.85 Ash content in the sorghum starch (0.121 The swelling power and solubility index of sorghum (flour and starch) are presented in The characteristic Maltese crosses for sorghum starch was observed ( The FTIR spectrum of sorghum starch is shown in Sorghum starch XRD spectrum indicated a crystalline pattern compatible with A-type starches (  Starch was extracted and characterized from the grains of a Brazilian graniferous variety of The SEM analysis showed that the starch granules were oval or semi-spherical in shape, free of protein ribbons, and with occasional superficial pores. Sorghum starch was classified as medium size, once the granulometric analysis showed that granules ranged from 5.5 to 30 No major differences were found regarding the sorghum starch paste rheology when compared with corn or cassava starches, which could indicate that no changes regarding pumps or equipment would be required in the case of the adoption of the new depressant in the mineral industry. However, gelatinized starches behaves as non-Newtonian fluids, to whom rheological properties play a critical role in fluid flow. More test work is required in order to investigate how the sorghum starch paste viscosity behaves for a range of shear stress, similar to those applied in industrial mineral circuits. No restriction was found regarding the sorghum starch lipid content and its use as a depressant. In fact, for more oil sensitive flotation systems, or when there are froth production or stabilization problems, the sorghum starch is more indicated than cornstarch. It is expected that sorghum starch would be a better hematite depressant than cornstarch, once cornstarch has 9.21% more amylose than sorghum starch and, consequently, less amylopectin. Apart from the lipid and protein content, sorghum flour also presents itself as a possible depressant. Since the flour production cost has to be less than the starch cost, sorghum flour could be feasible in flotation systems such as phosphate rock flotation. The found results make the sorghum a very promising starch source as depressant in the mineral flotation process. The analyzed parameters were similar to cornstarch, the major depressant used nowadays in mineral flotation. The application of these products in flotation will be evaluated and the results will be presented in the next paper of this study – Part 2. The authors declare no conflicts of interest. The authors thank financial support from the