The reuse of metals is one of the oldest recycling activities known to humankind. Ferrous and nonferrous scrap metals alike can be recycled indefinitely which enables saving energy and primary resources with the benefit of reduced costs and emissions. For an economic management of scrap metals, different actors collect, process/separate scrap metals to concentrate the different metals in order to make them metallurgical treatable. The mechanical processing consists of shredding and shearing the underlying scrap metal waste stream into defined dimensions and possibly preseparating complex compounds for further separation of the heavy fraction into ferrous and nonferrous substreams through magnetic separators. The nonferrous fraction can be further treated to recover light and heavy nonferrous metals (e.g., aluminum, copper, zinc) by eddy current separation, mass density separation, and sensor-based sorting. The resmelting of the produced high-grade concentrates closes the loop of metal recycling.  Ferrous Metals Nonferrous Metals    Scrap Shears Shredders and Shredder Plants Processing of the Shredder Heavy Fraction Processing of NF Metals From Incinerated Bottom Ash Sensor-Based Sorting for Metal Recycling   The reuse of secondary metals constitutes the oldest and most important kind of recycling activity in the history of humankind. The recycling of metal dates back to approximately 10,000 years ago, and the main reason why metals have always been recycled is because of the large amount of energy that must be expended to extract a metal from its ores in the first place. This has not changed over the millennia. Steel and nonferrous metal industries are among those sectors with the highest energy intensities and recycling saves up to 95% of the energy consumption expended in the production of the primary metal. Thus scrap and metal-bearing residues are of great importance when considering the purchase of raw materials to produce virgin metal. This is especially important for those countries which have little or no ore deposits. For instance in Europe, in the field of end-of-life vehicles (ELVs) and waste from electric and electronic equipment (WEEE), the EU directives created additional incentives concerning metal reclamation and recycling. As WEEE also contains valuable material besides metals, In this chapter, the fundamentals of metal recycling are described. The mechanical processing of recycling scrap metal is a major focus of this chapter as these processes are all that is required in order to produce metals which can be utilized without any difficulties and without further treatment in metallurgical plants. These metallurgical processes include the machinery which is part of the downstream equipment involved in smelting and refining and thus these processes complete the recycling loop for metals. Metals for recycling include those that are recovered from large bulky equipment and often consist of both ferrous and nonferrous materials. The metals involved are mainly iron, steel, stainless steel (also called inox-steel), and several nonferrous (NF) metals. In this section the advantages and approximate quantities of metals recovered for recycling are discussed. In 2012 the total world steel production amounted to 1.5 Stainless steel is an iron alloy containing nickel, chromium (usually it contains a minimum of 10.5% by mass of chromium), and other elements in order to protect the metal against corrosion and other unwanted chemical reactions. The market demand for this metal has doubled over the past decade with an annual production amounting to over 2.5 The most commonly used NF metals in the world today are aluminum, copper, brass, zinc, and lead. Because of their limited availability, their high value, and the considerable energy saved if recycled, large quantities of these NF metals are reclaimed and recycled in smelters, refineries, foundries in most countries of the world. This is not only ecologically sound (up to 99% reduction of CO The essential demands of modern waste management are to reduce the total amount of waste arising and to reuse and recycle as much of the waste as possible. In many fields of recycling, it is difficult to meet these requirements because the recovered products are often of reduced quality and hence value. As a result, these materials can only be used in a downgraded form. A typical example is the recycling of waste plastics. In most cases the collected material is of mixed types of plastic which are not easy to recycle. Mixed plastics can, however, be used in the production of components with inferior properties. However, for metal recycling the situation is very different. The most important reason for this is that metal can be recycled indefinitely and that subsequent metallurgical treatments do not substantially change the physical and chemical properties of the metal. Furthermore, metals (including recycled metals) have a high market value which is very rare in the recycling industry. Here, with metals, supply and demand are the determining factors that affect the market prices. Moreover, the prices can be influenced to a certain degree by operators of recycling plants as they have the chance to sell their products at convenient points of time, that is, when adequate revenues can be achieved and the “price is right.” In general, the recycling industry for metals is structured in an organizational form of a pyramid: at the bottom of the pyramid are many small companies which purchase and collect scrap metal. This scrap is then sold to larger business establishments which process and separate the metals and finally it is sold to companies which have metallurgical plants for further treatment. Scrap metal is made up of a mixture of metals originating from a variety of sources which include commerce and industry, municipalities, and households. This obsolete scrap is collected, stored, processed, and sold from scrap yards or other specialized facilities. In this context “home” scrap and “in-house” industrial scrap are not discussed as these materials can be considered as “works scrap” which never reach the consumer. As a rule this type of scrap does not contain foreign material and does not need any treatment or separation process and can be reused directly. However, obsolete scrap requires target-oriented mechanical processing in order to meet the quality demands of the customers which at this stage are metallurgists at metallurgical plants. At this stage, the following goals are to be achieved: modifications of physical properties, for example, dimensions and bulk densities, modifications of chemical properties, for example, metal content and unmixed grades of final products, modifications of safety properties, for example, removal of explosives and hollow bodies, modifications of other properties, for example, separation of different metals and separation of unwanted adherences. The collected scrap appears in a great variety of forms and properties such as different lump sizes and shapes; materials with differing bulk densities; different kinds of metals, each with their own properties (e.g., hardness, abrasiveness, etc.); and materials made of composite substances which could include plastics and other nonmetals. Consequently, it is necessary to adapt the treatment processes to the special characteristics of the most frequently found complex composed feed mixtures. Mechanical processing of scrap is carried out predominantly with mechanical equipment, such as shears, compaction units, shredders, and other types of machines. In the following section, typical machinery and processes used for scrap treatment are described. The most relevant machines which are employed in practice are listed in Guillotine shears are used in most industrialized countries for the cutting up of lumpy, thick walled steel and NF metal scrap, the majority of which is reasonably ductile. In the process, the material is usually stressed by compressing and shearing forces. The desired goal of this cutting process, using the hydraulic shears, is to achieve a single-stage reduction of the scrap to dimensions with a final length of approximately 400–1000 The functioning operation sequence of guillotine shears is characterized by spatial precompression with a side press, a press lid, and a feeding pusher forming a compact cord which is pushed underneath the cutting blade. This allows the scrap to be cut into pieces of variable length However, it is not possible to obtain a complete separation of complex and compounded material such as metal/metal or metal/nonmetal composites from the pieces cut with these scrap shears. Therefore the application of guillotine shears is limited to the processing of materials containing a minor quantity of foreign substances. Such shears are predominantly operated in steady continuous operation. The required electrical power ranges from about 300 to 900 There are about 900 shredder plants installed worldwide The baffle plate edge (3) and the baffle plate (4) are structurally formed in such a way that ductile metals are further crushed and compressed until they are small enough to pass through the grid (5). The position of the grid (11) can be adjusted hydraulically. The adjustment determines the final grain size and the compression ratio. As a rule, the steel scrap produced in shredder plants is compressed so that a bulk density of 1 The material which is discharged through the shredder grid has a very broad grain size distribution ranging from coarse (approx. 150 Within the heavy fraction of the air classifier, the metals are enriched. In most cases magnetic drum separators are employed for the selective separation of the iron and steel scrap—this accounts for approx. 65%–75% by weight of the shredder in-feed material. After handpicking for the removal of nonliberated copper containing items, for example, parts of electric motors, the final ferrous product fulfills the quality demands concerning the grade and the bulk density in order to be recycled in steel mills without further treatment. The material which is not attracted by the magnetic separator—the so-called shredder heavy fraction—is an intermediate product (3%–8% by weight of shredder input) containing NF metals. The processing of this fraction allows recovering valuable metals such as aluminum, copper, zinc, bronze, lead, magnesium, and stainless steel. In total approximately 50%–60% by weight of metals are to be found in the heavy fraction Further processing of the shredder heavy fraction, with the main aim to recover NF metals, mainly occurs in specialized plants which, however, very rarely belong to the downstream equipment of shredder plants. A simplified flow sheet of such a plant illustrating the state of the art for the processing of NF-metal-rich mixtures is shown in The screen underflow fractions (10–40 The segregation efficiency of eddy current separators depends to a great extent on the physical properties of the feed material. These are mainly the grain size range, the grain shape, and the ratio of the electrical conductivity to the density of the metallic components. With these systems, some metals such as wires, metal/nonmetal compounds, lead, as well as stainless steel cannot be deflected and remain in the so-called tailings fraction for further processing. Two heavy media separators are applied for the density separation of the NF metal mixture from the preceding process stages. A separation into three products (magnesium, aluminum, and a mixture of heavy metals) can be conducted based on the different densities using heavy liquids of densities of between 1.75 and 3.0 For the removal of stainless steel items, sensor-based sorters with inductive metal detectors are applied (q.v. The fraction < Currently, most of the nonmetallic residues are processed together with the shredder light fraction in order to either recover plastics and rubber or to be used as refuse derived fuel (RDF). In a waste incineration plant, different by-products are produced. Volume and mass of the processed waste are reduced by the incineration process. The largest amount of residual material is bottom ash and up to 15–30 mass% or 10–20 vol.% remain as bottom ash. There are two different techniques in order to discharge the bottom ash after combustion: wet or dry. A wet discharger is commonly used and the bottom ash ends up with a water content of about 15–25 wt% The varying composition of the incineration input material and the applied technology leads to various physical and chemical properties of the bottom ash. Additionally, the bottom ash is subject to regional and seasonal fluctuations Ferrous metals have the highest proportion of the metals fraction of around 8 wt%, while NF metals have a proportion of about 2 wt%. In addition to ferrous and NF metals, stainless steel (1 wt%) can also be found in the bottom ash The term “unburned” covers materials which have been incompletely burned. These residues mainly consist of paper, wood, plastic, or textiles A bottom ash processing plant, according to the current state of the art, consists of robust units, which ensure almost interference-free operation multilevel sieving, magnetic separation (separation of ferrous metals), eddy current separation (separation of NF metals), induction sorting system (separation of VA steel) (optional), handpicking (cleaning of ferrous fraction, separation of copper coils). A guard grate to separate coarse material > In the last decade, the main focus of the bottom ash treatment switched from conditioning of minerals to the separation of metals. This shift in processing targets was accompanied by the fact that the largest mass fraction of bottom ash, the fine material < Single grain separation using externally identifiable properties, which can be determined with suitable detectors, is defined as sensor-based sorting. This technology has revolutionized the design of dry working processes in the field of waste treatment over the past 30 years In order to achieve effective separation with sensor-based sorters, it is very important to condition the feed material before entering the detection zone so that the different components of the feed material can be recognized by the sensors. Thus single particles should not touch or overlap each other. The most common method of achieving this is to employ a cascade of different belt conveyors and/or inclined sliding chutes with increasing transport velocities. The application of sensor-based sorters, in recycling processes, has great advantages in comparison with conventional methods. This is becoming increasingly more beneficial as new separating criteria for separation are made accessible. In addition, the continuous development of new sensor systems continues to opening up innovative fields related to separation and recycling and remarkable progress concerning novel sensors and sensor combinations has been achieved over the past few years. A number of different types of sensor sorters have entered the market in the last decade especially designed for the separation of metals. Today, sensor-based sorters with inductive detectors are frequently used for metal separation. The assembly and functioning principle of such devices are to be seen in A vibrating feeder (1) and a belt conveyor (2) running with a speed of 3 A similar setup is used for XRF by replacing the line scan camera by an XRF sensor and the illumination by an X-ray source where the spectral information of an object regarding its composition is used for classification. The main use case is the separation of rotors of alternators from the iron fraction of shredded automobiles in which the heavily copper-coiled rotors are undesired due to their high copper content. The rotors are initially magnetically separated into the ferrous fraction due to their iron core. The XRT technology is usually used for the automated separation of heavy and light NF metals based on their proton number. In this scenario X-rays from a source travel through the material and are registered by a sensor on the opposite side. The registered attenuation of the X-rays correlates with the proton number and the thickness of the material. In order to compensate for the influence of the thickness, two different wavelengths/energies of radiation are used. This technique is termed Dual-Energy-XRT (DE-XRT). Mechanical treatment of different waste streams containing metals involves the use of well-established methods, which as a rule, is profitable because of the high market value of the recovered metals and also because metals do not change their properties with use and hence can be recycled an unlimited number of times. The main aim of the processing methods is to achieve high recovery values as well as the best possible grades of the final metallic products. Sensor-based sorters are implemented additionally to improve separation efficiencies. Finally, resmelting of the reclaimed products constitutes the closing of the complete recycling loop for metals.