 In most books on this subject there is a lack of a consistent modelling approach applicable to process systems engineering as well as a recognition that modelling is not just about producing a set of equations. There is far more to process modelling than writing equations. This is the reason why we decided to write the current book in order to give a more comprehensive treatment of process modelling useful to student, researcher and industrial practitioner. There is another important aspect which limits the scope of the present material in the area of process modelling. It originates from the well-known fact that a particular process model depends not only on the process to be described but also on the modelling goal. It involves the intended use of the model and the user of that model. Moreover, the actual form of the model is also determined by the education, skills and taste of the modeller and that of the user. Due to the above reasons, the main emphasis has been on process models for dynamic simulation and process control purposes. These are principally lumped dynamic process models in the form of sets of differential—algebraic equations. Other approaches such as distributed parameter modelling and the description of discrete event and hybrid systems are also treated. Finally the use of empirical modelling is also covered, recognizing that our knowledge Process modelling is an engineering activity with a relatively mature technology. The basic principles in model building are based on other disciplines in process engineering such as mathematics, chemistry and physics. Therefore, a good background in these areas is essential for a modeller. Thermodynamics, unit operations, reaction kinetics, catalysis, process flowsheeting and process control are the helpful prerequisites for a course in process modelling. A mathematical background is also helpful for the understanding and application of analysis and numerical methods in the area of linear algebra, algebraic and differential equations. The book consists of two parts. The first part is devoted to the building of process models whilst the second part is directed towards analysing models from the viewpoint of their intended use. The methodology is presented in a top-down systematic way following the steps of a modelling procedure. This often starts from the most general case. Emphasis is given in this book to identifying the key ingredients, developing conservation and constitutive equations then analysing and solving the resultant model. These concepts are introduced and discussed in separate chapters. Static and dynamic process models and their solution methods are treated in an integrated manner and then followed by a discussion on hierarchical process models which are related by scales of time or degree of detail. This is the field of multi-scale modelling. The second part of the book is devoted to the problem of how to analyse process models for a given modelling goal. Three dominant application areas are discussed: control and diagnosis where mostly lumped dynamic process models are used, static flowsheeting with lumped static process models, dynamic flowsheeting where again mostly lumped dynamic process models are in use. Special emphasis is given to the different but related process models and their properties which are important for the above application areas. Various supplementary material is available in the appendices. This includes: Background material from mathematics covering linear algebra and mathematical statistics. Computer science concepts such as graphs and algorithms. Each chapter has sections on review questions and application examples which help reinforce the content of each chapter. Many of the application exercises are suitable for group work by students. The methods and procedures presented are illustrated by examples throughout the book augmented with MATLAB subroutines where appropriate. The examples are drawn from as wide a range of process engineering disciplines as possible. They include chemical processing, minerals process engineering, environmental engineering and food engineering in order to give a true process system's appeal. The model analysis methods in part two are applied to many of the same process systems used in part one. This method of presentation makes the book easy to use for both higher year undergraduate, postgraduate courses or for self study. This book is intended for a wide audience. The authors are convinced that it will be useful from the undergraduate to professional engineering level. The content of the book has been presented to groups at all levels with adaptation of the material for the particular audience. Because of the modular nature of the book, it is possible to concentrate on a number of chapters depending on the need of the reader. For the undergraduate, we suggest that a sensible approach will be to consider Some industrial professionals with a particular interest in certain application areas could review modelling principles in the first half of the book before considering the specific application and analysis areas covered by  The authors are indebted to many people who contributed to the present book in various ways. The lively atmosphere of the Department of Chemical Engineering of The University of Queensland and the possibility for both of us to teach the final year “Process Modelling and Solutions” course to several classes of chemical engineering students has made the writing of the book possible. Presenting sections to professional engineers within Australian industry and also to Ph.D. and academic staff in Europe through the Eurecha organization, has helped refine some of the content. We would especially thank Christine Smith for the care and help in preparing different versions of the teaching materials and the manuscript. Also to Russell Williams and Steven McGahey for help in reviewing some of the chapters and to Gabor Szederkenyi for his kind help with many of the LaTeX and figure issues. We are conscious of the support of our colleagues working in the field of modelling in process systems engineering. These include Prof. John Perkins at Imperial College, Prof. George Stephanopoulos at MIT, Professors Rafique Gani and Sten Bay Jorgensen at the Danish Technical University, Prof. Heinz Preisig at Eindhoven and Prof. Wolfgang Marquardt at Aachen. Special thanks to Dr. Bob Newell for many years of fruitful discussion and encouragement towards realism in modelling. We thank them all for the advice, discussions and sources of material they have provided. We readily acknowledge the contribution of many whose ideas and published works are evident in this book. Any omissions and mistakes are solely the responsibility of the authors.