Individual casein fractions are of growing interest because of their multifunctional applications. The fractions of caseins (αS-, β- & κ-) possess a wide range of bio- and techno-functional properties. Although various isolation and purification methods to obtain casein fractions have been reported, there is still a need for improvement, especially on a technical scale. The aim of this study was to develop and establish a continuous process for the fractionation of caseins. The fractions were obtained from micellar casein by means of selective precipitation. The separation process was performed using a temperature-controlled decanter centrifuge. Enrichment of the fractions was optimised by altering the operational parameters of the decanter (inner weir diameter (Øweir), centrifugal force (FZ), differential speed (Δn), flow rate (V̇)). A 95% pure casein fraction containing αS- and β-casein was obtained. The purity and yield of the κ-casein fraction were 54% and 83%, respectively.Interest in casein and casein fractions has been growing due to their various techno-functional properties, such as solubility, emulsification, foam formation, stability, water-binding, gelation, heat and acid stability ( Different methods for the isolation and purification of casein fractions can be found in the literature, as reviewed by In the dairy industry, different separation technologies, e.g., centrifuges such as disc-stack, imperforate basket, solid-bowl and tubular centrifuges, are used ( A decanter centrifuge can be used to separate the solid phase, containing casein precipitates, from the liquid phase, as centrate or supernatant ( The feed is separated by high The separation of the phases depends on decanter design and different operating variables, including the centrifugal force exerted on the feed, the pond depth, the differential speed and the flow rate. The separation is also influenced by feed properties, such as the concentration of solids, viscosity, particles size and distribution, as well as the difference in density between particles and liquid ( The residence time (t, min) is defined as ratio of the process volume of the decanter centrifuge (V The process volume of the decanter is determined by the pond depth, which is set by the inner weir diameter. At a constant feed rate the residence time is increased for increasing pond depths ( The differential speed between screw conveyor and bowl determines the rate at which the solid phase is pushed towards the solid discharge and the time it remains in the clarification and drying zones. Low differential speeds should be applied for better dewatering of the solid phase ( Centrifugal acceleration is the driving force for the separation by density. It determines the separation rate and promotes further dewatering of compressible solids on the drying zone. These compressible solids, such as casein precipitates, are compressed further by the centrifugal forces ( According to As decanter centrifuges can be adjusted very well to different operation requirements, they are used for a wide variety of applications and different industrial branches, such as wastewater treatment, refining and dewatering of petrochemicals, mineral processing and vegetable oil & dairy processing ( Decanter centrifuges are used in the production of olive oils, because of their capacity to process large volumes in short time spans. Within this content, an increasing number of studies on optimising the efficiency of decanter centrifuges have been conducted ( The aim of this study was to develop and establish a continuous process for the fractionation of caseins to increase the yield and purity of the obtained casein fractions. To achieve this, the separation processes in the presented fractionation method were performed using a temperature-controlled decanter centrifuge. The effect of the operational parameters (centrifugal acceleration (F The micellar casein was produced in-house using a combined microfiltration and ultrafiltration process ( A decanter centrifuge (model MD 80-S, Lemitec GmbH, Berlin, Germany) was used for the separation steps in the presented casein fractionation method (section For the fractionation of bovine milk on technical scale, the process of The casein suspension was prepared in aliquots of 20 kg to a final casein concentration of 7% (w/w) with demineralised water at 30 °C and stirred for 2 h. The pH was increased from its native pH to pH 11 with a 5 The protein content was determined by a nitrogen analyser (Dumatherm-DT, C. Gerhardt GmbH & Co. KG, Königswinter, Germany) following the ISO 14891|IDF 185:2002 Dumas method ( The total casein content and the separated casein fractions were determined by reversed-phase high performance liquid chromatography (RP-HPLC) (Agilent 1260 Infinity, Agilent Technologies System, Santa Clara, CA, USA), equipped with a quaternary pump (Agilent 1260 Series, G1311B), auto sampler (Agilent 1260 Series, G1329B), thermostat with a column compartment (Agilent 1290 Series, G1330B; Agilent 1260 Series, G1316B) and a variable wavelength UV/VIS detector (Agilent 1260 Series, G1315D). The reversed-phase column VDSpher OptiBio Pur 300C The purity of the casein fraction (P The fraction-based yield ( The protein-based yield was defined as the ratio of the obtained and the freeze-dried casein fraction to the total amount of protein (as determined by the Dumas method) in the applied micellar casein powder. The total solid content (TS) was defined as the ratio of the mass of the sample after drying (m Figures show the mean values and the standard deviations for triplicate analyses. An analysis of variance (ANOVA) and Tukey's range test were performed. A value of The results of the chemical analysis of the micellar casein powder are shown in Unless specifically stated otherwise, the results presented refer to results for the precipitate (α The total solid content (TS) of the solid discharge was influenced by centrifugal force, differential speed, feed rate and weir diameter. An increase of the feed rate resulted in a decrease of the TS of the solid discharge, which is in agreement with Equation As stated, there are two major factors that influence the separation within a centrifuge; the separation rate, which is determined by the centrifugal force and residence time, which is influenced by the flow rate, the differential speed and the weir diameter. The recorded change in the TS of the solid discharge, caused by the centrifugal force, largely matched the expected results. By increasing the centrifugal force, the angular velocity also increased, leading to increased separation rates and higher TS in the solid discharge. However, at higher centrifugal forces, compressible solids, such as the precipitated casein particles, were further compressed and reached a “gelling point” upon which they formed a continuous gel within the decanter bowl, which was not transported by the screw conveyer to the solid discharge and led to blockages. This phenomenon was mainly observed for centrifugal forces above 3500 × By increasing the flow rate or increasing the differential speed, the amount of time the suspension was located within the decanter directly decreased; in other words, was conveyed to the solid discharge more quickly. This can be seen in Equation Interestingly, the magnitude of the recorded changes observed in the TS content suggest an interdependence of centrifugal force, feed rate, differential speed and weir diameter. While an increase in the differential speed adversely affected the TS for all parameter combinations tested, the magnitude of this effect increased with increasing flow rate. The interdependency could also be seen for different weir diameters (for constant feed rates) and different feed rates (for constant weir diameters), as the magnitude of the change in TS decreased with higher differential speeds at different weir diameters but increased with higher differential speeds at different flow rates. This indicates a multifactorial dependence of those parameters on the TS of the solid discharge. These results are in agreement with separation theory (Equations The yield for the obtained α The influence of the flow rate, the differential speed and the inner weir diameter on the yield was found to be largely dependent on the respective other parameters (flow rate, differential speed and inner weir diameter). The calculated yields did not only differ in their absolute values, but also showed different trends when the other operational parameters were set at different values. This effect was observed for increasing differential speeds at different flow rates. While an increase in the yield was recorded for increasing differential speeds from 10 to 50 rpm at a flow rate of 4.0 L h The protein- and fraction-based yields were calculated according to Equations The effects of the operational parameters on the yield for each obtained fraction were more difficult to predict, as the precipitated casein particles varied in size, shape, and density, and furthermore, were compressible. Increasing the centrifugal forces from 2000 to 4000 × The effect of the pond depth (set by the chosen weir diameter) was the easiest to predict. Smaller weir diameters led to longer clarifying zones ( The effects of differential speed and flow rate showed a strong influence on each other, and can cause major decreases in the separation efficiency. For parameter combinations (mainly flow rate and differential speed) that did not overload the decanter's capacity to separate the precipitate from the liquid phase, a minor or a major increase in the yields were recorded for increasing differential speeds with Ø The purity of the obtained fractions was determined using RP-HPLC and calculated as shown in Equation However, this did not apply to the κ-casein fraction obtained, where the protein content ranged between 83.4 and 85.4% and the achieved fraction purities were in the range of 46.2–51.8%, as shown in The aim of this study was to develop a continuous process for the fractionation of caseins using a decanter centrifuge. In this study, a decanter centrifuge was shown to be suitable for the intended process, as several steps have been realised with good results. The separation of a pure α However, more information is needed to identify and predict critical residence times and optimal operating conditions for better separation efficiency. Additionally, cleaning steps could be implemented to increase the purity of the κ-casein-enriched fraction obtained. Total solid and protein content in the starting suspension, as well as different operating temperatures might also affect the separation procedure and could be adjusted to further increase the separation efficiency of the decanter. These should be studied in more depth. In future work, the suitability of the decanter centrifuge for a cold extraction, and subsequently, separation at low temperatures will be examined and the three fractions will be generated as intended in This research project was supported by the