The pretreatment of tin anode slime using alkaline pressure oxidative leaching was studied. The effects of different parameters on the extractions of various metals were investigated based on thermodynamic calculation. The results indicated that the optimum leaching conditions were 2.5M of NaOH concentration, 130°C of temperature, 1.5h of time, 1MPa of oxygen partial pressure, 7mL/g of liquid-to-solid ratio and 700rpm of stirring speed. Under the conditions, the extractions of tin and arsenic reached 92.16% and 96.49% respectively, but that of copper and lead were at a low level. Meanwhile, antimony, bismuth, and silver were hardly dissolved into the NaOH solution. The leachate was then subjected to an evaporation and cooling crystallization process for arsenic removal. After the purification, 94.36% of arsenic was separate from the lixivium as sodium arsenate hydrate and the final solution can be used to produce sodium stannate.Tin anode slime, as a byproduct, is produced from electrolytic refining process of crude tin and contains many valuable metals, such as Sn, Pb, Sb, As, Cu, Bi, Ag, Au, and In, which are in the form of insoluble phases and finally precipitate in the bottom of refining tanks. It is economically attractive and is regarded as one of the important materials for the extraction of precious metals In general, the process for the treatment of anode slime includes the following steps: pretreatment, concentration, and refining, among which pretreatment is the most crucial to determine the whole process. A number of methods have been studied for the pretreatment of tin anode slime, which can be summarized as follows: oxidizing roasting-acid leaching Compared to these methods, pressure leaching is cleaner and more efficient, and has been extensively applied in the processing of nickel In the present study, an APOL was developed to selectively extract tin and arsenic from tin anode slime, and the removal of arsenic from the leach solution was carried out by an evaporation and cooling crystallization process. The effects of NaOH concentration, temperature, oxygen partial pressure, leaching time and liquid-to-solid (L/S) ratio on the extractions of tin and arsenic were investigated based on thermodynamic calculation. The final solution and solid products were analyzed by ICP and XRD for confirming the experimental results. The tin anode slime used in this study was supplied from a tin smelter in China. The original tin anode slime was firstly dried at 100 A schematic diagram of the experimental setup is presented in The contents of metals were detected with different methods according to their amounts in solution or residue. Sb, Bi, Pb, Cu, Au, Ag, In, Si and the low contents of Sn and As were detected by inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometry (ICP-AES, IRIS Intrepid II XSP), after the sample powders were digested with a mixture of concentrated HCl and HNO The Metal-H The chemical composition of the raw material shows that it contains about 47.94% Sn and 10.25% As. The selective extraction of Sn and As with NaOH solution under pressure was studied. The possible chemical reactions during the leaching process are listed as follows: It is well known that OH Leaching temperature is also an important factor on the APOL process. A higher temperature can accelerate the reaction but consume more energy. To investigate the effect of leaching temperature on the extractions of Sn and As, a series of experiments were conducted from 70 to 150  The solubility of oxygen in the solution is mainly determined by oxygen partial pressure which would remarkably improve oxidation efficiency and accelerate the leaching rate. To investigate the effect of oxygen partial pressure on APOL, a series of experiments were conducted with the oxygen partial pressure varying from 0.2 to 2.0 Liquid-to-solid ratio (L/S) is another important factor on the extractions of Sn and As. The effect of L/S on the extractions of Sn and As was therefore investigated and the results are presented in According to the results of the condition experiments, the optimum conditions of the APOL were established as: 2.5 Based on the different solubility between sodium arsenate and sodium stannate in water, a cooling crystallization process was performed to separate tin and arsenic in the alkaline solution obtained. When cooling the lixivium to the temperature about 25 The effect of evaporation degree on the crystallization rates of arsenic and tin was investigated, and the functional relation between evaporation rate and crystallization rate is presented in The tin and arsenic can be selectively extracted from the tin anode slime by alkaline pressure oxidative leaching (APOL), based on both thermodynamic calculation and experimental results. The parameters including NaOH concentration, temperature, oxygen partial pressure, leaching time, and liquid-to-solid ratio have significant effects on the extractions of tin and arsenic. It is found that arsenic and tin can be oxidized into soluble phases but antimony, bismuth and other metals are oxidized to insoluble species in alkaline solution. The optimum conditions were established as follows: 2.5 J. Han and C. Liang contributed equally to this work. The authors would like to thank the