This paper introduces improvements to the simulation of particle suspensions using the lattice Boltzmann method (LBM) and the discrete element method (DEM). First, the benefit of using a two-relaxation-time (TRT) collision operator, instead of the popular Bhatnagar–Gross–Krook (BGK) collision operator, is demonstrated. Second, a modified solid weighting function for the partially saturated method (PSM) for fluid–solid interaction is defined and tested. Results are presented for a range of flow configurations, including sphere packs, duct flows, and settling spheres, with good accuracy and convergence observed. Past research has shown that the drag, and consequently permeability, predictions of the LBM exhibit viscosity-dependence when used with certain boundary conditions such as bounce-back or interpolated bounce-back, and this is most pronounced when the BGK collision operator is employed. The improvements presented here result in a range of computational viscosities, and therefore relaxation parameters, within which drag and permeability predictions remain invariant. This allows for greater flexibility in using the relaxation parameter to adjust the LBM timestep, which can subsequently improve synchronisation with the time integration of the DEM. This has significant implications for the simulation of large-scale suspension phenomena, where the limits of computational hardware persistently constrain the resolution of the LBM lattice.In recent years, the lattice Boltzmann method (LBM) has emerged as a powerful numerical method for the simulation of fluid flow problems. Applications of the LBM include laminar flows in porous media [ A range of collision operators (see Section The use of a multiple-relaxation-time (MRT) collision operator [ It is worthwhile to note that Prestininzi et al. [ In some early LBM models of particle suspensions, the interactions among the solid particles were either ignored or treated in a simplified fashion. However, to simulate an industry case where particles are densely packed or in frequent contact, the particle interactions must be appropriately characterised. To address this, the discrete element method (DEM) has been employed to model the kinematics and mechanical interaction of solid particles. The discrete system in the DEM is solved by an explicit, central-difference time integration scheme, which is to some degree consistent with the LBM [ A number of practical computational issues must be taken into consideration when coupling the LBM and the DEM. Of primary importance is the synchronisation of their respective timesteps, It would be beneficial to the construction of LBM–DEM models if the relaxation parameter, The contents of this paper are organised as follows. In Section In conventional computational fluid dynamics (CFD) the fluid domain is defined as a continuum, in which the macroscopic properties, such as velocity and pressure, are obtained by directly solving the Navier–Stokes equations. In the LBM, however, the fluid domain is discretised at the mesoscopic scale where the primary variables are density (or particle) distribution functions, Generally, the LBE is expressed as, As discussed in Section In reference to Eq. The relationship between the relaxation rates in the TRT collision operator has been studied extensively [ Following collision, the streaming process moves the The macroscopic properties of the fluid (i.e. the density, It is worth pointing out here that the link between the LBE and the Navier–Stokes equations is dependent on, amongst other things, the small velocity limit (i.e. the maximum macroscopic velocity, The DEM was originally proposed by Cundall and Strack [ For each discrete element, the governing equations for translational and rotational movements are written as, In its most simple form, the normal contact force, During each timestep in the DEM, global contact detection is carried out to generate a list of potential interactions for every particle. Each contact pair is then checked for overlap and, if found to be in contact, locally resolved for normal and tangential forces according to the contact model and interaction law employed. Following the calculation and summation of all forces and torques present, the kinematic properties of the particles (i.e. acceleration, velocity, and location) are updated via Eqs. Critical to the implementation of the DEM is timestep selection. To ensure contact stability, At the macroscopic scale, the interaction between fluid and particles should obey the To more accurately describe solid boundaries on the underlying lattice, several improved forms of fluid–solid boundary conditions have been developed. These include the linearly interpolated bounce-back scheme (LIBB), the quadratically interpolated bounce-back scheme [ Studies [ To solve the problem of fluctuating forces, Noble and Torczynski [ When using the PSM, the MRT-LBE is modified as, Holdych [ In its simplest form, the solid weighting function is calculated directly as the solid coverage ratio of the cell, Previous studies [ To complete the definition of the PSM, the total hydrodynamic force and torque acting on the solid obstacle can be obtained by, It is worth mentioning that when no solid obstacle is present in the lattice cell, the PSM for fluid–solid interaction can recover the standard LBE with Two independent timesteps are utilised in the implemented LBM–DEM framework, namely In cases where Conversely, in cases where There exist certain practical limits on the number of sub-cycles used in LBM–DEM simulations. In the implemented LBM–DEM framework, the boundary nodes and the hydrodynamic loadings of the discrete elements are kept unchanged during the sub-cycling process. Therefore, the solid boundary cannot cross more than one grid spacing before it is remapped at the next LBM timestep to avoid fluctuation in the hydrodynamic response [ In the present work, The coupled LBM–DEM framework with partially saturated boundaries was tested in its original form, with a TRT collision operator, and then with the modified solid weighting function proposed in Section The first test case investigated was the flow past a periodic array of spheres. This was undertaken to determine the viscosity-dependence of different combinations of PSM collision operators and solid weighting functions, when used in conjunction with a TRT collision operator. These combinations are listed as follows:  Non-equilibrium bounce-back collision operator (Eq. Non-equilibrium bounce-back collision operator (Eq. Superposition collision operator (Eq. Holdych collision operator (Eq. The model was constructed using a fully periodic cubic domain with a side length of 20. A sphere was fixed at the centre of the domain, with its radius prescribed to result in a solid volume fraction of 0.1250. This facilitated direct comparison with the results of Zick and Homsy [ For a simple-cubic (SC) periodic array of spheres, the drag coefficient is calculated as, The drag coefficient was calculated for varying relaxation parameter,    An interesting finding observed from To allow direct comparison of the TRT-PSM formulation, with the modified solid weighting function, to other fluid–solid boundary conditions, the case of flow through a body-centred-cubic (BCC) array of spheres was considered. The model was constructed as described in Pan et al. [  As a natural extension to the testing reporting in Section  To test the modified solid weighting function in a lattice-aligned geometry, steady-state flow through a square duct was simulated. Maier et al. [ The quasi-parabolic axial velocity distribution for flow in a rectangular duct is given by the series approximation, To consider the worst-case geometry, the simulation was constructed using a square duct with height, width and length of 4, 8, 10, 20, and 40 grid spacings. These correspond to lattice node counts of 5, 9, 11, 21, and 41 across the height and width of the duct, and ensure that a node is located at the centre of the cross-section. Periodic boundaries were applied to the inlet and outlet, while the PSM boundary condition was utilised for the four transverse boundaries of the duct. A body force of 10 The duct simulation results are summarised in  Thus far, the tests in this study have focused on flow past and through fixed solid obstacles. In order to test the modified solid weighting function for cases in which the fluid–solidboundary can move across the lattice, a heavy sphere settling between two parallel plates was simulated. The drag force acting on a settling sphere is given by, The model construction followed the case described by Strack and Cook [ The settling sphere results are shown in  This paper has presented in improved framework for LBM–DEM modelling that uses the TRT collision operator and the PSM [ Results have shown that the TRT-PSM formulation exhibits significantly improved accuracy over the BGK-PSM formulation. The modified solid weighting function was also demonstrated to provide a range of computational viscosities, and therefore relaxation parameters, in which drag and permeability predictions are constant. Flow past a periodic array of spheres, both simple-cubic and body-centred-cubic packs, were found to be suitable benchmark scenarios to test the different combinations of the PSM collision operator and weighting function combinations. At low computational viscosities, errors were kept below Despite the improvements to the PSM boundary condition presented here, drag and permeability errors still increase rapidly at higher computational viscosities (i.e. DW would like to gratefully acknowledge the support of the School of Mechanical and Mining Engineering at the