A total of 27 patients were retrospectively reviewed following lag screw fixation alone of their fractured lateral malleolus. Mean follow-up was 4.3 years. Assessment was carried out using the functional score of Olerud and Molander. Forty-five percent of injuries occurred in footballers aged <30 years, all of who made an excellent functional recovery. No loss of fracture reduction occurred in any patient. All patients were routinely mobilised weight bearing in cast at 3 weeks without adverse effect. Associated ankle injuries such as fracture dislocations, medial malleolar fractures or syndesmotic injury are shown not to be a contraindication. A ratio of fracture length to fracture width of greater than 2:1 is found in 90% of all fractures. Intra-operative assessment of fracture stability after lag screw fixation should determine the need for additional hardware. Increased patient age or associated ankle injuries are not contraindications to this technique.Ankle fractures form a large part of the orthopaedic trauma surgeon's workload We looked at all patients who had undergone lag screw fixation of their fibular fracture. This technique is well recognized but not often used as fracture stability, bone quality, and the patient's physical demands may be perceived as unsuitable for lag screw fixation Our aim was to ascertain if associated ipsilateral ankle injuries or weight bearing in a cast had any effect on fracture reduction and to determine if the paradigm that the fracture must be 2–3 times as long as it is wide is valid. The benefits of lag screws alone when compared to the use of semi-tubular plates are several: less soft tissue dissection is required, operative time is decreased and there is no subcutaneous metal palpable and less risk to being exposed by either infection or trauma. All ankle fractures requiring surgery in Sligo General Hospital were identified from theatre records from 1992 to 1998. Of these only the lateral maleollar fractures fixed using lag screws alone were reviewed totalling 28 cases. All patients' charts and radiographs were reviewed. Data was collected from the date of first admission until discharge from the outpatients department. Radiographs at presentation, immediately following surgery and the late post-operative result after fracture union were reviewed. The fracture pattern and the degree of ankle mortise disruption were noted on the presenting radiographs. Associated medial and posterior malleolar fractures were noted, as was syndesmotic disruption. The length and width of the fracture was measured allowing calculation of a length to width ratio. Note was made of any comminution and the fracture was classified as per Lauge-Hansen Patient follow-up was by means of the Olerud and Molander (OM) All lateral malleollar fractures were fixed using lag screws alone ( Post-operatively all patients were supported in a back slab whilst the swelling decreased. This was changed to a full cast at an average of 3 days. Patients were kept toe touch weight bearing for 3 weeks then allowed to progress to full weight bearing as tolerated until 6 weeks after surgery. Three patients with syndesmotic injury were kept non weight bearing until removal of the syndesmosis screws. A total of 28 patients were identified; one patient was lost to clinical follow-up. Of the 27 patients in the study group, follow-up averaged 4.3 years (range 19–96 months). The patients had a median age of 27 years with a range 14–86 years. Fifteen (55%) of the patients were aged <30. The cause of the injury was football in 13 of the 15 patients aged <30. In the 12 patients over 30, injuries were due to tripping or falling during normal daily activities with one exception being a fracture sustained horse riding. Five patients were aged greater than 60 years of age, none of these patients lost fracture reduction. They had a mean OM score of 95. The fractures were predominantly supination external rotation injuries (total, 23), with pronation external rotation accounting for only four fractures. The average ratio of fracture length to fracture width (max) was 2.94 (range 1.5–4.9). Only one patient had any degree of comminution in their fracture. All injuries were closed with no neurovascular compromise. Six patients had dislocated ankles on attendance at the accident and emergency department and 17 others had subluxated ankle joints ranging from talar tilting to frank subluxation. Seven patients had associated medial malleolar fractures, of which all were fixed internally. The posterior malleolus was fractured in eight patients, only one required internal fixation. Syndesmostic disruption occurred in three patients who were treated with 3.5 mm screws to maintain reduction of the syndesmosis. There was no association between the degree of ankle mortise disruption or associated fractures around the ankle and functional outcome. Intra-operative X-rays showed the reduction to be anatomical in 26 of the 27 patients. One patient had a 2 mm step in the fibular fracture after fixation. Radiographic examination after fracture healing showed no patients had any loss of fracture reduction following fixation. Three patients had their lag screws removed following fracture union. Two patients were asymptomatic but underwent removal of the implants as part of routine surgical practice at that time. One patient had persistent ankle pain despite an anatomical reduction. The lag screws were removed but her symptoms remained unchanged. Assessment using the Olerud and Molander ankle score revealed that all patients who sustained their injury playing sport (total, 13) had an OM score of 100. Despite this only seven of the 13 patients returned to the same level of sporting activity after their injury. Those who did not say they had no problems with their ankle but did not have the confidence or desire to return to their previous sporting activities. Of the 27 patients contacted, 12 had OM scores <100. Of these three complained of pain; two whilst walking on uneven ground, the other at rest despite anatomical reduction and removal of the screws. Eight patients scored <100 due to swelling or stiffness in their ankle only and two elderly patients said they did not run or jump but this was not due to their ankle injury. Lag screw fixation of lateral malleolar fractures has been previously described. Tornetta and Creevy Patients with more complex fracture patterns should not be excluded from minimal fixation techniques. Fracture dislocation or subluxation of the ankle, syndesmotic injury, more proximal fibular (pronation external rotation type) fractures, and associated medial malleolar fractures are not a contraindication. The lateral malleolar component of these fractures can all be successfully reduced and held using lag screws alone without compromising fixation or reduction of other damaged structures. Weight bearing at 3 weeks was not associated with failure of fixation in any patient. It is our opinion that if the operating surgeon is uncertain of the fracture fixation to the extent that the patient needs to partial weight bear then a plate should be added at the time of surgery to reinforce stability. The maxim that fractures should be at least 2–3 times as long as they are wide before fixation with lag screws alone is generally correct. We had two patients with ratios of fracture length to width of 1.5 and 1.6; however, the mean ratio was 2.94. The two exceptions illustrate the most important point in patient selection, which is that per-operative fracture stability should be the final guide. There were no patients with prominent subcutaneous metal, and no patient underwent hardware removal due to prominence of the implant. This has substantial and beneficial financial and resource implications No patient had any problems with fracture or wound healing. The advantages of less extensive dissection, smaller amounts of foreign material and shorter operation time all add to this procedure. With 13 of the 27 patients sustaining their injuries playing football and all of these patients being aged <30, we have identified a subgroup of individuals who are most likely to have fractures suitable for minimal fixation. Coincidentally it is these younger patients who are most likely to benefit from the absence of a subcutaneous plate. Minimal fixation allows for return to sport without the risk of trauma to skin overlying the plate and was associated with excellent functional outcomes. This study illustrates the safety and efficacy of the use of minimal fixation in selected patients with lateral malleolar fractures. Fracture reduction was maintained in all patients. Stability was assured at intra-operative assessment. Weight bearing was commenced at 3 weeks. Functional outcome was not compromised, especially in the high demand younger patients. The use of lag screw fixation alone should immediately come to mind when treating the younger sporting patient with a fractured lateral malleolus, especially those patients with long uncomminuted spiral fractures. Associated ankle injuries should not be seen as a contraindication. The ultimate decision should always rest with the operating surgeon. If the fracture is stable after lag screw fixation alone at intra-operative assessment then this is all the internal fixation that is necessary.