Defined particle bed arrangements are an appropriate and useful tool for studying the substantial comminution behaviour of a particle collective. Two fractions of the material limestone were comminuted batch-wise by high pressure in a die press under defined conditions for eliminating the wall effects of the confinements. The particle interactions were modified by using the additive caproic acid and by varying the lateral confinements. The influence of feed size, additive amount and confinement on the specific surface growth and the energy absorption was investigated. It could be proved that a decrease of internal friction due to the additive exerts a small effect on the comminution process, whereas the material transport out of the stressing zone is decisive. For higher amounts of the additive, a decrease of the energy absorption in the fully confined particle bed with a concurrent decrease of the specific surface growth could be shown. On the contrary, there is a very high increase of the energy absorption in the partially open particle bed arrangement according to a high mass transport and specific surface growth. The inhomogeneous densification was observed in a half-cut configuration with a CCD camera. Superpositioning the pictures from tests with vertical and horizontal layers enables to study the reached densities in a grid pattern.Fundamental research on comminution operates mostly with two special cases, i.e., comminution of single particle and the idealised compression of multi-particle layers as well as particle beds. Systematical experiments on single-particle crushing, comminution in multi-particle layers and particle beds by Schönert et al. ( homogeneous structure (stochastical homogeneity) homogeneous densification known volume or mass of the loaded particles negligible influence of the die-wall friction However, a fully confined particle bed arrangement does not occur in comminution practice, and in mills a certain percentage of the particles, stressed between the grinding media, are able to escape the load laterally. Therefore, the confined particle bed arrangements considered here are either closed or partly or totally open to the side. Several kinds of open arrangements of particle beds were taken into consideration by Experiences in industrial mills regarding grinding aids clearly pointed out an improvement of comminution results, as the movability of the grinding material is enhanced by the grinding aid. This is due to the reduction of the internal friction and the agglomeration affinity of the progeny particles. Mostly, hydrophobic additives proved to be capable of weakening the bonds between the particles, which is caused by added water or simply by air humidity ( The improving effect of hydrophobic additives concerning the comminution results as well as the transport behaviour of feed material in the mills has often been observed ( The experiments on the compressive comminution were carried out using a force-controlled press with a maximal adjustable force of 1000 kN. The stressing velocity was slow and constant at 16 kN/s. The applied force and the displacement of the piston were measured. The particle beds were stressed between two radial-symmetrical plates (see The observation of the material transport process takes place in half-cut configuration through a glass window. Therefore the diameter of the mould is 40 mm. A CCD camera records the whole loading process and the picture sequences will be saved. With this configuration it is possible to evaluate the loading process up to a force of 50 kN. The energy consumption The progress of comminution is described by using the growth of the specific surface area Δ The sample solid was limestone mined in Geomin Hermsdorf, Germany. It consists of at least 95 wt.% calcite. The feed material was sieve-sized in <50- and 40–50-μm fractions. Based on the results of previous works by For the broad solid fraction, the flowability For the two limestone fractions 40–50 and <50 μm several test series on the stress levels 100, 200, 400 and 800 kN were realised. Either the mould diameter or the coverage of the material with the additive caproic acid was used as the main parameter. For the narrow fraction 40–50 μm the maximum coverage was The first qualitative results for the behaviour of the fully confined and the non-confined particle beds under pressure can be obtained by looking at the force-displacement curves. A rearrangement of the particles occurs during the loading process as well as the particle bed reacts with particle crushing. Further, there is an elastic deformation of the particle bed but there is no focus on it in this paper. The force-displacement curve describes the way For higher amounts of the additive caproic acid Variation of the lateral extension of the mould and addition of caproic acid modify the movability of the particles. The lateral extension primarily influences the movement of particles over a wide range as well as the material transport outwards the stressing zone, and this causes a reduction in the amount of material being stressed at the end. The additive caproic acid mainly influences the internal movement of particles into the empty spaces of the particle arrangement during compaction. In the mould The changes in the end bed height—the one after the particle bed was stressed—as a function of the bed confinement are shown in Except for the experiments with limestone <50 μm by higher amounts of caproic acid However, there is no longer a linear dependency between the energy absorption and the pressure for a high coverage The comminution results can be characterised by using the specific surface growth Δ For the tests in the 32-mm mould with the higher amounts of caproic acid and the high-energy absorption the specific surface growth shows the same course as without the additive. A degressively master curve helps to describe the growth of specific surface area over the energy absorption and adding the caproic acid does not change it. But it is possible to improve the comminution during a single compressive load in this case (see In general, the energy utilisation declines when the energy absorption increases. As the lateral extension of the mould becomes larger, the energy utilisation drops much faster. The small amount of solid particles staying beneath the piston absorbs much energy. Due to the high compaction and the hereto related large number of contacts among the particles at high forces, hardly any break event takes place. With respect to the pressure—a measure of the compaction grade—the energy utilisation of all used arrangements collapse into the same curve when high pressures are applied, independently of how much additive is added to the bulk. Noticeable differences only emerge at lower pressures, given that the comminution can still be influenced by the particle movability. At high-grade compaction the particle bed behaves like a solid, whose grindability does not depend upon the additive and the confinement anymore. Regarding the enlargement of the moulds, there is a displacement of the mean particle sizes of the assemblages in the 32-mm mould. Especially, the assemblages representing the coarser particle sizes decrease with an increasing load. Remarkably, the assemblies of the feed material are vanished. With an increase in the enlargement, the mean particle sizes of the assemblages are on the same places as in the fully confined particle bed again. There is only a decrease in the fractions of the assemblages of the crushed material with the increase of the enlargement of the mould. The first investigations of the material transport process during the loading process took place in a half-cut configuration with a mould diameter of 40 mm. The experiments show a mass transport in the bulk volume instead of a transport along the die wall. For this case an idealised particle bed arrangement can be supposed. It can also be shown that there is no homogenous mass transport. Clusters of densified material were moved outwards the stressed zone. For closer examinations of the inhomogeneous densification and mass transport a grid was produced by superpositioning horizontal and vertical layers from two tests of the same conditions. The mass transport is characterised by maximum displacement of a vertical layer and the density is calculated from the decrease in the area of a part multiplied with the half radius through the area centre and the initial mass of this part ( These investigations are on the behaviours of confined and non-confined particle bed commination by single compressive load, for which the caproic acid was added as an additive and the confinement was varied to modify the movability of the particles. Two fractions, <50 μm and 40–50 μm, of the material limestone were comminuted batch-wise by high pressure in a die press. The influence of grinding aids on the agglomeration and transport behaviours of the material are well known. Therefore it is to be expected that there are hardly any influences due to the grinding aid in a fully confined configuration during a single loading process. Consequently, the sidewall in our radial–symmetrical geometry was put back step by step to give the material the possibility to escape the load. Regarding the whole process, there are small influences due to the caproic acid with small amounts ( For higher amounts of caproic acid in the fully confined particle bed arrangement there is no longer a linear energy absorption function. Here a degressive course was found. For the non-confined particle bed arrangements a high material transport by higher load was observed. For this case the energy absorption increases away from a linear function as well as there is an increasing specific surface growth. Through observing the mass transport and densification process with a CCD camera, results about the inhomogeneous load on the non-confined particle bed arrangements can be obtained. Heretofore, more investigations will be carried out to study the coherence of the densification and comminution of an inhomogeneous densified non-confined particle bed arrangement.