Gasification biochar (GB) contains recalcitrant carbon that can contribute to soil carbon sequestration and soil quality improvement. However, the impact of GB on plant-available water capacity (AWC) and plant growth in diverse soil types still needs to be explored.
                  A pot experiment with spring barley (Hordeum vulgare L.) was conducted to investigate the effect of soil amendment by 1% straw and wood gasification biochar (SGB and WGB), respectively, on AWC and plant growth responses under two levels of water supply in a temperate sandy loam and a coarse sandy subsoil. In the sandy loam, the reduced water regime significantly affected plant growth and water consumption, whereas the effect was less pronounced in the coarse sand. Irrespective of the soil type, both GBs increased AWC by 17–42%, with the highest absolute effect in the coarse sand. The addition of SGB to coarse sand led to a substantial increase in plant biomass under both water regimes: shoot growth by 40–165% and root growth by 50–57%. However, no positive effects were achieved by the addition of WGB. In the sandy loam, soil application of GB had no or negative effects on plant growth.
                  Our results suggest that SGB has considerable potential for enhancing crop productivity in coarse sandy soils by increasing soil water retention and improving root development.An improvement in soil quality and an increase in soil organic matter reduce the exposure and vulnerability of crops to extreme events such as drought ( However, very little research has been undertaken so far on the effect of GB soil amendment on physical soil properties and plant growth. The majority of studies available have been conducted with pyrolysis biochar, the main product of a pyrolysis process conducted under low-oxygen conditions at temperatures of between 400 and 750 Biochar has a significant adsorbing ability due to its high specific surface area, and its internal porosity may contribute to increasing the water holding capacity (WHC) ( An improvement in soil structure may be especially beneficial in coarse sandy soils showing high mechanical resistance to root growth due to low compressibility and high friction ( Further information about the effects of specific GBs on the properties of different soil types as well as on plant growth under drought stress is required to learn more about how to optimize the use of a limited amount of GB material to improve soil quality and increase crop yields. The overall aim of this study was therefore to evaluate the effects of two contrasting GB materials on the capacity of plant-available water (AWC) and plant growth responses (shoot and root biomass, leaf water potential, stomatal conductance and carbon isotope discrimination) of spring barley ( Two biochar materials were used in this study: wood gasification biochar (WGB) and straw gasification biochar (SGB). SGB was produced in a Low Temperature Circulating Fluidized Bed gasifier (LT-CFB) at 750 The soils used in this study were sandy loam and sandy soils (USDA textural classification). The sandy loam soil was collected from the Ap horizon (0–25 The experiment was conducted in the Risø Environmental Risk Assessment Facility (RERAF) phytotron at the Technical University of Denmark, Roskilde campus, Denmark. The experiment involved 12 treatments with four replicates: two soil types, three GB amendments (control without GB, 1% WGB and 1% SGB respectively) and two water regimes (70% and 30% of the water-holding capacity (WHC) of the control treatment respectively). It was decided to base the water supply on the WHC of the control treatment to avoid effects simply caused by a higher water supply to the biochar-amended pots. The WHC was determined for each soil type in 28 Prior to the experiment, the dry soil was weighed into plastic bags to give 2.6 Prior to the experiment, the conditions in the phytotron were set as follows: The daylight period was set to 16 Stomatal conductance was used as an indicator of plant drought stress, as plants close stomata to reduce water loss and consequently stomatal conductance decreases. Stomatal conductance measurements using a leaf porometer SC-1 model (Decagon Devices) was initiated 25 Leaf water potential was used as an indicator of soil water availability. The leaf water potential was measured 37 The plants were harvested six weeks after sowing by cutting the aboveground plants by hand just above the soil surface. The roots were isolated by gently pressing the soil out of the pot, followed by carefully rinsing the roots with water. Both shoots and roots were dried in an oven for 48 Carbon isotope discrimination was used as an indicator of water use efficiency. Carbon isotope discrimination was analyzed on the harvested aboveground dried plants. Plant samples were first coarsely ground in a plant mill to pass a 4 Soil pH was only measured on soil samples from the 70% WHC treatments, using a soil-water suspension of 5 Pots under the 30% WHC water regime were used to determine water retention, as the root growth in those pots was lower compared to the pots under 70% WHC. This made it possible to take soil samples from the bottom of the pots with less root content. Undisturbed soil samples were taken after harvest in a metal ring of 100 Moisture content at equilibrium ( The plant AWC was calculated as the difference between volumetric water content at field capacity and permanent wilting point. Statistical analysis of the data was performed in R, version 0.98.1103. The significant interaction effect of the soil type, water regime and GB addition was assessed using a three-way analysis of variance (ANOVA). The effect of the water regime within each soil type was analyzed by two-way ANOVA. The differences between treatments within each soil type and water regime were analyzed using least-square means from the R-package lsmeans ( Shoot and root growth was affected by soil type, water regime and GB addition and type ( In the coarse sandy soil, the 30% WHC regime had no effect on shoot or root growth in the control treatments compared to the 70% WHC regime. The addition of SGB to the coarse sandy soil increased shoot growth by 165% and root growth by 50% under the 70% WHC regime; however the shoot biomass was still only half of the biomass obtained in the sandy loam soil. Under the 30% WHC regime, the addition of SGB increased shoot growth by 40% and root growth by 57%. In contrast, the addition of WGB to coarse sandy soil had a negative effect on shoot growth under both water regimes and on root growth under the 30% WHC regime. Generally the water regime had a consistent effect on the plant ecophysiological responses, while the addition of GB had variable effects ( The carbon isotope discrimination was highest under the 70% WHC regime and decreased significantly under the 30% WHC regime in both soil types ( The cumulative water consumption of barley plants overall corresponded to plant growth ( The application of GB did not have any effect on bulk density in either of soil types (data not shown). Both soil type and GB addition affected field capacity, permanent wilting point and AWC ( The reduced water supply affected root and shoot growth and plant water consumption in the sandy loam soil considerably, while in the coarse sandy soil the differences between the two water regimes were generally less pronounced. Plant growth in the control treatments in coarse sand was approximately the same under both water regimes. This may be due to the fact that coarse sandy soil under 30% WHC is not as close to the wilting point as sandy loam. However, the main reason is most likely the limited root growth caused by mechanical resistance, which often occurs even under moderately wet conditions ( In the sandy loam soil, the addition of SGB increased water content at field capacity and AWC. In other investigations, the effects of biochar on the hydraulic properties of loamy soils are reported to vary. Several studies showed positive effects of biochar amendment to loamy sand and sandy loam soils on field capacity and AWC ( In the coarse sandy soil, SGB increased water content at field capacity and AWC as well, which has also been documented in other studies on coarse sandy soils ( Under field conditions, the increased AWC and improved root growth may lead to improvements in both water and nutrient retention and hence decrease the leaching of mobile nutrients, such as nitrate ( WGB increased water content at field capacity and AWC to the same extent as SGB, but no positive effect on plant growth could be observed after the application of WGB in any of the soils or treatments. Quite the opposite, in fact, since WGB even decreased shoot growth under both water regimes compared to the control in the coarse sandy soil. The lack of a positive effect of WGB in this soil might be due to its higher proportion of larger particles (53% larger than 0.125 The reduced water regime significantly affected plant ecophysiological responses, plant growth and water consumption in the sandy loam soil, whereas it only had a small or no effect in the coarse sandy soil. Both gasification biochars increased the plant-available water content in both the sandy loam and the coarse sandy soil. However, the two contrasting GB materials had different effects on plant growth in the two soil types tested, suggesting that the mitigation of specific soil constraints needs specifically adapted GB materials. The application of WGB had either no effect or slightly negative effects on plant ecophysiological responses and growth. Under which conditions WGB with its interesting properties such as high SSA, pH and porosity can positively affect plant growth has to be the subject of future research. The greatest benefits were observed on coarse sandy soil where SGB markedly increased root and shoot growth under both water regimes. These results suggest that there is great potential in the ability of SGB to increase soil pH, water retention and root development in order to improve crop productivity on the often poor coarse sandy soils in many parts of the world. However, the results of this study are based on a pot experiment with disturbed soil and need to be verified in field experiments. This research was supported by a grant from the