This paper describes results on precipitation studies carried out on liquors containing low to medium concentration of uranium in alkaline (carbonate-bicarbonate-sulphate) media using phosphate based reagents. Studies with various phosphate reagents showed comparable performance with two variants namely, disodium/potassium hydrogen phosphate or sodium/potassium dihydrogen phosphate. Influence of various process variables on the yield and product quality indicated that pH of the liquor is a critical factor besides the NaHCO3 and Na2SO4 content in the leach liquor. The conditions found optimal for near complete precipitation, about 99%, are: pH6.3, NaHCO3 20g/L (max.) and Na2SO4 100g/L (max). Physical characterization of the precipitated uranyl phosphate by XRD, SEM and particle size analyzer indicated presence of two major uranium phases, namely, H2(UO2)2(PO4)2·8H2O and UO2(HPO4)·4H2O called as chernikovite. The experimental studies indicated the possibility of phosphate reagents in precipitating uranium values from alkaline process liquors over a fairly wide range of uranium concentration such as, about 50mg/L to 2g/L with good precipitation efficiency.Uranium is an important metal for the generation of nuclear energy. At present about 3% of the overall energy mix of India comes from nuclear energy ( After exhaustive bench-scale and pilot-plant studies, a novel process flowsheet ( Several alternatives were reported for upgradation of uranium content in lean leach liquors by different workers for various ores. The studies of A solvent extraction (SX) based process for uranium recovery from alkaline leach liquors was developed and evaluated in bench-scale with synthetic liquors by Phosphate precipitation of uranium from carbonate leach solution was reported in US Patents ( The phosphate precipitation method is generally accomplished in weakly acidic media ( However, addition of either HCl or HNO A sample of leach liquor generated from the operating TMPL plant was analyzed for major constituents ( Synthetic solutions comparable to leach liquor chemical composition were prepared by taking the required quantity of sodium carbonate, sodium bicarbonate and sodium sulphate in distilled water and adding known concentration of uranium to it. In those experiments carried out to study the role of NaHCO Metallurgical accounting was made on the basis of chemical assay of the filtrate. A digital pH meter (LT-120 of Elico Private Ltd., India) was used to monitor the pH of the aqueous solution with an accuracy of ± X-ray diffraction (XRD) (Inel France make, model MPD) using Cr Kα radiation (k  The effect of pH on precipitation of uranium with disodium hydrogen phosphate as precipitating reagent was investigated in the pH range of 5 to 7.  The effect of temperature of reaction on the recovery of uranium was studied using the precipitant - Na The effect of dosage of Na  Sulphate is generated during the leaching of uranium if the ore contains sulfide minerals like pyrite. The concentration of sulphate ions in the leach liquor builds up due to recycle of leach liquor, which is one of the options for enhancing the concentration of uranium in the liquors under steady state conditions. The bled-out portion of the recycled liquor constitutes the feed to precipitation reactor. The increasing concentration of sulphate ion in the recycled leach liquor not only causes problem during leaching but also influences the yellow cake precipitation process. Tests were carried out to understand the effect of sodium sulphate ions by varying its concentration from 60 to 130 The uranium concentration in the leach liquor is linked to the head assay and its leachability, besides the ore solids to liquid weight ratio, all of which are prone to change in the industrial operations due to variety of reasons. The influence of uranium concentration (U Reproducibility tests were conducted on actual leach liquors ( The precipitation experiments were carried out under optimized experimental conditions - pH  The XRD patterns of the precipitates are very complex as can be observed from The recovery of uranium from the leach liquor of Tummalapalle ore by phosphate precipitation method is illustrated in Feasibility of recovering uranium by phosphate precipitation route from carbonate leach liquor of a low grade uranium ore is established. The phosphate route is versatile enough to give good precipitation efficiency (about 99%) over a wide range of uranium concentration such as, 50 The authors wish to express their profound gratitude to Director, BARC for giving opportunity to carry out this work. Authors also would like to thank their colleagues Dr. Bhaskar Paul and Dr. Kinshuk Dasgupta, Materials Group for their help in obtaining the SEM images and XRD data for various uranium phosphate precipitates with different precipitating reagents.