Oxidation-resistant coating on the graphite anode sample was investigated experimentally. Boride coatings with anti-oxidation property were characterized via scan electron microscope (SEM) and oxidation weight loss experiments, respectively. The results show that the coating is in glassy state at around 800°C, resulting in easily impregnating into pores of graphite anode sample. The coating with strong adhesive is compact and without cracks. At the temperature of 750°C or above, the oxidation weight loss results indicate that the oxidation loss rate of graphite with coating is much lower than that of without coating. With the increase of temperature, the variation of oxidation weight loss of graphite with boride coating is a small amount, which suggests that the coating has the characteristic of excellent oxidation-resistant.Graphite anode is very likely to be damaged partly because there exist lots of pores in the graphite anode where coagulative electrolyte expand in volume with the process of water uptaken, hydrolysis and dehydration, and stress imbalance of ambient graphite particles and apparent damages of the anode, while partly due to the graphite particles with high activity in the porous oxides Boron trioxide, which is in molten state in the temperature of 600–1100 To reach the aims described above, some specially considered coatings on graphite to simulate the actual electrolyte are approached, and oxidation experiments of coatings in laboratory-scale are examined. The raw materials of the oxidation-resistant coating on graphite anode samples in this work are boric acid (analytical grade), soluble glass and SiO Coating preparation includes two steps: pretreatment of the graphite substrate and preparation of coating paste. Firstly, pretreatment of the graphite anode substrate is to remove dirt, oxide layer and contaminants on the surface of the graphite, then to coarse the graphite surface to improve the adhesive capability of coating on graphite anode. Secondly, boric acid, silica and soluble glass are mixed together in terms of expected amounts of components and are ground to fine particles. The as-ground paste is kept for 24 The coating must then be left to dry in shade, and then baked. The remained water should be accurately controlled so as to ensure the coating quality. The gradual heating procedures is recommended. In the experiment, the optimized temperature of baking is from 80 to 100 A schematic experimental set-up for oxidation test of coating is shown in The optimized particle sizes in the paste are ranging from of 0.074–0.048 The suitable thickness of the coating is approximately 0.5 The microstructures of sintered coatings are examined with A JEOL 6400 SEM. SEM micrographs of boride coating at different temperatures can be seen in   There exist intrinsic relationships between microstructure and properties of coating paste. Particularly, the crystallized B Oxidation-resistant coating on the graphite anode was prepared with boric acid, SiO