The efficient production of instant whole milk powders with stringent functional requirements is the economic goal for large-scale milk powder plants. However, the physical predictors of functional properties are not sufficiently characterised to ensure quality at the time of manufacture, and given high production rates, the time delays for testing can lead to significant amounts of devalued product if functional tests are subsequently failed. This work combines big-data collection and alignment with multivariate methods on a re-sampled, balanced data set to provide a real-time proxy measurement. A unique dataset was constructed to compare three large-scale plants of different designs, overcoming significant challenges in alignment of disparate data sources, across six years of production. Models were clearly able to differentiate plant and process changes, and by appropriate weighting of the unusual results, were able to predict functional test results, especially the production of off-spec product. These models can be used in real-time to significantly lower the likelihood of producing powder that will fail customer functional tests, and therefore substantially reduce cost of quality failure.The motivation behind this study was to provide The intention is to maximise the proportion of powder satisfying the quality specifications and it is imperative that this is done in near-real time, using existing measurements or those reasonable to implement, to prevent many tonnes of off-specification powder being produced before detection by the periodic offline measurements. The quality attributes of IWMP include quantification of physical, functional, sensory, and microbiological factors. However functional properties are inherently challenging to control, or even measure offline, due to their qualitative aspects, and they are often not tested regularly or automatically. Practical measurements tend to be subjective, heavily quantised, or require a trained human assessor. Furthermore sophisticated measurements (such as say inline particle size measurements as proposed in ( Finally, some key functional quality indicators cannot be measured until three days after manufacture due to the slow physical-chemical changes that occur in the powder such as fat crystallisation. This delay is not conducive to real-time process control to ensure product quality, and hence the prediction of the powder functional properties at the time of manufacture is key to preventing product wastage or rework due to failure to meet the tight specifications of premium products and the focus of this work. The underlying mechanistic causes for these subjective, but key properties are not well known and prior work has struggled to establish robust relationships between plant operating parameters and key functional properties by univariate methods ( While classical multivariate techniques were developed to tackle high dimensional/highly correlated data exemplified by chemometric or genomic problems, as popularised by Wold et al. (as recounted in ( While in this study, the data block is not underconstrained, (it still has more rows than columns), the number of columns is still moderate at around 30. Furthermore this situation is quite common in industrial monitoring applications, e.g. ( Of course the compute capability has increased by orders of magnitude since the development of the multivariable tools in the 1980s, and this is coupled with the realisation that the logged standard pressure/flow/temperature data was under utilised in most plants. The review by ( The success in consistently producing premium IWMP products varies across manufacturing plants. Some sites are able to meet the tight tolerances with relatively few failures, whereas others, which may have different designs, installed equipment, geographical locations, and process control schemes, have different risk profiles in terms of which functional tests that they are more likely to have failures with. One long term aim of this work is to predict functional properties so that premium products can be made at any plant reliably, by adjusting the process operation to suit the individual plant design and location. The investigations presented here combine diverse data from three large manufacturing plants spread across New Zealand, with differences in the types of dryers and evaporators used, across six seasons of production data from 2011 to 2016. A unique opportunity in this project was the ability to utilise a comparatively large dataset, both in geographical breadth, due to having access to many different plants producing a product of the same specification, as well as temporal depth, with historical data available for many seasons of production. This analysis of such historical data, whilst not unique as evidenced by ( However, sheer quantity of data is no guarantee of good models as noted by ( Our approach characterises three distinct types of industrial measured data as shown in Extensive work was undertaken to align process and quality data, as well as identifying and dealing with a large range of special and irregular cases, leading to a large This pre-processing procedure is somewhat different in intent from the classical data reconciliation algorithms of ( A significant challenge is the alignment of The data and models used have been structured such that the same process data can be related to any available measurements of powder functional property or physical attributes, and these investigations can be expanded in future to include new measurements of interest, or to add new plants or process measurements to the input data. This allows many combinations of models to be tested, changing the selections of input and output data without altering the database structure or requiring significant extra work. The main results presented in this paper show prediction of the powder dispersability, which is a property measured to indicate one of the stages of dissolving powder in water, as measured by a customer-specific test. The same input data can be easily regressed against other functional properties including bulk density, wettability, hot sediments, with 6 different properties currently aligned in the existing database, as shown in The full collection of 30-s process data encompasses approximately 6 million total samples in this dataset, with Whilst each plant contains hundreds of different process variables, these were rationalised into 29 values that are key for process control, in consultation with plant engineers. After alignment with hourly powder property measurements, the dataset is reduced to approximately 26,000 samples, and after alignment with final powder quality measurements, to approximately 12,000 samples spanning three plants and six seasons. The data is not interpolated to a regular time frequency, rather it is aligned to the best estimated production time of each quality (Z) sample. An example of some of the different data types and measurement frequencies are shown in While there were small structural changes in each dataset during the course of each season, the shifts from season to season (due to off-season plant design changes) were more marked, making the time-in-season variations (of input milk composition) of secondary importance. In addition, the routine ‘standardisation’ of the milk fat, moisture, protein levels throughout the year compensate for seasonal changes during production. The authors therefore deemed that seasonal effects were out of scope for this particular investigation. The cleaned and reconciled plant dataset described in §2 was used to investigate both the relationships between different plants producing the same specification powder, as well as to look for a relationship between process parameters and a number of functional and physical properties of the powder. For such an investigation a multivariate analysis makes sense because of the high dimensionality of the raw data, and the lack of useful physical-based models in this instance. A Partial Least Squares (PLS) regression was applied to the data using the Matlab plsregress function, which follows the SIMPLS algorithm, from the Statistical Toolbox (  The second point is the clear movement of the scores over time illustrated better in  The cumulative In summary, while the model is able to distinguish the differences between the plants as shown in the score plots of It is clear the predictive accuracy of the model derived from all the data as indicated by Given that the ambitious global model summarised in The time-varying scores plot in Such poor results should not really be surprising. Some functional properties only had 3 to 5 discrete levels, (e.g. miscibility), while others had around 20, (wettability or bulk density). Second, the absolute number of some of the poor samples (at the extremes of the y-data set) was relatively low, so that the standard un-weighted least-squares fitting did not take these values into proper account. What is needed is to over-weight the rare, but important, off-specification samples. Finally the laboratory functional measurements themselves are known to be subject to considerable variance. Section A common problem in the process modelling of an operating industrial plant is the paucity of data in one or more of the key classification sets, typically the failed quality set. In our instance, the unbalanced data is of the Resampling for class imbalances has proven to be very useful for improving the predictive ability of both multivariate and decision tree type models, which is intuitive given the relative rarity of the cases one is most interested in, namely the powders which have failed the functional tests. Resampling can been used to increase the number of these occurrences in the minority dataset by repeatedly resampling them from the initial population, so that their frequency is of similar magnitude to the other ‘normal’ powder samples. Class imbalances are a common problem and research topic in the machine learning, especially in production data, where both ( The balanced data sets in this instance used simple upsampling of the minority (failed) classes and downsampling of the majority (acceptable) classes to obtain 500 samples in each discretised reading (or bin). While this re-sampling procedure could be optimised based on heuristics, tests showed that provided the numbers were approximately equal, the exact number for each bin was practically independent of model quality supporting the findings of (     A simple way to incorporate nonlinearities is to increase the regressor space by adding simple nonlinear transformations of the An alternative way to model suspected nonlinearities is to use an artificial neural network, (ANN). Clearly the prediction performance is significantly improved in this case. However the black-box nature of the ANN means that the internal model is opaque. This caused some concern to our industrial partners who far preferred the fact that, for example, the loadings of the linear PLS model could be inspected and compared to The prediction of powder functional properties relating to density and dissolution was studied using a unique, relatively large, dataset spanning three separate large-scale production plants, across six years of operations. The preprocessing of the data to reconcile and align the different plants and measurement time scales was a significant challenge, but once achieved, enabled a range of models to be analysed, including flexible selection of input data and functional properties. It was clear from a preliminary multivariate model, that each plant ran in separate, non-overlapping operating states, despite each making the same powder, which usually passed all functional test results. Notwithstanding the overall good performance of the plants, there still remains significant economic benefit in the early detection of potential powder functional test failures, due to the large production volumes and the price premiums available for products meeting the tightest specifications. It was found that different plant designs or operating regions caused by changes of equipment over time dominated the multivariate model results, and hence it was necessary to reduce the scope of input data to remove these structural, explainable differences. However, even with structural differences removed, the models were unable to adequately predict the powder functional properties from process parameters and powder composition inputs. Adding more regressors in the form of simple nonlinear functions of the raw measured data did not significantly improve the model, and building plant-specific models had only a marginal improvement. The key barrier to constructing robust models to predict an off-spec product is the rarity of such events in the data set. This is overcome by simply balancing the data which could then be used to regress models with While the construction of a large dataset for plant comparison was a significant undertaking, it became clear that using more data was not necessarily conducive to making better models. In this case, the problem definition was a deciding factor. While the large dataset fulfilled its initial purpose of comparing and finding differences between three similar plants, it was not ideal for the ultimate aim of predicting powder functional properties. Exploration of the dataset and model results elucidated these issues, and gives better direction for future model building and data collection, which must be plant-specific, carefully aligned, and able to be updated and maintained as plant operations or equipment change over time. The authors would like to acknowledge the Primary Growth Partnership program from the New Zealand