This work concerns the oxidation of cyclohexane and methylcyclohexane in a motored engine at low to intermediate temperatures, which is largely unknown in the literature. The experiment is conducted with variable compression ratio from 4 to 15 at equivalence ratio 0.25 and intake temperatures of 120°C and 200°C. Results show that overall reaction activity, indicated by fuel conversion and carbon monoxide formation, is largely enhanced by the existence of the methyl group. Cyclohexane shows a stronger negative temperature coefficient (NTC) behavior than methylcyclohexane. Detailed product analyses reveal that conjugated olefins are the major product for cyclohexane and methylcyclohexane in both low temperature oxidation and NTC regime. Four C6 oxygenates, 5-hexen-1-al, 1,2-epoxycyclohexane, 1,4-epoxycyclohexane, and cyclohexanone are detected in cyclohexane oxidation. The relative yields indicate that intramolecular hydrogen abstraction of cyclohexylperoxy radical is more likely to occur on γ-carbons than on α-, β-, or δ-carbons. Four conjugated olefins, 1-, 3-, 4-methylcyclohexenes and methylenecyclohexane, are detected in methylcyclohexane oxidation, with relative yield about 1, 1.2, 1.4 and 0.25, respectively.The oxidation chemistry of hydrocarbons has attracted interest for many years due to its key role in combustion processes. Most studies have focused on chain paraffins such as Hydrocarbon oxidation can be generally classified into three regimes, low temperature, intermediate temperature, and high temperature, in which different reaction chemistry predominates. Pressure is an equally important parameter in this classification. Negative temperature coefficient (NTC) behavior is observed between low and intermediate temperature regimes for most hydrocarbons under appropriate conditions, where reaction rate decreases with temperature. Low temperature oxidation of cyclohexane with detailed product analysis has been studied in laboratory reactors. Gulati and Walker studied slow cyclohexane oxidation in a static reactor at 753 Few results are available for methylcyclohexane oxidation. High temperature oxidation (1160–1240 It is noted that no study has been conducted under practical engine conditions for low temperature oxidation of cycloparaffins. In this work, cyclohexane and methylcyclohexane are oxidized in a CFR octane rating engine under motoring conditions. With no spark firing, low temperature oxidation is studied at different compression ratios and two intake temperatures (120 Motored engines have been used to study low temperature hydrocarbon oxidation by various groups This work uses a modified CFR octane rating engine. Detailed engine setup has been described in Net heat release is calculated with the standard method Cyclohexane and methylcyclohexane (>99%, Aldrich) are tested. The equivalence ratio is 0.25. Two intake temperatures, 120 In this work both qualitative and quantitative analyses are performed for oxidation products by using a different approach in exhaust sampling and analysis than in previous work in this facility Analysis of liquid samples is performed on a Shimadzu GC-17A gas chromatograph coupled with QP-5000 mass spectrometer. A capillary column (Restek, VMS) with slight polarity is used. This column (30 Two gas samples are analyzed by the same column (Restek VMS) in a HP GC-5890 with a flame ionization detector (FID). Consistent condensation percentage is found for all species except several late-eluted epoxides and ketones. Relative standard deviation of condensation percentage for most species is less than 10%, but for the high-boiling oxygenated species it is as high as 50%. This may be due to the high-boiling point causing condensations in the sample line. A similar problem has been experienced by Leppard The above method recovers ⩾90% fuel carbon in cyclohexane oxidation and ⩾85% fuel carbon in methylcyclohexane oxidation. The missing part is likely from loss in the sample line and from uncounted formaldehyde. At low compression ratios, low temperature heat release (LTHR) is detected for cyclohexane and methylcyclohexane at intake temperatures of both 120 Overall reaction progress can be studied via fuel conversion and CO formation.  It is seen from Products from oxidation are divided into three groups according to elution order from GC. The first group contains C Product analysis is performed for cyclohexane oxidation with  Oxygenated species in The relative yields of the C The considerable formation of pentanal and acrolein is not directly explained by the paraffin oxidation mechanism. Silke et al. proposed alternative paths in degenerate branching, which forms a five-membered transition ring, to explain acrolein formation Product analysis for methylcyclohexane oxidation is performed with Variation of major products with compression ratio is shown in The conjugated olefins, 1-, 3-, 4-methylcyclohexene and methylenecyclohexane altogether, are again the dominant products in both the low temperature and the NTC regimes. The four methylcyclohexene isomers consist of all conjugated olefins with six-membered ring that can be formed by methylcyclohexane. 3-Methylcyclohexene is newly detected with the Restek VMS column and not reported in our previous results Over the range of compression ratio studied, relative yields of 1-, 3-, 4-methylcyclohexene and methylenecyclohexane are around 1, 1.2, 1.4, and 0.25, respectively, normalized by 1-methylcyclohexene. These ratios increase modestly from the starting compression ratio to CR of 10.7 where the peak species concentrations locate, then decrease as oxidation exits the NTC regime. Formation of 1,2-epoxy-1-methylcyclohexane likely takes a similar path to that forming 1,2-epoxycyclohexane in cyclohexane oxidation. Formation of 5-methyl-5-hexen-2-one can be explained by β-scission of the methylcyclohexylperoxy radical whose unpaired electron and peroxy group is on carbon 1 and 4, respectively, as shown in In this work controlled oxidation of cyclohexane and methylcyclohexane are studied in a motored engine at intake temperatures of 120 Fuel structure shows a strong effect on reaction activity and is more important than temperature. Cyclohexane shows a stronger negative temperature coefficient (NTC) behavior than methylcyclohexane. Conjugated olefins are the most abundant product in cyclohexane and methylcyclohexane oxidation in both low temperature oxidation and the NTC regime. Four C Four conjugated olefins, 1-, 3-, 4-methylcyclohexenes and methylenecyclohexane, are detected in methylcyclohexane oxidation, with the relative yield about 1, 1.2, 1.4 and 0.25, respectively. Reaction paths leading to these olefins are proposed. The authors thank the Department of Energy for support of project Grant DE-FC26-03NT41828. The authors also thank Daniel Strope, George Parks, Garry Gunter and Bradley Taylor of ConocoPhillips for their support of this work. The authors also wish to express deep gratitude to Dr. James Szybist of Oak Ridge National Laboratory for his substantial contributions to this work.