Discharging waste gangue from coarse iron ore prior to subsequent upgrading and purification is beneficial to decrease the energy consumption in the grinding stage. In this study, a dry density-based gravity separation technique was used to improve the quality of iron ore by discharging waste gangue. Mineralogical analysis results indicated that the major component of raw iron ore is hematite with small amounts of magnesioferrite and magnetite, and the elements included in the iron ore sample were Fe, Si, S, Mg, Al, and Ca, and the specific iron–compounds (Fe3O4, Fe2O3, and FeS2) were determined. High-density gas-atomized iron powder and low-density zircon sand with specific size fractions were validated for appropriateness for mixing in proportion as a binary dense media for the dry separation of coarse iron ore. A regulatory model of the bed density based on the composition of the binary dense media was proven efficient in predicting and adjusting the bed density for separating the coarse iron ore. The actual separation experiments of −31.5+6mm iron ore indicated that the concentrate yield and grade of 83.4% and 52.4%, respectively, were achieved with the highest Fe-recovery of 96.1% at a gas velocity of 6.37cm/s. The concentrate yield and grade of 63.7% and 52.7%, respectively, with the highest Fe-recovery of 73.0% were achieved at a static bed height of 80mm. Both the results suggested the satisfied separation performance. The fundamental investigation indicated that discharging waste gangue using the dry gravity separation prior to further upgrading coarse iron ore has substantial potential in industry.The conventional beneficiation approaches for iron ore mainly include magnetic separation, gravity separation, electrostatic separation, and several combined flowsheets [ Gravity separation is an alternative approach to improve the quality of ROM iron ore by discharging waste gangue. Conventional gravity separation techniques mainly involve dense medium separation and jigging separation for coarse iron ore, as well as spiral separation and centrifugal separation for fine iron ore. However, water shortage has become a global issue [ Despite some novel findings in the dry separation of lump mineral particles by using a gas–solid fluidized bed, a deep understanding is necessary on the mineralogical characteristics of the typical iron ore that influence the separation performance of the coarse iron ore particles. The application potential of upgrading the quality of iron ore by discharging waste gangue using the dry density-based gravity separation should be further determined and validated. Therefore, this work mainly focused on the mineralogical characterization of a typical iron ore, and the separation possibility of the coarse iron ore using the dry density-based gravity separation. The novelty of this work is that the mineralogical characterization of the typical iron ore sample was determined through combining various advanced techniques. Meanwhile, the separation possibility of the coarse iron ore using the dry density-based gravity separation was experimentally proved and validated. X-ray fluorescence spectrometer (XRF), X-ray diffraction (XRD), and energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS) were combined to perform the mineralogical analysis of the typical iron ore. The appropriate dense media for the dry separation of coarse iron ore were determined by investigating the particle size distribution, and the bulk density of dense media powders. Based on the compositions of the binary dense media, a regulatory model of the bed density was established and was proven efficient for predicting the variation and fluctuation of bed density. The actual dry separation experiments of −31.5 The typical iron ore from Xuzhou city, China was used as the studying object. The process of the sample preparation has been clarified in our previous work [ Four types of solid media, namely, reductive iron powder, water-atomized iron powder, gas-atomized iron powder, and zircon sand were preliminarily selected for the subsequent separation of iron ore. The major component of the reductive iron powder, water-atomized iron powder, gas-atomized iron powder was metallic iron, with iron contents exceeding 95%. Therefore, the specific gravity of these three types of solid media was approximately 7.8. Moreover, the specific gravity of the zircon sand was approximately 4.6–4.7. XRF was used to determine the chemical composition and major element contents of iron ore. XRD was used to ascertain the mineral composition of iron ore. EDS was used to investigate the liberation degree of the raw iron ore. A laboratory-scale experimental system based on a dense medium gas–solid fluidized bed was designed to perform the separation experiments for the coarse iron ore. The experimental system was successively composed of a compressed air fan, an air buffer, an air valve, a rotameter, a butterfly valve, a hood, an air distributor, an air chamber, a gas–solid fluidized bed separator, a pressure transducer, a data transmission and control device, a data receiver, and a dust collector, as illustrated in The mass, true density, and Fe-grade of 500 iron ore particles were measured, and the yield, mean density, and Fe-grade of all iron ore particles were recorded and summarized.   EDS analysis was conducted to study the degree of dissociation of raw iron ore and the disseminated degrees of iron-compounds and other gangues. The liberation degree of the iron-bearing grains, gangue phases and linked particles of the iron ore sample was obtained through EDS analysis. The main targeted elements of Fe, Si, S, Mg, Al, and Ca were measured by the line-scanning analysis, as shown in The results of EDS analysis provided fundamental information on the disseminated degree of the iron-compounds and other gangues, which is beneficial for determining the probability of discharging waste gangue using the gravity separation techniques. Based on above analysis results, the efficient discharge of the waste gangue is difficult to achieve by merely utilizing the physical separation technique (such as gravity separation) if the disseminations of iron-compounds and gangue are extremely fine or the elementary compositions of the Fe element in the raw iron ore are highly complex. Otherwise, the gravity separation technique can be used as an alternative approach to discharge the waste gangue from the raw iron ore prior to the grinding stage. The dense media utilized for the dry separation of coarse iron ore should satisfy the following characteristics: (1) easy recycling and purification; (2) steady property and low oxidation tendency; (3) broad source and easy preparation; (4) appropriate distributions of particle size and bulk density; and (5) sphericity and low viscosity after fluidization [ Normally, two types of dense media with specific particle size distributions and densities are mixed to form a binary dense media for the dry separation of coarse sized minerals using a gas–solid fluidized bed [ The measured bulk densities of the reductive iron powder, water-atomized iron powder, gas-atomized iron powder, and zircon sand are 2.71, 3.75, 4.47, and 2.48 The proportion of high-density gas-atomized iron powder in the binary dense media is crucial for the fluctuation of bed density. The fundamental fluidization tests of various-sized gas-atomized iron powder and zircon sand were reported in our previous work [ The volume expansion degree  Finally,   Therefore, the calculation equation of bed density can be simplified as Eq. In the actual separation experiments of the −31.5  As shown in As the gas velocity gradually increased, the bed expansion increased, thereby decreasing the bed density. Moreover, the apparent viscosity of the fluidized bed decreases, thereby improving the fluidity of medium powders and enhancing the bed activity. Therefore, the resistance of coarse iron ore particles in the bed decreased, leading to the increase in the settling velocity of iron ore particles. In this case, the high-density iron ore particles sank to the bed bottom as the iron concentrate, thereby improving the concentrate grade. However, when the gas velocity exceeded the limit, the bed became unstable because of the bubbling turbulence, which affected the density-based separation of coarse iron ore particles. Abundant low-grade iron ore particles may mix into the sinks and the high-grade iron ore particles may float to the bed surface, resulting in the decreased concentrate yield and grade and the recovery of the iron concentrate. Therefore, as clearly observed in The optimal separation performance of the coarse iron ore particles could be achieved at a gas velocity of 6.37 With the increase in static bed height, the bed resistance caused by the accumulation of the dense media increased, thereby resulting in an increased bed density. Therefore, the high-density coarse iron ore particles were more likely to float on the bed surface and reduce the concentrate. Moreover, the movement distance of the coarse iron ore particles sinking to the bed bottom increased due to the increased static bed height. The bed bubbling behavior exerted a notable influence on separation and decreased the separation efficiency. Therefore, the static bed height should be maintained within an appropriate variation range for the separation of coarse iron ore. For the laboratory-scale fluidized bed in this investigation, the optimal static bed height should be maintained within 80–100 Based on above analysis and discussion, it can be concluded that the final products mainly have a grade of 52–53%. Therefore, according to the Fe-grade requirement of the feed for iron making, the final products have again to be subjected it to the further beneficiation for being treated as a feed for iron making. As a result, discharging the waste gangue from run-of-mine iron ore using the dry gravity separation technology aims to provide the high-quality iron ore feed for the subsequent magnetic separation and flotation. This technique cannot substitute the necessary beneficiation stages of magnetic separation and flotation prior to the treatment of iron ore as a feed for iron making. The purpose of this technique is to provide a preliminary removing approach of waste gangue, which can efficiently decrease the energy consumption of the further grinding of iron ore by reducing the amount of iron ore feeding.  The combined analysis methods of XRF, XRD, and EDS were proved effective in the determination of the mineralogical composition. The major component of the iron ore sample is hematite with a dissemination size of approximately 200 High-density gas-atomized iron powder and low-density zircon sand with specific size fractions were validated for appropriateness for mixing in proportion as a binary dense media for the dry separation of coarse iron ore. A regulatory model of the bed density based on the composition of the binary dense media was proven efficient in predicting and adjusting the bed density for separating coarse iron ore. The actual separation experiments of −31.5 This work was supported by The