Pressure filtration offers the opportunity to produce solids (filter cake) that can be stacked or mixed with the coarse refuse, and water (filtrate) that can be recirculated in the plant. In this study, the bench-scale pressure filtration testing was performed to dewater coal refuse slurry, which was obtained from the thickener underflow stream of a coal preparation plant, and was being discharged into a slurry impoundment. A flexible fractional factorial design was developed to determine the effects of pressure, pH, and solids concentration on the performance of filtration, which was measured in terms of filtrate flux. The results indicated that the pH had a maximum effect on the filtrate flux followed by the pressure and solids concentration. Additionally, a linear regression model and an Artificial Neural Network (ANN) model were developed to predict the filtrate flux based on the test variables. Both models were able to fit the data well, with R2 values of 0.986 and 0.991 for the linear regression model and the ANN model respectively. It was also found that the test dataset had a mean squared error of 0.2 for the ANN model, while it was 3.99 for the regression model.Filtration is commonly used for dewatering across many industries such as biotechnology, chemical, food, brewing, ceramic, and mineral processing ( Since the failure of a coal slurry impoundment in Kentucky in 2000, where the dam failed and released about 300 In this study, an experimental design was developed to study the effects of applied pressure, slurry pH, and feed solids concentration on the filtration performance for dewatering of the thickener underflow slurry using a bench-scale unit. Meanwhile, the experimental data were then used to develop a linear regression model and an Artificial Neural Network (ANN) model. The coal slurry sample was obtained in twelve 5-gallon buckets from the thickener underflow of an operating bituminous coal cleaning facility in Pennsylvania, United States. To prepare the samples for the bench-scale testing, each 5-gallon bucket was circulated via a pump in a closed circuit, and sub-sampling was performed by collecting the slurry from the discharge line. These slurries were then used to determine the solids concentration, particle size distribution, ash values and sulfur contents of the samples. The slurry was dried overnight in a convection oven at approximately 100 The pressure filtration testing was performed using a bench-scale unit ( About 90  Preliminary tests were conducted to establish the operating ranges for each independent variable, and accordingly levels for each variable were fixed. It was observed that the pressure filtration was effective above 345 The two tests that were performed for reproducibility (Tests 14 and 15) provided similar results as shown in    The specific cake resistance, a measure of the amount of resistance offered by the cake to the flow of filtrate through it, was calculated for all the runs ( The effect of pH could be explained by a likely flocculation of solids at lower pH due to reduced surface charge of the particles. A point-of-zero-charge (PZC) at pH A multiple linear regression was performed on the experimental dataset to develop a relationship between the independent variable (filtrate flux) and the dependent variables (pressure, pH, and solids concentration). Since the experimental setup did not have a provision to control the flow of feed slurry, it was not possible to recover the filter cake independently from the feed slurry. Therefore, filtrate flux was modeled as the response variable instead of cake moisture. All first-order terms, square terms and interaction terms were considered for the model. The model, which had the minimum Akaike Information Criterion amongst all possible combinations, was chosen by an exhaustive search algorithm in software package R ( The An Artificial Neural Network (ANN) is a machine learning technique that is inspired by the natural information processing of the human brain. An ANN consists of a number of nodes called ‘neurons’ that are interconnected to each other by synapses. Each synapse carries a particular weight, which indicates the importance of the corresponding neuron. The incoming data to each neuron are integrated using an integration function and transformed using an activation function. An ANN typically has three layers – input layer, hidden layer, and output layer. Each neuron in the input and output layers corresponds to an input variable and an output variable, respectively. The hidden layer has neurons, which are connected to each input variable, and a constant neuron, called the bias neuron, which is not related to any input variable and is the equivalent of the intercept in a linear regression. A schematic of an ANN with two neurons in the input layer, three neurons in a hidden layer, and a neuron in the output layer is shown in The input and output data are entered into the ANN, and the network allocates initial weights randomly. ANNs are generally developed with two stages – training and testing. The dataset is typically randomly subdivided into two sections for training and testing, respectively. During the training of an ANN, the weights are optimized by the network until the mean squared error (MSE), the error between the network predicted output and the actual output, is minimum. The trained ANN is then tested using the test dataset. The input values of the test dataset are provided to the ANN and the predicted values from the network are compared against the actual output. ANNs have been used to study the performance of various mineral processing unit operations. For example, it was shown that ANNs were better than regression techniques for predicting the combustible recovery and quality of coal flotation concentrate using values from proximate analyses and group macerals analyses as inputs ( The ANN for predicting the filtrate flux using pH, pressure, and feed solids concentration as inputs was trained using a weight backtracking resilient back-propagating (RPROP) algorithm ( The dataset was subjected to pseudo randomization to be subdivided into training and testing subset in the ratio of 80:20. The architecture of the network was determined by calculating the sum of squares error (SSE) for all ANN models of one hidden layer with the number of neurons varying from 1 to 20. The minimum SSE was obtained with a 7 neuron network and hence a 3-7-1 network was developed. One hidden layer was deemed appropriate as a linear regression model was able to fit the data well indicating the absence of a strong non-linear trend. The developed ANN model, with an SSE of 0.007 and an R The training dataset was also provided to the regression model to compare the goodness of fit of each model. Similar comparisons have been made between regression and ANN models for predicting the grinding characteristics of chromite ores ( The test dataset was presented to both the regression model and the developed ANN to validate the model. It should be noted that the ANN model was never exposed to the test dataset during its training while the regression model was developed using the complete dataset, which included the test data points. The pseudo randomization algorithm in the formation of the test dataset had a constraint to include data points that were close to the minimum and maximum values of the dependent variable to ensure that the model was validated across the complete range of the dataset. Bench-scale pressure filtration testing was carried out using coal refuse slurry that was obtained from the thickener underflow of an operating bituminous coal preparation plant in the Appalachian basin of the United States. The sample had a solids concentration of 27.6% with an ash value of 52.0% and a sulfur value of 1.90% of which 1.17% was pyritic sulfur. About 40% of the material was < This study was sponsored in part by the