The effect of the plasticizer (butyl benzyl phthalate, BBP) addition on the corrosion resistance properties of paint films has been investigated by means of different electrochemical techniques (EIS and ac/dc/ac) and accelerated tests (salt fog spray). Primers based on epoxy resin were prepared with different plasticizer content (0, 1.5, 3, 5, 11, 16 and 25% in weight ratio to epoxy resin). An optimum quantity of plasticizer content (1.5–3%) was determined that gave the maximum anticorrosive performance of the epoxy primer. Results offered by each one of the techniques were quite similar and the ac/dc/ac one offered the results in a very short time (24h).Epoxy resins are used in the primers formulation because of their excellent toughness, adhesion, low permeability and chemical resistance. Liquid epoxy prepolymers are converted to thermoset materials through their oxirane group by means of a suitable hardener. The most widely used epoxy resin is based on bisphenol A and epichlorhydrin The coating formulation may also be enhanced by plasticizers, fillers and cure promoters which influence the cure reaction. Moreover the relative hardener to epoxy ratio or the nature and amount of plasticizer used may also affect the reactivity of the formulation of the final crosslinked polymer that will act as binder in the primer The primary role of a plasticizer in a coating, as the name indicates, is to reduce the rigidity of the polymer is used as binder to render it more flexible (it will improve the elastic coating deformability with mechanical stress). Also it may improve the processing of the product. The number of commercial plasticizers is extremely large and recourse to the experience of polymer manufacturers and plasticizers suppliers to obtain best results at minimum cost is recommended. Esters form the largest class and are of the aliphatic (alkyl) or aromatic (aryl) types. Phthalates are esters of difunctional phtalic acid; examples include di-2-ethyl hexyl phthalate (DOP), dibutyl phthalate (DBP), butyl benzyl phthalate (BBP), etc. In predicting material properties and durability, the main problem arises from the complexity of the total process of ageing. Due to this complexity many testing methods and material assessments were developed by using different exposure processes and techniques of measurement of properties. Principal types of exposure processes are: accelerated ageing tests and field exposure experiments (which must be planificated for long times and are very expensive to run). The measurements of properties can be electrochemical, mechanical, chemical, etc. Various electrochemical techniques have been used for evaluating the performance of organic coating/metal system. The application of electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) to coated metals has been shown to be a useful technique in the study of the corrosion performance of anticorrosive primers Therefore, there is still an explicit interest in rapid assessment methods for practical applications, which enable an early indication of corrosion processes in the surface of coated metallic substrates. Hollaender et al. The work presented here will concentrate on: (I) the evaluation of epoxy primers formulated at different plasticizer content, using different techniques in order to determine anticorrosion properties; (II) the development of an electrochemical test procedure (ac/dc/ac) which can be applied to coated metals and offers results in a short time; (III) the comparison of compare the different evaluation procedures applied to the coated metals in order to know whether the conclusions offered by each of them coincide. The primers were formulated using an epoxy resin based on Bisphenol A; an aliphatic amine type curing agent was added in the formulation and a tertiary amine was used as catalyst. The values of CPV used in this work were obtained by the procedures developed by Bierwagen Cold rolled low carbon steel normalized test panels were used in order to ensure uniform substrate surfaces for testing purposes. All test panels were degreased with acetone, and paints were deposited by means of a graduated spiral application bar for wet film thickness of 150 Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy tests were carried out on coated samples exposed to 3.5 The ac impedance data was obtained at the free corrosion potential using an AUTOLAB PSTAT 30 potentiostat and a frequency response analyzer. The impedance tests were carried out over a frequency range of 100 The equivalent circuit model, shown in Fitting the EIS data to the circuit determined the values of the equivalent circuit elements. The The ac/dc/ac procedure consists of a combination of dc and ac measurements. First, an ac test is applied to the sample under the same conditions as described above in EIS. This measurement allows the present state of the test sample to be determined. After the first ac measurement the test sample is treated by a constant cathodic current (−2 Experimental results obtained in EIS measurements are modelized using the equivalent circuit shown in The test applied to the primers consisted just in sample exposition to salt fog spray chamber in accordance with ASTM B117. Coated samples were previously scribed through the paint down to the bare metal. The scribe marks were made at right angles to form a Evaluation of samples was performed after different periods of time of exposure and consisted in the measurement of corrosion which is determined by measuring the distance between the center of the scribed line and the furthest points where the coating has been delaminated. It is generally assumed that the elements of the equivalent circuits are correlated to the corrosion properties of the system The pore resistance Some authors have found three regions in the time dependent decreases of  The polarization resistance  The fundamental molecular effect of a plasticizer is to interact on a molecular scale with the segments of the polymer to speed up the viscoelastic response of the polymer. Thus, a plasticizer increases the molecular mobility of the polymer chain. This increase in mobility produces a lowering of the glass transition temperatures ( On the other hand if the epoxy primer does not contain any plasticizer it will have a high value of rigidity and the adherence to the metallic substrate can be locally reduced because any stress application (curing process, thermic cycles, water absorption, corrosion products development in the metallic surface, service conditions, etc.), can produce coating delamination and cracks in some areas of the interface. In this way the plasticizers act reducing the rigidity of the coating film and avoiding the primer delamination due to stress processes, impacts, etc. As it can be seen plasticizer addition will have benefits and disadvantages over anticorrosion primer performance, so it can be expected the existence of an optimum value of plasticizer content that will give the best properties in the primer.   As the primers are formulated at higher plasticizer content than 3%, the formation of new paths for the electrolyte is easier and the primer/metal interface is more active with corrosion reactions taking place at the metallic surface and coating delamination occurs (there is an increase in   The cathodic polarization that is applied in the ac/dc/ac tests can cause in the primer: The introduction and pass through the paint film different cations (like H The cathodic reaction that takes place on the metallic surface considering the level of the negative potential and the type of electrolyte The deterioration of the coating can be caused then by one or both of the following processes: the formation of pores in the primer because of the pass of ions and principally electrolyte through the film, and a film delamination process at the interphase if the cathodic reaction of production of H When cathodic polarization is stopped, the coated metal potential can relax according to two different mechanisms: If the cathodic reactions were taking place, the potential will have first a rapid relaxation in the surroundings of −1 If not, there will be a unique relaxation process that corresponds to the exit of ions and electrolyte from the primer. The time relaxation will be longer the deeper ions and electrolyte have penetrated into the film. But this time will probably be shorter than in case where ions and electrolyte have passed through all the coating thickness.   A possible explanation of why primers without BBP allow cathodic reactions can be the existence of local coating delamination areas in the interface as a consequence of the high film rigidity. Primers containing 5, 11 and 16% of plasticizer present similar behavior to samples of 0 and 25% BBP as it can be seen in If the primer is formulated with BBP content up to 3%, there will be a big increase in the free volume As it can be seen a coating with high anticorrosive properties will be one that only presents one relaxation process after cathodic polarization (this means that cathodic reaction with hydrogen and OH  A number of epoxy primers have been formulated with different plasticizer contents (0, 1.5, 3, 5, 11, 16 and 25%) and were studied by means of electrochemical methods (EIS and ac/dc/ac) and salt fog spray tests. Primers quality results obtained with the three techniques were quite similar, although the ac/dc/ac test offered results in quite shorter times (1 day). The different results showed that for this type of epoxy coating the anticorrosion properties are enhanced when formulating with low plasticizer contents (1.5–3%) and significantly decrease when plasticizer addition was over 3% or when it was not. The potential relaxation process after cathodic polarization in the ac/dc/ac technique indicated that samples containing plasticizer in the interval of 1.5–3% did not degrade significantly with the test cycles and do not allow cathodic reaction at the metal surface. On the other hand, primers without plasticizer or with contents of it over 3%, deteriorate with the polarization cycles and allow the cathodic reaction which produced delamination. We would like to thank Ms. Eva Romero Sales, Mr. Ramón Novoa, Mr. Juan Carlos Galván and Mr. José Ortega for their help and collaboration in the development of this project. The authors are grateful for the economic support in this work of project CICYT MAT 2000-0123-P4-03.