Sequestration of carbon dioxide in unmineable coal seams is an option to reduce carbon dioxide emissions. It is well known that the interaction of carbon dioxide with unconfined coal induces swelling. This paper contributes three-dimensional strain distribution in confined coal at microstructural level using high-resolution X-ray computerized tomography data and image analysis. Swelling and compression/compaction of regions in the coal matrix occurs with CO2 uptake. Normal strain varies between −1.15% and 0.93%, −3.11% and 0.94%, −0.43% and 0.30% along x, y and z axes respectively. Volumetric strain varies between −4.25% and 1.25%. The positive strains reported are consistent with typical range for unconstrained swelling. However, the average volumetric strains value (−0.34%) reflect overall volume reduction. Overall swelling is apparently influenced by the confining stresses. The magnitudes of normal strains are heterogeneous and anisotropic. The swelling vs. compression/compaction observed after CO2 uptake is localized and likely lithotype dependant.The injection of carbon dioxide in deep unmineable coal seams for sequestration or enhanced coalbed methane recovery purposes has been studied. Worldwide estimates indicate that the storage capacity of unmineable coal seams for CO As part of the ongoing investigation on the sequestration of carbon dioxide (CO It has long been recognized that coal swells with sorption of solvents and gases ( The imbibition or dissolution of carbon dioxide, a powerful coal plasticizer, results in the physical structure relaxation and rearrangement ( The magnitude of the changes induced by any swelling or shrinkage and the related changes of stress depends on the coal rank, sorbate pressure, its composition ( Although surface strain characterization methods can provide bulk rock deformation values, the knowledge of local internal strain distribution and cleat closure/expansion behavior is poor. Generally, the relationship between microstructure and deformation is not possible with this method. This issue can be overcome using high-resolution X-ray computerized tomography (CT) imaging. In contrast to conventional radiography projection in which a two-dimensional projection of a three-dimensional object is made, computerized tomography reconstructs a volume representation from which a cross-sectional view of a selected transverse plane can be obtained. The CT imaging allows a quantitative map of the X-ray attenuation coefficient in any transverse plane to be reconstructed. The distribution of the X-ray attenuation coefficients allows the localization of specific features in the material. Following the displacement of these features throughout the volume permits the evaluation of strains at matrix level. This technique quantifies the microstructure deformation and its heterogeneous behavior. This paper presents an assessment of the three-dimensional local strain distribution induced in coal structure due to CO The evaluation of a local strain has been reported for materials using X-ray CT. In this study, a three-dimensional measurement of local strain distribution by tracking inherent discrete clusters of mineral particles has been determined for a confined coal core. These isolated volumes of high density material were located using commercial visualization software. Each isolated volume contains multiple voxels. CT analysis software was used to map and calculate the centroids of these clusters of points. Each cluster produced one fiducial. Fiducials were then compared between the scans before and after CO The sample was cut from 5.08 cm (2-inch) diameter of Pittsburgh #8 coal core using a corundum-blade circular saw. The cuts were made perpendicular to the bedding plane. The sample was stored under Argon gas in vacuum-sealed sample bags until the time of experiment to avoid oxidation and exposure to moisture. To allow transference of the confining stress, the sample was surrounded by silica beads within a heat-shrink Teflon jacket. The attenuation of stress by the beads was assumed negligible. The annular space within the vessel was filled and pressurized with water to simulate confining stress on the coal core. Once packed, the sample was evacuated within the system by applying a vacuum of under 100 µm of Hg for 48 h. This technique removes any weakly-bonded water molecules as well as any free water while maintaining the integrity of the sample as is consistent in other volumetric experiments. Experiment was conducted subjecting the sample to the confining pressure of 3.8 MPa (550 psig). The gas pressure was 2.9 MPa (430 psig). Sorption capacity after 56 days of injection was 0.34 mmol CO The sample subjected to confining pressure was analyzed using high-resolution X-ray CT technology. Two scans of the sample were taken on the sample: (1) packed and subjected to confining pressure before exposed to CO The CT scans were viewed and analyzed using commercial software. After volume rendering of the sample, the coordinates of each fiducial in the two sets of scan were located. It is a difficult and time-consuming process; it is not easy to find a corresponding fiducial from CT volumes before and after deformation due to heterogeneous displacement of fiducials and existence of image noise and artifacts arisen from CT scanning condition. Tetrahedrons, whose vertex is constituted by tracked fiducials, were constructed. The general local strain distribution measured using the feature tracking method is qualitatively what would be expected from a softened-compressed material. The interaction of CO  From   The results from the uniaxial testing undertaken by Feature tracking method for three-dimensional strain calculations has been successfully adapted to quantify the deformation of coal structure during CO values vary between − values vary between − values vary between − values vary between − An average strain values of − The authors are grateful to Dr. Derek Elsworth for his advices and comments during the preparation of this manuscript. Dr. Tim Ryan is thanked for his assistance during image analysis. The translation in any direction can be calculated as the difference between the location of the fiducial position initially and its location after CO The state of the displacement of a point is defined by three directional displacement components The displacement of a node has three components The displacements within an element have to be uniquely defined by the three linear polynomials as described by The twelve constants From which The value of represents the volume of the tetrahedron. By expanding the other relevant determinants into their co-factors we have: With the other constant defined by cyclic interchange of the subscripts in the order Strains were calculated using Lagrangian description defined by Eqs. The volumetric strain was defined as: The procedure was repeated for the entire strain elements (tetrahedrons) in the volume, yielding local strain values that allows the characterization of the coal core in three dimensions.