Intergranular corrosion is induced after a single step pickling in HF electrolyte while not in HCl. The depth of intergranular corrosion obtained from a multi-step pickling is dependent on the successive sequence and duration of the two electrolytes used. Intergranular corrosion is deepened with increasing immersion time in HF.Pickling of stainless steels includes successive mechanical, electrochemical and chemical operations used to remove oxide scales and chromium-depleted layer that formed at high temperatures A mechanical descaling is used to break up and disrupt the oxide scales, and to enhance the subsequent pickling Single and multiple step procedures were used in pickling 304 stainless steel, and a surface finish free of oxide scales was achieved Stainless steel strips (type AISI 304, thickness of 2.8 mm) were provided by the UGINE & ALZ Belgium NV (Genk, Belgium). The chemical composition of the stainless steel is listed in The stainless steel strips were cut into test samples of 25 High purity chemicals and deionised water were used to prepare the HCl and HF electrolytes. HCl electrolyte contained 5.50 M acid and 1.61 M iron ions, while HF electrolyte contained 1.00 M acid and 1.07 M iron ions. Immersion tests were carried out at 55 °C in the set-up shown elsewhere The surface finish was characterised with scanning electron microscopy (SEM Phillips XL30 FEG). An iron film of 20 μm was electrodeposited on the samples to avoid any edge degradation during metallographic preparation of the cross-sections. The iron-plated samples were mounted in resin, polished down to no. 2400 emery paper followed by a 1 μm diamond paste finish. To reveal any intergranular corrosion and austenite grains, the polished samples were etched for 40 s in 20 g picric acid added to 100 ml HCl. HCl and HF electrolytes were used in pickling. The weight loss after pickling was detailed elsewhere The weight loss resulting from a multi-step pickling in HCl followed by HF is nearly the same as the one resulting from a multi-step pickling in which the successive sequence of immersion in the two electrolytes is altered keeping the immersion time in the respective electrolytes identical. However, the surface finish obtained from multi-step pickling is greatly affected by the pickling sequence Representative cross-sections of pickled samples are presented in The depth of intergranular corrosion at the surface of stainless steel after pickling in different successive sequence of the two electrolytes for different durations, is presented in Pickling of stainless steels proceeds in three steps. These are transport of the electrolyte to the metal surface through the oxide scale film, oxidation and dissolution of the chromium-depleted layer, and removal of the oxide scales by undercutting The oxidation of the chromium-depleted layer is of great significance for a successful pickling. Metallic elements in the chromium-depleted layer are oxidised to bivalent ions that readily dissolve in pickling electrolytes. The dissolution of stainless steel is uniform in HCl and selective in HF. As a result, intergranular corrosion is induced in HF, while not in HCl. According to the previous results and discussion, the evolution of surface finish of stainless steel during multi-step pickling in HF followed by HCl can be described ( The evolution of surface finish of stainless steel after pickling in HCl followed by a pickling in HF is schematically shown in The following conclusions can be drawn from this study: Intergranular corrosion is induced after a single step pickling in HF electrolyte while not in HCl, since pickling is uniform in HCl and selective to metal depleted in chromium in HF. The depth of intergranular corrosion obtained from a multi-step pickling is dependent on the successive sequence and duration of HCl and HF electrolytes used. The intergranular corrosion becomes deeper with extending pickling in HF, while remaining the total immersion duration in the two electrolytes identical. The UGINE & ALZ Belgium NV (Genk, Belgium) is gratefully acknowledged for the financial support and the fruitful discussion on lab and field test results.