Gas outburst is a serious disaster in deep mining. In this paper, we first study the effect of water content on gas outburst, and found that increasing the water content of coal can significantly reduce the elastic modulus and uniaxial compressive strength, which is beneficial in reducing the peak stress concentration in the roadway and pushing the peak stress deeper. We also found that by increasing the water content of the coal seam, the firmness coefficient increases, while the initial speed of gas diffusion decreases simultaneously. Increasing the water content of the coal seam can also change the Langmuir adsorption constant of coal, reduce the a value of the limit adsorption capacity, increase the b value of the adsorption capacity, and reduce the amount of desorption gas in the coal. These studies indicate that increasing the water content of coal can significantly reduce the risk of gas outbursts.
                  To increase the water injection volume, the technology of promoting coal seam infusion by blasting has been proposed. Blasting promotes equilibrium distribution in the stress field and generate new fractures, which promotes the water injection. In the 8th coal mine in the Pingdingshan coal field, the test results indicate that after loosening blasting, the water injection of a single borehole increased by an average of 54.6 times under the injection pressure of 3–7 MPa. The water content of coal is improved significantly, and the prediction index value of the gas outburst is reduced significantly. This technology is important for gas control in similar coal mines.Coal remains the primary energy source across the world. In the deep underground, when the in-situ stress and gas pressure are large enough, gas outbursts tend to occur, causing plenty of coal and gas to be thrown onto the roadway or working surface in a short time, which may result in the loss of life and property To prevent gas outbursts, one of the primary technology is pre-drainage of coalbed methane in the borehole area Current water-related gas disaster management measures include coal seam infusion by deep-hole, hydraulic fracturing In this paper, we firstly study the mechanism of water inhibiting the gas outburst risk, and then the technology of blasting promote coal seam infusion is proposed. The field experiment was performed in the 8th coal mine in the Pingdingshan coal field. Blasting in boreholes can significantly increase the cracks in coal seams and promote the water injection. The increase of water content in coal seam effectively reduces the risk of gas outburst and the predicted value of gas outburst risk decreases significantly. The ability of coal to resist fragmentation, the speed of gas emission and the ability of gas adsorption are the important influencing factors of gas outburst. It is generally believed that increasing the water content of coal can reduce the risk of coal and gas outburst The coal samples were made into specimens with a diameter of 50 mm and a height of 100 mm. After that, the samples were divided into four groups: the first group was dried in an incubator at 40 °C until the weight does not change, and the water content is assumed to be 0%; the other three groups were immersed in distilled water for different times to produce coal samples with water content of about 1%, 2% and 2.5%, respectively. Water content was measured by weighting method. Then the uniaxial pressure test was used to test the stress–strain curve and uniaxial compressive strength of the specimens affected by water content. The firmness coefficient ( The Step 1 is to prepare coal samples. Coal blocks with a diameter of 100 mm and a total weight of about 10 kg are collected and sealed with plastic bags from the 8th coal mine. Soft and hard coal are collected separately. Smash the coal blocks to coal particle samples with the size of 1–3 mm. Step 2 is to change the water content of coal samples. Saturate the samples in distilled water for one week using the vacuum water saturation instrument. Prepare five different types of soft coal and hard coal samples with different water contents in a drying box by controlling the drying time. There are altogether 10 types of coal samples. The water content of coal samples ranges from 0.5% to 4.5%. Each type of coal sample is 250 g, divided into five parts, each 50 g, for five repeated tests. Step 3 is to test the The Step 4. Repeat step 3 and test the The initial speed of gas diffusion ( (1) The coal sample was cased into a coal-sample tank and retained at adsorption equilibrium with pure CH A large number of pores with a large surface area exist in coal; therefore, coal is a natural adsorbent. As a type of adsorbate, the relationship between the adsorption amount and pressure of gas is related to the Langmuir equation at the constant temperature The larger the adsorption constant The coal samples for the determination of adsorption constant are identical to those for the determination of The uniaxial compression stress–strain curves of coal with different water contents are shown in As shown in The dissolution of water. When water enters the coal mass, it dissolves soluble salts and hydrolyzes colloid minerals. Hence, water and glue connects together, reducing the connection between particles and decreasing the sample strength The lubrication of water. Under the action of water, coal samples are more easily deformed, resulting in larger deformation under the same stress. The wedge effect of water. Under the external loads, when water enters the fractured pores of coal and rock mass, it will produce a pore pressure. The greater the water content, the more obvious is the water wedge fracture effect on the pore fissure. Thus, the strength of coal rock decreases and the deformation increases. With the increase in the coal water content, the compressive strength of coal mass decreases and its corresponding variable increases. If we use roadway tunneling as an example, it allows for the coal in front of the roadway to be destroyed easier. The bearing capacity of the coal is reduced and the peak stress in front of the roadway will be transferred to the deep part to achieve a new equilibrium. Therefore, water injection in the coal seam not only causes the stress peak to become lower, but it also transfers the peak stress to the deep, which significantly reduces the gas outburst risk. Through the test steps, we found that the The greater the moisture content, the greater is the From the test method of When the water content of the coal samples is 0.5–2.5%, The influence of water content on the adsorption constants With the increase in water content, the limit adsorption quantity of gas decreases and the gas adsorption capacity increases. The reason for this phenomenon is that the combination of partial free water and combined water with the coal surface occupies a certain number of adsorption spaces on the coal surface, thus reducing the effective area of methane adsorption accordingly. Therefore, the amount of methane adsorption decreases with increasing water content. In addition, a small amount of water molecules competes with the methane molecules in the gaseous form, thus resulting in a lower The gas content of coal seam before water injection is certain. After water injection, due to the increase of water injection, the limit adsorption capacity decreases. Some of the gas in the adsorption state will become free state, which will inevitably increase the gas pressure inside the coal seam, and the gas pressure gradient will promote the gas flow inside the coal seam. Therefore, coal seam infusion can displace gas, and the higher the water content, the lower the gas content in coal seam. The analyses above indicate that increasing the water content of coal can significantly change the mechanical properties of coal, enhance the plasticity of coal, and inhibit the release and desorption of gas. It is beneficial to prevent coal and gas outburst. During water injection, a high pressure water-injection pump was not used to increase the pressure of water injection in the coal seam. A high-pressure water injection may retain the residual high-pressure water in the coal seam, and a local stress concentration appears that may induce coal and gas outburst accidents In the 8th coal mine in the Pingdingshan coal field (see Through the water injection test in ordinary boreholes, when no cracks appear in the borehole, it is difficult to use low-pressure water to inject water into the coal seam. To improve the water content of the coal seam, we propose the technology of increasing coal fracture and promote coal seam infusion through loosening blasting (see Loosening blasting can form a uniform fracture around the borehole, thus causing the seam to form a fracture ring. The spatial location of fracture expansion after blasting can also be characterized as the influence area after water injection. Therefore, the scope of fracture expansion in coal seam after blasting was first tested. The experimental scheme is as follows ( Drill nine inspection boreholes and one blasting borehole (see Next, pack 2.64 kg of explosives in the #1 blasting hole and detonate it after sealing the borehole. The diameter of the emulsion explosive roll is 38 mm and the total length is 2.64 m. The emulsion explosive roll is located in the middle of the coal seam. The gas concentration in different inspection boreholes was tested before and after loosening blasting, and the influence range of the blasting was determined by comparing the change characteristics of gas concentration. When the gas concentration increases by more than 25% on the first day after the loose blasting, and the attenuation amplitude is small on the second day after the loose blasting, it can be considered as being in the influence range of the loose blasting. The gas concentration of the inspection boreholes was examined several times before blasting. Subsequently, the mean value of the gas concentration was calculated. The change law of the gas concentration in the boreholes was examined for two consecutive days after blasting; subsequently, the mean value was calculated. The results are illustrated in As shown in Two ordinary water injection boreholes, numbered #1’ and #2’, are located 20 m and 30 m away from the right side of the #1 blasting borehole, respectively. We injected water into them directly without loosening blasting. Five blasting boreholes, numbered from #2 to #6, were arranged on the left side of the #1 borehole, and the distance between the #1 and #2 boreholes is 12 m. The adjacent distance of other blasting boreholes is 7 m, and the experimental length is 70 m. The arrangement sketch is presented in All boreholes were drilled from the E Since #1 borehole has been blasted in the course of testing the influence range of blasting, we started with #2 borehole and carried out blasting and water injection for all blasting boreholes in turn. Taking #2 borehole as an example, the operation process is introduced. The #2 borehole was filled with 2.64 kg of emulsified explosive, subsequently, we performed the blasting operation after sealing. After blasting, a drilling rig was used to drill the borehole again along the #2 blasting borehole. After that, we sealed the borehole within 15 m of the borehole opening and injected water into the borehole. The injection pressure was between 3 and 7 MPa, and the water injection pressure gage and the flow meter were used to record the water injection pressure and water volume. Then, blasting and water injection operations were carried out in the boreholes from #3 to #6 according to the sequence of #2 boreholes. The final injection volume after blasting is shown in  This section focuses on the change characteristics of water content in the coal seam after blasting and water infusion. During the excavation of the E As shown in The loosening blasting and water injection of the coal seam can fully increase the moisture content of the coal mass and can result in local stress concentration reduction, which will reduce the risk of gas outburst. Predicting the gas outburst risk by testing the  The risk of coal and gas outburst was affected by the comprehensive influence of the in-situ stress, gas pressure, and coal strength. With the deepening of mine exploitation, the danger of gas outburst will become more severe. Recently, researchers worldwide have focused on intelligent technical mining solutions considering less underground labor. However, the effective prevention of gas outburst accidents is necessary to ensure future coal mine safety and development. The current research indicated that by increasing the water content of coal, the risk of gas outburst could be reduced significantly. The technology proposed by loosening blasting to promote water injection in coal seams and increase the moisture content of coal mass have become a new technical method for preventing and controlling gas outbursts. The In this context, many advantages were found in the present study. The influence of water content on the mechanical properties, and desorption and adsorption capacity of coal were studied experimentally. It was found that increasing the water content of the coal mass could significantly reduce both the elastic modulus and uniaxial compressive strength, and increase the plastic deformation capacity. Increasing the water content of the coal mass could increase its firmness coefficient and reduce the initial speed of gas diffusion. To improve the anti-comminution ability, the gas diffusion rate could be reduced. Coal moisture could also affect the Langmuir desorption constant, in which the limit adsorption quantity of gas decreased, while the adsorption capacity increased, thus causing decreased desorbable gas content. All these issues indicated that increasing the water content of coal could reduce the risk of gas outbursts significantly. We proposed the method of increasing the fracture around the borehole by loosening blasting to improve the water injection. The blasting shock wave generated by loosening blasting was beneficial in improving the fracture around the borehole. The new fractures could also guarantee uniform water injection in the coal seam. The blasting was completed in a short time, the shock wave performed more uniform work on the coal surrounding the borehole, and the fractures generated around the boreholes were more balanced. Therefore, if we used water injection after blasting, the water content of the coal around the borehole was relatively uniform. The tests in the 8th coal mine in the Pingdingshan coal field indicated that the injection volume after blasting was 54.6 times larger than that of the original boreholes. Field experiment of water injection to prevent gas outburst was carried out in the 8th coal mine in the Pingdingshan coal field. The gas emission concentration of boreholes within the scope of blasting hole of 7 m was improved significantly. Subsequently, a row of blasting water injection boreholes through the center of the pre-excavation roadway was constructed. In the process of coal roadway excavation, the water content and outburst danger were measured. The water content in the coal seam increased significantly, and the initial velocity of gas emission from borehole and amount of drill cuttings decreased significantly. Overall, the results indicated that the coal seam infusion strengthened by loosening blasting prevented gas outburst accidents significantly. This work was supported by the