Historically, phlogopite and olivine have been mined in the Silver City Dome District in Kansas, USA, from lamproite ultra-potassic igneous rock for use as a supplement in cattle feed. Micro-Lite LLC is now evaluating processing techniques for recovery of phlogopite to be used for reinforcement in plastics, high temperature applications, and electrical insulators, which requires a higher grade phlogopite product. To determine the purity of the processed ore, QEMSCAN® was utilised to identify and quantify phlogopite and impurities, including olivine, pyroxenes, feldspars, titanium phases (mainly titanite and perovskite), apatite, magnetite, chromite, and other phases. Samples were prepared and analysed in a manner to decrease or eliminate preferred orientation of phlogopite to provide accurate quantitative results. The results show that the flotation product has a higher concentration of phlogopite at 87% (by mass), compared to 78% in the hydrosizer product. The main impurity phase in both products is olivine (10% in the flotation product and 18% in the hydrosizer product). In the hydrosizer product, 15% of the sample consists of liberated phlogopite particles, while in the flotation product 58% of the sample occurs as pure, liberated phlogopite particles.Industrial minerals are important in a multitude of applications. Phlogopite is an industrial mineral that is mined for use in various applications, mainly because of its beneficial chemical and physical properties, such as outstanding electrical properties, temperature resistance, and UV light absorption. These properties make it a useful resource for many practical applications, including high temperature insulation, reinforcement for high-density polyethylene and polypropylene plastics, electrical insulation, natural lubricant, and additives in cosmetics. This paper covers the findings of a quantitative mineralogical study performed on two products from a pilot plant, initiated by Micro-Lite LLC, to extract a pure phlogopite product from a lamproite deposit in Kansas, USA, for use in such industrial applications, to gain an understanding of any processing issues present in the pilot plant. The Silver City Dome District is located in the Osage Cuestas near the Chautauqua Hills in Woodson County, south-eastern Kansas, USA ( The Silver City Dome lamproite mainly consists of anhedral olivine (∼75%), which may be partially or completely altered, and euhedral to subhedral reddish-brown phlogopite (up to 20%). Minor constituents (typically <5%) of the lamproite are diopside, K-richterite, rutile, apatite, perovskite, and spinel group minerals, which also make up the fine-grained groundmass (determined by optical microscopy). Silver City obtained its name in the late 1800s when the shiny flakes of mica in the lamproite were mistakenly identified as silver, creating a short period of mining activity. Although no silver is present, the area has been mined on and off over the years. From 1961, the lamproite was mined for use in industrial applications. Since 1982, Micro-Lite LLC has been mining approximately 70,000 In 2005, tests were initiated by Micro-Lite LLC to extract the phlogopite from the lamproite for use in industrial applications. The testing resulted in the construction of a pilot plant utilising hydrosizer and flotation separation methods, to concentrate the coarse and fine phlogopite, respectively. The mineral processing in this pilot plant consists of the following steps: firstly the raw ore is reduced in size using a ball mill. The milled ore is then separated into a fine and coarse product using a hydrosizer. The coarse product consists of large phlogopite flakes, up to a few millimetres in size, and is the first end-product (the “hydrosizer product” analysed in this study). The fine hydrosizer product is fed into an attrition scrubber to remove clay from the ore. The cleaned product goes into the flotation process where phlogopite is floated. The resulting flotation product is the final product, which was also analysed in this case study ( To determine the purity of the two final products from the pilot plant, Micro-Lite LLC had several mineralogical studies conducted. These included stereo microscopy, X-ray diffraction (XRD), and manual scanning electron microscopy–energy dispersive spectroscopy (SEM–EDS). None of these techniques, however, proved satisfactory with respect to the specific aim of this study: stereo microscopy was manual, subjective, time consuming, and did not take into account locked particles containing both olivine and phlogopite; XRD has numerous peak overlaps for olivine and phlogopite; and SEM–EDS was capable of conducting elemental maps, but was inadequate for quantifying the various phases for a large amount of sample. This current mineralogical study was initiated to quantify the amount of phlogopite in the hydrosizer and flotation products using QEMSCAN QEMSCAN Each sample was split to obtain a representative aliquot, graphite was added to disperse particles, create random orientation and minimise density-induced particle segregation or settling. The samples were mounted into an epoxy approximately 5 More than 3600 particles (corresponding to over 3.7 million measurement points (pixels)) were analysed by QEMSCAN The quantitative mineralogy for the coarse hydrosizer product and the final flotation product is given in Average particle and mineral grain sizes have been calculated from the QEMSCAN The hydrosizer product represents the coarse product from the hydrosizer process, while the flotation product is derived from the fine product of hydrosizing (through attrition scrubbing and flotation) and is thus finer (see Apart from obtaining the quantitative modal mineralogy of the hydrosizer and flotation products, the QEMSCAN The phlogopite particles that contain impurity phases can be divided into different groups, based on which mineral phase, or combination of mineral phases, they contain. These mineral association categories of phlogopite are displayed in Phlogopite is a mineral belonging to the mica group, which are sheet (or phyllo) silicates. They have a platy morphology and perfect basal cleavage ( In order to determine the occurrence of preferred orientation of the phlogopite flakes in the sample blocks used in this project, an additional study was conducted on the two original replicate blocks of both samples. One of these two replicate blocks was cut into perpendicular and oblique sections, which were subsequently mounted in epoxy, ground, polished, and carbon-coated and then analysed by QEMSCAN Chemical assay data was not available for the two products in this case study, and could thus not be compared to the calculated chemical assay derived from the modal mineralogy data obtained from the analysis of the four different sections. The modal mineralogy of the different sections is, therefore, compared to one another. The quantitative mineralogy results from the analysis of the four different sections for both products are displayed in These results can be used as an indication only, because of the smaller sample area measured for the perpendicular and oblique sections, and especially the shortest section C. Thus, the variation between sections C and D is probably primarily caused by the smaller sample size (fewer measurement points) measured in these sections (as well as in section E) compared to that in sections A and B; B being the second replicate block with the same section as section A. Because sections C and D are both perpendicular sections to the original section, and parallel to each other, one would expect them to have similar phlogopite orientations.  In order to classify and quantify the orientation of the phlogopite particles in the different sections, five particle shape categories were created in the iDiscover™ software, based on the five crystal section types as defined in The particle section shape distributions ( In this study, QEMSCAN The results show that the flotation product, which is derived from the fine fraction after hydrosizing by scrubbing and flotation, has a higher concentration of phlogopite at 87% than the hydrosizer product, which represents the coarse fraction after hydrosizing, at 78%. The main impurity phase in both products is olivine, with 18% in the hydrosizer product and 10% in the flotation product. The remaining 3–4% consists of impurities, including orthopyroxene, clinopyroxene, titanium-bearing phases (predominantly titanite and perovskite), apatite, feldspars, quartz, magnetite, chromite, sulphides and carbonates. These impurities predominantly occur locked with phlogopite, although 1% of the hydrosizer sample and 2% of the flotation sample are free impurity-phase particles (not containing any phlogopite). Both products contain a considerable amount of pure, liberated phlogopite particles, although lower (15%) in the hydrosizer product and much higher (58%) in the finer flotation product. A high percentage of non-liberated phlogopite-bearing particles occur as binary or complex particles with olivine being the major impurity. Thus the finer phlogopite, concentrated in the flotation product, has a higher degree of liberation than the coarser phlogopite, extracted as the coarse fraction in the hydrosizer. In order to better determine the pilot plant efficiency and provide suggestions for improvement of the phlogopite product, additional hydrosizer feed, flotation feed and flotation tailings samples should be analysed to obtain a balanced picture of the effects of the mineral processing circuit on the ore. The additional study investigating the orientation of phlogopite particles within the epoxy-mounted sample blocks obtained quantitative mineralogy results on the four different sections of each product, which were fairly similar, with slightly more variation between the sections of the hydrosizer product. The phlogopite particle shapes and orientation within each section clearly show that the original basal section contains some platy-shaped phlogopite particles, while these are virtually absent in the perpendicular and oblique sections, in which thin elongated phlogopite shapes dominate. Further investigation of the occurrence of preferred orientation of phlogopite crystals in epoxy-mounted sample blocks and its effects on the modal mineralogy obtained with a 2-dimensional surface analysis technique, should be to obtain chemical assay information of the samples and compare this data to the calculated chemical assay based on the modal mineralogy obtained from analysing the different sections of the sample block. The sample particles in the epoxy-mounted blocks used in this study consisted of only several millimetres of the thickness of the mount (this is standard operating procedure to reduce density separation with depth). The basal section, with a diameter of 30 QEMSCAN The authors wish to extend their thanks to Esben Kjaer, Struers @ Intellection, for his advice and instruction on sample preparation techniques for preferred orientation samples, Dr. Alan Butcher and Dr. Hanna Horsch, Intellection Pty Ltd, for and mineralogical advice their for reviewing the paper, and to Intellection Pty Ltd, for their contribution of QEMSCAN