The iron ore deposit of the Northern State of Sudan, at Wadi Halfa, is a huge deposit, but is low in grade. It assays 36% Fe and 48% silica. The present study is an attempt to investigate the amenability of this newly discovered ore for upgrading. Based on the appreciable differences in specific gravity and magnetic susceptibility between the desired iron minerals and the gangue minerals, it was suggested that gravity separation and/or magnetic separation may be useful to concentrate this type of low-grade ore. As a result of the fine dissemination of the iron minerals and the most abundant gangue mineral, quartz, the optimum degree of grind is around 150μm. Using two-stage separation, roughing and cleaning, it was possible to obtain a high grade concentrate assaying about 64% Fe at a recovery of 72%.With increasing global demand of iron ores due to the huge requirement of steel all over the world, important iron ore producing countries have increased their production by initiating steps to utilize the low-grade iron ores, fines, and slimes. Upgrading these low-grade ores is becoming an attractive proposition today. The most commonly used beneficiation methods for iron ores are the gravity and magnetic separation techniques. Gravity separation is widely used in mineral beneficiation practices for its low-cost, ease of operation and easy to control, and eco-friendly nature. They are based on the differential settling velocities of the constituting particle of the ore. Upgrading iron ores by jigging has been an emerging trend ( The iron ore deposit of Wadi Halfa is located on both sides of Nasser Lake. The ore reserves are estimated to be about 400–800 Wadi Halfa iron ore, is a low-grade iron ore. The iron minerals occur as a mixture of goethite and hematite in an oolitic pisolitic texture. The existence of the suitable infra-structure favors exploiting the mineral resources in the area. It is worth mentioning that the Wadi Halfa iron ore deposit was discovered recently by the Geological Research Authority of Sudan ( A composite sample of about 200 Using X-Ray Diffraction analysis, it was found that the ore consisted of goethite, hematite, quartz, calcite, kaolin, and feldspar. The main gangue mineral was quartz. Under the optical microscope, it was observed that the iron minerals and quartz are finely disseminated. The head sample assayed about 36% Fe and 48% SiO A laboratory shaking table of 50 Effects of two important operating parameters of the shaking table, feed size range and table tilt, were investigated. The following summarizes the obtained results. The assay of the concentrate obtained using the coarse size fraction is not significantly different from that of the feed. The assay of the concentrate as well as the metal recovery continued to increase as the feed size gets finer. The assay increased from 37.4% Fe to 44.9% Fe at an iron recovery of 81.2% Fe when the feed size fraction was − The tilt angle was varied between 3° and 8°. The optimum tilt angle was 5°. At 3° table inclination, large amount of middling particles are driven towards the concentration end of the table, which increased the recovery (90.1%) and had an adverse effect on the grade of the concentrate (41.1% Fe). At higher tilt angle, 8°, large amounts of the iron-bearing particles was washed towards the tailing section of the table, resulting in the iron recovery as low as 66.0%. The optimum parameter values for using the shaking table as a roughing stage are: feed size of − Three parameters affecting the performance of the high intensity magnetic separator, feed size fraction, magnetic field intensity, and drum rotating speed, were investigated. The effect of each of these operating parameters is discussed in the following paragraphs. This series of experiments was carried out at current intensity of 0.3 The current intensity to the coil is an indication of the magnetic field intensity, as the current increases the field intensity increases. The range of the current variation in the magnetic separator which was used is from 0.1 to 0.5 The assay of the concentrate decreases with increasing the magnetic field intensity. This result is due to the degree of selectivity as a function of the field intensity. The optimum result was obtained at a current intensity of 0.3 The drum rotational speed was varied from 60 to 220 The above results show that the conditions under which the optimum concentrate was obtained, using the HIMS, are: feed particle size of − However, the concentrate assay under optimum operating conditions is low, 44.9% Fe, at a recovery of 81.2% in the case of the gravity separation and 42.4%Fe, at a recovery of 86.3% in the case of the magnetic separation. These results suggest that a cleaning stage of the concentrate obtained from the first stage, gravity or magnetic separation, may improve the assay of the final product. The rougher concentrates obtained from the shaking table as well as the magnetic separator were subjected, separately, to a second stage of separation using the high intensity magnetic separator. The magnetic separator was set at the optimum operating values obtained in the first stage, 0.3 The low-grade iron ore sample obtained from Wadi Halfa iron ore deposit, North of Sudan, was characterized mineralogically and chemically. The major mineral constituents were hydrated iron oxides and quartz. The average iron assay was about 36% Fe, and the silica content was about 48% SiO