Herein, we report a simple and effective preparation of ultrafine CNFs (u-CNFs) with high surface area via electrospinning of two immiscible polymers [polyacrylonitrile (PAN) and poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA)] followed by calcination at high temperature in an inert atmosphere. Various electrospinning conditions were optimized in detail. Four different kinds of PAN/PMMA ratios (10/0, 7:3, 5:5 and 3:7) were chosen and found that the PAN/PMMA ratio of 3:7 (PAN/PMMA-3:7) is the optimum one. BET analysis showed the specific surface area of the u-CNFs-3:7 was 467.57 m2/g with an excellent pore volume (1.15 cm3 g−1) and an average pore size (9.48 nm): it is about 25 times higher than the conventional CNFs (c-CNFs). TEM and FE-SEM images confirmed the ultrafine structure of the CNFs with a thinner fiber diameter of ~50 nm. The graphitic nature and atomic arrangement of the u-CNFs were investigated by Raman and XPS analyses. For the supercapacitor application, unlike the common electrode preparation methods, the u-CNFs-3:7 was used without any activation, chemical or mechanical modifications. The u-CNFs-3:7 showed a better specific capacitance of 86 F/g in 1 mol/L H2SO4 when compared to pure CNFs. The excellent physicochemical properties make the u-CNFs-3:7 an alternative choice to the existing CNFs for the supercapacitors.Energy shortage is now becoming a serious global problem due to the dramatic climate change Although a number of methods have been reported for produced nanofibers (NFs), the electrospinning is a well-known, simple and powerful technique for the preparation of functional nanofibers (NFs) including CNFs with nano to sub-micrometer diameters Polyacrylonitrile (PAN Mw: 150,000) and poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA Mw: 120,000) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Surface tension meter (CBVP-Z, Kyowa Interface Science) and optical microscope (VH-5500, KEYENCE) were used to measure the surface tension of polymer blend solutions and to observe the modality of the solutions, respectively. The viscosity of the polymer blends was evaluated by using Rheometer (DV-I, Brookfield. Co., USA). Morphology and cross-sectional microstructure of the NFs samples were investigated by field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM, S-5000, Hitachi) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM, 2010FasTEM, JEOL, Japan). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS; AXIS-ULTRADLD, Shimadzu) and Raman spectrometer (Hololab 5000, Kaiser Optical Systems, Inc., Ann Arbor, MI, USA) were recorded to study the chemical state of the molecules presented in the CNFs. For Raman analysis, Ar laser was operated at 532 nm with a Kaiser holographic edge filter. The specific surface area was evaluated using the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) method (BELSORP-max, BEL Japan, Inc.). Fourier Transform Infrared (FT-IR) spectra were recorded on an IRPrestige-21, Shimadzu, Japan. The electrochemical studies were carried out in Versastat-4 potentiostat at a scan rate ranging from 5 mV/s to 100 mV/s. For electrospinning, a high-voltage power supply (Har-100*12, Matsusada Co., Tokyo, Japan), capable of generating voltages up to 100 kV, was used as the source of the electric field to produce the NFs web. Electrospun PAN/PMMA solutions having four different mixing ratios (10:0, 7:3, 5:5, 3:7) with various mass fractions (from 8 wt% to 22 wt%) were prepared by dissolving PAN and PMMA in DMF. Note that the wt% of the polymer blends is with respect to the PAN. The PAN with 10 wt% was used as a standard. To obtain a better dispersion of PAN and PMMA, all the PAN/PMMA solutions were ultrasonicated for 2 h followed by stirring at 60 °C for 2 h. The suitably prepared PAN/PMMA solutions were electrospun under an electric field of 9 kV at a tip-to-collector distance of 15 cm. A metallic Cu wire was used as an anode, and a cathode was attached to a rotating metallic collector (RMC). The RMC was wrapped with aluminum foil and used as a collector for the nanofibers. For more details, see Fig. S1 in the Supplementary Information (SI). Then the resultant electrospun nanofibers were stabilized using a conventional muffle furnace at 300 °C with the heating rate of 1 °C/min for 1 h in the atmosphere of air. The optical images of PAN/PMMA nanofibers before and after stabilization are shown in Fig. S2 (see the SI). Subsequently, the stabilized nanofibers were carbonized under nitrogen atmosphere at 900 °C with heating rate of 5 °C/min for 1 h. The schematic illustration for the preparation of The CNFs and Four main reasons for choosing the PAN and PMMA as precursors for the preparation Initially, various parameters such as surface-tension ( Based on the optimization results, three PAN/PMMA blend ratios [7:3 (14 wt%), 5:5 (16 wt%), and 3:7 (20 wt%)] were chosen for further investigations. To understand the phase separation between PAN and PMMA, the microscope photos were taken for the PAN/PMMA solutions with different blend ratios (7:3, 5:5 and 3:7) ( Polymer blends with different PAN/PMMA ratios (10:0, 7:3, 5:5, and 3:7) were electrospun followed by two-step thermal treatment to fabricate the  The morphology of the CNFs, CNFs-7:3, CNFs-5:5 and Apart from the morphology, surface area and porosity, the nature and arrangement of the atoms presented in the CNFs are very important for the supercapacitor applications. Particularly, the carbon materials with nitrogen- and oxygen-containing functional groups have played a vital role in energy applications. Hence, the graphitic nature and atomic arrangement of CNFs, CNFs-7:3, CNFs-5:5 and The most advantageous feature of the prepared  After the complete characterization, the We succeeded in fabricating the ultrafine CNFs This study was supported by a research fund of Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following is the supplementary data to this article: