Nanocrystalline Cu12 at% Al alloy was synthesized by high energy ball milling under cryogenic condition. The alloy was then annealed up to 900 °C (or 0.87 Tm). Phase and microstructural evaluation were carried out by X-ray diffraction (XRD), transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and the mechanical property was investigated by microhardness testing. Results show that at elevated temperatures grain growth of Cu 12 at% Al alloy is much less than pure Cu prepared under same condition. The microhardness of the alloy decreases from 2.91 GPa to 2.73 GPa (∼6% decrease) after annealing at 900 °C. Superior thermal stability at high temperature was ascribed to the grain boundary pinning by nano-scale intermetallic particles. Kinetically stabilized grain size and hardness show good agreement with theoretical predictions.Nanocrystalline (nc) metals and alloys (grain size <100 nm) have garnered attention for practical applications due to the unique property combinations unattainable in their coarse-grained state In the present work thermal stabilization of Cu by Al addition has been assessed and the experimentally determined results were verified with the theoretically predicted one, for a comprehensive understanding of the micromechanical phenomenon of strengthening. The starting materials used were elemental powders of pure Cu (Alfa Aesar, 99.9%) and Al (Cerac, 99.95%). These elemental powders, in determined quantity (say Cu-12 at. % Al), were loaded into 440 stainless steel milling container (Spex Sample Prep, Metuchen, NJ). Milling of the powder blend was carried out with Grade 25, 440 stainless steel balls (Salem Specialty Ball) with a ball to powder ratio of 10:1. A combination of 0.3125 inch diameter (number 17) and 0.250 inch diameter (number 16) ball was used for milling. The entire loading operation was performed in an argon atmosphere (O Constituent phases of both cryomilled and annealed powders were evaluated by X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns. XRD patterns were collected by RigakuDMax/A X-ray diffractometer using Cu Kα radiation (λ = 0.154051 nm). Scans were performed from 20 to 100° (2θ range). In order to minimize the background noise and removal of Kα Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was carried out by JEOL JEM 2000FX using beam energy of 200 keV. TEM samples were prepared by uniaxially pressing the powders at room temperature under 2.6 GPa pressure within a 3 mm tungsten carbide die. The compacts were then mechanically thinned and electropolished by 30 vol % nitric acid and methanol at −20 °C by Tenupol-2 electropolisher. Vickers microhardness (BuehlerMicromet II hardness tester, 25 g load and dwell time 12s) of powder compact was measured for each annealing condition as well as for milled powder. For each indentation, the ratio of particle diameter-to-indent depth was always greater than 10:1. At least 10 indentations were made for each condition. Data obtained from each test condition were averaged out to get average hardness value and corresponding standard deviation was taken into account for comparison.   The variation of Scherrer grain size (calculated from XRD peak broadening) with isochronal annealing temperature has been shown in The microstructure was examined in a similar manner after annealing. The BF-TEM image of annealed sample ( The variation of hardness with respect to the isochronal annealing temperature is shown in In the present work grain growth and mechanical property of binary nc Cu 12 at% Al alloy was investigated as a function of annealing temperature and compared with pure nc Cu prepared under similar condition. The TEM investigation has shown precipitation of intermetallic phases occurs during annealing. Similar solid state dissociation of MAed single phase solid solution has been reported previously for Cu The grain size (d) and precipitate radius (r) values can be obtained from TEM images. For estimating average grain size and precipitate size, 150 grains and 50 precipitates were taken into account. The average grain size and precipitate size of the 700 °C annealed sample was calculated to be ∼23 nm and 2.73 nm respectively. Using Eq. Based on the sources, the total hardness (H) value can be divided into contributions from solid solution (H Following Labusch Using the grain size obtained from TEM images (23 nm) and considering σ Previous research work suggests that kinetic stabilization nc Cu can be achieved by the finite addition of immiscible large sized solutes e.g. W The main conclusions of the present research work are as follows: Single phase nanostructured Cu 12 at% Al has been successfully produced by cryomilling. The XRD pattern, change in the lattice parameter (3.6495 nm after 8 h cryomilling in comparison to 3.6144 nm of pure Cu) and the SAED pattern of the milled powder confirm the complete solid solution of Al in Cu in the as-milled condition. Precipitation of nanoscale Cu-Al intermetallic phases (mainly CuAl Hall-Petch grain size strengthening has been found dominant in the annealed alloy along with minor contributions from Orowan and solid solution strengthening.