The molecular interaction volume model (MIVM) is used to predict the formation enthalpies of Bi–Cd–Ga–In–Sn–Zn and Bi–Cd–Ga–In–Pb–Sn–Zn liquid alloys, using only the infinitely dilute enthalpies of binary systems and the coordination numbers of the constituent elements in liquid alloys. In addition, the infinitely dilute enthalpies of binary system were obtained by Miedema's theory without requiring experimental data. The results are compared with the experimental data and calculated values using the Hoch–Arpshofen model (HAM), the results indicate that the model is reliable as well as being convenient.The knowledge of the formation enthalpies of multicomponent alloys is important for providing important thermodynamic information in materials science and metallurgical engineering. A great deal of binary data has been so far compiled as monographs for example Hultgren et al. In a preceding paper According to MIVM In order to determine the required binary parameters The parameters The partial molar formation enthalpy of component It is shown that the values of The Miedema model is partly based on the Wigner–Seitz atomic cell theory for pure metals, this is applicable to a very large number of alloys The HAM was deduced from physical principles and is applicable to multicomponent systems For a multicomponent solution ( The values of  From For Ga–Pb sub-system of the Bi–Cd–Ga–In–Pb–Sn–Zn system, For comparing with experimental data, the average relative error is given by From the calculated results above it can be clearly seen that the present calculations using the MIVM are in overall agreement with experimental data, due to the accuracy of the experimental technique and the thermodynamic data of the sub-systems. The model will bring certain errors during prediction, the reason for this may arise from the predictions of correspond binary systems that will impact multicomponent systems, especially asymmetry systems. In addition, for multicomponent systems, only the binary interaction between atoms is considered and the multicomponent systems atomic interactions between the constituents are neglected when the MIVM extends to multicomponent alloy systems. On the other hand, if the strong interaction between unlike atoms and the physical properties of elements involved in alloy systems, the applicability of MIVM is not as good. Using the properties of pure components and boundary binary systems of multicomponent liquid alloys, the formation enthalpies of multicomponent liquid alloys can be predict using the MIVM on the whole composition range. It therefore avoids empirical fitting for the pair potential energy interaction parameters. The results obtained have been compared to the experimental data and the results using HAM. The present calculations show that the model is reliable and convenient because it has a clear physical picture. This research work is supported by the Fund of National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No. 50764006, the Applied Fundamental Research Foundation of Yunnan Province under Grant Nos. 2006E0021M and 2007E039M.