Thin film, Sn, Cu–Sn and Sn–Zr–(O) anodes for microbatteries are deposited on a copper substrate by radio frequency (rf)-magnetron sputtering at room temperature. Charge–discharge characteristics are compared. It appears that the alloying of Sn with Cu or Zr improves the cycling performance. The best cycling efficiency is obtained when Sn is alloyed with Zr. The effects of alloying elements on the electrochemical properties on the thin film are discussed.Tin oxide and tin-based composite oxide electrodes have been studied The research groups of Huggins and coworkers Thin-film electrodes were prepared by depositing Sn, SnCu For electrochemical measurements, coin-type test cells were constructed using the film electrodes in 2016 coin cell hardware. The cells used a separator, an electrolyte (1 The surface microstructure of the electrodes was observed by means of scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and X-ray diffraction (XRD) was used to examine the structure of the films. The composition analysis for as deposited films was carried out by Rutherford backscattering spectroscopy (RBS). The first charge–discharge curves of a tin, thin-film (70 The cycling characteristics of tin thin films as a function of film thickness are presented in It has been suggested The discharge capacity versus cycle number of Cu–Sn thin-film electrodes is presented in Electron micrographs for the SnCu The comparison between the values of the enthalpy of formation (Δ The first charge–discharge curve for the SnZr The differential capacity versus voltage plots for the 100th, 200th and 560th cycles of the film electrode (1200 Finally, the present results illustrate that the alloying of tin with an inactive element such as zirconium can enhance significantly the electrode performance. In order to optimise the desired property, however, the composition and microstructure of the thin film need to be further controlled. It has been shown that alloy composite films, prepared through co-sputtering tin and inactive elements (copper, zirconium), improve, the cycling stability of electrodes. Especially, it is suggested that tin films alloyed with zirconium can be strong candidates for thin-film rechargeable battery anodes. These results are consistent with the concept for composite electrodes proposed by the research group of Huggins This work was supported by the Korean Ministry of Science and Technology through the research programme for “National Research Laboratory.”