Mineral bioflotation encompasses the principles and methods used in mineral flotation using microorganisms as flotation reagents. This work deals with the fundamental aspects of apatite and quartz flotation using Rhodococcus opacus bacteria as a bioreagent. Each mineral sample was conditioning with the bacterial suspension in a rotary shaker under specific conditions as particle size, biomass concentration, pH solution and conditioning time, for all the studies done during the research. The zeta potential results showed a change in zeta potential measurements of the minerals after the bacterial interaction. This change was more significant in the zeta potential curves of apatite than those for quartz. The results also suggest that the bacterial adhesion onto the mineral surfaces was predominantly specific. The greatest apatite flotability achieved 90% at pH around 5, in the presence of 150mgL−1 of bacteria after 5min of flotation. On the other hand, quartz achieved a flotability of 14% under identical experimental conditions. The fundamental flotation studies revealed the prospect that R. opacus presents as a biocollector and biofrother and indicate its promising application in phosphate flotation industry.Phosphate rocks are vital nonrenewable resources and are essential components in agricultural fertilizers and phosphorous-based chemicals. In Brazil, about 85% of the phosphate produced is consumed in the fertilizer industry. Phosphate deposits can be divided into three groups: sedimentary, igneous and biogenetic deposits ( In recent years, mining industry has been facing several problems that influence the mineral processing, such as the depletion of high-grade ore ( One of the most important steps in mineral bioflotation is the adhesion of the microorganism onto the mineral surface ( The literature review shows that the use of bioreagents in mineral processing is still in the early stages. In order to have a better understanding of the fundamental aspects of mineral bioflotation, it is required to significantly increase the research related to the electrophoretic behavior of minerals/bacteria systems, thermodynamic adhesion of different bioreagents onto mineral surface and bioflotation kinetics to name a few. The Brazilian igneous phosphate deposits are associated with several gangue minerals, particularly quartz, magnetite, carbonates and silicates ( Pure apatite and quartz mineral samples were used in this study. Pure apatite sample was provided by the Centre for Mineral Technology (CETEM) and pure quartz sample was provided by a local supplier (  Zeta potential measurements for The contact angle measurements were carried out through a Goniometer Ramé–Hart using the captive bubble method. A mineral crystal was carefully cut (dimensions at The surface tension measurements were performed using the ring method in a Kruss K10 digital tensiometer with an accuracy of ±0.1 The microflotation evaluation was carried out in a modified Hallimond tube. An amount of 1.0 The bacterial suspension sample was centrifuged at 3000 This study deals with the changes in electrophoretic patterns of mineral samples after interactions with  The zeta potential profile of apatite and quartz can also be seen at  The observed shift in potential zeta values of both minerals, after the interaction with  The effect of pH on the surface tension of biomass suspensions is shown in However, a little controversy is found in the literature, according to  After the bacterial interaction on mineral surface, it was observed, for both minerals, an increase in contact angle measurements, presenting a highest change at a pH value around 5, demonstrating a larger hydrophobic character at this pH. Moreover, a higher hydrophobic behavior was verified on apatite surface due to its higher contact angle value (around 45°) in comparison with the value presented for quartz (around 20°). Furthermore, at others pH values, insignificant increases were observed. The improvements observed in the measurements of minerals contact angle after the interaction with the biomass could be related to a bacterial cells adhesion and/or metabolic products interactions onto the mineral surface. Likewise, the contact angle measurements showed a higher adhesion of the biomass at apatite surface than at quartz surface, demonstrating a preferential adhesion of the The flotability studies were performed to evaluate the potential of using It can be observed, for both minerals, that the highest flotability was attained at pH values around 5 and using 0.15 Despite observing a high influence of pH and biomass concentration on the flotability of both minerals, a strong affinity between apatite particles and microbial cells was highlighted.  Additionally,  In the case of  As mentioned before, the application of this bioreagent in phosphate rocks processing will depend on the flotation behavior of each mineral present in the ore. Other mineral presents in phosphate ores is calcite. Calcite flotation using the The zeta potential evaluation of the mineral particles before and after the The authors acknowledge CNPq (Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico), VALE, CAPES (Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior) and FAPERJ (Fundação Carlos Chagas Filho de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado do Rio de Janeiro) for the financial support.