This study presents the energy and environmental performance assessment of producing magnesium hydroxide (Mg(OH)2) from Mg–silicates for CO2 mineral sequestration applied to a natural gas combined cycle (NGCC) power plant. Mg(OH)2 produced via a closed loop reaction of serpentinite and ammonium sulfate (AS), precipitation of Mg(OH)2 and AS looping/recovery binds CO2 into a thermodynamically stable, environmentally benign and leak-free magnesium carbonate (MgCO3). We used results from laboratory, modeling and life cycle assessment (LCA) studies to determine the extent to which magnesium (Mg) from serpentinite rock can be converted to Mg(OH)2, the effects of reaction parameters, scalability and the associated life cycle greenhouse gas emissions (GHGs). We found that reaction temperature positively affects Mg extraction from serpentinite, reaching a maximum yield at different temperatures depending on the reaction time. Also, the reactor properties affect the extraction results as the optimal extraction yield and conditions reported for different reactors differ. While the process of producing Mg(OH)2 is promising, it also possesses a level of energy and environmental burden that cannot be ignored when considering large scale implementation. At 100% conversion and recovery of reagent, the CO2 mineralization process has a life cycle global warming potential (GWP) of 433kg CO2 equivalents per ton CO2 (CO2e/t-CO2). This value increases by 82, 7 and 0.4kg CO2e/t-CO2 for every %-point efficiency loss of AS recovery, Mg(OH)2 production and Mg(OH)2 carbonation respectively. Mineral sequestration applied to the 555MW NGCC plant reduces its net plant efficiency from 50.2% to 38.6%-points (an energy penalty of 30%) but avoids 51% of the GHG emissions to the atmosphere. The results from this study are timely, and could have significant implications on mineral sequestration methods that consider the exothermic nature of the overall mineral carbonation chemistry beneficial.CO CO We present here a proof-of-concept and feasibility assessment based on results from optimized laboratory tests, and a systematic evaluation study of environmental performance of producing Mg(OH) To what extent do identified parameters influence production of Mg(OH) How can scale-up from laboratory to pilot scale be achieved? Here, we expanded on our understanding of process scalability by performing tests with a bench scale equipment, exploring the role of mixing. What are the life cycle energy and environmental impacts of producing Mg(OH) Possible options to improve the process efficiency as well as reduce the process greenhouse gas emissions (GHGs) footprint are suggested. We present here the methods applied to the laboratory studies of producing Mg(OH) Mg(OH) After separating the residue, mainly silica from the mixture by filtration, 25 The processing of the serpentinite rock entailed pulverizing, separating into particle size fractions (<74 Three types of reactors: an aluminum foil cup ( Questions related to effects of reaction parameters on the extraction reaction were addressed by performing tests with On the other hand, a bench scale rotary reactor ( This life cycle study aims at assessing the life cycle energy balance and global warming impacts of producing Mg(OH) The system boundary ( Data for serpentinite mining, pulverization and hauling were extracted from The process data for material and energy/exergy requirements of producing Mg(OH) This LCI model assumes that the NGCC plant supplies heat and power to all the processes (rock mining and natural gas exploration activities, CO The capture unit recovers 90% of the CO An NGCC power plant without CO Given that mitigating climate change through GHG emissions reduction is the main goal of CO Experimental results from tests performed with For both Mg and Fe extraction, an increase in both reaction time and temperature, from 30 On the other hand, there is a significant improvement (averaging 17%-points increase) on Mg extraction if the reaction time increased from 30 By implication, the results provide a basis for exploring trade-offs between the reaction temperatures and the residence times, and subsequently operating versus equipment costs. With a heat source below 480 Extending the reaction time from 1 An important question posed by the results from The effect of the type and configuration of the reactor was also observed, most plausibly affected by the rate of heat up of the reactor and its contents. At reaction times <30 The The decline in Mg extraction above 480  The measured temperature inside the reactor was less than that of the set point temperature by an average of 15 A surprising Fe extraction trend was observed, similar to that observed in  The life cycle inventory data for mineral sequestration of CO Emissions from upstream NG production and processing are predominantly fugitive methane emissions (0.014 The Mg(OH) The exergy input requirements for process heating in producing Mg(OH) At 100% Mg(OH) Uncertainties exist in the data because of unclear and unspecified system boundaries and allocation methods. The LCI model also included GHG emissions from lorry transport of make-up AS and MEA reagents over 200 AS can also be obtained as by-products of flue gas scrubbing with ammonia, requiring ∼3.9 The impact of achieving varying conversions in producing and carbonating Mg(OH) There is no energy penalty from Mg not extracted because the reaction enthalpies of the unreacted serpentinite and AS were not expended. However, an additional amount of electric power is consumed in crystallizing the unreacted AS as part of its recovery. Up to 733 MEA solvent degradation was assumed to be 1.5 Compression power was estimated at 0.12 Application of CO The NETL study The reference NGCC power plant (with no CO After capturing 90% CO While CO Given the accessible amounts of Mg–silicate minerals, there is essentially no concern of running out of mineral supplies even if many of these plants operate at same time. However, it would not be realistic to think that a single technology is sufficient to reduce CO We presented in this paper a performance assessment of producing Mg(OH) Results obtained using different reactors show that the reactor properties affect the extraction results; for example, the “optimal” extraction yield and conditions for The production of Mg(OH) This work was supported by the Academy of Finland program “Sustainable Energy” (2008–2011). Further support came from KH Renlund Foundation (2007–2009). Financial support from Åbo Akademi University’s Graduate School for Chemical Engineering (GSCE) is also acknowledged. Professors David W. Keith and David Layzell of the Institute for Sustainable Energy, Environment and Economy, University of Calgary, Canada are acknowledged for their support. The properties of the three types of reactors and their heaters used for the Mg extraction reaction are presented in See See AS reagent can be produced from SOx scrubbing of flue gas with ammonia according to the following reactions: Exergy analysis, based on the Second Law of Thermodynamics) allows for calculating the maximum power or useful work that can be produced from a given energy form (see e.g., For given environmental conditions (here, The chemical exergy of a substance gives its exergy with respect to a reference environment, i.e. the lowest exergy level in nature. Standard chemical exergies, For the assessment of the exergy destruction or unavoidable losses, Δ