The lime is a typical material for the building industry. The grinding of such material is connected with the hundreds of years of human experience. However, present activities using lime as the sorption material for exhalations show that the knowledge of the lime grinding process is very poor. Several methods as classical sedimentation, the remains on the 90- and 63-μm sieves, BET, CILAS diffraction, SEM photographs and the microstructure relieves were used to reply the question: “Where are hidden all the enormous energy requirements of the pre-grinding, the ball mills and the separators in the lime hydrate grinding circuits, when the material with its complicated micro-structure before and after grinding seems to be nearly the same?” The paper marks the basic technology outlook for the lime hydrate sorption surface enlargement.The lime hydrate processing dates back to the prehistoric communities of mankind, when our ancestors found strange white slimy matter instead of some stones near their fireplaces after rainfalls. The burned limestone, also milled to the finer flour to obtain “fine lime” and the “airy lime“ products which is more advantageous for the subsequent hydration, has really accompanied mankind's civil activities long raw of centuries already. The up-to-date term “lime hydrate” means the lime hydrate product of the minimum stechiometric adding water oversupply process—the dry, light, for transport relatively expedient product of the guaranteed quality which is applicable on the building sites immediately—without the problematic “extinguishing” period. The all-form world lime production exceeds the 10 The lime hydrate production is kept along the well-known equations: The lime hydrate quality control is kept under the civil industry building materials hydrate nomenclature. The quality control laboratories check the fineness of the material (in Czech nomenclatures CSN 72 2240 and 44 “Lime fine hydrate“ or “very fine“ in their I and II purity classes, with their rests on the 0.2-mm sieve of 8% or 2%, respectively, and the rest on the 0.09-mm sieve of 8% max. for the “very fine” sort), the sedimentation and keep some special mechanical tests. One of the most progressive applications of lime hydrate offers the pollution sorption mainly (  When we take the crystalline calcite as the limestone raw material example for the lime hydrate production, the forming process of the structure is as follows: rhomboedric form of calcite in the burning process (1) of the basic dimension of the elementary lattice The structure of production quality of lime hydrate can be evaluated from the SEM photograph (input of the ball mill, the sample point no. “6” of Grain-size measurements (CILAS laser and ZetaSizer) show that the ball mill lime hydrate material input is formed by several discontinuous grain-size strips of shares from the units of nanometers up to the firm agglomerates of the mm's level! The surface-specific areas (Micromeritics ASAP) are in the range of 17–21 m Moreover, with regard to the wide range of the grain-size representation of the particle diameters in the product which overhangs six rules (!), these changes do not refer to the ability to change the medium diameter of the material before and after the process of grinding and separation! As to the changes of surface-specific areas of the product, the situation is even more complicated: The fine strips of the hydrate have often got smaller surface-specific areas than the coarser ones! For example, the material of the input surface-specific area 20.3 m As long as this reality is compared to the standard Rittinger's “surface” grinding theory that may be expressed by the relation: We have obtained the rich experimental material of our tests of the selected parameters of the lime hydrate grinding, which has been still waiting in grate amount to the full evaluation. Even if the evaluation is not finished yet, it should be nowadays unmistakable established the existing lime hydrate grinding technology which has been designed in order of civil industry utilization has got a number of question marks for the area of the sorption applications: Is the sorption surface of lime hydrate practically not changing by the very high-powered process of grinding in the ball mill grinding circuits? The basic structure of the material is in the submicron area—it means far out of the effectiveness of the used classification circuits! Has the quality control of the product on the sieves 200, or 90, or 63 μm, respectively, used in the hydrate production lines of value? Any sorption tests in the lime hydrate production lines quality control laboratories are not common. If the attendance of the larger particles or agglomerates does not have any influence on the sorption quality of hydrate, is it of sense to separate some certain fractionations for the sorption market? The supervisory sedimentation method used in the common practice of quality control in production plant monitors the existence finest-grained shares of hydrate only. The gels quickly formed round about hydrate particles spoil the long-time spending method of measurement result interpretation remarkably. Has the measurement method any foundation? The ball mill mode of grinding of its questionable non-stable ratio of tangential and normal forces begets the pack effect in the essential portion of material with the entire closure of it for the sorption processes desirable for pore material structure. Does the very substantial specific mechanical energy exposure causes the desirable surfaces activation of hydrate in the ball mill grinding process? Why the grinding circuits of the many hundreds cubic meters dimensions, many tens metric ton weight category of the own mill, hundreds kW of install input, and the price of 1 million of monetary value frequently should be used for the sorption purpose lime hydrate projects? Where are the production technology possibilities for the enlargement of sorption surfaces of lime hydrate? We can try to lay down: The changes in hydration conditions of lime seam to be sure, but more expensive way to obtain the suitable crystalline changes of the lime hydrate sorption surface enlargements. There are several calcium hydroxide products of a larger specific surface on the world market (the surface-specific area even more than 50 m The changes in the grinding and separation process are another way to the lime hydrate sorption surface enlargements. Is it the cheaper but limited way? We have tried some high share press forces grinding systems which work with a larger air oversupply (AFG 50 Alpine, the cage mill of Gebr. Pfeiffer and the acoustical SEPTU mill). We reached up to the 32-m The detail comparison of all the above lime hydrate sorption surface enlargement grinding tests results will be the subject of our next paper.