In this study the critical parameters directing osteogenic differentiation of umbilical cord blood-derived mesenchymal stem cells (UCB-MSCs) were investigated, key factors and conditions identified and improved protocols for a more cell-type adapted differentiation developed. Today only little information about the specific conditions directing osteogenic development is available and current protocols for cultivation and differentiation of UCB-MSCs are based mainly on experience with bone marrow-derived MSCs (BM-MSCs) without further adaptation. Thus, protocols for improved osteoinduction are of particular interest.
                  The goal of this study was to investigate the influence of three different culture media (A) alpha MEM, 15% FBS, (B) DMEM, 15% FBS and (C) MSCGM, 10% SingleQuot growth supplement on the osteogenic differentiation of UCB-MSCs. Moreover, a systematic analysis of two concentrations of dexamethasone (10−8
                     M/10−7
                     M) in combination with or without BMP-2 (10−7
                     M) was carried out by detecting the expression of alkaline phosphatase (ALP), collagen-1 and the mineralization of ECM.
                  We found that MSCGM, 10% SingleQuot had a supportive effect on the osteogenic differentiation of UCB-MSCs. In case of treatment with 10−8
                     M dexamethasone, mineralization occurred in combination with BMP-2 exclusively, while a concentration of 10−7
                     M dexamethasone led to a high amount of mineralized ECM and the expression of collagen-1 independent of BMP-2 addition. According to this data dexamethasone is the leading osteoinductive factor, but BMP-2 seems to have supportive properties in UCB-MSCs. In conclusion, MSCGM supplemented with 10% SingleQuot and 10−7
                     M dexamethasone was the condition identified to be best for inducing the osteogenic differentiation of UCB-MSCs.Due to their self renewal capacity and potential of multipotent differentiation, adult stem cells are promising candidates for use in cell-based therapies and tissue engineering. Stem cells exist in various tissues of the adult organism where they play an essential role in tissue repair and regeneration processes. The best characterized adult stem cells are the mesenchymal stem cells isolated from bone marrow (BM-MSCs), alternatively named bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs). This population of non-hematopoietic cells was first isolated by Friedenstein in 1968 and has been reported to have the potential to replicate and differentiate into osteogenic precursor cells. Thereafter, a large number of investigators reported on additional differentiation lineages of BM-MSCs e.g. into osteoblasts, chondrocytes, adipocytes, tendon and stromal cells ( The bone marrow is a common source of stem cells, but isolation of BM-MSCs requires surgical procedures associated with risks, including infection ( The umbilical cord is a postnatal organ discarded after birth; hence umbilical cord blood (UCB) is readily accessible particularly regarding an excess of one million births per year. UCB is a high class source of hematopoietic stem cells, since those isolated cells show a reduced risk of acute graft-versus-host disease after transplantation ( Today, only little information is available on the specific conditions necessary to direct the osteogenic development of UCB-MSCs and current protocols for cultivation and differentiation of UCB-MSCs are mainly based on earlier experiments with BM-MSCs. As the UCB-MSCs have the potential to become an important future stem cell source for basic research as well as clinical application, protocols for an improved osteoinduction of UCB-MSCs are of particular interest. To better understand the differentiation processes in UCB-MSCs and improve osteoinduction Culture slides were obtained from BD Falcon (Erembodegem, Belgium). All other cell culture materials were purchased from Greiner Bio-one GmbH (Frickenhausen, Germany). Phosphate buffered saline (PBS), alpha MEM (without desoxyribonucleotides or ribonucleotides, with GlutaMAX), DMEM (low glucose, with GlutaMAX), penicillin/streptomycin, trypsin/EDTA solution and goat serum were obtained from Gibco (Invitrogen Karlsruhe, Germany). FBS was purchased from PAA Laboratories GmbH (Pasching, Austria). MSCGM Bullet kit (#PT3001) including MSCGM culture medium and SingleQuot growth supplement were obtained from Lonza (Basel, Switzerland). BMP-2 was purchased from ImmunoTools GmbH (Friesoythe, Germany) and Vectashield mounting medium was obtained from Vector (Burlington, Canada). The primary antibody anti-collagen Type 1, clone Col-1 was purchased from Sigma Aldrich (mouse IgG1, #C2456, Hamburg, Germany) and the secondary antibody Alexa Fluor dye 568, was from Invitrogen (goat anti mouse, #A11031, Karlsruhe, Germany). The leukocyte alkaline phosphatase (ALP) staining kit (#86) and all other chemicals were obtained from Sigma Aldrich (Hamburg,Germany). UCB-MSCs were kindly provided by Dr. Bieback, Institute of Transfusion Medicine and Immunology, Mannheim, Germany. The isolation procedure was approved by an institutional ethical review committee after the informed consent of the donor. UCB-MSCs obtained from two donors were used for the experiment. UCB-MSCs were cultured at 37 To determine the influence of different cell culture media compositions on the osteogenic differentiation of UCB-MSCs, three different preparations of growth media were tested, namely (A) alpha MEM, 15% FCS, 50 For histological staining, cells were fixed with 4% PBS-buffered formalin for 15 The assay for expression of the alkaline phosphatase (ALP) in UCB-MSCs was conducted immediately after fixation, using the leukocyte alkaline phosphatase staining kit. The cell layer was washed with dH The mineral deposition in the bone-specific extracellular matrix was determined by von Kossa staining of calcium. In brief, the cells were washed two times with dH Cells were fixed with ice cold methanol for 15 The mineralization was quantified using image processing according to the percentage of area of a culture well which was positive after von Kossa staining. The dark von Kossa positive areas of multichannel microscopic images (RGB images) were segmented by the thresholding method cell^P software (Olympus GmbH, Hamburg, Germany). Afterwards the percentage of the segmented areas was determined using the same software. From a total surface of 3.9 UBC-MSCs maintained in condition A, B and C underwent a significant change in morphology from spindle shaped to a cuboidal appearance after 20 days of osteoinductive treatment with 10 The cultures were also studied for their ability to express mineralized extracellular matrix (ECM) assayed by von Kossa staining, as shown in To compare the amount of osteogenic cells derived from UCB-MSCs subjected to treatment with 10 Further, the expression of collagen-1 was assayed by immunostaining after 21 days of cultivation, with a growth medium C. The osteogenic development was induced by treatment with 10 This study analyzed and elucidated the critical parameters directing osteogenic differentiation of UCB-MSCs. A systematic investigation of the influence of the basal medium and important osteogenic factors was carried out. Currently, culture protocols are based on experience with BM-MSCs and have not yet been adapted for UCB-MSCs cultivation; although several observations have indicated that isolation, expansion and differentiation of UCB-MSCs are difficult, since the properties of those UCB-MSCs differ from BM-MSC in specific aspects. A study performed by In order to investigate the effect of standard culture conditions commonly used for the osteogenic differentiation of BM-MSCs, three different growth media (A) alpha MEM, 15% FBS, (B) DMEM, 15% FBS and (C) MSCGM, 10% SingleQuot growth supplement were tested for cultivation of UCB-MSCs and the ability to support osteogenic development of those cells. For induction of osteogenic differentiation, these culture media were supplemented with dexamethasone in concentrations of 10 Our data demonstrates a growth-dependent difference between UCB-MSCs cultured in condition B and C, which grew in higher densities and formed a more homogenous cell layer than UCB-MSCs cultured in condition A. Moreover, we found that the mineralization process was supported by cultivation in media C exclusive ( The finding that UCB-MSCs are sensitive to the culture medium confirmed the observations reported by All growth media contained FBS and although FBS is a common supplement, the use of FBS is still contradictory because of variations and the possibility of xenogenic contamination with regard to clinical applications ( The osteoinduction in our study was initialized by the treatment of UCB-MSCs cultivated in medium C with dexamethasone at differing concentrations of 10 To sum up, we could show that the condition (C) based on MSCGM seems to support osteogenic differentiation of UCB-MSCs. Even if BMP-2 induced the expression of mineralized ECM in combination with 10 This work was funded by the EU under the framework VI project OsteoCord. We thank Karen Bieback from the Institute of Transfusion Medicine and Immunology, Mannheim, Germany for providing UCB-MSCs. The authors are solely responsible for its content; it does not represent the opinion of the European Community and the Community is not responsible for any use that might be made of the information contained therein.