Iron endpoint control in nickel-copper converting operations is critical for optimal operation of subsequent hydrometallurgical extraction and refining operations and has additional impacts where such operations are also associated with platinum group metal (PGM) processing. The identification of the optimal converter iron endpoint, its impact on operations and real time inferential detection are discussed. An evaluation of the thermochemistry was conducted with thermodynamic equilibrium modelling software and validation of the data was performed with actual plant data and operating experience. The impact of iron endpoint on the quality of the matte, from a downstream refining perspective, environmental and safety considerations and the impact on smelter costs were qualitatively evaluated. Different methodologies of end-point control in the converter are discussed with emphasis on flame optical emission spectroscopy as the preferred endpoint monitoring method. While optical emission spectroscopy as a tool to determine the oxidation state in a converter is well established in the Cu industry its application in Ni matte converting is recent. Western Platinum has been the first PGM producer to apply this technology for iron endpoint control. Results achieved after implementation are presented and the current focus/development areas are listed, specifically around the practice in which the converters at Western Platinum Limited finishes the blow before granulation.Western Platinum Limited (WPL, a subsidiary of Lonmin Plc.) is a primary producer of Platinum Group Metals (PGMs) through a process of smelting sulphide bearing minerals in a slag resistance electric furnace to produce slag and furnace matte. The furnace matte is subsequently transferred in molten form to a converting operation to remove most of the iron and some of the sulphur from the matte. At WPL the converting operation consists of 3 Pierce-Smith converters that are each 3.048 At WPL classical Sherrit Visual endpoint detection lead to a number of operating challenges and process variability, primarily associated with the amount of material (slag phase with large quantities of spinel and solid SiO What is the most appropriate iron endpoint, when the whole smelting and converting value chain is considered? Which endpoint detection technologies were appropriate for Peirce Smith based Ni-Cu (+PGM) matte converting operations, taking into account the need for control information turnaround time, particular converter aisle operating practices and sensor reliability? Pierce-Smith converting operation is described adequately ( As the primary aim of the study is to gain an understanding of the trend and final end state of the converter, and not for process control, it was decided to use FactSage Like other nickel-copper matte converters, the converting step in the Western Platinum Limited process centres around the removal of FeS in furnace matte. FeS reacts exothermically with oxygen in blow air according to reaction The FeO formed need to be fluxed with silica in order to form a low melting fayalite type slag according to reaction The free energy of formation of oxides are given in The presence and relative abundance of different phases change dramatically and exponentially as Fe concentrations in the matte is lowered at the end of a blow. The Spinel phase would consist primarily of Fe and Ni oxides (like magnetite Fe The major negative impact of the formation of spinel phase is its refractory nature in dissolution processes of hydrometallurgical extraction at BMR. Most of the spinel phase that is present (suspended) in converter matte will leach only to a limited extent in the BMR process and will tend to leave the BMR process in much larger concentrations to the PMR process where it creates difficulties in PGM separation. The alloy phase starts appearing at low Fe values. The alloy phase is primarily Ni and Cu rich and is S deficient. Although this phase leaches quickly in the BMR, it is very hard and difficult to mill. Silica (as Tridymite) also becomes stable at the low Fe values. Plant assays on converter matte has shown that the alloy phase appears at higher Fe levels than predicted by FactSage Ni and S are primarily removed in the same step in the BMR process during the first stage leach. Both leave the BMR process in a stoichiometric ratio as part of a NiSO The liquidus temperature (T  Western Platinum Limited currently operates a concentrated mode dual alkali plant for fixating SO From an environmental and economical perspective, it is better to maintain reasonable S levels in the matte and transported it to the BMR since SO  Western Platinum Limited operates a mill and float circuit on the converter slag in order to recover valuable metals. However, some of the converter slag is repulped and reworked at 100% mass pull. Any Co and Ni that is oxidised and present in the slag or the spinel phases will not be recovered through the mill and float circuit.   Below 2% Fe remaining in matte, the rate of Fe removed from matte starts to level down while that of S remains at the same removal rate, pointing to oxidation of other species (primarily CoS and Ni As discussed in Section Blowing time is not linearly related to the Fe removed below approximately 3% Fe remaining in converter matte. Shorter blowing times have an impact on possible production throughputs. Shorter blowing times would have a direct positive impact on cost with regards to both refractory wear and the cost of punching. Several methods are used in industry in which some kind of converter end-point control is applied. A number of options were listed and evaluated based on necessary inputs and capabilities. These are listed and discussed below: Traditionally most smelters with Pierce-Smith converters control Fe end-point around 1% by monitoring the flame colour in the duct above the converter. The presence of green in the flame is reported to be due to Cu vapour in the converter off-gas ( On-line mass-balance modelling could be used to determine the amount of air that is necessary to lower Fe content to a set value. Such a mass balance model could be excel based or programmed in the PLC and would need the inputs of composition and mass of all the material entering the converter. The decision to not pursue this further was based around the uncertainty of revert composition, leftovers from preceding cycle, crane scale availability, oxygen efficiency and turn-around time of furnace matte analysis. Only one reference ( Optical spectroscopy is well established in the Cu industry as a tool to determine the end-point of a blow. A description of the technology is done in Section It would be possible to determine the actual Fe content by analysing a physical sample of converter matte from the converter. The two major problems with this method proved to be the difficulty in obtaining a good matte sample from the converter (without skimming) and obtaining an acceptable turn-around time on the analyses. Due to limitations or the requirement of infrastructure or equipment and capital for the options listed above, the decision was taken to do a test with Optical spectrometry technology at the Western Platinum Limited smelter. The test was done on all 3 converters for a 3 The use of optical spectroscopy to monitor the condition inside a Peirce-Smith converter has increased widely over the last 20 The OPC technology is available as a remote monitoring to the converter. A telescope is mounted outside of the converter to monitor the flame in the hood and a fibre optical cable transfers the light to a remote spectrometer. The spectrometer can handle fibres from up to 6 converters in parallel. The output of the spectrometer is processed by a server. An analogue signal representing a specie concentration in the off-gas is sent to the PLC from which it can be displayed at the operator work bench. This signal is typically updated every 20  The species that are used to monitor oxidation state in the converter is PbS, PbO and CuOH. The presence, abundance and sensitivity of these species have been analysed with FactSage The presence of CuOH is thought to be due to moisture that is injected to the converter with the blown air. FactSage Pb vapour species readily appear with a FactSage investigation assuming equilibrium. Equilibrium models under predicts the amount of Pb reporting to the slag phase, while over predicting deportment to the matte phase. At Western Platinum Limited there is very poor correlation between actual plant data of Pb in matte and deportment to matte projected by equilibrium simulations. The presence of PbS and PbO in gas phase was evaluated with FactSage From modelling and experience, certain species are used to monitor specific conditions in the converter, specifically pertaining to the fluidity of the converter slag, the oxidation state of the bath and the solid content of the slag (indirectly through impact on the vapour pressure above the bath). Choice of species to use, calibration of specie concentrations and training provided by Semtech can be used to control the converter operation at each specific plant. Different species seem to be representative of certain conditions at different sites, and the amenability of the technology was evaluated during an actual plant trials. At the Western Platinum Limited site, the following species in the gas phase are monitored and their typical relevance is mentioned: PbS (Lead sulphide): The concentration of this gaseous specie provides an indication of the slag fluidity. It is managed as high as practically possible. PbS is represented by the dotted grey in PbO (Lead oxide): The concentration of this gaseous specie provides an indication of the oxidation potential in the bath. In the copper industry it is used to determine the end-point, but in the case of Western Platinum Limited, it is only included as an indication of the relative presence of spinels in the slag (magnetite, trevorite, etc.). PbO is represented by the solid grey line in CuOH (copper hydroxide): The concentration of this gaseous specie is very sensitive to the oxidation potential of the bath. It remains low during the initial stages of blowing, but increases rapidly as the oxidation potential in the bath increases. The end of a blow is signalled when the CuOH line crosses with the PbS line. CuOH is represented by the solid black line in  For each blowing cycle, a trend graph is reviewed by production supervision the following day. Implementation of the Semtech optical spectroscopy system was done on all three converters simultaneously, as a single server and spectrometer and with multiple channels I/O was installed. Data of the system output (analogue 4–20 The system’s primary function is to determine the converter end-point and terminate the blow. As an additional benefit, the system provides an indication of the slag quality and the state of oxidation in the converter by the concentration of certain species. On a real-time basis the converter operator can now get feedback from the slag quality in the converter, if the converter slag is ready for additions (like SiO Due to the trace-ability of the data from the converter, operators can review the state of the converter from previous shifts and daily reviews of the blow can be done. The blowing practice was adjusted and monitored in order to get all the operators working on the same standard. The service level agreement between the BMR and smelter at Western Platinum Limited on product quality specifications was revised after the modelling study was completed. The lower specification limit on Fe was adjusted to 0.7% and upper specification limit was set at 1.5%. The aim of Fe end-point on the smelter was set at 1%.   After implementation, the mean Fe achieved increased as already discussed. Western Platinum Limited did struggle with variability on the end point achieved, despite stopping at the cross point. In an effort to better understand the sensitivity of what influence the cross point, some variables were investigated with FactSage Western Platinum Limited is currently not using a slag retaining wall in the spoon/tundish during granulation. In an effort to minimize slag/spinel carry over to the granulation jet stream, the slag in the converter is stiffened (frozen) at the end of the blow. The stiffening practice is done by skimming the converter as clean as possible after the end-point is achieved (as shown by the process control graph in The Semtech system does not give an accurate prediction of the oxidation state or the slag quality when the slag is solid. The converter therefore needs to be stopped according to the system before the stiffening blow (freezing step) is begun. The impact of this blow after the end-point was once again modelled in FactSage The converter was modelled as being at 1% Fe (with corresponding matte, slag and spinel compositions). The amount of slag and spinel remaining in the converter after the final skim (before the stiffening step) was calculated as a 5  The effect of the higher Fe removal rate is clearly seen in A typical finishing temperature range was modelled for the Western Platinum Limited practice. This temperature range is typically between 1250 Controlling temperature at the end of a blow is not an easy target and requires the operator to plan ahead and “set up” the final blow, as cooling can only be done by reverts that contains Fe in the form of both FeS and Fe Finally, the chosen practice to end the converter and controlling the temperature near the end of the blow remains a challenge to overcome in order to get the variance of the data to a narrow band. The remaining Fe in converter matte after Pierce-Smith converting was identified to be a very important measure of product quality and the impact on cost was quantified at the Western Platinum Limited smelter. The chosen technology to control the Fe end-point achieved was optical spectroscopy and the results of implementation showed a clear improvement in end-point control from day one. Optical spectroscopy does give an indication of the condition of the slag in the converter and the oxidation state of the converter. Despite the good results achieved and the ease of operation of the Semtech system, Western Platinum Limited has found that the control accuracy of the Semtech system is affected when there is a shift in the feed chemistry (for instance the addition of a new type of concentrate being fed to the furnace). After an investigation, Western Platinum Limited experienced that calibration changes were necessary on the Semtech system to cater for the new feed and accuracy could be restored to the system. The system has now been running for more than 7