SiO2–CaO–P2O5 ternary bioactive glass ceramic nanoparticles were prepared via the combination of sol–gel and coprecipitation processes. Precursors of silicon and calcium were hydrolyzed in acidic solution and gelated in alkaline condition together with ammonium dibasic phosphate. Gel particles were separated by centrifugation, followed by freeze drying, and calcination procedure to obtain the bioactive glass ceramic nanoparticles. The investigation of the influence of synthesis temperature on the nanopartilce’s properties showed that the reaction temperature played an important role in the crystallinity of nanoparticle. The glass ceramic particles synthesized at 55°C included about 15% crystalline phase, while at 25°C and 40°C the entire amorphous nanopowder could be obtained. In vitro testing showed that the bioactive glass ceramic nanoparticles can induce the formation of hydroxylaptite from simulated body fluid rapidly. As a result, this bioactive glass ceramic nanoparticle with excellent bioactivity would be a promising filler material for bone tissues engineering.Since developed by Hench, as a promising bone repairing material with high bioactivity and biocompatibility, bioactive glass has attracted extensive investigations In order to get bioactive glass nanoparticles with excellent dispersible capability, the sol–gel process that was carried out simultaneously in traditional sol–gel route was divided into two different processes. The precursors were hydrolyzed to sol in acidic condition, and condensed to almost singly dispersed gel particle in alkaline solution. Lyophilization was used to prevent the secondary aggregation of gel particle via the linkage of H A typical procedure for preparing BGC nanoparticles (Si:Ca:P (mol) Morphologies and microstructure of the BGC nanoparticles were observed by Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope FESEM (XL30 ESEM FEG, PHILIPS) equipped with energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX). Thermo properties of BGC were tested by thermal gravity analysis (TGA, Perkin–Elmer, TGA-7). Nitrogen adsorption isotherms were measured with Autosorb 1-C from Quantrachome Instruments at 77 The TGA curve for as-synthesized BGC showed the heating profile of dried gel calcined from room temperature to 750 FT-IR spectra of the BGC particles prepared at different temperature were presented in  To study the effect of calcination temperature on the morphologies and properties of BGC particle, the dried gel powders were calcined at different temperatures ranging from 500 The FT-IR spectra of the BGC calcined at different temperatures were presented in XRD patterns showed that after calcined at 900 The specific surface area measurement was carried out by nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherms for BGC synthesized at 40 It has been reported that with the same chemical formulation, crystallization of bioactive glass would decrease its bioactive capacity Before soaking in SBF, BGC nanoparticles could be homogeneously dispersed in ethanol solution (  The formation of hydroxyapatite (HAP) was also recorded by XRD ( SiO This Project is financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Project No. 20574066) and National Fund for Distinguished Young Scholar (No. 50425309). The authors acknowledge Professor Peter Pfeifer and Dr Matthew W. Beckner of University of Missouri for helping in carrying out the Specific Surface Area test. We are also grateful to Dr Carina Poltera of University of Missouri for her help with English writing.