The dissolution of the rotating disk electrode (RDE) of natural lead sulfide (galena) and the ground mineral in nitric acid solutions has been studied as a function of electrode potential, HNO3 concentration and temperature. The rate of dissolution producing hydrogen sulfide slowly increases as the potential varies from +0.1 to −0.4 V (Ag/AgCl). The reaction order on nitric acid concentration has been found to be 1.2±0.15 at 0.2 V and 0.9 at −0.4 V (40 °C), and the apparent activation energy is 35 kJ mol−1 in 1 M HNO3 at 0 V, suggesting that the process is controlled by a chemical or electrochemical reaction. At higher biases the RDE of PbS dissolves for the most part anodically, showing the highest rate at ∼0.7 V, whereas the rate as a function of acid concentration is maximal in 1 M HNO3. The yield of sulfate increases with potential and is small for the leaching of both compact and ground galena, while it reaches 50% in the case of a flotation lead concentrate. Ferric ions catalyze the dissolution of compact and, especially, ground galena, with the peak rate at the potential of immersed platinum electrode of 0.4–0.5 V. The Fe3+/Fe2+ couple is concluded to act as an intermediator for the electron transfer between nitrate ions and the solid, indicating that the dissolution is electrochemical in nature.Nitric acid leaching of sulfide concentrates and ores is an attractive method for recovery of basic metals, because HNO The kinetics and mechanism of metal sulfides dissolution in nitric acid media and the formation of elemental sulfur and sulfate are poorly understood. It seems to be established that the sulfate production grows with an increase in the nitric acid concentration and electrode potential of pyrite and other minerals, while elemental sulfur is oxidised to sulfate very slowly The objective of this research was to study the kinetics and mechanism of PbS decomposition in nitric acid solutions as a function of electrode potential and to correlate the behaviour of compact galena electrodes with that of the ground mineral and a sulfidic lead concentrate. The strong catalytic effect of ferric ions was discovered and considered as an important detail for explaining the mechanism of PbS interaction with acidic nitrate electrolyte. The polycrystalline galena obtained from Geological Museum of Central Siberia (Krasnoyarsk, Russia) had less than 0.1% by mass of iron, zinc, copper and silver as the major impurities and no inclusions of other phases. The material was of n-type conductivity with ∼6·10 The galena samples were ground in a jasper mortar to −70 μm directly before the leach experiments, which were conducted in a thermostated glass vessel with Pt or PbS indicator and Ag/AgCl reference electrodes introduced. The vessel was isolated from atmosphere using a water seal; no attempts were made to remove oxygen before or in the course of the tests. The slurry (usually 5% solid) was agitated by a magnetic stirrer. After each test, the concentration of lead in aqueous phase was determined, the solid residue was filtered, washed, dried and analysed for lead sulfate using conditioning in hot 20% sodium acetate and titration with EDTA. The same methodology was applied when processing the flotation concentrate. The solutions were prepared from analytical grade HNO The rate of lead dissolution, The lead release enhances due to oxidation of PbS as the potential becomes more positive starting from approximately 0.2 V. At the biases higher than 0.4 V, the anodic current sharply falls in a few initial seconds and exhibits several maxima afterwards; the mass of lead dissolved in the first time interval is also the largest The ratio of the positive charge passed through the electrode and lead solubilised during the oxidation, i.e., a number of electrons released for 1 Pb atom, Lead sulfide can be oxidised by HNO The It is commonly accepted that aqueous oxidation of metal sulfides proceeds via the electrochemical mechanism, involving coupled counter-reactions of cathodic reduction of an oxidant Similar to the compact samples at open-circuit potentials, the dissolution of powdered galena is rather slow, produces H The dissolution of galena sharply accelerates in the presence of ferric nitrate, with almost all sulfur of PbS converting into S It should be admitted that the specific percentages are dependent on such experimental conditions as reaction vessel volume, insertion of the glass capillaries with electrodes and so on, especially in the case of iron-free solutions, although the regularities reported above remain valid. The extension of the inert surface area was noticed to result in a reduction of the mineral breakdown. Similar effects are known to be distinguishing characteristics of a chain-radical reaction mechanism and may be assigned to active (radical) particles deactivation on the wall. The lead recovery from the lead concentrate by nitric acid solutions without Fe The above results make clear that the interaction of pure lead sulfide with nitric acid proceeds largely by non-oxidative mechanism Nitrite (nitrous acid) is known to be a much more active oxidant than nitrate The rate of galena dissolution and the lead sulfate formation strongly depends upon the potential. The difference in the potentials measured using Pt and PbS electrodes is due to semi-conducting properties and a limited density of free charge carriers, first of all holes in the surface layer of galena. Furthermore, these properties are thought to vary as a result of time- and potential-dependent modifications of the composition and structure of the reacted near-surface PbS, being responsible, in particular, for retarding the anodic oxidation at the potentials more positive than ∼0.7 V The fastest release of lead both from mineral samples and the concentrate takes place in Fe-bearing leach media in the short period when the potential of Pt electrode is in the range of 0.4–0.5 V The excessive concentrations of NO Galena dissolves in nitric acid media largely via the non-oxidative pathway producing hydrogen sulfide; the process is controlled by a chemical or electrochemical stage and becomes somewhat faster, in contrast with other acids, when the electrode potential is shifted in the negative direction. At higher biases, the RDE of PbS dissolves for the most part anodically, showing the highest rate at ∼0.7 V, whereas the rate as a function of acid concentration is maximal in 1 M HNO