The indirect steam gasification in circulating fluidized bed reactors was studied by modelling. The object of study was a coupled 12MWth gasifier-combustor system, which was fired by woody biomass. The heat for the steam-blown gasifier was produced in the air-blown combustor and transported by circulating solids between the interconnected reactors. The system was modelled by a semi-empirical three-dimensional model, which simulated the fluid dynamics, reactions, and heat transfer in the coupled process. The studied cases included different temperature levels, which were controlled by the amount of additional fuel feed to the combustor. The model concept can be later applied to study sorption enhanced gasification, which is a promising method for sustainable production of transport fuels to substitute fossil based fuels.Gasification of biomass is a method to produce renewable, carbon neutral energy, which, unlike wind and solar, is not dependent on weather conditions. The gasification generates producer gas, which contains high share of combustible gas components: carbon monoxide, hydrogen, and hydrocarbons. The producer gas can be combusted for producing heat and electricity, but it can also be converted to different products, such as synthetic natural gas (SNG), Fischer–Tropsch diesel, dimethyl ether (DME), and methanol. The terms “producer gas” and “syngas” are often mixed. Producer gas (or product gas) is simply the gas exiting the gasifier. Depending on the gasification technology and process conditions, the composition of the producer gas can vary largely: in addition to above mentioned combustible gases, it can contain large amounts of carbon dioxide, water vapour, and nitrogen. Syngas (synthesis gas) is a gas for chemical synthesis and it mainly consists of carbon monoxide and hydrogen. Conversion of producer gas to syngas involves e.g. catalytic cracking of tars, reforming of hydrocarbons, filtration, and possible modification of the CO/H The gasification technologies are categorized to direct (autothermal) gasification and indirect (allothermal) gasification. In direct gasification, the fuel is partially oxidized to generate heat to sustain the gasification process. This can be accomplished by air-blown or steam/oxygen-blown methods. The disadvantage of air-blown method is the high amount of nitrogen in the producer gas, which decreases the heat value of the gas. This is avoided in steam/oxygen-blown method, but this is expensive due to need for air separation unit to produce oxygen. In indirect gasification, the heat for gasification is imported from outside the gasifier reactor. This can be accomplished by heat exchangers, but this is thermally inefficient and technologically difficult due to high temperature requirements. Another method is to apply circulating hot solids as heat carriers, which is the object of this study.  Various concepts have been proposed for indirect steam gasification by using fluidized bed technology In 1970's a Pyrox process was developed in Japan by Kunii and co-workers The SilvaGas process was invented by Battelle in the early 1980's Technical University of Vienna developed a FICFB gasifier in late 1990's In the MILENA process, the gasifier is operated in CFB mode and it is surrounded by a BFB combustor. A lab-scale MILENA gasifier was built in 2004 by ECN (Energy research Centre of the Netherlands) followed by an 800 The performance of gasifiers can be improved by using catalytic bed materials, which enhances the reforming reactions of tar and methane and thus reduces the amount of tar and increases the amount of hydrogen in the producer gas. Various artificial catalysts have been tested, many of them nickel-based metal oxides Using CaO containing bed material in gasifier and adjusting the reactor temperatures such that the gasifier operates below and the combustor above the calcination temperature allows transport of CO In AER/SEG process, decreasing the CO The modelling of indirect steam gasification process has been usually carried out using a flowsheet software, such as Aspen Plus, IPSEpro, Belsim-Vali, or Matlab/Simulink. The simulation of the gasification process can be based on: thermodynamic equilibrium restricted thermodynamic equilibrium kinetic mechanism experimental data An alternative simulation method is to apply neural network modelling As the reactions in the gasifier (e.g. shift conversion) progress along the reactor and are affected by local process conditions (e.g. gas composition and temperature), a more detailed description of the process can be achieved by discretizing the reactor model to blocks along the height of the reactor. These approaches are called as one-dimensional (1D) models For more detailed analysis, the reactor can be modelled three-dimensionally. Until quite recently, the only 3D modelling of fluidized bed gasifiers were given by Petersen and Werther Recently, Multi-Phase Particle-In-Cell (MP-PIC) approach has been applied for simulating indirect steam gasification. In this approach, the gas phase is treated as a continuum (Eulerian frame) and the solid phase is treated as particles grouped to parcels (Lagrangian frame) This paper presents a modelling method, which is suitable for simulating interconnected fluidized bed processes. The reactors are modelled three-dimensionally using the earlier developed semi-empirical modelling concept The coupled CFB reactors were simulated by a semi-empirical, steady-state engineering model In the 3D model frame, the gasifier and combustor were directly coupled, i.e. the circulating solids separated in the cyclone of one reactor were applied as the incoming circulating material for the other reactor. The solid concentration fields inside the reactors are set based on empirical correlations The reaction paths illustrated in Any unreacted char, which is circulated to combustor, is burned in presence of oxygen. With biomass, the share of volatiles is high and the devolatilization process mostly determines the composition of gas in the gasifier. With zero oxygen, the homogeneous oxidation reactions are prevented and only the reversible shift conversion affects the gas composition in the gasifier: The total elemental composition of the burning fuel, i.e. char and volatiles, is determined by ultimate analysis The reaction rates for evaporation (Eq. The water-gas and Boudouard reaction rates are defined by the following equations, which are simplified forms of the expressions used by Petersen and Werther The reaction rate of the shift conversion is defined by Eq. A positive value of The current model does not simulate the formation of tars. The tars are complex heavy hydrocarbons, e.g. levoglucosan and naphthalene, which are formed during gasification and can cause fouling of the downstream equipment. In steam-blown gasification, the measured amount of tar in producer gas has been in the order of 2…5   The applied fuel was woody biomass (  In the combustor, most of the fuel burns at the lower section of the furnace and consumes the oxygen, which originates from the primary and secondary air feeds. Some local CO and H   The gas concentration of the producer gas is presented in The modelled case is a conceptual study, thus, proper measurement data for validating the model does not exist. However, in In the measurements, the H The trends of CO and CO The contents of hydrocarbons (CH Comparing with the incoming steam, the consumption of H  The cold gas efficiency (sometimes called chemical efficiency) is defined as the chemical heat of the produced producer gas divided by the total fuel power fed to gasifier and combustor: In direct air- or oxygen-blown gasification, the higher gasification temperature leads to lower heat value of gas. This is because the higher temperature is achieved by increasing the amount of oxygen, which increases the oxidation reactions and reduces the share of combustible gases. In indirect steam gasification, the higher temperature is achieved by increasing the fuel input to combustor. This increases the gas yield from gasification of char. Consequently, the heat value of gas is higher with a higher gasification temperature. As noted earlier, most of the producer gas originates from the devolatilization. Consequently, the increase in the gas yield is relatively small and thus, the increment in the chemical heat of producer gas is smaller than the increment of the fuel power. Consequently, the cold gas efficiency decreases with higher fuel input to combustor. The unreacted char from gasifier is transferred to combustor with the other circulating solids. Based on these calculations, the amount of char from gasifier, which is burned in combustor is enough to sustain the gasification process. As the temperature increases, the water-gas reaction is enhanced and the char flow from gasifier decreases ( The modelled case does not represent any existing facility, thus, direct validation data is not available. Based on the effect of temperature on different gas components, the generation of H The presented semi-empirical modelling method is an efficient tool for simulating indirect steam gasification in coupled gasifier/combustor CFB reactors. The model helps to analyse the different phenomena occurring in the reactors and to study the effects of process parameters on producer gas composition and cold gas efficiency. Based on the simulations, the process can be operated without additional fuel to combustor. Increasing the fuel input to combustor increases the gasification temperature, which increases the heat value of the producer gas slightly, but reduces the cold gas efficiency of the system. The modelled case was a conceptual study and measurement data for validation did not exist. Based on comparison with the measurements in literature, the model could simulate many of the observed trends correctly, e.g. the effect of temperature on CO and CO In the modelled cases, the limestone feed was small and the calcination and carbonation reactions did not contribute much to the producer gas composition. In future, the model concept can be applied to study sorption enhanced gasification, in which the CO  coefficient, 1/s model parameter model parameter molar concentration, mol/m particle size, m reference size, m activation energy, J/mol fuel mass flow rate, kg/s producer gas flow rate, m lower heat value of fuel, MJ/kg lower heat value of gas, MJ/m reaction source term, mol/m reaction source term, kg/m universal gas constant, J/(mol K) temperature, K weight fraction volume fraction cold gas efficiency density, kg/m  Boudouard reaction char (fixed carbon) particle size group shift conversion volatiles (in solid form) moisture water-gas reaction The FLEDGED project has received funding from the