This contribution provides a detailed in-situ account of transformation reactions during calcination of a typical high-grade α-spodumene (α-LiAlSi2O6) concentrate, a pre-treatment step required to refine spodumene into commercial lithium chemicals. We observe four reaction pathways during the transition of spodumene, employing in-situ high-temperature powder XRD measurements using both cathode-tube and synchrotron radiation. At a relatively slow heating rate of 8 °C min−1, we observe a close relationship between the development of γ-spodumene, with an onset temperature of 842 °C, and reduction of the amorphous background, in the collected XRD spectra. This demonstrates that, initially γ-spodumene recrystallises from amorphous spodumene. At the fast initial heating rate of 100 °C min−1, γ-spodumene first appears at a higher temperature of 1025 °C. This mineral subsequently transforms into β-spodumene at high temperatures along the reaction pathways denoted as pathway (1) amorphous spodumene → γ-spodumene → β-spodumene and (3) crystalline α-spodumene → γ-spodumene → β-spodumene. The stability of γ-spodumene strongly depends on the mechanical treatment of the sample, and the heating rate of the calcination process, suggesting high and low activation energies for pathways (3) and (1), respectively. In another experiment, we observe rising peaks of β-quartz, a minor gangue mineral in the spodumene concentrate, that reflect the substitution of Li+ and Al3+ for Si4+ above 875 °C. This phase ultimately transforms to β-spodumene at 975 °C. The same experiment demonstrates the spectrum of β-spodumene continuously increasing in magnitude, above 975 °C, with decreasing abundance of α-spodumene, indicating a direct conversion of α- to β-spodumene. Thus, the two other reaction corridors comprise: (2) crystalline α-spodumene → β-quartzss → β-spodumene; (4) crystalline α-spodumene → β-spodumene. Heating of a finely ground sample results in faster and more-complete conversion of α-spodumene compared to a coarser specimen. Our experiments establish the characteristic temperatures of phase transformations during spodumene calcination and reveal the influence of amorphous material and thermal history on reaction sequences. Approaches that integrate the optimisation of grinding and heating thus bear the potential to reduce the energy requirements of the calcination process, including the extraction of lithium from γ-spodumene formed at a lower temperature.Natural spodumene occurs as Studies on the transformation of spodumene concentrate show inconsistent results of phase change during the reaction process. Prior to 2015, the direct transformation of  In this study, we apply in-situ X-ray diffraction to gain further insight into the evolution of spodumene phases at high temperature. We aim to resolve some of the inconsistencies in previous literature and to contribute to the reduction of energy requirements and cost of spodumene calcination. We present in-situ laboratory and synchrotron XRD measurements of the phase transformations that occur during calcination of a typical high-grade spodumene concentrate. Based on detailed observations, we assess the influence of grain size, amorphous content and thermal history on the phase-alteration pathways and especially on the formation of Talison Lithium Pty Ltd, Western Australia kindly supplied about 1 kg of a technical grade of spodumene concentrate (7.6% Li  The stoichiometric structural formula of spodumene requires a theoretical oxide composition of 8.02 wt% Li A PANalytical X'Pert PRO XRD at the Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation (ANSTO) and a GBC Enhanced Multi-Material Analyser at Murdoch University served to collect the XRD spectra under ambient temperature. The ANSTO instrument operated between 5 and 80° 2 One can readily note in In-situ high-temperature X-ray diffraction measurements were collected at ANSTO on a PANalytical X'Pert PRO XRD, equipped with an Anton Paar HTK-2000 hot stage. The instrument operated for Cu Kα radiation in a  The first heating program, denoted as HT-XRD1 in The second heating program (HT-XRD2) consisted of a fast ramp up to 950 °C at a rate of 100 °C min Finally, the third experiment (HT-XRD3) involved a heating rate of 100 °C min A heating experiment was carried out on the powder diffraction (PD) beamline of the Australian Synchrotron ( The Match! software afforded the identification of mineral phases based on reference patterns from Crystallography Open Database (COD). We determined the temperatures of phase formation and decomposition by visual inspection of XRD patterns in the Match! software. For each pattern, our procedure included a manual setting of the background and positions of the peaks, as well as removal of erroneous peaks, prior to fitting of the full profiles; i.e., small peaks that belong to the background and affect the matching process. The reference intensity ratio (RIR) ( To investigate the effect of grain size reduction on spodumene crystallinity, we compared two samples of different sizes of 120 and 20 µm, prepared by grinding of the original concentrate (315 µm).  The intensity of synchrotron radiation makes it possible to resolve the changes in the background of XRD patterns that correspond to the conversion of amorphous phase of the concentrate. For this reason, we conducted an in-situ experiment at the powder diffraction beamline of the Australian Synchrotron (  The reduction in the concentration of The method of reference intensity ratio includes normalisation of phase concentrations, for the combined phase abundances to sum to 100%. This introduces an element of interdependence in the estimation of phase concentrations and neglects the presence of amorphous fraction. Thus, we need to consider alternative explanations for the initial changes in the concentration of  The stuffing of Li and Al ions in The (0 1 2) 22.7° 2 The increase of with the tentative observation that the decomposition of The solid solution of quartz mainly transforms to a solid solution of The transformation of the stuffed The restriction on the maximum temperature during the SHT-XRD experiment prevented us from observing the complete yield of Experiment HT-XRD3 consists of an initial step characterised by the fast heating rate of 100 °C min Between 975 and 1025 °C, i.e., in the temperature range after the exhaustion of the solid solution of Literature describes the direct transformation of Our experiments demonstrate that the amorphous content and the thermal history determine the phase transitions occurring during calcination of spodumene concentrate. Grinding pegmatitic ore to produce the concentrate liberates spodumene from the gangue minerals but also induces amorphicity in the mineral by destroying the crystallinity at particle surfaces ( We further tested the influence of heating rate on the formation of The measurements of experiment HT-XRD1 indicate the emergence of The comparison of The CO The presented data suggest ways to optimise the energy-intensive calcination of spodumene to reduce the energy penalty and cost associated with heating.   This contribution reported the phase transitions during calcination of a technical grade spodumene (7.6% Li The Prior to the formation of Our experiments demonstrate that, amorphicity and thermal history of the concentrate influence the reaction sequence, the latter because of different activation energies involved in each pathway. Further progress in the field requires measuring or calculating these activation energies, for detailed optimisation of the calcination process. Integrated approaches to grinding and heating thus bear the potential to reduce energy requirements of the calcination, especially when optimised to extract lithium from The authors would like to thank Dr Bjorn Dybdahl, Talison Lithium Pty. Ltd, for providing spodumene concentrates and valuable insights into the operation of the processing plant at Greenbushes. We are grateful to Australian Institute of Nuclear Science and Engineering ( Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: