This work focuses on the effect of Up-Quenching experimentation on mechanical properties of SAE 4130 steel. In that sense, the effect of time and temperature of Up-quenching on hardness, yield strength (YS), ultimate tensile strength (UTS), elongation, and toughness of this automotive steel were investigated. Up-quenching of the austenitized specimens were performed in the temperatures range between 350 to 500 °C for the times period between 20 to 60 min. Mechanical properties were evaluated by means of tensile and hardness tests. In addition, Charpy impact tests were done to measure the fracture energy of the specimens. Microstructural analyses, including texture development and fracture surfaces analyses, were done using Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) equipped with Electron backscattered diffraction (EBSD) and Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM). Results showed that UP-quenching has positive contribution on hardness, UTS, Elongation% (EL%) and toughness. The results of the present work are useful to control the mechanical properties of SAE 4130 steel via changing the heat treatment parameters. Electron microscopy results showed that the maximum amount of bainite was observed at 450 °C. And the optimum microstructure, that provides the best mechanical properties, is formed in the case of Up-quenching at 450 °C for 20 min {100} pole figures for the Up-quenching in 20 min were constructed and showed that at different Up-quenching temperatures, textured structures with the main components of S, Brass, Copper and Cube are attainable. Texture components were substantially weak in the cases of non-optimum temperatures of Up-quenching. Texture intensity was quite high for the Up-quenching case situation of 450 °C. As well, non-cube textures of S, Brass, and to some extent Copper, were developed for the Up-quenching condition of 450 °C, which clarified the acceptable combination of mechanical properties in this condition. Finally, fracture surfaces examination showed that increasing the temperature and time of Up-quenching leads to lower of porosity that is better distributed in the microstructure.Heat treatment process is a combination of controlled heating, soaking and cooling that is applied to a particular metal or alloy in the solid state to produce the desired microstructure and attain acceptable levels of mechanical properties [ Quenching is a rapid cooling, in which a work piece gets immersed in water, oil, or compressed air to achieve certain mechanical properties through the its microstructural alteration [ Annealing is a type of heat treatment most frequently applied in order to soften iron or steel materials and to refine their grains due to the resultant ferrite-pearlite microstructure. This process is used where elongations and appreciable level of tensile strength are required in engineering materials [ Bainite structure was first introduced in 1920 by Bain and Davenport who were studying the isothermal austenite transformation at temperatures above the martensite start temperature (M In steels, Bainite transformation is carried out in the temperature range between the temperature of end of pearlite formation and the martensite start temperature. Thus, the kinetic and the microstructure of bainitic transformation is a combination of pearlitic diffusional transformation and martensitic non-diffusional transformation. Moreover, the product of bainitic transformation usually contains two phases of ferrite and cementite similar to what is observed in pearlite [ In addition to the microstructure, the properties of steels are affected by the orientation of the grains that form such a structure. Therefore, the texture of steel can possibly influence various interpretation of mechanical properties. Generally, texture measurement enables crystallographic information to be obtained from very small surface areas of bulk samples. In this work, Up-Quenching process was executed on SAE 4130 steel to understand the effect of process parameters on microstructural evolution, mechanical properties and texture development. The research was conducted to achieve the optimum condition of up-quenching by varying the temperature and time of this process. The microstructure of samples under various times and temperatures of Up-quenching were studied and the effect these variables on hardness, yield/tensile strengths, elongation, impact toughness and texture development of SAE 4130 steel were assessed. The initial material used in this research was the SAE 4130 steel. The chemical composition of the initial material is provided in For isotherm heat treatment, samples were first austenitized at 900 °C for 15 min. Right after austenitization, samples were quenched in a salt bath that was kept at a temperature below the martensite start temperature (i.e. about 300 °C) [ The microstructures of the heat treated specimens were investigated using Optical Microscope and Scanning Electron Microscope (Philips XL 30) that was equipped with an Electron Backscatter Diffraction (EBSD) detector. To prepare samples for this latest apparatus, electro-polishing, in a 900 ml solution and under the voltage of 20 V was done on the samples. The temperature of the solution was kept at 11 °C. Then, TSL-OIM software was used to analyze the EBSD data. Metallographic samples were prepared in the form of a cylinder with the diameter of 15 mm and height of 10 mm. Common sample preparation steps were carried out for optical microcopy studies. To carry out microscopic studies and reveal their microstructure, samples were etched by a 10% Picral solution. This solution was prepared based on DIN50601 standard for similar compositions. Grain size was measured by intercept method. As will be shown later, metallographic studies on the initial sample prepared from the rod before the operation showed that its original microstructure consists of ferrite and pearlite. Also, samples were prepared using a thin foil created by ELM (Electro Polishing Method), and subsequently TEM study was carried out by a FEI-Tecnai G2F20 microscope operating at 200 KV. Specimens for this latest studies were taken close to the surface of indentation samples. This was done to make, as much as possible, the microstructural observation within the same prior austenite grains. The intended mechanical properties included hardness, ultimate tensile strength, yield strength, elongation percentage and toughness. Samples for the tensile tests were prepared according to ASTM To measure the hardness, samples were ground and their surface was flattened. Then, hardness tests were carried out using the Ernst hardness testing device on different parts of the sample and from the center of the sample to the surface. To perform this test, a load of 100 gr was applied for about 15 s. An average of five measurements was reported in each hardness date point. Specimens were prepared for the impact test to study the variation of impact energy through the above Up-quenching heat treatment processes. For this purpose, a 2 mm V-notch was made in the Up-quenched samples for the Charpy impact tests with the dimensions of 55*10*10 mm. The initial microstructure of SAE 4130 steel containing pearlite and ferrite phases, which was taken by the optical microscope, is shown in   SEM images in Variation of hardness with the Up-quenching temperature and time is shown in  In terms of elongation, it can be seen in The results of the impact energy versus temperature and time of transformation in the SAE 4130 steel is shown in  EBSD analysis of the SAE 4130 steel was performed at different temperatures of Up-quenching and for the austempering time of 20 min. For this purpose, the transfer section of the tensile samples was studied. The microstructure of the steel Up-quenched at 350 °C for 20 min is shown in The grain structure of the SAE 4130 steel Up-quenched at 400 °C is presented in The microstructure of the steel Up-quenched at 450 °C is depicted in The microstructure of the SAE 4130 steel after the Up-quenching heat treatment at 500 °C for 20 min is shown in It is known that modifying the microstructure of the steels through quenching below M It is also worth mentioning that the rate of carbon diffusion under the Up-quenching situation is very influential. This is mainly due to the fact that the cooling rate during the water quenching is not sufficiently fast to obtain a fully martensitic structure. Therefore, the various morphologies of AM constituents observed in The strength properties can be justified by the Hall-Petch relationship given above. Since the behavior of the mixed microstructures is a function of the properties of each individual constituent, it is sensible to estimate the mechanical properties of the microstructure from its components. Therefore, the rule of mixtures can be used to determine the strength of a microstructure containing a mix of martensite-bainite as follows [ When the matrix becomes fine by transformation products in the form of second phase, its strength increases according to the Hall-Petch equation more than when it is consisted of only one phase. The above hypothesis can be applied for the mixed microstructures of martensite-bainite, in which the size of the martensitic matrix (S According to the above equation, the lack of significant strength loss of the mixed microstructure of martensite-bainite in the short austempering condition can be explained. Therefore, the strength loss due to the presence of a relatively soft bainite phase, compared with martensite, is compensated by the higher strength caused by martensite resulting from the formation of a fine structure. This hypothesis can be explained for austempering time of 20 min, in which the properties do not decrease significantly. However, with increasing the isothermal transformation time, the loss of strength decreases as such. This latest change is due to an increase in the volume percentage of Bainite, which is added up to the matrix phase and reduces the contribution of martensite in strengthening through the σ On the other hand, the highest amount of impact resistance for this steel was observed at the austempering temperature of 450 °C. This temperature seems to provide a proper combination of mechanical properties and can be considered as the optimum Up-quenching condition. It was also explained above that depending on the temperature and time of the transformation, the structure is made of various amounts of martensite and bainite. As can be seen in In In For the case of 450°, similar to the other cases, it is seen here that with increasing the Up-quenching temperature, bainite increased at the expense of martensite lath. On the other hand, the texture is predominantly consisted of S and Brass components. The absence of Cube and Copper components would lead to high toughness and high mechanical properties characteristics observed in Very low amount of M/A phases were also identified in the microstructure after highest temperature of Up-quenching (500 °C) which could be the result of the transformation of retained austenite and martensite lath to upper bainite and carbides. In fact, it was explained before that the presence of carbides in this case prevents further reduction in strength despite much lower amount of martensite [ The following results were obtained by performing these experimental analyses. It was found that as Up-quenching temperature increases, strength increases and the elongation percentage decreases. At high temperatures of Up-quenching, carbides grow in the matrix and in the boundaries between the martensite and Bainite layers. In such a condition, the decrease in the amount of Bainite and the formation of granular Bainite changes the slope of the mechanical properties curves at 500 °C. The Bainite phase in the isothermal heat treatment started by the formation of Bainite-ferrite layers. The second phase is observed between the layers and subunits which are believed to be M/A. The morphology of the Bainite-ferrite at the highest temperature of Up-quenching (500 °C) was in the form of granular one which converts to the needle shape by reducing the temperature. Strength increases with increasing the up-quenching temperature due to the reduction of hard phases such as martensite. With the rise of the up-quenching temperature up to 500 °C and with a change in the morphology of bainite, the slope of mechanical properties curves become almost constant at short time (20 min). This was related to the formation of granular bainite and carbides at such a high up-quenching temperature. The best combination of strength, elongation percentage and toughness was obtained by performing Up-quenching heat treatment at 450 °C. TEM studies of the different Up-quenched cases showed the variation of austempered martensite (AM) alongside the ferrite matrix. It also showed these AM are formed in the prior grain boundary regions for the case of optimum temperature of Up-quenching. The variation of twin boundaries and dislocations formation were also elucidated under different heat treatment conditions. The texture components, and their intensities, were substantially changed in the case of Up-quenching at 450 °C. Almost no amount of Cube ({100} <001>) and Copper components was detected in this situation and the texture was predominantly consisted of S and Brass components. The absence of Cube and Copper components were related to the best mechanical properties combination observed in this case. At very high temperature of Up-quenching mostly Cube ({100}<001>), Copper ({112{<111>) textures were developed, though with a relatively texture intensity. This texture development (especially Copper component) together with the changing morphology of bainite and carbide formation, could explain the not so much deficiency in mechanical properties. The raw/processed data required to reproduce these findings cannot be shared at this time as the data also forms part of an ongoing study. In this study for the first time Up-Quenching experimentation was combined with the design of experiment (DOE) to predict mechanical properties of SAE 4130 steel used for automotive applications. In that sense, the effect of time and temperature of Up-quenching on hardness, yield strength (YS), ultimate tensile strength (UTS), elongation, and toughness of this automotive steel were investigated. Design of experiments was used to develop linear models for the tests responses, particularly for the UTS, toughness and Elongation. It is shown here that UP-quenching has positive contribution on hardness, UTS, %EL and toughness. The results of the present work are useful to control the mechanical properties of SAE 4130 steel via changing the heat treatment parameters. Among the temperatures employed it was showed that the maximum amount of bainite can be observed at 450  All authors listed declared that they have no conflict of interest.