In both the mining and construction industries, blasting is the predominant method for fragmentation of consolidated mineral deposits. The blasting process, however, remains a potential source of numerous hazards to people and surrounding objects. This paper presents the results of the research study on flyrock phenomena and blast area security related accidents in surface mining. The study revealed that a total of 45 fatal and 367 non-fatal accidents in coal, metal and non-metal surface mines had occurred between 1978 and 1998 where the primary causes were the lack of blast area security, flyrock, premature blast, and misfires. The lack of blast area security and flyrock accounted for 281 (68.2%) accidents. Investigations of flyrock accidents have revealed one or more of the following contributing factors: discontinuity in the geology and rock structure, improper blasthole layout and loading, insufficient burden, very high explosive concentration, and inadequate stemming. The study also shows that accidents due to lack of blast area security are caused by failure to use appropriate blasting shelter, failure to evacuate humans from the blast area, and inadequate guarding of the access roads leading to the blast area. The research results should have a positive impact on hazard awareness, prevention, and safe blasting practices in mining and construction industries.The main purpose of blasting operations in surface mining is the rock fragmentation, and is considered to be essential to the success of mining operations. This process provides appropriate material granulation that will be suitable for excavation and transportation. According to the The blasting process, however, remains a potential source of numerous hazards. Even though the mining industry has improved its blasting safety, there are still reports indicating blasting-related accidents involving both people and various structures. Investigations carried out by the Mine Safety and Health Administration ( Further historical data summarized by Since flyrock and a lack of blast area security constitute the majority of all blasting-related accidents, the cause and control of these hazards and activities are discussed. Flyrock is defined as the rock propelled beyond the blast area by the force of an explosion ( Previous experimental and theoretical work about flyrock phenomena has been performed by  The theory for predicting flyrock from blasting operations in hard rock such as granite has been developed by Additional studies on flyrock phenomena can be found in The rock structure and rock properties may vary considerably from a location to location even within the same blast area. Discontinuity in the geology and rock structure causes a mismatch between the explosive energy and the resistance of the rock. Existence of fissures, joints, weaknesses, and voids are likely to assist in the creation of flyrock. The compressive strength, abrasiveness and the rock density also play a very important role in the blasting process, as does the spatial distribution of rock properties. Base information (e.g. consolidation, voids, etc.) regarding the rock structure and properties of the material to be blasted can be routinely obtained from drill hole logs, and must be considered prior to hole loading. A much more in-depth analysis of geologic characteristics can be achieved through modeling. Realistic representation of geological domain requires a form of a spatially referenced database that provides means for modeling a 3-D body from all geological and geophysical data. Depending upon the rock type, data can be analyzed and modeled using: Stratigraphic modeling, where a set of grid surfaces and subsequent intervals represent a sedimentary deposit; or Discrete fracture network (DFN) approach and incorporates deterministic, conditioned, and stochastic features; or Block modeling where each block consists of unique rock strata property information. As a result, a 3-D model can be generated providing information and spatial visualization of the rock structure as shown in Inaccuracies in the design of blasting patterns, including incorrect blasthole angle can cause large deviations from the planned pattern resulting with flyrock occurrence. Commonly, the graphical design of drilling and blasting patterns is performed by using 2-D computer aided design (CAD) tools, or is generally determined by drill operator experience. However, 2-D design techniques do not consider spatial characteristics of rock properties and usually use the average value of a parameter that is of interest. An engineer’s ability to analyze interactions among rock properties, geology, and pattern design could be enhanced considerably using 3-D graphics. Insufficient burden is one of the primary causes of flyrock ( Until recently, a convenient means of gathering drilling records were not available. Wireless technology applied at the drilling rig may help to resolve this problem. Drilling machines can be instrumented with the variety of sensors, from which data can be digitized and transmitted to any location for analyses. A global positioning system (GPS) installed on the drill system can provide the precise locations of boreholes drilled ( The Blasthole overloading is one of the frequent causes of flyrock occurrence. Such overloading generates excessive release of energy. It appears due to the loss of powder in fissures, joints, voids, and cracks. In order to prevent hole overloading, it is necessary to load holes as designed using the correct charge weight. Additionally, a blast ratio should be ensured sufficiently high to eliminate the possibility of excessive charging, and holes have to be monitored to check the rise of the powder. Stemming material provides confinement and prevents the escape of high-pressure gases from the blasting holes. This material must be free from rocks and properly tamped. Inadequate stemming results in stemming ejections from the holes resulting with flyrock. In general, the stemming length should be not less than 25 times the blast hole diameter ( The US Code of Federal Regulations—CFR, Title 30 defines ‘Blast Area’ as the area in which concussion (shock wave), flying material, or gases from an explosion may cause injury to persons. Furthermore, the CFR states that the blast area shall be determined by considering geology or material to be blasted, blasting patterns, blasting experience of the mine personnel, delay systems, type and amount of explosive material, and type and amount of stemming. During the last two decades, lack of securing blast areas caused 45.64% of the fatal and non-fatal accidents in coal surface mining due to failure to use appropriate blasting shelter, failure to evacuate blast area from humans, and inadequate guarding of the access roads leading to the blast area. Failure to evacuate humans from blast areas is complicated by the increase in accessibility to rough terrain brought on by the substantial increase in use of all terrain vehicles (ATV’s). Areas inspected to be all-clear can be infiltrated by non-mining personnel on ATV’s within seconds. The issue of blast area security can be successfully addressed by providing appropriate training and education of personnel involved in blasting operations to apply the best safety practices, as well as state and government regulations. Furthermore, the blast area must be inspected to determine distances to nearby structures, roads, public places, and due consideration must be taken in determining the degree of protection necessary, including the use of line-of-sight inspection methods to guard against ATV’s. It is of primary importance to clear all employees from the blast area, guards should be posted at the entrance to all access roads leading to the blast area, and the blaster should communicate to the foreman about the impending blast. The blaster must go outside the blast area or stay inside a blasting shelter, and after receiving the feedback from the foreman and guards, blast signal needs to be sounded. A detailed study on safeguarding blast-affected areas is given by Furthermore, blasting regulations (30 CFR Part 77.1303) require that ample warning shall be given before blasts are fired, and all persons shall be cleared and removed from the blast area unless suitable blasting shelters are provided to protect persons endangered by concussion or flyrock from blasting. The administration of industrial safety rests on the foundation that accident investigation results in the identification of cause followed by the appropriate response or correction in procedure. This approach can be referred as reactive safety, since the safety response mechanism occurs after an accident. The proactive safety response mechanism occurs when corrective action is taken after a non-event called a near-miss. A benchmark safety study done in 1969 involving over 3 billion man-hours revealed for every serious or disabling or serious injury, 10 minor injuries occur, 30 property damage events occur, and 600 incidents occur with no visible injury or damage ( Dyno Nobel Corporation, like other large explosive manufacturers, provides product delivery to the minesite, and in fact into the very drill hole in mining operations. Exposure of an explosive’s manufacturer’s employees is therefore equal to miners. Dyno Nobel North America implemented a proactive safety program of which one the main elements was a near-miss reporting and evaluation procedure for their employees. The results have been excellent. For example, for the period from 1995 to 1998, lost time injury frequency rate decreased from 4.44 to 1.11, and lost time injury severity rate decreased from 95 to 29. The approach of reporting near-misses affected safety performance in a large magnitude. Effectively training the workforce in blasting hazard recognition and avoidance, and the safe use of explosives is an essential activity in reducing blasting incidents. In the United States, the use of explosives in mining is regulated at both the Federal and states’ level. The federal government and individual state governments maintain and enforce health and safety, and training standards to help minimize blasting mishaps that endanger life and property. While each government entity works toward the same goal, the federal government and state governments assume somewhat different approaches to achieving the goal. Under federal training regulations contained in Title 30, CFR, Parts 48 and 46, ( State level involvement in achieving the goal of safe blasting activities typically includes the establishment and implementation of a program of blasters’ training, examination, and certification. The general purposes of these programs are to ensure that “blasts” are designed, supervised, and executed by trained and competent personnel ( The historical trend over the 23-year period is a general decrease in the number of injuries and fatalities from blasting accidents for coal, metal and non-metal operations. Even though blasting accidents for all types of mining operations have declined, they continue to occur and cause fatalities and injuries. Mining personnel continue to suffer fatal and disabling injuries from blasting accidents. An analysis performed shows that the lack of blast area security and flyrock accounted for 281 (68.2%) accidents during the analyzed period. A major challenge facing users of blasting techniques is how to apply the state-of-the-art technology to assist them in evaluation of the potential to cause harm to workers, and to develop effective strategies for control and to minimize occupational health hazards associated with blasting. Training and education of personnel involved in blasting operations play a critical role in preventing fatalities and injuries, and should be focused on: codes and standards, workplace responsibility, assessing and developing accident prevention strategies, developing workplace safety procedures, implementing work practices that meet specified legislation and standards, identifying strategies for monitoring and updating safety and health information, effective occupational health and safety communications, and improving occupational health and safety performance.