Twenty-five different slope excavation and 19 different tunnel excavation observations, measurements and field studies were performed in order to create a Rock Mass Breakability Chart (RMBC) to select an excavation machine. These fields comprise different rock mass conditions. This developed chart consists of Rock Structure Index (RSI), which was developed in this research and rock mass definition formed in this study. RSI includes test results of Impact Hammer System (IHS), which was designed in this study to determine the breakage energy of rocks with impact, and also rock strength, the structure of rock mass and discontinuity properties. In regards to the rock mass classification, the definition that was already suggested by ISRM was used. Impact hammers used in different excavation fields were compared by using RMBC. It was concluded that the performance of the proposed chart is satisfactory.The most important studies on this subject are based on the performance prediction of impact hammers This research was conducted in order to create RMBC. In this chart; while the rock mass definition is determined by the volumetric joint count ( Selection of the rock excavation machines is quite a difficult process involving complex parameters Strength of the excavated rock materials, discontinuities and properties of the discontinuities are important for the impact hammer excavation Many parameters should be evaluated together in the selection of excavation machines. Although, there are many studies based on the performances of the machines run by cutting theories, the works based on the selection of the impact hammers have not been available yet. This study proposes a new rock mass rating for the selection of impact hammers. A new method, called Rock Structure Index (RSI), was developed in order to define the breakability by impact. New laboratory equipment was improved to calculate rock breaking energy. The data obtained from the tests of this equipment were used as RSI parameters. The other parameter related with rock material is UCS in RSI (indirect method: Block Punch Index for laminated-foliated rocks The most important part of this research is the determination of the energy spent during breaking of rocks by impact hammer. For this purpose, new laboratory equipment, IHS, has been developed. With the help of this equipment, minimum breaking energies of rock samples are calculated considering following cases: (i) different impact revolutions of this device, (ii) different impact forces, (iii) various bits, and (iv) strokes of different angles. The details of the system can be found from the other paper of Author Rock material strength is important in the selection of the rock excavation machine. It does not make any sense to excavate clay and basalt with the same machine. Thus, the uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) of rock is a parameter in RSI. Where UCS is not applicable, (laminated rocks) Block Punch Index (BPI) can be used to get UCS value. Here, UCS=5.1 BPI The condition of the rock mass where the excavation is to be made affects the performance of the excavation. If we consider excavations under the same conditions with the same impact hammer; it can be observed that there will be a big difference between hourly excavation rates of very big block rock mass and very blocky rock mass. Therefore, it was thought that the developed RSI must include the structural state of the rock mass. In RSI determination, structure rating (SR) recommended by Sonmez and Ulusay Rock masses contain discontinuities of different types, sizes and properties. These discontinuities affect the excavation significantly. Sometimes, discontinuities containing big blocky rock masses allow easy excavation and sometimes do not. In this part of the research, the integration of discontinuities to RSI is investigated. Here, again, surface condition rating (SCR) suggested by Sonmez and Ulusay The table of the chart, RSI, developed for the selection of the impact hammer consists of 4 parameters. The cumulative rating of MBE, SR, SCR and UCS parameters, the details of which were given above are given in Rock masses with different properties excavated by impact hammers using impact force. Impact hammer type varies depending on the rock properties to be excavated. Impact energy, weight of the machine body and weight of the hammer are important parameters to selection of impact hammers. In the light of literature and observation of this research, the classification was formed to integrate to proposed chart system. The impact hammer classification carried out under this research is given in In this classification impact energy, body weight and hammer weight are evaluated in order to determine the types of impact hammers. Impact hammers use impact forces to break the rock different from the other excavation machines. Although, there are lots of satisfactory studies about the selection and performance evaluation of the machines based on cutting theories, there are very limited studies on the selection of impact hammers. Many projects have problem due to the selection of incorrect hammer. Especially practicing engineers have some difficulties in selection of those machines and they could not reach satisfactory data. The main topic of this work is to prepare a chart providing some easiness to rock engineers for selecting impact hammers. Lots of field works in different rocks have been completed for 2 years. Works have been completed at 44 different fields. Samples taken from these fields have been prepared at laboratory for the newly generated IHS Tests and over 5000 experiments have been made about this issue. Otherwise, at the fields, measurements and experiments have been made over 1000 In very big blocky rocks, rates of 81–100 according to proposed RSI, it is found that usage of impact hammers is not economical. It is not necessary to use impact hammers in very small blocky and very soft rock mass (proposed RSI is between 1 and 20), instead scraping is more suitable for excavation. In very small blocky rock mass, neither RSI values are expected as between 61 and 100, nor this type of fields have been encountered. Moreover, rock masses shown in red color in the proposed chart are rarely seen. These types of fields have not been seen in our fields. As demonstrated in The proposed chart is based on a system that can easily be used for the selection of impact hammers by practicing rock engineer. This chart provides the definition of rock mass and selection of the impact hammers according to RSI values. Rock mass is defined by using All of the investigations and observations in these sites have been repeated five different times. At first, physical and mechanical properties of these rock samples from the sites were determined. Part of the proposed chart is related with rock material and rock mass properties. This part is defined as RSI which consists of impact effect, minimum breaking energy, rock strength, structural and discontinuity properties of rock mass. Rock mass is defined by When RMBC is examined, it can be seen that different impact hammers are recommended for different conditions of rock masses. Some parts of the chart are defined as transition zones. Transition zones are done by VBT/BT, BT/MT and MT/ST impact hammers. Machine selection in this transition is carried out by the rock engineer based on the condition of the rock mass. There is an important interaction between the impact hammers classified in this research and rock structure. When In RMBC, for the cases of very blocky rock masses and high RSI values of 81–100, impact hammer usage is not recommended unless it is necessary. The main reason for this is that a satisfactory excavation productivity will not be achieved. For this type of excavations, 15–25 Selection of an excavation machine is a very important decision due to its direct effects on initial investment and project costs. By the help of this research, a document that can be used easily by practical rock engineers was tried to be created. With these 2 years study, impact hammers are classified based on tunnel and slope excavation of different rock masses. A chart consisting of rock mass, rock strength, rock mass structure and discontinuity properties is created. RMBC is a document that can be used easily especially for practicing rock engineers. The application performance of the RMBS chart is found to be very high. The most important reason why this chart succeeds is that the parameters it contains. When these parameters are investigated, the breakability of rock mass through impact is a combination of rock strength, the properties of rock mass and the parameters which represent the excavation machine. In addition to the previous studies on that topic, the rock mass was defined with more than one property. Besides, the breakability of rocks by impact energy was analysed within the context of this study. This study includes field observations and laboratory studies together. In other words, the success of RMBC lies beneath the fact that it considers rock material, rock mass, machine properties and the parameters regarding the breakability of the rock by impact energy. This work was financially supported by