In froth flotation the individual particles have a probability of reporting to the concentrate by either attachment or entrainment. The net result of these probabilities is the observed mineral recovery. A probabilistic equation is presented to calculate the overall recovery in a unit from the mechanisms of attachment and entrainment, by assuming that these mechanisms are independent.
                  The form of the derived equation differs from that of Savassi (2005) and these differences are discussed. It is demonstrated that, for typical operating conditions and given a typical simulation fitting methodology, the equations are effectively equivalent.
                  However, consideration of attachment and entrainment as independent mechanisms yields an elegant derivation, a mathematically tractable solution and permits a more powerful and general approach to the calculation of solids recovery in different flotation units.A succinct derivation is presented of the recovery by the independent mechanisms of entrainment and attachment in a single cell in accordance with widely accepted flotation theory. It is then shown that the entrainment and attachment mechanisms can be combined as probabilities of recovery to yield a relation for the overall recovery. This represents the most significant novel contribution of this work. It is demonstrated that given a typical model fitting approach, the resulting equation for recovery is functionally equivalent to that due to Thereafter, the method is extended to the case of a bank of cells in series, demonstrating the power of this approach both in terms of extension of the equation to derivative systems and in terms of computational efficiency in flotation simulation. This section presents the terminology used in this work. Recovery by attachment is considered to be a first order kinetic process with respect to particle concentration in the pulp ( Substituting Eq. By definition the recovery by entrainment is: Combining Eqs. Assuming the cell is well mixed, the composition of the tailings stream is equal to the composition of the pulp and given that: Eq. Substituting Eqs. In flotation, particles can be recovered to the concentrate either by true flotation (attachment) or by entrainment. In this paper these two mechanisms are assumed to be independent and the probability of a particle being recovered by attachment is not influenced by its probability of being recovered by entrainment and vice versa. Considering flotation as a generic splitter, there is no inherent difference between recovery to the concentrate or tails. For clarity and mathematical convenience, let A be the event that a particle is In probability theory if the probability of two events The recovery of a particle class is the net effect of the probability of recovery of that class acting on a large number of particles. Hence the recovery of a particle class is, on average, equal to the probability of recovery for a single particle within the class. From Eq. Eqs. In contrast to the effective equivalence of Eqs. Leaving aside the theoretical advantages of mathematically separable mechanisms, consider for example the problem of determining the recovery by attachment and entrainment, and the overall recovery for a bank of mechanical flotation cells. Expanding Eq. Since Eq. An equation has been derived to simulate the flotation recovery in a mechanical cell from the mechanisms of attachment and entrainment. The key assumption used in the model is that these two mechanisms are independent. The resulting equation has been shown to be functionally equivalent to that due to The general form of recovery in a bank of cells has been discussed. It has been demonstrated that the equations developed for recovery by the independent mechanisms of attachment and entrainment yield conceptually simple, yet mathematically powerful descriptions of the flotation process. Although beyond the scope of this work, the approach presented has been used to calculate the recovery in batch cells and flotation columns by taking into account their respective differences in equations for attached and entrained recovery.