A roast-acid leaching process has been developed for upgrading titanium slag with high Ca and Mg to a synthetic rutile. The optimized roasting conditions used a Na2CO3 to slag weight ratio of 3:7 at 850°C–900°C for 1h. The roasted product was mainly comprised of sodium titanate, sodium ferrite and Na–Fe–Ti–O and Na–Mg–Ti–O phases. The impurities associated with the roasted product were leached in water and dilute sulfuric acid solution, while the soluble titanium precipitated as hydrated TiO2. The hydrated TiO2 was transformed into a synthetic rutile, assaying over 95% TiO2 and 0.82% MgO+CaO, by calcination.Titanium is an important industrial raw material and commonly exists in nature in the form of ilmenite (45%–67% TiO A number of pyrometallurgical and hydrometallurgical treatment processes have been developed to upgrade ilmenite concentrate. The hydrometallurgical processes include partial (or full) reduction roasting followed by acid leaching of the iron metal. The pyrometallurgical treatment processes include electric furnace smelting, plasma smelting, selective chlorination and other thermal reduction methods ( Panzhihua, China has a very large resource of titanium–vanadium ore which is processed into an ilmenite concentrate by conventional means. The concentrate can be processed into titanium slag by electric furnace smelting where the TiO Investigations ( In this work, a roasting-acid leaching process was investigated to produce synthetic rutile from Panzhihua titanium slag with high Ca and Mg contents. The experimental parameters affecting the roasting process were investigated and optimized. The titanium slag used in the work was provided by Panzhihua Iron & Steel Company, China. The chemical composition, phases present and microstructure were characterized by X-ray fluorescence, X-ray diffraction and scanning electron microscopy as outlined in Finely ground (100% < In this work, the effects of Na The effect of various weight ratios of Na The effect of roasting temperature on the TiO  According to the optimum conditions, Panzhihua titanium slag was treated by Na It can be concluded that the Na–Fe–Ti–O and Na–Mg–Ti–O phases present in the roasted product are dissolved by sulfuric acid. The major impurities of Na, Fe, Mg and other elements remained in solution while the Ti hydrolyzed forming a precipitate of hydrated TiO It is interesting to note that A roast-acid leaching process has been developed to produce synthetic rutile from Panzhihua titanium slag with a high Ca and Mg content. The optimized roasting conditions used a Na This work was supported by the