This paper illustrates a new way for modeling and control of flotation processes based on froth appearances. As shown our previous work [Liu, J., MacGregor, J.F., Duchesne, C., Bartolacci, G., 2005. Monitoring of flotation processes using multiresolutional multivariate image analysis. Minerals Engineering 18 (1), 65–76], scores of the MR-MIA features can be viewed as numerical estimates of froth status or health. Therefore, scores of the MR-MIA features can be directly used in froth control as well as in froth modeling by employing the scores as process outputs (dependent variables).
                  When applied to real froth images and corresponding process data, PLS regression provides good R
                     2 (the fraction of variance of dependent variables explained by the regression model) and Q
                     2 (the fraction of variance predicted for dependent variables not used in the regression model) values for both steady-state and dynamic causal models. Simulation study shows that a controller designed using the steady-state causal model provided control performances which were very satisfactory in achieving desired froth appearances.Due to the frequent and random disturbances to flotation circuits, there has been the need for automatic control of flotation processes for more than three decades ( A typical flotation control scheme ( For these reasons mentioned above, considerable amount of research has been done on the analysis of color, structure, and morphology of froth as discussed in the previous paper ( Although it has been proven in the literature that froth appearances are essentially process outputs which respond to process inputs such as reagents flow rate, there has been no attempts to build a causal model that predicts future froth appearances. The purpose of this paper is to illustrate a new method for modeling and control of flotation processes based on froth appearances – developing a steady-state causal model using MR-MIA ( As mentioned earlier, literature on flotation control using machine vision is very limited. Although it is very limited, the literature regarding froth-based flotation control confirms the possibility of the use of image features in controlling flotation processes. Froth image features reflect important process characteristics and respond to changes in manipulated variables. Therefore by employing image features as process outputs, it is possible to build a causal process model that can predict image features from the given values of manipulated variables, and furthermore any model-based control technique can be applied to froth-based flotation control using the causal model. The use of a model-based control technique will provide better control performance compared to simple PID or rule-based controllers. Suppose the process model A controller based on this model will act as a stabilizing controller ( The Laronde image dataset ( Because only one manipulated variable was changed during each test (CuSO In order to compare PLS regression results using the DWT and linear scale CWT (see Although there are several manipulated variables in a flotation circuit that can be used to control froth appearances, often only one manipulated variable, which has the most dominant effect on froth appearances, is used to control the appearances manually, or is paired with an estimated froth appearance in a PID (Proportional-Integral-Derivative) control loop when machine vision solutions are used. For example, only activator (CuSO There have been several attempts to account dynamics into PLS models by using time-shifted data matrices or time-shifted PLS inner relations, yielding multivariate moving average (MA) or autoregressive moving average (ARMA) models ( A dynamic model is developed using the dataset from the first plant test. The dataset have 243 observations including both steady-states and transition states; each observation consists of two PCs from the averaged MR-MIA features, and the corresponding feed conditions and one manipulated variable (flow rate of CuSO The steady-state models developed in Section Following Based on the PLS model using the linear scale CWT in A second control move is also illustrated in This paper discusses and illustrates a new method for froth-based flotation modeling and control that can be used as part of comprehensive flotation control systems. The new method is based on the causal process model predicting future froth appearances from the given values of manipulated variables and observed values of the process variables. With this model, the new values of manipulated variables for achieving specified froth appearances can be obtained via optimization. Simulation using the steady-state causal model provided control performance that was very satisfactory in achieving a specified froth appearance. The results from dynamic process modeling showed the possibility of using advanced model-based control techniques such as MPC in controlling flotation processes based on froth appearances. Also this paper compares wavelet size signatures calculated from the DWT and integer scale CWT. The size signature using linear scale CWT provides a bubble size histogram with constant bin width and thus provides better performance in steady-state process modeling as well as characterizing froth images. The continuous wavelet transform (CWT) of a signal The discrete wavelet transform (DWT) computes the CWT at dyadic scale The wavelet size signature calculated using the DWT in In order to compare size signatures from the DWT and linear scale CWT, 20 steady-state images from the Laronde image dataset in For each steady-state, 100 bootstrapped estimates of the bivariate mean of two PCs are calculated from the 20 steady-state PCs pairs for both the DWT and linear scale CWT cases. After scaling, the estimated means of the DWT and linear scale CWT cases are shown in Figs.