Because of the physical, chemical and environmental risks related to industrial wastes and the high consumption of finite natural resources in the construction industry, this paper presents an ecological and sustainable way to manufacture ceramic products using calamine hydrometallurgical processing wastes. This process generates a by-product called herein calamine process tailings (CPMT). Moreover, a sample of treated calamine process tailings (TCPMT) with low amounts of lead was also studied. The aim of this study is to characterize both wastes in order to assess the feasibility of their reuse potential as ceramic alternative materials. The effect of firing temperature on the chemical, mineralogical, environmental behaviors and the physical and mechanical properties of ceramic samples as well as the characterization of the fumes released during firing process are assessed. The results showed that increasing firing temperature enhances the flexural strength of ceramic samples and decreases their open porosity and water absorption. The TCPMT ceramic samples showed very different physical and mechanical properties in comparison with those made with CPMT. These latter samples present high flexural strength values and very low level of water absorption when fired at 1050 °C. This difference might be attributed to high amounts of glassy phase produced in CPMT fired samples. Moreover, the amount of leached metals is reduced significantly after the thermal treatment. However, arsenic, which was in a non-leachable form in the green samples, was found to be leached when tailings are fired. The scanning electron microscopy analysis (SEM-EDS) of condensed fumes evolved during the thermal treatment shows that lead is slightly volatilized.One of the ongoing worldwide concerns, from an economic and environmental point of view, is the management of high amounts of industrial and mine wastes daily generated. This concern continuously grows due to different reasons: (i) the scarcity of available spaces to dispose wastes, (ii) the negative environmental impact of some wastes, (iii) the increasing pressure on disposal alternatives, and (iv) the high rate of finite natural resources consumption (clays silts, sand, aggregates, etc.) mainly as construction materials. These finite resources are becoming increasingly scarce and many governments across the planet try to limit their exploitation. For example, the Chinese government has already forbidden in many regions the production of solid bricks using natural clay ( Zinc is one of the non-ferrous metals widely used in various applications: galvanizing industries, batteries and rubber manufacturing industries, cosmetics, construction and renovation, etc. The production of zinc in Morocco is estimated at 91,600 t in 2012 ( Calamine hydrometallurgical processing (CHP) is a direct sulfuric acid leaching method used to recover zinc from oxidized zinc ores. The term “calamine” derives from a location in Belgium and has no real mineralogical significance. The most known economic Zn-minerals are smithsonite (ZnCO However, before considering the valorization of any waste, some challenges related to transportation, processing and commercialization of the valorized products should be dealt with. Transport costs present the biggest challenge for waste producers and potential consumers. That is why it is crucial to consider possible options for reducing these costs. The use of these tailings as fine aggregates to manufacture mortar and concrete (cement based products) was assessed in the first place. However, results of this study were not encouraging. Characterization tests showed that some constraints linked to the hydration mechanisms were observed. This was explained by the presence of some pollutants such as Zn and Pb which are considered as setting retarders. So, it was important to find another way of valorization. In this study, the feasibility to produce ceramic materials from calamine process mine tailings is assessed. Ceramic industry was chosen due to high demand on ceramic products and because Marrakech city is one of the main centers of pottery and ceramic production in Morocco. Nevertheless, no study has been made to characterize and determine the sintering behavior of CPMT for investigating their potential reuse as ceramic materials. Due to their content in fluxing agents (K CPMT was supplied by Hajar Hydrometallurgy Plant (HHP), a subsidiary of Managem Group; 35 km far away from Marrakech city, Morocco. Calamine hydrometallurgical process ( A representative sample of CPMT was collected from the tailings dam with a moisture content of 20 wt.%. After the recovery of lead sulfide by flotation process, a representative sample of TCPMT was collected. The samples had agglomerated aggregates and were therefore dried at low temperature (60 °C), deagglomerated, sieved to produce <200 μm particles samples, homogenized, separated and sealed in plastic bags until they were tested. The major elements were determined by X-ray fluorescence (Bruker, Tiger Model) and expressed as oxide weight percentages. Traces analysis was performed using an ICP-AES device (Perkin Elmer Optima 3100 RL) following a HNO The mineralogical composition of fired and unfired samples was determined by X-ray diffraction (Bruker AXS Advance D8), using CuKα The thermogravimetric analysis of the calamine tailings was carried on using a TA Instruments In order to assess the potential use of calamine tailings as alternative materials in ceramic industry, rectangular prismatic proofs were prepared. The wastes were mixed with water (targeting 14 wt.% humidity), compressed with a hydraulic press to prepare 100 × 20 × 12 mm proofs. The manufactured samples were air-dried at room temperature for 24 h and then oven-dried for another 24 h at 60 °C to remove the remaining water content. The dried samples were then fired at different temperatures (950, 1000 and 1050 °C) in an electric muffle furnace with a heating rate of 1.5 °C/min. The soaking time at the desired temperature was fixed at 3 h. The fired samples were then cooled according to the proper muffle furnace inertia. The physical and mechanical properties of fired samples were investigated. Water absorption, open porosity and bulk density were tested according to The quantitative phase analysis of the sintered samples at 500, 800 and 1050 °C was performed by TOPAS 4.2 program based on Rietveld analysis. It is a structure analysis new generation software where profile fitting techniques (single line fitting, indexing, whole powder pattern decomposition, ab-initio structure determination in direct space from powder and single crystal data, Rietveld structure refinement (RSR) and quantitative Rietveld analysis) are used. In this study, the combination of RSR and quantitative Rietveld analysis is adopted. This technique was used also by Moreover, the environmental behavior of unfired and fired samples was assessed according to the Toxicity Characteristic Leaching Procedure, TCLP (US Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA) Method 1311). Extraction fluid No.1 was used to evaluate the mobility of inorganic species. After filtration, the leachate was collected, acidified for preservation and analyzed by ICP-AES. The characterization of the released gases was realized using an apparatus composed of a horizontal tubular furnace coupled with a condenser system. The composition of the condensed products was determined by SEM-EDS. The particle size distribution of wastes powders is shown in The chemical analysis was performed on unfired and fired calamine tailings (1000 °C) ( Lead content is revealed to be much lower in TCPMT (0.8 wt.%) in comparison with CPMT (1.8 wt.%). This was predictable due to the flotation of lead sulfide. Zinc content decreased slightly after flotation from 2.2 wt.% (CPMT) to 2.1 wt.% (TCPMT) due to a possible entrainment during flotation. The content of the other minor trace elements in the calamine tailings was lower than 620 ppm ( The loss on ignition is almost identical in both tailings (18.8 wt.%, 19.7 wt.%). After thermal treatment, it is highly reduced due to a good decomposition of gypsum and carbonates. Based on XRD analysis ( The mineralogical analysis of the studied tailings is complicated by the presence of amorphous materials. Hence, polished sections of the raw materials were studied by scanning electron microscopy. In order to understand the heavy metals behavior during firing and leaching, it was important to study their bearing minerals using SEM coupled with EDS analysis. During thermal treatment, various mineralogical transformations take place. Therefore, calamine tailings samples fired at different temperatures (500, 800 and 1050 °C) were analyzed by X-ray diffraction. When the firing temperature was increased to 500 °C, the gypsum disappeared and transformed into anhydrite whereas magnetite (Fe  After thermal treatment, various transformations took place. Hence, heavy metals bearing phases may change and affect their leaching behavior. The TG/dTG curves of calamine tailings ( The main physical and mechanical properties of fired samples at different temperatures are presented in CPMT and TCPMT fired samples present very different properties. The flexural strength was increased in the case of CPMT from 4.6 (950 °C) to 23.3 MPa (1050 °C) while it was increased to reach a maximum of 3.1 MPa with TCPMT fired samples. Simultaneously, open porosity and water absorption decreased significantly when increasing the firing temperature. This behavior is more pronounced with CPMT fired samples where open porosity and water absorption decreased to reach respectively 5 wt.% and 2 wt.% at 1050 °C. However, unlike CPMT fired samples, TCPMT fired samples present high values of open porosity (36 wt.%) and water absorption (22 wt.%). The higher porosity in TCPMT fired samples results from the great gas release following the decomposition of sulfate and carbonates during the firing process. Loss on ignition results supports this finding. The lower open porosity values observed in the case of CPMT fired samples may be explained by the formation of viscous liquid phase which fill the pores and enhance the sintering mechanism. As widely demonstrated in the literature, the liquid phase flow formed during firing process is an important factor that reduces the open porosity and facilitates the mass transport performance ( Moreover, the density was increased with increasing firing temperature and reaches a maximum of 2.25 g/cm In order to study the influence of thermal treatment on the calamine mine tailings leaching behavior, the American Characteristic Leaching Procedure test TCLP, method 1311, was used. The leaching tests ( During thermal treatment of mine calamine tailings, volatile compounds might be released to the atmosphere. Therefore, the characterization of the released gases is important to assess the environmental impact of using mine tailings in ceramic industry. The method adopted in this study was used to eliminate toxic elements and to concentrate valuable metals from industrial wastes ( Calamine processing wastes were characterized in order to assess their potential reuse as ceramic material. This type of waste is mainly composed of CaO, Fe The sintering and densification process was more pronounced in the case of CPMT fired samples. The flexural strength of CPMT fired samples at 1050 °C was seven times higher than that of TCPMT ones. The open porosity and water absorption were decreased significantly with the thermal treatment while density increased. The leaching test indicated that Pb, Zn and Cd were mobile in the unfired calamine tailings. After thermal treatment, their mobility was significantly reduced. Arsenic was found to be leachable in the fired samples. This behavior may be explained by the enhancement of the iron oxides crystallinity and/or a change from arsenides into arsenates and make it more mobile in the fired matrix. Because of the increase of As, Pb and Zn mobility after thermal treatment, it will be unsafe to use calamine tailings in this form as ceramic materials. It will be necessary either to define an optimum of substitution of natural clay by these tailings in order to dilute the As leaching risks or to incorporate adsorbents (magnetite on a zeolite or perlite matrix) in the raw materials before using as ceramic materials. The incorporation of adsorbents in the production of ceramics is increasingly studied as a valuable alternative for the stabilization of oxyanions and other heavy metals ( We are grateful for the financial support from the International Research Chairs Initiative, a program funded by the