The displacement and deformations of rock mass due to underground mining has often resulted in major disasters throughout the world, frequently inflicting heavy losses of life and damage to property. And these disasters have motivated the development of rock mass mechanics. The prediction of displacement of rock mass and their surface effects is an important problem of the rock mass mechanics in the excavation activities especially the coal and metal mining in mountainous areas. Based on results of the statistical analysis of a large amount of measured data in mining engineering, the fundamental fuzzy model of displacements and deformations of rock mass is established by using the theory of fuzzy probability measures. The theories of both two- and three-dimensional problems are developed and applied to the analysis of engineering problems in excavation and underground mining in mountainous areas. The agreement of the theoretical results with the field measurements shows that our model is satisfactory and the formulae obtained are valid and thus can be effectively used for predicting the displacements and deformations and the safety evaluation of the buildings on the ground.In both the underground and surface mining, if a void is excavated in a rock continuum, the load formerly applied on the rock in the opening will be transferred either to the rock surrounding the opening or to the supports (pillars) within the opening or both, and finally to the ground surface, hence resulting in a macroscopically nonuniform deformation of the surface in the horizontal or vertical direction. If the uneven deformation or subsidence (i.e. differential subsidence on the top of the mined-out area) cannot be effectively controlled then it will cause damage and even a disaster, such as deformation or even cracking of buildings, particularly tall buildings. This means that the failure of a building is to a great extent controlled by the presence of differential subsidence rather than the absolute magnitude of subsidence It is difficult to calculate the accurate displacement of every point in a body of rock because of the complexity of the problem. Instead, various approximate methods have been used for this calculation. In recent years, in mining engineering in particular, theory of fuzzy mathematics has been applied to analyze the problems of displacement and deformations of rock mass due to underground mining In this paper, the application of the fuzzy probability measures to the analysis of the rock mass displacements due to underground mining in mountainous areas is described. We first briefly give several definitions of fuzzy probability  Suppose a triplet Let fuzzy events  If Here formulae (1) and (2) are Lebesgue–Stieltjes integrals. Because  Let We shall restrict our discussion to the ground subsidence due to ore mining, although a more general subsidence due to excavation may be discussed in a similar manner. When the subsidence of overburden takes place due to the underground mining, some points in the associated surface will deviate from their equilibrium positions, and so displacement will occur. The positions of these points can be denoted by a fixed rectangular coordinate system, as shown in Because a ground subsidence is controlled by many factors such as geologic conditions, the presence of ground water, the properties of rock mass and mining conditions, it is difficult to predict the ground subsidence accurately. Because the theory of fuzzy mathematics is generally taken to embrace the whole field of imprecisely described systems, the above theory of fuzzy probability can be used for this prediction. For this purpose, we first describe the assignment of the membership function for the plane problem. Consider an Now the membership function for engineering problems can be assigned by the membership function of the subsidence surface to the fuzzy subset The statistical analysis is made by using a large amount of measured data, and the results obtained show that The above density distribution function (i.e. the distribution function for the surface subsidence) can be established by using the statistical theory of probability. In the case of the mining of ore, the subsidence of ground surface depends on many factors. We shall consider the theory of the plane problems as particular cases of rock mass movements. In the From The fuzzy probability of slope, The value calculated from formula When a subsidence takes place in the underground rock mass, there must exist one subsidence point In the space rectangular coordinates, let In the In the In the case of the underground mining in mountainous areas (as shown in The fuzzy measure formula of ground subsidence in the From formula The fuzzy measure of ground subsidence in the In the two-dimensional case, the ground subsidence W ( In the three-dimensional case, the ground subsidence The formula of tilt ( In the The formula of directional slope The formula of curvature in the The formula of directional curvature The formula of horizontal displacement in the The formula of horizontal strain in the The formula of vertical strain is The similar discussion can be made for the three-dimensional problems of the multiseam mining.  Mou-Mine, Shan-dong Province The topography in the district is complex, with the maximum relative difference of height up to 30 In order to demonstrate the application of the formula for the fuzzy probability measures of rock mass displacements some examples are given of the practical application of the above theoretical results.  The engineering parameters can be determined by the artificial neural networks (ANNs) method. Recently, ANNs, has begun to be used in rock and soil mechanics and geotechnical engineering Neural networks are nonlinear dynamic systems that have important features, such as self-learning, adaptive recognition, nonlinear dynamic processing and associative memory. They have the ability to learn knowledge from historical data (e.g. A–E in Neural network models are set up by learning or training. If a network model is trained with a large number of input–output pairs, it can produce an appropriate output for untrained inputs. More than 50 neural network models have been devised so far, and it is found that the back-propagation learning algorithm based on the generalized delta rule by Rumelhart et al. The BPNN generally consists of many sets of nodes arranged in layers (e.g. input, hidden and output layers). The output signals from one layer are transmitted to the subsequent layer through links that amplify or attenuate or inhibit the signals using weighting factors. Except for the nodes in the input layer, the net input to each node is the sum of the weighted outputs of the nodes in the previous layer. An activation function such as the sigmoid logistic function is used to calculate the output of the nodes in the hidden and output layers. We can divide the BPNN into five subsidiary nets for the sake of predicting five parameters ( In topological structure of BPNN in The parameters of rock mass displacements are obtained using a BPNN method ( From these data in  Wangjiazhai Coal Mine, Shui-cheng Bureau of Mining, Guizhou Province The topography in the district is complex, with the maximum relative difference of height up to 125 The stope face has a strike length 330 From these data in From these data in The theoretical horizontal displacement curve was plotted using the above formulas and was compared with the observed data ( The theoretical subsidence curve was plotted using the above formulae and was compared with the observed data (  Hong-lingwan No.4 Coal Mine The mining thickness of the coal seam is 1.80 The topography in the district is complex, with the maximum relative difference of height up to 100 The stope face has a strike length 140 From these data in The theoretical results are given in The agreement of the theoretical results with the field measurements shows that the model is satisfactory and the formulae obtained are valid, and thus can be effectively used for predicting the displacements and deformations due to underground mining in mountainous areas. In this paper, by applying the concepts of fuzzy probability measures to actual cases of excavation, mining, ground surface movement and subsidence have been analyzed and the corresponding membership function is established. The approximate subsidence and horizontal displacement have been calculated and compared with the recorded data obtained from monitoring stations. The comparison shows that the theoretical prediction is in agreement with the observations. The formulae derived in this paper have been confirmed by a large amount of measured data. The fuzzy model, therefore, is valid for solving the problems of the rock mass displacement and ground subsidence due to underground mining, especially the mining of coal and metal in mountainous areas. The author wishes to thank Professor J.A. Hudson for reading the manuscript and making some useful suggestions and corrections. The project was supported by the research fund of the key laboratory of Rock and Soil Mechanics, Institute of Rock and Soil Mechanics, the Chinese Academy of Sciences, CAS under grant no. Z110406, which is gratefully acknowledged.