Catalytic aqueous-phase reforming (APR) can be applied to process the organic compounds in the water fractions derived from the Fischer-Tropsch (FT) synthesis. This work aimed at finding an active nickel-based catalyst to convert organic compounds typically found in FT-derived waters, such as alcohols, into hydrogen. In addition, this work aimed at proposing potential reaction pathways that explain the product distribution resulting from the APR of C1–C3 alcohols. Solutions with 5% mass fraction of either methanol, ethanol, propan-1-ol or propan-2-ol in water were processed in APR at 230 °C and 3.2 MPa over different nickel-based catalysts in a continuous packed-bed reactor. Methanol was successfully reformed into hydrogen and carbon monoxide with conversions up to 60%. The conversion of C2–C3 alcohols achieved values in the range of 12% to 55%. The results obtained in the APR of C2–C3 alcohols suggest that in addition to reforming to hydrogen and carbon monoxide, the alcohols underwent dehydrogenation and decarbonylation. The most stable catalyst, nickel-copper supported on ceria-zirconia, reached feedstock conversions between 20% and 60% and high hydrogen selectivity. Monometallic nickel supported on ceria-zirconia catalysts reached higher H2 yields; however, the yield of side products, such as alkanes, was also higher over the monometallic catalysts. Accordingly, ceria-zirconia nickel-based supported catalysts constitute suitable candidates to process the alcohols in the water fractions derived from the FT synthesis.The water fraction derived from the Fischer-Tropsch (FT) process contains organic, water-soluble compounds that are challenging for conventional wastewater treatment processes [ Aqueous-phase reforming takes place at low temperatures, 200 °C to 250 °C, and above the bubble point pressure of the feedstock [ In a previous work on the APR of methanol, doping of nickel on alumina with copper or cerium enhanced the hydrogen production compared to the monometallic catalyst [ This work focuses on comparing the APR of methanol, ethanol, propan-1-ol and propan-2-ol. Water solutions of these alcohols were selected as model feedstock because they are representative of the FT-derived water fraction. Self-prepared nickel catalyst on ceria-zirconia supports with different ceria contents, and nickel doped with cerium on γ-alumina were selected due to their high activity and hydrogen selectivity, reported in previous studies [ Ceria-zirconia supports with mass percentage of ceria in zirconia equal to 17% or 25% were supplied by MEL Chemicals in powder form. Engelhard supplied the γ-Al The catalysts listed in The equipment and methods utilized for the characterization of catalysts were detailed in [ Aqueous solutions prepared with Milli-Q water and 5% mass fraction of either MeOH, EtOH, 1-PrOH or 2-PrOH were processed in APR over the catalysts listed in Ideally, the reforming of MeOH, EtOH, 1-PrOH or 2-PrOH results in the formation of H Methanol full reforming: Ethanol full reforming: Propan-1-ol full reforming: Propan-2-ol full reforming: WGS reaction: CO The results presented in this work are based on product analyses taken at approximately 6 h on stream, when the amount of gases in the outlet stream had stabilized to nearly constant concentrations after a gradual increase. The parameters used to evaluate the experimental results are mass balance (MB, Eq. 8), conversion ( In Eqs. The ceria-zirconia-supported catalysts were impregnated with either nickel, or nickel and cerium or copper, and the metal content in the catalyst was determined with AAS analysis (  The surface area, and pore volume and average pore diameter of supports, and calcined and spent catalyst are also included in  The crystallite size of Ni species in calcined catalysts and in spent catalysts determined by Scherrer equation are presented in To maximize the H H Mainly gaseous products were obtained also in the APR of EtOH over Ni/17CeZr and Ni/25CeZr. However, 30% selectivity to liquid products indicates that full conversion to gases and WGS (Eqs. 2 and 5) were not the only reaction pathways, and side reactions to produce ethanal took additionally place. Ni/17CeZr and Ni/25CeZr reached also similar conversions close to 15%. However, H The APR of 1-PrOH resulted in liquid product selectivities around 25%, over Ni/17CeZr, Ni/25CeZr and NiCu/25CeZr. Therefore, as in the APR of EtOH, full conversion to gases and WGS (Eqs. 3 and 5) was not the only reaction pathway and side reactions to produce liquid compounds took additionally place. The conversion of 1-PrOH over Ni/25CeZr, 44%, was twice as high as over NiCu/25CeZr, and three times as high as over Ni/17CeZr. H In the APR of 2-PrOH, similar results were obtained over Ni/25CeZr and NiCu/25CeZr differing from the APR of other alcohols in the liquid selectivity. The APR of 2-PrOH resulted in higher liquid product selectivity around 65% and its conversion was comparable to that achieved in the APR of MeOH, close to 60%. However, H The discussion included in the previous paragraphs suggests that the APR reaction pathway of C The APR of MeOH over different Ni-based, and Cu- and Ce-containing catalysts was conducted to evaluate the effect of metal dopants on the catalyst performance. Methanol conversion and H The yields obtained over NiCu/25CeZr, compared to that of Ni/25CeZr, suggest that copper addition promoted the WGS reaction and methanation was less favourable. Additionally, MeOH conversion was lower over NiCu/25CeZr than over Ni/25CeZr. To evaluate the effect of Ni content on the APR of MeOH, the Ni loading was used to calculate the H Methanol is a simple molecule with no C Conversion and H MeOH ( The main reaction pathways in the APR of MeOH can be deduced from the product distribution ( The APR of MeOH produces H In the APR of EtOH, H Ethanol dehydrogenation Ethanal decarbonylation Ethanol decarbonylation In the dehydrogenation of EtOH, ethanal is formed, as previously suggested in a different study [ The formation of CH The APR of 1-PrOH was conducted over Ni/17CeZr, Ni/25CeZr and NiCu/25CeZr. Hydrogen was the main product over these three catalysts. Over NiCu/25CeZr, CH Hydrogen can be produced via full reforming of 1-PrOH to gases and WGS (Eqs. 3 and 5). Additionally, H Propan-1-ol dehydrogenation Propanal decarbonylation Propan-1-ol decarbonylation Over Ni/17CeZr, C Carbon monoxide was not detected in the APR of 1-PrOH over NiCu/25CeZr and CO The conversion and product distribution in the APR of 2-PrOH was similar over Ni/25CeZr and NiCu/25CeZr ( Propan-2-ol dehydrogenation Acetone decarbonylation In a different study [ The product distribution in the APR of different alcohols originates from the C The APR of MeOH proceeds through O The APR of EtOH proceeds through O Full reforming of 1-PrOH to gases (Eq. 3) was less thermodynamically favourable than the dehydrogenation or decarbonylation of the alcohol (Eqs. 19 and 21). However, the experimental results indicates that the APR of 1-PrOH proceeds through O The APR of 2-PrOH mainly proceeds through C Catalytic APR of C Focusing on Ni/17CeZr, Ni/25CeZr and NiCu/25CeZr, these catalysts performed differently in the APR of C Ni/17CeZr, Ni/25CeZr and NiCu/25CeZr are potential catalysts to process the oxygenated hydrocarbons in FT-derived water fractions. The monometallic Ni/17CeZr and Ni/25CeZr are preferred to maximize the hydrogen production. Nonetheless, NiCu/25CeZr could be additionally considered because of its improved stability during the experiments, compared to the monometallic catalyst, and when more selective production of hydrogen among gases is required. The authors thank Dr. Pekka Simell, Prof. Klaus Hellgardt and Prof. Leon Lefferts for their guidance and support. We are grateful to Aleksi Rinta-Paavola for his help with the preparation and characterization of catalysts, to Tyko Viertiö and Eveliina Mäkelä for their help with the adsorption isotherm measurements, and to Laura Lonka for her help with the APR experiments. The Bioeconomy Infrastructure and the Raw materials research infrastructure (RAMI) that permitted conducting the experimental work for this study at both VTT and Aalto University. This work was funded by