Purpose
                  The purpose of this study was to review clinical and radiographic outcomes of perilunate dislocations and fracture-dislocations treated with arthroscopic reduction and percutaneous fixation.
               
                  Methods
                  Twenty patients who had an acute dorsal perilunate dislocation or fracture-dislocation were treated with an arthroscopic technique at a median interval of 3.9 days from the time of injury. They were retrospectively reviewed at a mean follow-up of 31.2 months (range, 18 to 61 months). Range of motion and grip strength were measured. Radiographic evaluations included time to scaphoid union, measurement of radiologic parameters, and any development of arthritis. Functional outcomes were determined by the modified Mayo wrist score; Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand questionnaire; and Patient-Rated Wrist Evaluation score.
               
                  Results
                  The flexion-extension motion arc and grip strength of the injured wrist averaged 79% and 78%, respectively, of the corresponding values for the contralateral wrists. The mean Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand score was 18, and the mean Patient-Rated Wrist Evaluation score was 30. According to modified Mayo wrist scores, overall functional outcomes were rated as excellent in 3 patients, good in 8, fair in 7, and poor in 2. Nonunion developed in 2 patients with a trans-scaphoid perilunate injury; 1 of the 2 underwent scaphoid excision and midcarpal fusion. On the basis of radiographic parameters, reduction obtained during the operation was maintained within normal ranges in 15 patients. Arthritis had not developed in any patient by the last follow-up.
               
                  Conclusions
                  This study suggests that arthroscopic reduction with percutaneous fixation is a reliable minimally invasive surgical method for acute perilunate injuries in that it provides proper restoration and stable fixation of carpal alignment and results in satisfactory functional and radiologic outcomes on a midterm basis.
               
                  Level of Evidence
                  Level IV, therapeutic case series.Note: To access the supplementary table accompanying this report, visit the February issue of Perilunate injuries are accompanied by severe disruptions of carpal anatomy that are characterized by a complete loss of contact between the lunate and surrounding carpal bones. The key to successful treatment of a perilunate dislocation or fracture-dislocation is the restoration of normal alignment of the carpal bones, followed by stable maintenance until healing. As a useful alternative for the treatment of perilunate injuries, arthroscopic reduction with percutaneous fixation has been suggested by several authors. The purpose of this study was to review the outcomes of arthroscopic reduction and percutaneous fixation performed in a consecutive series of patients with an acute perilunate injury to assess whether arthroscopic techniques are a reliable surgical option for the treatment of this challenging injury. Our hypothesis was that arthroscopic treatment of perilunate injuries would result in successful restoration of carpal alignment and good functional outcomes. This retrospective review comprised 20 patients with a perilunate dislocation or a fracture-dislocation who were treated with arthroscopic reduction and percutaneous fixation between April 2002 and November 2008. Our series included 5 perilunate dislocations, 12 trans-scaphoid perilunate fracture-dislocations, and 3 trans-scaphoid trans-triquetral perilunate fracture-dislocations. There were 19 men and 1 woman with a mean age of 37.3 years (range, 19 to 57 years). The dominant wrist was involved in 8 patients. Fifteen patients sustained an injury during a fall from a height onto the outstretched hand. Three injuries were caused by motorcycle accidents, and the remaining 2 injuries occurred during snowboarding. There were no open injuries. The median time from the injury to operation was 3.9 days (range, 1 to 20 days). Six patients had concomitant fractures. Three patients had ipsilateral fractures, including an olecranon fracture, an intertrochanteric fracture, a patellar fracture, and a calcaneal fracture. The other 3 patients had contralateral fractures, including a distal radius fracture, an elbow fracture-dislocation, and a hip fracture-dislocation ( Eight patients showed symptoms suggesting carpal tunnel syndrome after the injury. Acute carpal tunnel syndrome developed within 24 hours in 4 patients, who underwent an index operation on an urgent basis. The remaining 4 patients visited our clinic 2, 3, 5, or 15 days after the injury, and arthroscopic surgery was performed within 24 hours. The symptoms resolved within 48 hours after arthroscopic reduction, and no patient required release of the transverse carpal ligament. The mean follow-up period was 31.2 months (range, 18 to 61 months). Outcomes were investigated by an independent observer who had not participated in the surgery. Range of motion was measured with a handheld goniometer, and grip strength was measured with a hydraulic dynamometer (JAMA; Asimov Engineering, Los Angeles, CA). Subjective outcomes were evaluated with the Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand (DASH) questionnaire Radiographs were evaluated by measuring the scapholunate gap, the lunotriquetral gap, the scapholunate angle, and the carpal height ratio at the time of surgery and at the last follow-up examination. Before arthroscopy was performed, a closed reduction had been attempted in the emergency department or operating room with the patient under anesthesia. Of 20 patients, 15 (75%) achieved a gross reduction of the capitolunate joint by manipulation. Of the 5 patients in whom the gross reduction failed, 3 did not present to our institution at the time of initial injury and underwent surgery more than 5 days after injury. The surgery was performed with the patient under brachial plexus block or general anesthesia. A Traction Tower (Linvatec, Largo, FL) was applied with 10 to 15 lb of traction. The 3-4 and 4-5 portals were initially used for removing clot and debris and evaluation of the radiocarpal joint. The 6U portal was created for separate outflow. The forearm was wrapped with a compressive elastic bandage, and continuous saline solution irrigation was instilled by gravity infusion from an elevated bag to minimize fluid extravasation. Through the radiocarpal portals, the palmar capsular ligaments, scapholunate and lunotriquetral ligaments, and triangular fibrocartilage complex were evaluated. In all patients we observed that the radioscaphocapitate ligament had ruptured to some extent whereas the long and short radiolunate ligaments remained relatively intact. After evaluation of the radiocarpal joint, the midcarpal space was entered at the midcarpal radial and midcarpal ulnar portals. Bone or cartilage fragments, as well as frayed edges of torn palmar capsular ligaments, if present, were thoroughly debrided or removed to facilitate reduction of the proximal intercarpal joint. In patients in whom failure to achieve a gross reduction by closed manipulation occurred, the lunate, which was displaced in a volar manner with or without the proximal fragment of the scaphoid, was effectively reduced by pulling it with the use of a probe. When the injury pattern was established, K-wires were inserted percutaneously into the scaphoid and triquetral bone under a fluoroscope. After proper placement of the K-wires into the carpal bones, the surgeon manipulated the scaphoid and triquetral bone to reduce the scapholunate and lunotriquetral intervals using K-wires as joysticks, while viewing the articular surface from the midcarpal portals. If the lunate needed to be rotated into the neutral position, a K-wire was inserted into the lunate dorsally and used as a joystick. When the anatomic reduction was restored, the wires were then driven across the intercarpal intervals into the lunate. For trans-scaphoid–type injuries, provisional K-wires were driven into the distal fragment of the scaphoid and not across the fracture site, and an additional K-wire was placed on the dorsum of the proximal pole of the scaphoid. These wires were then used as joysticks to further reduce the fracture anatomically, as viewed directly in the midcarpal portal. Longitudinal traction was released when the K-wires in the distal pole of the scaphoid were advanced across the fracture site into the proximal fragment to lessen the fracture gap. Percutaneous scaphoid fixation with a cannulated headless autocompression screw (Acutrak; Acumed, Beaverton, OR) was attempted in 11 patients, in whom the scaphoid fracture was not severely comminuted. Under fluoroscopic control, the wrist was gently flexed while the fracture was provisionally fixed with K-wires, and a guidewire was advanced from dorsal to volar along the central axis of the scaphoid, as described by Slade et al. After the operation, the wrist was immobilized in a short arm cast. The thumb was incorporated if a scaphoid fracture was involved. In ligamentous injuries, the K-wires transfixing the scapholunate and lunotriquetral intervals were removed at 10 weeks. In patients with a scaphoid fracture that had been fixed with K-wires, the K-wires were left in place until there was radiographic evidence of union. Active-assisted wrist motion was usually allowed at 10 weeks with the use of a thermoplastic short arm brace. Intensive physiotherapy was started after the scaphoid united and K-wires were removed. In 5 patients with failure to achieve a gross reduction by closed manipulation, it was found that the palmar capsular ligaments were torn and interposed between the lunate and capitate, which might be a cause of reduction failure with a closed method. Focal cartilage damage of the capitate was noted in 9 wrists, and a tip fracture of the volar rim of the lunate, attached by the volar capsule, was noted in 7 wrists. Of 15 scaphoid fractures, 9 had comminution. Of 15 patients with trans-scaphoid injuries, 6 showed combined scapholunate ligamentous injuries. These were considered grade II in 4 patients and grade III in 2 patients according to the classification suggested by Geissler et al. At the final evaluation, the mean flexion was 51° (range, 25° to 70°), which was 79% compared with the contralateral wrist. The mean extension was 53° (range, 30° to 70°), which was 80% of the contralateral wrist. The mean ulnar deviation was 30° (range, 18° to 42°), which was 81% of the contralateral wrist, and the mean radial deviation was 17° (range, 10° to 26°), which was 89% of the contralateral wrist. The mean pronation was 71° (range, 50° to 90°), and the mean supination was 79° (range, 55° to 90°). The mean grip strength was 78% (range, 62% to 94%) of the contralateral wrist at the final evaluation. The mean DASH and PRWE outcome scores were 18 (range, 1 to 36) and 30 (range, 5 to 52), respectively. The mean modified Mayo wrist score was 79 (range, 50 to 95). The overall functional outcomes according to the modified Mayo wrist score were rated as excellent in 3 patients, good in 8, fair in 7, and poor in 2. The 1 patient who underwent a 4-corner fusion with excision of the scaphoid was considered as having poor result. In the other patient who had a poor result, diffuse stiffness of the wrist and hand developed ( Radiologic measurements are summarized in The mean time to scaphoid union was 14 weeks (range, 9 to 21 weeks). Among the 15 trans-scaphoid perilunate injuries, nonunion of the scaphoid developed in 2 of 4 wrists that were fixated with K-wires. One patient with a trans-scaphoid trans-triquetral perilunate fracture-dislocation underwent arthroscopic surgery 20 days after injury. Loss of the carpal alignment with an avascular change of the proximal fragment of the scaphoid was observed at the 6-month follow-up evaluation; a scaphoid excision and 4-corner fusion were subsequently performed. This patient was excluded from the final examination. The other patient who had had a trans-scaphoid perilunate fracture-dislocation showed a fracture gap on the computed tomography scans taken at 12 months after the operation. Because the patient did not complain of wrist pain or functional disability, no additional treatment was performed. Eighteen patients were able to return to their full work duties. Two patients who had been employed as full-time laborers before the injuries had some limitation in their job activities. One patient returned to the same occupation with modified work duties, and the remaining patient found a new occupation with light work duties. Besides the scaphoid fractures that failed to achieve union, there were no conspicuous complications, except skin irritation near the buried pins in 2 patients, which resolved after the pins were removed. To investigate the proper healing of interosseous ligaments, we compared radiologic parameters measured on initial postoperative radiographs with those of final radiographs. Although the results showed a tendency toward a gradual loss of reduction with time, this would not indicate the loss of stability based on the facts that a small change in parameters was observed and the final radiologic values were within normal ranges in most patients. It should be noted that the major portion of our series comprised trans-scaphoid perilunate injuries, in which the scapholunate interosseous ligament was intact or partially injured. When we focused on the 5 patients with a pure perilunate dislocation, the final scapholunate gap and scapholunate angle, which are the parameters for assessing the scapholunate instability, were also within normal ranges: the mean scapholunate gap was 1.8 mm (range, 1.5 to 2.0 mm), and the mean scapholunate angle was 58° (range, 54° to 60°). Most surgeons have suggested that the key to a successful long-term result in the treatment of a perilunate dislocation or fracture-dislocation is open repair of interosseous and capsular ligaments and internal fixation of the fracture. Scaphoid nonunion might be more common despite adequate fixation of the perilunate injuries. This is attributed to the high degree of displacement, comminution, and soft-tissue injuries compromising the blood supply when compared with an isolated scaphoid fracture. Recently, percutaneous fixation of acute scaphoid fractures under the guidance of a fluoroscope has been accepted as a standard surgical method. Although functional outcomes are not well related with radiologic results, post-traumatic arthritis has been reported to be common after these injuries. Although we could reduce and percutaneously fix the intercarpal relation with the aid of an arthroscope, direct repair of the torn capsule or ligaments was not possible by this method. Many surgeons have emphasized the need for repair of the interosseous ligament to stabilize the carpal architecture, As a limitation of this study, the follow-up period is insufficient to prove the efficacy of arthroscopic techniques in preventing the development of post-traumatic arthritis. Additional limitations of this study are the relatively small number of cases and heterogeneity of pathologies with pure dislocations and fracture-dislocations. This study suggests that arthroscopic reduction with percutaneous fixation is a reliable minimally invasive surgical method for acute perilunate injuries in that it provides proper restoration and stable fixation of carpal alignment and results in satisfactory functional and radiologic outcomes on a midterm basis. 