 Solid-state chemists characterize materials with respect to their chemical and physical properties, structure, and bonding, as well as define how these properties are controlled by the chemical bonding and microscopic structure. They play an increasingly important role as part of a team of condensed matter specialists whose common goal is to design materials with optimum properties for critical applications. Improved economic performance in a globally competitive economy is strongly dependent upon materials development. Materials problems limit the development of a variety of technologies, including high-temperature superconductors, high-energy density batteries, structural and insulating materials able to withstand extremely high temperatures, improved heterogeneous catalysts, improved electronic materials, optics compatible with very high laser intensities, stabile nuclear waste containment materials, and longer lasting electrodes for fuel cells and magnetohydrodynamic generators. To solve such problems and to optimize performance, it is necessary to control the molecular-level structure and bonding and to understand the structure–property relationship. The syntheses and fabrication processes themselves are therefore critical for preparation of solid-state materials which display the desired properties. Properties of interest include the chemical reactivity as well as the electronic, magnetic, optical, and mechanical properties. Characterization of the detailed chemical structure and bonding of a solid is a prerequisite to the understanding and control of the chemical and physical properties. In general the properties of a solid are controlled by the macroscopic and the microscopic structures. The macroscopic characteristics (e.g., dislocations) predominantly influence the mechanical properties, such as strength for metals and ceramics. The microscopic structure (interatomic or molecular-level structure) is controlled by the chemical bonding. Solids are classified according to their chemical bonding as metals, semiconductors, or insulators. Complete structural characterization of a material involves not only the elemental composition for major components and a study of the crystal structure, but also the impurity content (impurities in solid solution and/or additional phases) and stoichiometry. Noncrystalline materials can display unique behavior, and noncrystalline second phases can alter properties. Both the long-range order and crystal imperfection or defects must be defined. For example, the structural details which influence properties of oxides include the impurity and dopant content, nonstoichiometry, and the oxidation states of cations and anions. These variables also influence the point-defect structure, which in turn influences chemical reactivity, and electrical, magnetic, catalytic, and optical properties. Point defects are imperfections in the actual crystalline architecture as compared to the ideal lattice in which each atom site is filled with the appropriate element. They can influence properties at extremely low levels (ppb or ppm). Typical point defects include crystal sites with missing atoms (vacancies), atoms positioned in sites that are not filled by the crystal structure in question (interstitials), crystal sites containing impurity atoms (dopants), and cations with different oxidation states. Because mass, charge, and the number of lattice sites must be conserved, unusual oxidation states can be introduced (in dopants or predominant cations) and nonstoichiometric compositions stabilized. For example, Ni(III) can be formed in NiO, which nominally contains Ni(II) ions, and nickel vacancies (V  The determination of how nonstoichiometry is accommodated (i.e., by what type and amount of defect) is an active research area. Nonstoichiometry can also be accommodated by subtle changes in structure known as extended defects or crystallographic shear. Crystallinity, impurity levels, point-defect structure, and nonstoichiometry are each controlled by or influenced by the preparation method; therefore, it is discussed further in Surface properties can differ from the bulk structurally, both as clean surfaces or because of products formed on reactive surfaces (physisorbed or chemisorbed). The former can experience relaxation, that is, surface reconstruction due to the distortion in bonding for surface atoms which are lacking bonds. Impurity segregation at a surface can further alter properties, as can second phases formed on a surface. The activity of heterogeneous catalysts and corrosion is controlled by such surface properties and by the bulk and surface point-defect structures. Phases formed on semiconductor surfaces can change the electrical properties in an uncontrolled, deleterious fashion. Oxide passivation layers on compound semiconductors (e.g., mercury cadmium telluride IR detectors or gallium arsenide solar cells) can be grown to impart protection to the surfaces and to stabilize electrical properties by preventing uncontrolled reactions. Interfaces between two bulk phases, between the bulk and a surface, or at grain boundaries can further complicate the chemistry. Grain boundaries in polycrystalline materials can contain second phases (crystalline or noncrystalline) and have significant width. This is termed an interphase. On the other extreme, highly ordered (coherent) interfaces can occur between two microcrystallites (or grains). A second phase in a boundary can impart unique electrical properties, significantly influencing the characteristics of a capacitor, for example. Furthermore, dopants may segregate to a grain boundary phase, affecting boundary and bulk phase properties. Positive temperature coefficient (PTC) resistors and boundary layer capacitor operation are based on such effects. Characterization of the preceding structural variables is complex and challenges an extensive array of modern analytical instrumentation. Diffraction techniques (X-ray, neutron, and electron) are basic to the study of crystal structures. Improved data analysis techniques make these methods even more powerful for the study of powders. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy has become a powerful tool for the study of solids with the advent of magic angle spinning techniques. Neutron inelastic scattering, Raman scattering, and IR vibrational spectroscopic analyses have been traditionally used to study lattice dynamics and solid-state phase transformations. They can also provide information about dopants and point-defect structures through studies of local modes as well as the extensive crystal structure information. High-resolution electron microscopy lattice imaging has proven to be a powerful tool for the study of crystal structures and extended defects. Electron spin resonance remains an effective tool for the study of paramagnetic solids, including impurities or low-level dopant structures. A variety of X-ray and electron spectroscopic techniques have been developed. These are particularly useful for providing information about elemental composition, surface structures, and cation oxidation states. The crystal structure of a solid can influence the properties of a material, for example, the structure must be noncentric for a material to demonstrate antiferromagnetic, ferromagnetic, ferroelectric, or piezoelectric behavior. Rapid cooling of a sample from high temperature and/or high pressure can quench in a structure that is not stable at room temperature or atmospheric pressure. High-pressure oxide polymorphs, which are more dense, have been studied to model the earth's interior. Furthermore, unique crystal structure characteristics of a material can allow structure–property variation, for example, insertion compound formation in layered materials. Solids can be prepared as single crystals, glasses, thin films, powders, or sintered powder compacts (ceramics). Powders may be noncrystalline or polycrystalline, exhibiting varying degrees of order. Powders may be used as catalysts or as precursors for crystal growing, glass formation, or ceramic formation. Numerous technologically useful components are produced by sintering powders, taking advantage of the unique electrical, magnetic, optical, or mechanical properties. Particle size is also an important powder variable. Production of powders with a controlled particle size distribution allows production of ceramics with uniform microstructures, improving mechanical properties. Strength of zirconia and zirconia–alumina refractories can be improved another way. Phase transitions which involve large atomic displacements lead to microcracking during heating and cooling, which implement fracture. Small-particle-sized zirconia stabilizes a high-temperature phase at lower temperatures. This behavior, called “phase transformation toughening,” has been explained on the basis of higher surface free energies for these systems. Since a phase transition from this high-temperature phase is eliminated, the structural properties are improved. Research has shown that novel chemical preparation methods allow the production of unique materials, demonstrating properties unattainable through more traditional methods. Traditional solid-state synthesis techniques require high temperatures to increase the kinetics and allow reaction in reasonably short times. It is common to react solid powders after mixing by grinding or ball-milling. To ensure complete reaction of two powdered reactants it may be necessary to carry out repeated grinding and heating cycles. The grinding is necessary to reduce diffusion distances and increase product homogeneity. Repeated grinding and high-temperature treatments introduce undesirable impurities. Low-temperature solid preparation methods (meaning from ∼900 Low-temperature syntheses can sometimes allow unique surface phases to be stable. Tetragonal barium titanate, prepared at ∼700 A variety of solution (water or organic solvent) techniques have been devised to control composition (e.g., the Ca:Mn ratio in an oxide such as CaMnO The sol–gel technique is a low temperature, solution-preparation method which has been applied extensively to produce glasses, fibers, coatings (protective or dielectric), abrasive particles, and controlled-pore-size catalyst–substrates. This method is used to prepare glasses, for example, that cannot be obtained upon quenching from the melt. Either colloidal or polymeric gels are formed by gelation of a precursor solution, involving hydrolysis and condensation of colloidal sols of metal salt or hydroxide solutions or of metal alkoxides. Drying, solvent removal, and firing conditions are then chosen to provide the desired microstructures and properties. Another important solution technique which should be mentioned is the “homogeneous precipitation technique.” It favors formation of a more ordered, crystalline product when two solutions are mixed to form an insoluble compound. The principle is slow precipitation, avoiding instantaneous formation of a disordered product. The benefits of all of the low-temperature solution techniques include homogeneity (atomic scale mixing) and minimal introduction of impurities. Other methods of preparation include chemical vapor deposition (CVD) and electrochemical methods. The latter are used to form thin films and protective coatings as well as battery electrodes. Since this is generally a low-temperature method, the structure can differ from that of the same material prepared at a higher temperature. It can be disordered or amorphous. Chemical vapor deposition involves vapor phase transport of volatile organometallics or other metal-containing species to the reaction site, and is used in the production and development of semiconductor devices. In some instances materials with potentially useful properties have not been exploited until prepared as pure crystals and films. Examples of this include doped polythiazyl, (SN) An exciting example, demonstrative of every aspect of solid-state chemistry, is the development of high-temperature superconducting oxides, which has followed the 1986 discovery of superconducting YBa Control of the structure during preparation and processing allows one to control the properties and to optimize material performance for particular applications. Thorough structural characterization is a prerequisite. Based on the knowledge of how synthesis and processing influence structure and of how structure controls properties, the structure can be tailored and materials can be designed for optimum performance.   Include solid-state physics, ceramic science and engineering, metallurgical engineering, polymers, and materials science, as well as solid-state chemistry. General process by which powders react and densify to form polycrystalline compacts or ceramics. Such compacts densify by grain growth and porosity reduction. Sintering can be reactive, i.e., involve the reaction of two or more solid components to form a product or products. Used herein to refer to the molecular-level, crystallographic, three-dimensional arrangement of atoms, as controlled by the chemical bonding. Both long-range and short-range order/disorder, including crystal imperfections and defects, must be considered.