As important rare raw material, Se and its compounds are widely used in metallurgy, glass manufacturing, chemicals and pigments, and electronics industry. However, current processes used for Se recovery are usually constrained by the serious pollution and high energy consumption. To dispose the issues in the process of Se recovery, this study developed an environmentally friendly process by using MnO2 in dilute H2SO4 as oxidant to efficiently recover Se and Cu. The effects of MnO2 dosage, H2SO4 concentrations, stirring speeds and temperature on the recovery were investigated. It was found that the major Se bearing phases in anode slime were elemental Se and Ag2Se. The oxidation capacity of MnO2 greatly increased with the H2SO4 concentration higher than 0.5 M and at a temperature above 60 °C. Optimum conditions derived from this study were 1.2 g MnO2 dosage, 1.0 M H2SO4, 600 rpm, and temperature at 80 °C, under which both the Se and Cu were recovered by 100% after 6 h. The cost-benefit analysis of the proposed process manifested that the profit of processing 1 t of anode slime was $ 82, and the sensitivity analysis showed that the price of Cu2Se and the Se recovery rate were the most important determinants of the profit. This research has great potential in Se recovery from anode slime.Selenium (Se) is an essential element for living organisms ( Current processes used for Se recovery include pyrometallurgical process and hydrometallurgical process. However, these processes are usually limited by serious pollution or high energy consumption. The conventional pyrometallurgy-based processes for Se recovery are sulphatising roast ( In this study, an environmentally friendly strategy by using MnO The anode slime used in this study was from our previous work, whose particle size distribution was presented in Leaching experiment was performed in a 50 mL flask with a magnetic stir bar in it, and the flask was placed in a water bath to maintain the temperature for the leaching solution. For all experiments, 2 g anode slime and 20 mL diluted H    Besides, the slag yield was calculated based on Eq.    Leaching solution for Section The Gibbs free energies of reactions and Eh-pH diagram were given by HSC 6.0. X-ray Fluorescence Spectrometry (XRF, AXIOS-MAX, PANalytical B.V.) was used to determine the compositions of anode slime and leaching residue. Phases of the samples were identified by X-ray diffraction (XRD, Smartlab-201307, Rigaku Corporation, Japan) with a scanning angle from 5° to 90°. Surface morphologies and compositions of the samples were both observed by optical microscope (BX51M, Olympus, Japan) and scanning electron microscope with energy dispersive spectrometer (SEM-EDS, JSM-7001 F, JEOL, Japan). Concentrations of Ag Ba and O were both 22.40%, the most abundant elements in anode slime. Se, Ag and Cu were 10.62%, 5.38% and 5.47%, respectively, which were quite significant contents for recovery. The contents of other elements, such as S and Pb, were also quite significant but they were less economically important for recovery. Traces of Sb, Au and Cl also existed in the slime ( Surface compositions and the valence state of elements of anode slime were studied with XPS. The peaks of Se 3d, S 2p, Ag 3d, Ba 3d and Cu 2p existed in the survey spectrum ( The morphologies and chemical composition of anode slime were examined with SEM-EDS. As shown in MnO In To test the effects of H Previous studies attested that the oxidizing capacity of MnO To test the effect of stirring on recovery of Cu and Se, a series of stirring speed from 150 to 1050 rpm were applied to dissolve anode slime with 1.2 g of MnO As mentioned in Section To test the effect of temperature on Se and Cu recovery, anode slime was oxidized with MnO To isolate useful elements from the leaching solution, flow chart of a separation process for Ag, Se and Cu was made. As given in The preliminary economic analysis of the proposed process was done by estimating the cost and benefit of processing 1 t of anode slime. The cost included the raw material, depreciation and maintenance of the equipment, energy consumption ( As presented in The energy consumption of the proposed process was given in Sensitivity analysis method referred to previous research ( This study developed an environmentally friendly process to effective recover Se and Cu from anode slime. By studying various parameters on the Se and Cu recovery, the optimal leaching conditions were achieved. The Cu anode slime used in this study was mainly composed of BaSO The authors are thankful for the financial support from The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at