We demonstrate the successful application of 3D printing (additive manufacturing) to construct high energy density and power density sulfur/carbon cathodes for Li-S batteries. A self-standing 3D-printed sulfur/carbon cathode with high sulfur loading based on a low-cost commercial carbon black was fabricated via a facile robocasting 3D printing process. The 3D-printed sulfur/carbon cathode shows excellent electrochemical performance in terms of capacity, cycling stability, and rate retention by facilitating Li+/e- transport at the macro-, micro-, and nano-scale in Li-S batteries. Meanwhile, the areal loading of the sulfur/carbon cathode can be easily controlled by the number of stacking layers during 3D printing process. The Li-S batteries assembled with the 3D-printed sulfur/carbon cathodes with a sulfur-loading of 3 mg cm−2 deliver a stable capacity of 564 mA h g−1 within 200 cycles at 3 C. Moreover, cathodes with a sulfur-loading of 5.5 mg cm−2 show large initial specific discharge capacities of 1009 mA h g−1 and 912 mA h g−1, and high capacity retentions of 87% and 85% after 200 cycles at rates as high as 1 C and 2 C (equaling to high areal current densities of 9.2 mA cm−2 and 18.4 mA cm−2), respectively.Fabrication of high-performance electrodes plays an important role in improving the electrochemical performance of energy storage devices such as Li-S 3D-printing technology has found wide applications in the fabrication of electrodes for various energy storage systems such as Li-ion batteries (LIBs) Herein, we demonstrate the use of 3D printing (additive manufacturing) to construct a self-standing high areal energy density cathode for Li-S battery based on a sulfur/carbon composite, which demonstrates superior electrochemical performance. A low-cost commercial carbon black (BP-2000) containing abundant micro-pores is chosen as the host material for sulfur to fabricate the sulfur/carbon (S/C) cathode. The ink for 3D printing is composed of the S/C active material, acetylene black (AB) and commercial carbon nanotubes (CNTs) as the conductive additives, and polyvinylidene fluoride-hexafluoro propylene (PVDF-HFP) as the binder dissolved in 1-methyl-2-pyrrolidinone (NMP). The porosity and conductivity of the electrode structure is further optimized from the macroscale to the nanoscale by (1) 3D-printing a porous structure with macro-sized pores (several hundred micrometers), (2) phase inversion of the polymeric binder to produce pores between several micrometers to nanometers in size, and (3) selecting materials with a microporous structure (less than 2 nm). Moreover, two critical post-treatment steps after 3D printing involve phase inversion and freeze drying to significantly elevate the electrochemical performance of the final 3D printed S/C electrode with hierarchical porous structure enabling facile electronic and ionic transportation. As a result, a superior Li-S battery containing high sulfur loading S/C cathodes with excellent C-rate performance and cycling stability are realized via 3D printing. The Li-S batteries assembled with approximately 3 mg cm 1200 mg of sulfur powder (99.5%, Sigma-Aldrich) was mixed with conductive carbon (Cabot BP-2000) with a weight ratio of 6:4, then ground with mortar and pestle for 0.5 h. The mixture was then transferred to a sealed steel reactor and was heated at 155 °C for 8 h followed by 300 °C for 4 h. After cooling to room temperature, the final S/BP-2000 composite with a sulfur content of 60 wt% was obtained. 3D-printed S/BP-2000 cathode was fabricated using a custom-made 3D printer equipped with a 3-axis micropositioning stage (FFF Delta 3D printer) motorized by stepper motors (CNC4PC, CS4EA4-1Rev1). The printing process is as follows: S/BP-2000 composite, PVDF-HFP, carbon nanotubes (CNTs, diameter of 40–60 nm, length of 2 µm), and acetylene black with a weight ratio of 7:2:0.5:0.5 were first mixed with 1-methyl-2-pyrrolidinone (NMP) to form an ink. The as-prepared ink was then loaded into a 3 mL syringe and extruded through a 150 µm diameter nozzle. The 3D-printed S/BP-2000 cathodes were printed with a diameter of 10 mm at a print motion speed of 6 mm s N-doped carbon nanotubes were synthesized by a spray pyrolysis chemical vapor deposition (SPCVD) method based on previous reports The morphologies of the samples were characterized by a Hitachi S-4800 field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM). The sulfur content in the S/BP 2000 composite was determined by a SDT Q600 thermogravimetric analyzer (TGA) under a nitrogen atmosphere from room temperature to 600 °C with a heating rate of 10 °C min The electrochemical performance of the 3D-printed S/BP 2000 cathodes were tested with CR2032 coin cells, constructed in an Ar-filled glovebox. The cathode and Li anode were separated by a polypropylene membrane (Celgard 2400). A CP@NCNT interlayer was used between the separator and the cathode to improve the active material utilization capacity retention as well. The interlayer is beneficial for providing fine contact with the cathode surface, offering electron pathways through the insulating S/Li Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was tested at open-circuit with a frequency range of 5.0 × 10 The 3D printing fabrication of the S/BP-2000 electrode is summarized in The 3D printed structure of the cathode is designed to improve Li To highlight the advantages of 3D-printing for the fabrication of high sulfur loading cathodes, the widely used blade-casting method was chosen for comparison. As shown in The appearance and morphology of the 3DP-FDE is shown in The micro and nanopores form part of a homogenous “tri-continuous” phase structure containing the polymeric binder and the S/C composite, shown in The cyclic voltammograms (CV) of 3DP-FDE and 3DP-ODE electrodes with sulfur loadings of approximately 3 mg cm The electrochemical performance of 3DP-FDE with high sulfur loadings of 3 mg cm The long-term cycling stability of the cells assembled with 3 mg cm Additionally, the cycling performance of 3DP-FDE with a sulfur loading of 5.5 mg cm The excellent cycling stability of the 3DP-FDE with high sulfur loading can be attributed to the optimized ionic and electronic conductivity of the cathode material, as the unique advantage of the application of 3D printing fabrication technology, as summarized in In summary, we developed a 3D-printed freeze-dried S/C composite electrode (3DP-FDE) via a facile layer-by-layer manufacturing process based on low-cost commercial BP-2000 carbon material for high-energy-density and high-power-density Li-S batteries. The 3DP-FDE is fabricated with well-controlled extruded fibers. The electrons can be transported along the fibers, which shortens electron transport distance, while the microscale pores among the fibers is beneficial for electrolyte accommodation and Li This research was supported by the Natural Science and Engineering Research Council of Canada ( Supporting information is available from the Wiley Online Library or from the author. X. G. and Q. S. contributed equally to this work. X. S. and T.-K. S. directed the project. X. G., Q. S. and X. Y. conceived the idea and designed the experiments of this work. X. G. did all experiment of this work. J. L. did the SEM characterization. A. K. edited the language. W. L. did the SEM mapping. J. L. provided the Raman test. J. W. helped some 3D printing test. R. L. assisted with purchasing chemicals. The 3D printer was cooperated by A. D. P. group (Including the student F. B. H.) and X. S. group. S. Y. helped freeze drying. X. G. wrote the original manuscript. All authors discussed the results and reviewed this manuscript. The authors declare no competing interests. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at 