The constant pressure batch dewatering process of fine suspension systems in which dewatering occurs in two stages, viz. cake formation and cake consolidation is considered. Scaling transformations for the dewatering time and extent of dewatering are proposed. Using experimental data obtained by varying the applied pressure and feed solids concentration, we show that the distinct temporal dewatering profiles in the cake consolidation stage collapse on to a unique master curve as a result of scaling. For fixed suspension chemistry, the master curve can be generated using data from a single dewatering test. Application of the existence of the master curve for prediction of key dewatering process parameters is illustrated. In addition, it is shown that the scaling behavior can persist even when the chemistry of the suspension is varied.Use of dewatering is common in many of the chemical, mineral processing, and water industries. The objective of dewatering is to increase recovery of liquid or to improve the recovery of suspended solids. Frequently, these objectives are achieved by imposing a pressure gradient across a semi-permeable medium. In cake filtration, the suspension is fed upstream of the filter medium where permeable layers of particulates form initial layers, which aid subsequent dewatering of the remaining suspension as the cake grows with time. The flow of liquid through the filter cake induces viscous drag forces on the constituent particles due to transfer of momentum from the liquid to the solid particles. In suspensions of fine particles, the resulting time dependent particle rearrangement induces a porosity gradient through the cake height and the cake is considered to be compressible. Numerous experimental studies of constant pressure dewatering of materials which form compressible cakes have been reported in the literature ( In general, dewatering experiments of dispersed suspensions and flocculated suspensions at a relatively low applied pressure can be extremely time consuming. In such instances, methods for predicting the final solids concentration in the cake using partial experimental data, i.e. when a dewatering test is stopped before its completion, can be useful, especially in situations when several constant pressure dewatering tests have to be carried out. However, satisfactory empirical or model based methods applicable for predictive purposes are not available at present. An objective of this paper is to demonstrate that temporal evolution in the cake consolidation stage of dewatering is governed by the existence of underlying scaling relationships, which result in a unique dewatering profile in the scaled coordinates. The scaling property implies that distinct cake consolidation part of the dewatering curves in For a fixed suspension chemistry, the master curve can be obtained using data from a single dewatering experiment carried out at some pressure and initial solids volume fraction, This paper is organized as follows: The experimental procedure is described in In this work, we only present results obtained using fine powders of alumina and kaolin, with mean particle size of 0.35 μm and 1.1 μm, respectively. Particulate suspensions for pressure filtration tests were prepared using a standard procedure ( For experiments using polymer additive, two different preparation methods were followed. In the first method, the suspensions were prepared by dispersing the powder in water containing the polymer on a magnetic stirrer. Magnetic stirring was done for 2 min. Following this, the suspensions were ultrasonicated using a Branson 450 sonicator for 2 min using 50% duty cycle with 40 W power input. In the second method, sonication was carried out before adding the additives. Following sonication, the drops of additive were added with fast agitation on a magnetic stirrer for 2 min, followed by slow agitation for 3 min. Constant pressure dewatering experiments were carried out in a highly instrumented and programmable computer driven laboratory scale test rig ( Experiments reported in this paper cover a reasonably wide range of operating conditions: the applied pressure was varied in the range 2 kPa–300 kPa, the solids concentration of the feed was varied in the range of 6% to 30% by volume. In addition, experiments at an applied pressure of 5 kPa were also carried out to investigate the role of polymeric additive on dewatering. Here, dewatering experiments were carried out using 100 ppm of (poly-) acrylic acid (PAA), in a range of molecular weights from 8000 to 4.5 million. For the sake of clarity, the discussion summarized in the first section of this paper is revisited and elaborated upon. It is assumed that dewatering of a feed suspension containing We first present the scaling transformations which yield the scaled master curve, and then validate the use of the transformations. Application of occurrence of scaling behavior for prediction of the process parameters It is well known that constant pressure dewatering experiments carried out by varying the pressure yield distinct curves in The scaled dewatering time is defined as the product of the dewatering time, the rate of dewatering at Two of the parameters which can be easily varied in practice are the applied pressure and the solids concentration of the feed suspension. In the next two sections, we first validate the use of the scaling transformations mentioned above by demonstrating the existence of a master curve when each of these operating parameters is varied. We present results of dewatering experiments at different pressures carried out using suspensions prepared from two grades of alumina and kaolin. The existence of the master curve for evolution in the cake consolidation stage of dewatering indicates that the process parameters Dewatering experiments at an applied pressure of 100 kPa and six different feed solids concentration, ranging from a low of 0.06 to a high of 0.30 solids volume fraction, have been carried out using A16-SG powder. The temporal evolution, i.e. the When the objective is to investigate the effect of solids concentration of the feed, the existence of the master curve implies that the transition point We now consider the situation where complete experimental dewatering data at one applied pressure, ▵ Relatively simple models for the cake consolidation stage of dewatering are available in the literature ( In the cake consolidation stage, the applied pressure is carried partly as particle network stress, and partly as fluid stress. The distribution of the applied pressure between the liquid and solid phases depends on the instantaneous average solids concentration of the cake. The model for evolution of the average solids fraction in the cake consolidation stage of dewatering is given by the following form of Darcy's equation The parameters in this model are the permeability correlation Incorporating this relationship in the model Eq. The permeability correlation Existence of the master curve for the cake consolidation stage of dewatering provides the basis for estimation of the final solids concentration at a desired pressure, ▵ First, the master curve is generated by transforming the consolidation stage part of the experimental data (obtained using an applied pressure, ▵ The model in Eq. A capability to predict the final solids concentration using partial experimental data can lead to substantial savings in experimentation time. We next consider the problem of predicting the solids concentration at the cake formation–consolidation transition point, It is known that suspension chemistry has a strong impact on the dewaterability of suspensions. In this work, we only summarize results obtained by modifying the chemistry of alumina suspensions in the following ways: (i) change in pH, (ii) change in pH in the presence of 100 ppm of low molecular weight (poly-) acrylic acid (PAA) polymer additive, and (iii) change in molecular weight of PAA, at constant pH. Somewhat surprisingly, we have observed that the master curve can persist even when the pH varies over a reasonably wide range. In complete contrast to the above, clear evidence of unique master curve is seen when the pH is kept constant, and the molecular weight of polymeric additive is varied over a reasonably wide range. These results are shown in Constant pressure batch dewatering of alumina and kaolin fine particle suspension systems has been experimentally investigated. Scaling relationships for the extent of dewatering and dewatering time, which yield a unique master curve in the cake consolidation stage of dewatering, have been proposed. In the systems investigated which show two-stage dewatering behavior, the existence of a master curve appears to be a fairly general phenomenon since it persists even when the pressure, initial solids concentration and the suspension chemistry are varied. Using a simple consolidation stage dewatering model, an application involving use of the master curve for prediction of dewatering process parameters has been demonstrated. Results reported here appear to indicate that an understanding of the scaling behavior can provide useful insights about the characteristic quantities governing evolution of the pressure dewatering process. It is hoped that the results presented here will be helpful for the analysis of laboratory pressure dewatering experiments. Financial support for this work from the Department of Science and Technology, Government of India, is gratefully acknowledged. The authors are grateful to Prof. P. C. Kapur and Dr. Pradip of Tata Research Design and Development Centre (TRDDC), Pune, India, for their comments and suggestions.