We are pleased to announce that David Rodney and Nitin Padture, two editors who previously had single journal appointments with Acta Materialia and Scripta Materialia, respectively, have accepted joint appointments and are transitioning into their new roles as editors of both journals. Previously exclusively Acta Materialia, we now welcome David Rodney to the Scripta Materialia editorial team, and Nitin Padture, who was exclusively Scripta Materialia, to the Acta Materialia team. This strategic move will help broaden the expertise of both editorial boards. David Rodney is a Professor in the Institut Lumière Matière of the University of Lyon in France. Prior to this appointment, which started in 2013, he was an Associate Professor at the Laboratory Science et Ingénierie des Matériaux et Procédés of the Institute of Technology of Grenoble. Prof. Rodney is an engineer of Paris School of Mines with a M.S. degree from Jussieu University in Paris in Solid State Physics. He received a Ph.D. in Materials Science for research performed at Brown University and the CEA Saclay, and was a post-doctoral fellow at ONERA. Prof. Rodney has been an invited researcher at MIT and the University of Chicago. His research is focused on the modeling of materials at different length and time scales, with a particular emphasis on linking elementary processes at the atomic scale with macroscopic properties. Nitin P. Padture is the Otis E. Randall University Professor in the School of Engineering, and Director of Institute for Molecular and Nanoscale Innovation, at Brown University. Prior to January 2012 he was College of Engineering Distinguished Professor at the Ohio State University (OSU) in Columbus, and also the founding Director of the NSF-funded Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) at OSU. Padture received his B.Tech. in Metallurgical Engineering from Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Bombay (1985), M.S. in Ceramic Engineering from Alfred University (1987), and Ph.D. in Materials Science & Engineering from Lehigh University (1991). He was a postdoctoral fellow at NIST (Gaithersburg, MD) before joining the University of Connecticut (UConn, Storrs) faculty in January 1995. He served as Interim Department Head at UConn before moving to OSU in January 2005. Padture’s research interests are in the broad areas of advanced ceramics and nanomaterials used in applications ranging from jet engines to solar cells, impacting transportation, energy, and defense sectors. Specifically, he has active research in: (i) advanced structural ceramics, composites, and coatings for mechanical, thermal, and optical properties; (ii) hybrid perovskites and photovoltaics; and (iii) functional 1-D (nanowires, nanotubes) and 2-D (graphene, thin films) nanomaterials and devices. Since early 2014 many new additions to the Acta and Scripta Materialia editorial boards have been joint appointments between the two journals, which broadens the expertise across them, and provides more custom, area-specific matching with our authors.