Mesoporous TiO2–CeO2 nanopowders responding to visible wavelength were synthesized by using a surfactant assisted sol–gel technique. They were obtained using metal alkoxide precursors modified with acetylacetone (ACA) and laurylamine hydrochloride (LAHC) as surfactant. The samples were characterized by XRD, nitrogen adsorption isotherm, SEM, TEM, and selected area electron diffraction (SAED), respectively. The 95mol% TiO2–5mol% CeO2 system yielded single anatase phase, however, further addition of the CeO2 formed cubic CeO2 structure while anatase TiO2 decreased. Additions of 5 and 10mol% CeO2 increased the surface area, but those of 25, 50, and 75mol% CeO2 did not affect it very much. By using this mixed metal oxides system, TiO2 can be modified to respond to the visible wavelength. The mixed metal oxides had catalytic activity (evaluating the formation rate of I3
                     −) about 2–3 times higher than pure CeO2, while nanosize anatase type TiO2 materials had no catalytic activity under visible light. The catalytic activity was almost proportional to the specific surface area. The formation rate of I3
                     − was much improved by changing the calcination temperature and calcination period. Highest catalytic activity in this study was obtained for the 50mol% TiO2–50mol% CeO2 nanopowders calcined at 250°C for 24h.Titanium dioxide (TiO In this study, the surfactant-assisted process has been extended to prepare mesoporous TiO Mesoporous TiO The crystalline structure of samples was evaluated by X-ray diffraction (XRD, RIGAKU RINT 2100). The microstructure of the prepared materials was analyzed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, JEOL JSM-6500FE), transmission electron microscopy (TEM, JEOL JEM-200CX), and selected-area electron diffraction (SAED). The Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) specific surface area was determined by the nitrogen adsorption (BEL Japan, BELSORP-18 Plus). The samples were outgassed overnight at 200  Nitrogen adsorption isotherms of these mixed oxides calcined at 400  TEM images of the TiO With 5 TEM image of the 100 In The diffuse reflectance spectra for the TiO  Since the 50 The I The mesoporous TiO The authors would like to express gratitude to Prof. S. Isoda and Prof. H. Kurata, Institute for Chemical Research, Kyoto University for the use of TEM apparatus and Prof. T. Yoko, Institute for Chemical Research, Kyoto University for the use of XRD equipment. Cerium butoxide, zirconium butoxide, and hafnium butoxide were kindly supplied by Hokko Chemical Industry Co., Ltd. This work was supported by a grant-in-aid from the Ministry of Education, Science Sports, and Culture of Japan under the 21 COE program and the Nanotechnology Support Project.