Carbon-in-pulp (CIP) operations are used extensively in the gold mining sector to recover aurocyanide form solution. In this study, an attempt was made to model these operations by making use of various simplifying assumptions in order to simulate the effect of changing operating conditions on plant performance. A pragmatic approach was followed as the developed simulation is aimed at industrial scale applications. The model is based on the assumptions that leaching and adsorption rates are a function of the difference in concentration between metallic gold and aurocyanide, and aurocyanide and gold adsorbed onto the activated carbon respectively. This type of model proved to be effective for plant data simulation purposes and could be solved using a Newtonian search algorithm where the errors between predicted outputs and plant data is minimized.rate constant (h equilibrium constant mass flow rate (t carbon loading (g adsorption stage leaching Major advances in the practical application of CIP technology have been made over the last few decades resulting in this technology being firmly entrenched in the gold mining sector. However, CIP dynamics are not always well understood by plant operators and engineers. Furthermore, the intensity and amount of research on the understanding and effective operation of CIP plants tend to follow the gold price. During the 1980s when the gold price was relatively high, numerous gold research projects were conducted. Less interest in new projects were shown since the 1990s as the gold price reached new low levels. However, it is even more important to launch projects during these difficult times to ensure optimal plant performance. There is inevitably means to improve on recovery rates and/or reduce operating costs provided the CIP plant can be simulated accurately. Moreover, it has become extremely important to manage cyanide levels in the wake of even more stringent pollution control legislation worldwide. This can for example be achieved by an accurate simulation balancing the effect that a decrease in cyanide addition may have on the rate of gold dissolution in the leaching section and making use of the shifting equilibrium phenomenon in the CIP section to counter the decrease in leaching section efficiency. This study attempts to develop a simplified model that can be used to predict CIP plant performance under varying operational conditions, thereby assisting plant metallurgist to achieve optimum efficiency and to highlight plant sensitivity to certain variables. The model was kept as simple as possible by assuming a linear equilibrium and kinetic operation. This resulted in only eight parameters that must be solved for. Elsner’s equation can be used to show how metallic gold is leached by cyanide Various gold leaching models has been proposed in the past by Generally, air is released constantly at the bottom of each leaching vessel during gold dissolution and in many cases pure oxygen is injected. Thus, it was assumed that the ratio of oxygen to cyanide is sufficiently large to avoid the possibility that leaching kinetics is under oxygen concentration control. A further practical reason for this assumption is that most gold plants do not measure oxygen levels and it would be meaningless to add such a term to the modelling procedure. Elsner’s dissolution reaction is reversible and equilibrium of the reaction is thus also influenced by the amounts of solid gold and gold cyanide present. Hence, If it is assumed that the rate of the reaction is a linear function of the distance from equilibrium then: Many other metallic species are also present, including iron, copper, nickel and silver, which will consume cyanide and oxygen. However, including all possible species in the modelling procedure will be impractical and it was decided to lump these as a single metal M of valency +3  The sorption modelling procedure followed in this study is that proposed by The basic operation of a CIP plant seems at first glance to be relatively simplistic. However, literature reveals that there are numerous variables that could affect the process. These include: pH fouling of carbon pore structure of carbon preg-robbing carbon transfer rates competitive adsorption carbon breakage mechanisms equilibrium conditions carbon activity Many attempts have been made in the past to simulate or model CIP operations ( No adverse pH changes are present. Adsorption and leaching kinetics are explained by a linear rate equation (as explained previously). The effect of fouling on mass transfer kinetics and equilibrium is constant. Carbon breakage can be expressed as a fixed percentage of the amount of carbon transferred with carbon fines gold loading equal to the loading of carbon in the final stage. Carbon transfer occurs continuously. No carbon loading profile per stage. Perfect mixing. The effect of back-mixing is negligible. Carbon activity remains constant. The plant model is built by the input of appropriate plant data in an Excel spreadsheet. This includes: Pulp and carbon flow rates. Leaching and CIP stage volumes. Solution concentration and carbon loading in each stage. Solid gold profiles. Dissolution data from leaching section (for both gold and M). Cyanide addition to leaching section. Free cyanide and metal cyanide complexes in effluent. An error term is developed where the percentage error between actual plant data and estimated outputs is calculated and minimized using Excel’s Solver capabilities employing a Newtonian search. Leaching data is analysed first to obtain the values of Each stage of the CIP plant is constrained in order to ensure the conservation of mass, that is, metal species mass into and out of each stage is equal (steady state is assumed). This procedure is followed to determine the constants A similar procedure is followed to determine the change in concentration of M after which the cyanide balance is completed. A plant simulation utilizes these mass transfer and equilibrium parameters in order to predict the effect of changes in operating conditions to plant performance. When attempting a CIP simulation, various “cross-referencing” terms are generated. The most obvious being the calculation of the gold loading on the carbon fed to the final stage from the elution section. This value is a function of elution efficiency and is calculated from the carbon loading in the first CIP stage. However, the loading in the first stage is also a function of the loading fed to the system from an overall mass balance. Many situations such as the above are created in a CIP simulation, and it is required to estimate certain values and to minimize the error between the actual calculated value and that estimated. A continuous estimation of values in each stage occurs and the values then calculated from the rate expression and the error generated minimized by Excel Solver’s Newtonian search method. Values that have to be estimated include From the above it is clear that the focus of this project is strongly on the realistic solving of mass balancing functions in a CIP circuit based on simplified rate expressions rather than using complex functions at the risk of not obtaining a realistic mass simulation. The developed model was tested against actual data obtained from a South African gold plant with a summary of the results obtained shown in The rate and equilibrium constants calculated for Au are: 0.00032 16 4.8 0.07 0.00003 12 1.0 0.82 Once a realistic model, that is a reasonable correlation to plant data has been found, certain operating conditions may be varied in order to test the impact on plant operations. A typical example would be an increase in feed rate to the CIP plant. One option to counter the effect of this increase would be to increase the carbon flow through the circuit provided the elution section has sufficient capacity. Also, an increase in cyanide addition may be required to leach additional gold feed. In this simulation a 20% increase in feed rate is counter-acted by an increase in carbon flow rate together with a 10% increase in cyanide addition to the leaching section ( This study suggests that realistic CIP simulations can be achieved using various simplifying assumptions and using simple semi-empirical rate expressions. It is not suggested that complicating factors such as back-mixing and intermittent carbon transfer does not play a role, but that the focus of a CIP simulation should be on solving mass balance relationships as accurately as possible. Finally, it was shown that the optimisation algorithm built into Excel (solver) is a very powerful tool in solving process parameters and conducting simulations. However, the problem must be set with realistic constraints and error functions to avoid unrealistic outputs.