A new adsorbent was synthesized with antimony oxide and barium sulfate to be used in the purification of copper electrolyte. The adsorbent possesses not only the properties of common adsorbents, but also special merits of its own. It can adsorb antimony from copper electrolyte, which then becomes adsorbent itself after regeneration; so the more the use-times, the more the amount of the adsorbent. Under the conditions of fixed contents of Cu and H2SO4 in copper electrolyte, the adsorbent can adsorb 90% of Bi, 80% of Sb, as well as parts of As. The paper presents the results of adsorbent synthesis, characterization, regeneration, and metal ion separation. The feasibility of utilizing this adsorbent for copper electrolyte purification has been examined.In the electrolytic refining of copper, impurities such as arsenic, antimony, and bismuth are accumulated in the electrolyte. The conventional process to control these impurities involves multistage electrolytic deposition cells. This process has many disadvantages, due to the limited rate at which the electrolyte can be cycled through the cells, the loss of copper, the formation of toxic gas, and the formation of toxic deposits which have to be disposed of. Many methods have been proposed for the purification of copper electrolyte with stannic acid A novel way of purification has been found recently. A silver-extracted residue that contains 21.35% Sb was used to adsorb bismuth, antimony, and arsenic from copper electrolyte A titanium-made reaction vessel (3 m Commercial grade Sb The solution of 100–120 g/L H The adsorption of impurities from copper electrolyte with AB was conducted according to the flow sheet shown in Another adsorption experiment was carried out in the pressure filter. When AB had been regenerated and washed by water in the filter, the electrolyte (58 °C) piped from the tankhouse was directly pumped into it. The contact time of the electrolyte with AB was adjusted by the flow of the electrolyte. The filter solutions were piped back to the tankhouse and sampled every half an hour for elemental analysis to determine the adsorption curve. The used AB was returned to the reaction vessel for regeneration. The operation of the regeneration of used AB is similar to that of its synthesis. Antimony(III), bismuth, and arsenic adsorbed on AB can be desorbed by a mixture (∼3 M H Recent studies showed that Sb(V) can combine with Bi(III) or Sb(III) to form BiSbO When Sb(III) is oxidized to Sb(V), it adheres to the surface of BaSO The influence of temperature, time, addition, and reuse-times on adsorption of impurities is illustrated in Because As, Sb, and Bi are VA elements, the reactive capability of SbO When the addition of AB is less than about 17 kg/m From  In order to remove the adsorbed impurities from the adsorbent, a mixture of sulfuric acid and sodium chloride (not hydrochloric acid and alkali tartrate) was employed as the stripping solution. Stripping studies showed that over 80% of adsorbed bismuth and antimony could be desorbed with 1.5 M H The build-up of metal ions with the cycle-index of stripping solution is shown in After being used for several times, the size of AB grains will increase. Therefore, AB needs to be ground regularly, and if the content of antimony in it is over 35%, BaSO Though Sb is one of the most harmful impurities to the cathode copper, Sb(V) can combine with Bi(III) and Sb(III) to form the precipitation of BiSbO The authors are grateful to Jiangxi Copper for supporting this work. We wish to thank the tankhouse workers of Guixi Smelter for their assistance during this period.