Selective separation of Mo and W from Mo-rich leach liquor is always a difficult task. The SX route is more costly, and for better process economy an inorganic route is preferred in terms of impurity removal. Spent HDS catalyst leach liquor of composition (in g/L): 17.11 Mo, 0.583W, 0.646 Ni, 0.052 Co, 0.005V and 0.152 P was taken for the present study. Impurity removal was investigated by adsorption using Mn and ferric compounds. Adsorption of W and P on freshly precipitated hydrous ferric oxyhydroxide (HFO) at W/Fe ratio of 0.5M, temperature 50°C for 2h was found to yield an optimum at ~90% efficiency, whereas Co and V become fully adsorbed. Adsorption kinetics of W onto HFO was determined and correlated with common equations; a good fit was found with Freundlich model, and it follows 1st order. Ni as an impurity remains almost untouched during adsorption; it was separated during precipitation of molybdenum as ammonium octamolybdate. The present approach may directly applied to remove impurities from Mo-rich leach liquor as per the proposed schematic flow sheet.Molybdenum and tungsten are both elements of group VIB in the periodic table having strategic and industrial importance due to their applications in many technological fields. The so-called lanthanide contraction make the radii of Mo HDS catalysts are either Co-Mo or Ni-Mo type and account for about one-third of total worldwide catalyst consumption. Even after the completion of their life cycle, the spent catalysts (in sulphide form) are important as secondary resources, not only due to their large quatity and economic value of metals, but also because of the environmental concerns, if disposed off ( Although, number of approaches are available for separation and purification of metals from spent catalyst Mo leach liquors, ( A few researchers have also studied the adsorption phenomena for Mo-W separation. The procedure adopted by Hence, an efficient process to separate out W and Mo is still desired, especially from ammonium molybdate solution of ~ The as received spent HDS catalyst (analysis in  Where, A stands for Fe added as adsorbent. The typical leach liquor obtained from Mo-leaching plant (composition given in Technical grade Fe(OH) The chemistry of iron hydroxide indicates that freshly precipitated HFO is better adsorbent than iron hydroxide. In fact the ferric hydroxide, Fe(OH) The effect of dose of adsorbent (HFO) on the amount of tungsten adsorbed was studied at W/Fe molar ratios of 0.2 Effect of temperature from 30 to 80 The adsorption isotherms are usually determined under equilibrium conditions. A series of contact time experiments from 30 The distribution of adsorbed molecules between the liquid and solid phases at equilibrium was studied by two well-known adsorption isotherms, Langmuir and Freundlich. The equation of Langmuir isotherm model for linear form can be represented as: Where, The well-known logarithmic form of Freundlich model can be represented as: Where, Adsorption kinetics depends on the adsorbate-adsorbent interaction and system condition. Two vital evaluation elements for an adsorption process operation unit are the mechanism and the reaction rate. Solute uptake rate determines the residence time required for completing the adsorption reaction and can be determined from kinetic analysis ( In order to distinguish kinetics of tungsten adsorption with HFO, the obtained data was analyzed using pseudo-first order and pseudo-second order kinetic model equations. The pseudo-first order Lagergren model is expressed as ( Here, The plot of log( The pseudo-second order model was proposed by Here, The data of sorption of W on HFO surface were plotted according to the pseudo-first order and pseudo-second order models as shown in Where, The square root of the residual variance i.e. the sum of error squares (SSE, %) is given as ( The higher is the value of The change in concentration of a reactant (or a product) in a given period of time gives the rate of reaction. The rate equation for an irreversible reaction of first order may be represented as: After integrating the above equation may be represented as follows: Where The value of rate constant The experimental data of concentration However, the impurity removal efficiency for W, Co, V, and P from leach liquor of ammonium molybdate was achieved by their adsorption on HFO surface; nickel as an impurity still remain in leach liquor, which was subjected to separate out during AOM precipitation. The purified leach liquor obtained after the HFO treatment ( After establishing the optimum conditions for removal of tungsten and other impurities (P, V, Co & Ni) from leach liquor, a trial on semi-pilot scale by taking 2 For the first time, freshly precipitated HFO as a more suitable adsorbent is applied for the removal of W, Co, V, and P than that of Fe(OH) Authors are thankful to the management of Rubamin Limited, Vadodara (India) for granting permission to publish this research work.