Ball-mills are used widely for secondary grinding. Loveday (2010) reported on laboratory tests in which small pebbles (7–25mm) were used in various proportions with balls. The optimum proportion of pebbles, by volume, was found to be about 25%. Substantial savings in power and ball consumption were achieved, with no loss in grinding capacity. However, continuous pilot-plant tests were disappointing, because the consumption of small pebbles was too high.
                  The idea of using a mixture of balls and pebbles, at a mill speed suitable for ball-milling, was revisited in this investigation, using a normal spectrum of pebble sizes (19–75mm). Batch tests in a pilot-scale mill (0.57m diameter) were used to compare ball-milling to various ball/pebble mixtures. The mill power was measured online by monitoring lateral torque on a freely suspended motor and gearbox. Initial tests were done using pebbles from previous tests on gold ore, in combination with balls, to mill silica sand (0.6–1.5mm)
                  The size distributions of the balls and the pebbles were calculated to simulate steady-state addition of balls (37.5mm) and partly-rounded pebbles (19–75mm). There was a reduction in pebble consumption, as expected, when using larger rounded pebbles, to about 6% of total production. The grinding capacity, when using a mixture containing 25% pebbles, was the same as that with balls alone, resulting in a 13% saving in energy and an implied saving in ball consumption of 25%.
                  
                     It was concluded that the use of a composite load for secondary grinding is a very attractive option. Further tests were done, using samples from a platinum mine, namely the feed to a secondary mill (ball-mill) and rounded pebbles from a primary AG mill. Grinding capacity was maintained over the range 0–30% pebbles, by volume, with savings in energy and ball consumption increasing progressively. At 25% pebbles, the saving in energy was 18% and the pebble consumption was about 7% of total production.
                  The theory of pebble wear was developed during this investigation, for application to batch grinding tests. The size distribution of the pebbles was measured after each test and the theory was used to calculate the pebble wear rate (mmh−1) and the specific wear rate (kgh−1
                     kg−1) for all screen fractions. The wear rate of pebbles in the presence of balls was higher than that for pebbles alone. When the proportion of pebbles in the mill charge was low (up to 30%), the larger pebbles wore away significantly faster than expected, based on a constant surface wear rate. This could be due to size segregation in the mill.The grinding circuit used for processing of gold, platinum and base metal ores typically consists of SAG primary mills, followed by ball-mills. The power drawn by the ball-mills is about the same as that of the SAG mill for high capacity milling circuits. Attention has been focused on the control of the primary mill, as variations in the proportion of competent rock in the feed, can cause significant variations in the throughput and consequent variations in product sizing. Closed-circuit crushers for SAG mills, or their replacement with HPGR’s, has been used to reduce this problem. The control of ball-mills is relatively simple in comparison (i.e. addition of balls to maintain power and control of the cyclones and pulp density). Pebble-milling is used on some mines for secondary grinding, to reduce operating costs. However, the availability of pebbles is essential and pebble storage is required. The pebble mills need to be much larger than ball mills, to draw the same power, and hence it is not easy to change from one type of milling to the other. Most mining companies have opted for the ‘safe’ option of ball-mills for secondary grinding.  The current investigation involved various aspects of pebble milling, using a full range of pebble sizes (i.e. the size distribution normally discharged from pebble ports in a SAG mill and periodically crushed in a recycle crusher). The experiments were limited to rounded pebbles, as pebbles in this form were considered to be preferable to rock recovered by screening the feed to a primary mill. This paper is focused on a specific application, namely the partial replacement of balls (about 25%) and grinding at a conventional speed for ball-milling (69% of critical speed). The term “composite milling” is used to describe the use of a mixture of balls and rounded pebbles. The larger pebbles last longer and hence pebble consumption is reduced, but the efficiency for fine grinding was questionable. Simple (open-circuit) batch grinding is used by laboratories to produce samples for flotation tests. There is no short-circuit of coarse material in a batch test and the ground material has a size and mineral distribution which is similar to that of a closed-circuit mill (i.e. the cyclone overflow). A simple batch test can also be used to measure relative ore hardness ( Tests using pebbles with diameters up to 75 Mill charge fillings of 30% and 40% were tested. Previous experience has shown that either filling could be used, and hence a 30% charge was used in preliminary tests, to reduce ore consumption and labour. The charge volume was further subdivided into media (50%) and pulp (50%). The aim of most tests was to produce the final product sizing and hence a relatively low solids content of the pulp was used (30% by volume), to avoid viscosity problems, which had been experienced in previous investigations. The size distributions of the pebbles and balls were calculated to simulate steady-state in a mill operated continuously (i.e. a ‘seasoned’ load). Any feed size distribution can be transformed into a ‘seasoned’ size distribution. The ball size distribution was calculated to simulate a periodic top-up using 37.5 A series of tests was conducted using rounded pebbles of silicate ore (gold ore and rocks from a local quarry). The density of the pebbles was about 2650 The pebbles were screened and weighed after each test and re-used in subsequent tests, after adding make-up pebbles to restore the required size distribution. The pebbles were considered to be derived from the ore and hence the calculation of the rate of production of fine material included the ‘bonus’ production of material abraded off the pebbles. The initial mass of sand added was reduced in some tests on composite milling, so that the average mass of fines in the mill was about the same as the base case of ball-milling. When encouraging results were obtained using silicate pebbles, arrangements were made to obtain samples from a platinum mine, consisting of rounded pebbles (150 It is easy to measure the overall mass loss of pebbles, but an analysis of pebble wear is more complicated than it first appears. Selected pebbles were spray-painted in previous investigations, in order to identify them and measure mass loss ( There was a wide range of pebble sizes in each The mass of a single pebble (  The total number of pebbles ( The mass can be used to calculate The screen fraction can then be divided into (say) 10 linear sub-intervals, and the mass The average diameter Eq. Once the value(s) of The rate of abrasion from a single pebble is derived from Eq. If it is assumed that abrasion rate (Δ The application of this theory was found to be satisfactory, by counting the rocks in a few experiments. The rate of pebble wear can be expressed as the specific rate The aim of using a composite grinding medium was to reduce energy and ball consumption, without compromising the rate of production of finished product. The product size distribution varies in the experiments and therefore it is convenient to measure productivity as the rate of production of material finer than 75 The composite tests were conducted using rounded pebbles of quartz ore (gold ore and rock from a local quarry).   The encouraging results obtained using quartz ore, provided a motivation for additional work, using samples from an operating plant. Samples were obtained from a platinum mine. The fines were sampled from the feed to a secondary ball-mill (cyclone underflow) and pebbles were collected from a stockpile of low grade pebbles from a primary AG mill.  Having confirmed that significant savings can be achieved using platinum ore, the next series of tests was to see if the replacement of balls by pebbles can be done gradually, when testing the process. The results in The investigation has demonstrated that the grinding capacity of a mill is maintained when balls are replaced by pebbles, up to about 30% of the charge volume. The energy dissipation and the surface area for grinding are reduced as the pebble volume increases, and it reasonable to assume that the pebble wear compensates for these changes. It may be concluded that composite grinding is not sensitive to pebble size and a wide range of pebble sizes can be used, with the largest pebble size being much larger than the top ball size. This is an important practical consideration, as a larger tonnage of rounded pebbles will be available from a primary SAG/AG mill discharge, than the small pebbles proposed by The pebbles were screened and weighed after all tests involving pebbles. The information on pebble mass in each screen fraction made it possible to apply the pebble wear theory, to calculate the wear rates (mm   It is evident from The paragraphs above have demonstrated a method for comparing composite milling to ball milling, when producing a final product size distribution. However, where a sample of the feed to an existing plant ball-mill, (in closed-circuit with a cyclone), is available, it is a simple matter to use a batch pilot-scale test to evaluate composite milling, using plant conditions. Tests on the platinum ore were conducted using the same solids concentration as used on the plant (36.8% solids by volume). The time for the base case ball-milling test was adjusted to produce the size distribution leaving the plant mill (55% passing 75 The energy utilization for ball-milling (35.1  Pilot-scale batch tests have shown that pebbles in the size range 19–75 The theory developed for batch tests involving pebbles, has produced data which are consistent with published data. Nevertheless, it should be applied to more data to confirm its validity. When a sample of ball-mill feed is available from an operating plant, plant milling conditions can be used for a more accurate laboratory assessment of pebble consumption and the benefit of composite milling. It should be noted that the test results were based on the use of partially rounded pebbles, which normally emanate from pebble ports in a primary mill. A recycle pebble crusher is often used to crush some of these ‘critical size’ pebbles, as a means of controlling the level in the primary mill. Rather than expending energy on crushing these pebbles, they can be put to good use in secondary mill(s). Recovery of pebbles from the feed to primary mills by screening is not envisaged, as the initial fracturing and rounding of rocks will generate chips, which can contribute to a large circulating load in the secondary milling circuit. The withdrawal of pebbles from the primary milling circuit will cause the feed rate to a primary mill to increase. If one considers both milling stages, the comparison with ball-milling was based on the same final rate of production from the ball-mill(s). Hence, the required rate of production by the primary mill will be reduced (by about 7%). This means that it may be possible to reduce ball addition to the primary mill and the power drawn by the primary mill will then decrease. The power drawn by the closed circuit crusher would also be reduced substantially. These would be additional benefits of composite secondary grinding. Given the comments above, the primary milling circuit should be considered first, when contemplating the use of composite secondary grinding in an existing plant. Simulation may be useful to understand the interactions between pebble withdrawal and ball addition. The flow of pebbles entering the recycle crusher should be monitored and a suitable flow of pebbles should be withdrawn, to determine the reaction of the circuit. The stockpile of pebbles can then be used for future tests of composite secondary milling. Financial support of this project by