Brittle particles fragment when compressed or under impact. The particle fragmentation leads to a power-law relation of the number or mass of particles as a function of the particle size. The resulting power-law relation is accurately characterised by a fractal dimension of the particle fragmentation. The fractal dimension of particle fragmentation depends on the probability of particle failure, which correlates with the applied stress and fracture energy according to Weibull's statistics. Thus, the fractal dimension of particle fragmentation is related to the applied stress and fracture energy, and the relation of the fragmentation fractal dimension to the applied stress and fracture energy is proposed in this paper. It can be validated by the experimental data of marble particle fragmentation and brittle fracture data for rock particles published previously.Particle fragmentation is abundant in nature and many fields of engineering, thus attracting a continuous interest in scientific and engineering research over the past decades Several theoretical models have been proposed linking the fragment size distribution to the stress level and fracture energy Turcotte Combining Eq. Turcotte Due to Eq. For particle impact breakage tests, a batch of marble particles with 500 Impact energy supplied by the plate shaped weight is given in the following equation: A photograph of the broken fragments in the drop-weight tests is shown in The relationship between the fragmentation fractal dimension and the specific fracture energy is shown in Eq. In order to investigate the fragmentation fractal dimension in different tests, particle fragmentation is conducted in one-dimensional compression tests and direct shear tests. The apparatus of one-dimensional compression tests and direct shear tests are shown in Municipal solid waste incineration (MSWI) bottom ashes were used in one-dimensional compression tests and shear tests. The relative density of dense samples is 0.82, and that of loose samples is 0.27. Samples of MSWI bottom ashes are shown in The fragment mass-size distributions of MSWI bottom ashes in direct shear tests were shown in The fragment mass-size distributions of MSWI bottom ashes in one-dimensional compression tests were shown in Hagerty et al. The fragment mass-size distributions of quartz, limestone and basalt particles were collected in the literature Gençet al Tuzcu and Rajaman Fragmentation fractal dimensions of quartz, limestone and basalt samples were collected and related to the specific fracture energy. The relations of the fragmentation fractal dimension to the specific fracture energy of quartz, limestone and basalt samples are shown in The evolution of the fragmentation fractal dimension with the applied stress and specific fracture energy for brittle particles is investigated thoroughly. The fragmentation fractal dimension correlates positively with the applied stress and specific fracture energy. Here are the two main conclusions: The fragmentation of both single particle and bulk particulate samples leads to a power-law mass-size distribution. The fragmentation fractal dimension can be calculated by Eq. The fragmentation fractal dimension positively relates with the applied stress and specific fracture energy as a logarithmic function. The parameters The