Boron and its derivatives are effective in bone recovery and osteointegration. However, increasing the boron levels in body liquids may cause toxicity. The aim of our study is to investigate serum boron levels using ICP-MS after implantation of different ratios of nano-hBN–HA composites in rat femurs. All rats were (n=126) divided into five experimental groups (n=24) and one healthy group (6 rats); healthy (Group1), femoral defect+%100HA (Group2), femoral defect+%2.5hBN+%97.5HA (Group3), femoral defect+%5hBN+%95HA (Group4), femoral defect+%10hBN+%90 HA (Group5), femoral defect+%100hBN (Group6). The femoral defect was created in the distal femur (3mm drill-bit). Each implant group was divided into four different groups (n=24) also 6 rats sacrificed for each groups in one week intervals during four weeks. In our results; at 1, 2, 3, and 4weeks after implantation near bone tissue, serum levels of boron were evaluated using ICP-MS. We demonstrated that neither short-term nor long-term implantation of hBN–HA composite resulted in statistically increased serum boron levels in experimental groups compared to healthy group. In conclusion, this study investigated the implant material produced form hBN–HA for the first time. Our data suggest that hBN is a new promising target for biomaterial and implant bioengineers.Boron isotopes, Boron has many crucial roles in animals in processes such as brain development and function On the other hand, boron nitride (BN) is a preferred material in biomaterial applications because it has specific physical and chemical properties. In structural terms, it has a hexagonal structure similar to that of graphite, low density, high thermal conductivity, chemical stability, and easy workability The treatment of bone injuries and defects, which are commonly caused by trauma, represents a serious problem for reconstructive orthopedic surgery. For bone fractures, many mineral-based implants are being used in orthopedic surgery. However, the most important problem with these implants has to do with increased serum levels of the implant material after implantation. Previously, serum levels of titanium, nickel, chromium, niobium, and aluminum were reported to be elevated in some implantation conditions Hydroxyapatite (HA) is the main non-living material in the bone structure. Thus, in implantations, it is commonly used as a bearer material As specified in the above mentioned studies, due to the erosion of implants made using metal composites in body fluids, it is likely that the serum concentration of these metals will increase. Therefore, we researched whether boron wears away over time and transits into the serum in the hBN–HA composite that we produce. To date, there has been no study performed on serum boron levels after such implantations. In light of the abovementioned topics, the aim of our study is to investigate serum boron levels using inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) after implantation of different ratios of nano-hBN–HA composites in rat femurs. Nano-HA powder was provided by NANOTECH Inc., Eskişehir, while nano-hexagonal BN powder (hBN) was supplied by BORTEK Inc., Eskişehir and poly vinyl alcohol (PVA; ALDRICH, Mw: 89,000) was used as a binder. Samples that included 0.0 For the structural characterization of samples, X-ray diffraction (XRD) and Raman spectroscopy were used; however, for the identification of morphology and surface features, the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) technique was utilized. The phase composition of the samples was analyzed via XRD using a Bruker AXS, D8 Advance Diffractometer with Cu Animal handling and surgical procedures were performed according to ethical permission obtained from the Ataturk University Ethics Committee of Experimental Animal Use and the Research Scientific Committee at the same institution (Agreement number, 27.03.2015/72). In this research, 126 Sprague–Dawley rats (275–300 All operations were carried out under sterile conditions. The rats' right femurs were included in the study, and implant materials were located in the femurs. For this purpose, balanced anesthesia was induced with 10 Blood samples were collected over a time course of 1, 2, 3, and 4 ICP-MS (Thermo Scientific X Series II, Bremen, Germany) with an RF power of 1400 The calibration solutions for ICP-MS analysis were prepared from the SpectrascanH boron standard solution (1000 Limit of detection (LOD) and limit of quantification (LOQ) were established by decreasing analysis amounts to signal/noise of 3:1 and 10:1, respectively. The LOD and LOQ were 0.2 and 0.8 For statistical analysis, we used the IBM-SPSS 20.00 software. Results are presented as means The XRD patterns of HA and nano-hBN powders are shown in The Raman spectra of HA and hBN nanoparticles are shown in The morphology of HA and hBN powders are shown in At 1, 2, 3, and 4 In orthopedic surgery and many surgical departments in which implants are used, the implants are coated with several materials in order to make them compatible with the tissue. Particularly in tooth implants, this practice enables osteointegration, prevents infection, and increases the soundness of the implant material. Nickel, cobalt, titanium, chromium, silver, aluminum, and vanadium, as well as alloys of these metals, are often used in the coating In their study, Cundy et al. reported that serum chromium levels were elevated in 37% of patients with stainless steel spinal instrumentation. Moreover, Bradberry et al. performed a retrospective study on systemic toxicity related to metal hip prostheses (including cobalt and chromium), and effects like neuro-ocular toxicity, cardiotoxicity, and thyroid toxicity were reported in patients with metal-containing hip prostheses Due to its chemical similarity with the mineral of the crystal that is found in the human bone structure, HA is a calcium phosphate-based bioceramic whose chemical formula is Ca The studies that have been previously done on boron have shown the effects of this element and its derivatives on bone recovery and osteointegration If boron derivatives are to be used as implant materials, one must know that it will not transit into the blood or the rate at which it can transit. This is because, in addition to its positive effects on health, studies have also shown that increased boron levels in body liquids can have adverse effects We primarily examined HA and hBN compatibility and observed quite compatible materials in the composite material in our study. In our study, XRD and Raman Spectroscopy were used for structural characterization. To investigate the phase composition, XRD analyses were performed and phase analysis revealed that all major peaks of HAp were present for the samples that were sintered at 1100 The morphology of HA powder showed nearly spherical agglomerates. The nano-hBN particles had a thin plate-like morphology with rounded edges. In HA powder, nano-porous spherical structure, with a pore size of approximately 300 In conclusion, this study investigated the implant material produced form hBN–HA for the first time. It demonstrated that neither short-term nor long-term implantation of hBN–HA composite resulted in increased serum boron levels. In addition, increasing the concentration of hBN in the composite material did not cause a difference in serum boron levels. These data suggest that hBN is a new promising target for biomaterial and implant bioengineers. The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest to disclose. This study was supported by