The efficient use of water has become an important issue in the mining industry, especially in countries where it is located in desert areas with low water reserves, as is the case in Chile. In addition, low ore grades necessitate efforts to recover the maximum amount of minerals in solid–liquid separation processes. Fine particle flocculation is a preliminary stage in various solid–liquid separation processes. The conventional flocculation process is done at low shear rates, ensuring that large flocs remain unbroken. However, it has been seen that the application of high shear rates at the beginning of the process for a short period of time significantly improves the solid removal efficiency, reducing the flocculant dosage and the duration and cost of the process, which is known as ultra-flocculation. This work presents a numerical CFD study of the hydrodynamic behavior in five hydraulic reactors for ultra-flocculation, analyzing the shear rate curve over treatment time, dissipation efficiency and average shear rates. A new mean shear rate, which uses hydraulic variables to estimate the average agitation, is also defined. It was shown that the hydraulic shear rate can be useful for developing better hydraulic designs because it provides a second view, which, added to the shear rate curve over treatment time and effective shear rate, allows a more complete judgment of the performance of the designs.Quadratic error in the mean shear rate Pressure drop within a hydraulic reactor Dissipation efficiency Molecular or dynamic viscosity Turbulent viscosity kinematic viscosity Average shear rate based on the input power dissipation in the volume Effective mean shear rate obtained from the local shear rate averaging in the reactor volume Hydraulic average shear rate Local shear rate average obtained from the pathlines local shear rate Actual retention time estimated by the average of the pathlines residential time. Velocity vector Wall shear stress Turbulent kinetic energy dissipation rate Local shear rate Dissipated power Hydraulic power consumption Flow rate Koh's parameter Hydraulic retention time reactor volume Vorticity magnitude Dimensionless distance of the first adjacent cell to the wall Water consumption has become an important problem in the mineral processing industry, especially in countries in which most plants are located in desert areas, where water scarcity and low ores grades are two difficulties that call for additional efforts to make mining water and mineral recovery processes more efficient. In order to facilitate lower-grade mineral liberation, particles are grinded in crushers and millers before the flotation process to sizes of 50–150 Flocculation is a physicochemical process in which strong, dense aggregates (flocs) of destabilized suspended particles are made by the effect of a polymer (flocculant) and the application of a hydraulic field ( Different stages in the flocculation process have been identified: particle-polymer mixing, polymer molecule attachment onto the particle surface, reconfiguration of the polymer molecules on the particle surface, particle aggregation and floc breakup ( The effectiveness of flocculation depends on the chemical and physical conditions under which the process occurs ( Micro-floc aggregation occurs thanks to particle collisions, which depend on Brownian motion, differential settlement, kinetics, shear and inertial effects ( Flocculation can be produced by mechanical or hydraulic means; in mechanical flocculation the energy is provided by driven agitation, while in hydraulic flocculation the energy is added by making the fluid flow pass across a reactor of complex geometry ( CFD modeling has been used by several authors in the study of the flocculation process. These numerical techniques can be applied to study the flow field within a reactor, design new reactors and simulate the process of flocculation in a reactor. An excellent review of the use of CFD modeling in flocculation for water treatment is presented on another article by ( This article aims to expand our understanding of the flow field produced in different geometrical configurations of hydraulic ultra-flocculation reactors through the use of CFD, analyzing the shear rate production and distribution and the energy required to produce the hydraulic fields. In addition, a new way of computing the mean shear rate is proposed, which could be useful for making better hydraulic designs for flocculation reactors. Simulations are done using water as the working fluid, but the conclusions obtained here are applicable to different types of suspensions. The article has five sections: Introduction, Theory, Methodology and Validation, Results and Discussions and Conclusions. The most effective way to enhance the process of flocculation is to increase the intensity of the agitation, usually quantified through the velocity gradient In the first part of the ultraflocculation process the values of At the end of the process the values of The values of  In flocculation, suspended particles are subjected to two hydrodynamics sub-ranges: the viscous sub-range and the inertial sub-range, which are the most relevant factors in floc formation and breakage. Shear stress depends on the kinetic energy dissipation rate ( In order to avoid floc breakage, flocculation is traditionally carried out in long (15–60 The transport equations involved in the study are the continuity equation and momentum conservation equation. There are different strategies in turbulence modeling, such as the RANS, LES and DNS approaches. The RANS approach is a proven robust, stable and economic way to address a wide range of problems ( There are a wide variety of RANS turbulence models available in commercial codes such as ANSYS FLUENT. Among these, the Reynolds Stress Model (RSM) is the most complete ( The numerical simulations were done using the commercial, finite-volume-based CFD solver ANSYS FLUENT 14.5 ( Three numerical discretizations were used for the grid independence study in the simulation of the UF1 reactor, increasing the grid resolution mainly near the walls. All the simulated reactors have inlet and outlet ducts of 16 [mm] and a volume close to 1 [lt]. The reactor designs were made to get high shear rates at the inlet and lower values at the outlet. The UF2 reactor consists of three co-axial cylinders of different diameters, where the distance between the outer wall and the cylinders increases as the fluid passes through the reactor. The UF3 reactor has a cylinder at the top followed by an inverted cone, keeping the same idea of increasing the gap between the walls as the fluid passes through the reactor. The UF4 reactor also has a cylinder at the top, which gives way to a truncated cone. The outer wall of this design has an hourglass shape, in which the lower half is hollow. The UF5 reactor consists of Simulations were done following the same strategy as used for the UF1 for a Although all the reactors have a similar volume and were simulated for the same hydraulic retention time, the pressure drop and the power input required to make the fluid pass through the reactor is different in each reactor. This is because the form of the reactors has a direct impact on the pressure drop and thus on the power input. It is observed that the UF2 and UF3 have very similar results, which is due to their similar geometric configuration. It is also observed that the dissipation efficiency is similar in all the designs but the UF4, which has a 60% higher efficiency than the rest. This means that the UF4 reactor uses the power input to produce agitation better than the other designs. While almost all the reactors presented small differences in hydraulic retention time, the UF1 had a very short It is known that floc strength decreases as its size increases and that high-intensity mixing at the start of the process can improve flocculation results significantly ( The vorticity vector is calculated by Eq. Figs.  Shear stress depends on  The hydrodynamics of five different laboratory-scale hydraulic reactor designs for ultra-flocculation were studied through CFD simulations. The average local shear rate variation with treatment time, dissipation efficiency and mean shear rates were studied for a hydraulic retention time of 2[ A hydrodynamics study of different hydraulic reactors for a variant of the conventional shear flocculation was presented, showing that the shear rate production in this type of reactors depends on the pressure drop, the vorticy and the confinement level of the flow inside the reactor. The authors declare no potential conflicts of interest. This work was supported by the ”Centro de Recursos Hídricos para Agricultura y Minería” (Conicyt/Fondap 15130015); and the ”Fondo de Fomento al Desarrollo Científico y Tecnológico” (FONDEF ID15I10291). FB also acknowledge to CONICYT-Chile through the project AFB170001 of the PIA Program: Concurso Apoyo a Centros Cientificos y Tecnologicos de Excelencia con Financiamiento Basal.