The system of heat-treatment operations, involved in the manufacture of alloy-steel axle-shafts, is reengineered and standardized to ensure quality-consistency as per international standards. The quality-engineering tool of Cause-and-Effect diagram/analysis is also applied in the reengineering technique. The heat-treatment temperatures and time-duration parameters are readjusted by their relationship to their mechanical properties. The Fe–Fe3C phase diagram was extensively referred in reengineering of the austenising temperature. The required hardness values were successfully achieved in the heat-treated axle-shafts as a result of this reengineering research and development.Progressive automotive industries are now striving to produce quality-consistent component or product at minimum possible cost. The research and development presented in this paper assures quality-consistency in alloy-steel axle-shafts of racing cars, by reengineering the system of manufacturing processes resulting in reducing the cost of manufacture without affecting the quality of the automotive component. The mechanical properties of alloy-steels are strongly dependant on the heat-treatment parameters Drive axles are subjected to immense torque loads. The drive axle of a 1300 hp drag car must collectively withstand upward of 12,000 lb-ft of torque every time the driver drops the hammer. The damping force of the shock absorber itself, excluding the spring effect, can be indicated according to the axle weight/road wheel at the point of displacement Material and heat-treatment are the next area of concern. OE carbon steel axles (typically SAE 1055 or 1541) are induction-hardened only up to the bearing surface, leaving the flange much softer than the rest of the shaft. That’s so people can run into curbs and snap the flange off. Induction hardening (shaft passes through an electromagnetic coil that excites a powerful current within the shaft thereby heating it) penetrates about 15 in., so the axle core remains relatively soft. Typically, the shaft surface is 55–58 Rockwell and very stiff (almost brittle). This material characteristic may be suitable for curb-bangers, but certainly not capable of handling the shock loads associated with massive torques On the flip side, Hi-torque axles are usually made of high-strength chromium–molybdenum–nickel alloy and are subsequently heat treated via a lengthy process called austempering. In this phase, the forging is submerged in a special solution at 830 °C in a vertical furnace for more than an hour. This treatment provides an ultimate tensile strength of 225,000–253,000 psi along with exceptional ductility. The shaft surface hardness is about 50 Rockwell – far less brittle than an induction-hardened carbon-steel axle. When these heat-treated forgings are subjected to thousands of lb-ft of torque, they twist and rebound like a torsion bar instead of snapping like a wishbone. This material behavior is due to the microstructural changes (mostly phase transformations) arising as a result of the heat-treatment The research and development reported in this paper reengineers forming and heat-treatment processes involved in the manufacture of axle-shafts. The existing (previous) method was cheaper; however, there were quality-consistency related problems. These problems have been solved by reengineering the heat-treatment process/system so as to ensure quality-consistency in the axle-shafts. An improved heat-treatment procedure is presented in this paper, which also assures absence of distortion/deformation due to heat-treatment. It is recalled that the deformation due to heat-treatment accounts for faulty mechanical parts The heat-treatment cycle (presented in There is non-consistency in hardness values in the heat-treated shafts. Most of the hardness values deviate from the specified (required) hardness range of In some cases, there is excessive distortion/deformation in the axle-shafts during the heat-treatment process. Sometimes there is scaling on the surface of the heat-treated shafts. As regards the exact problem of quality-consistency, the data pertaining the non-consistent hardness values in the shafts, as collected from the manufacturer is presented in It is evident from the data in The problem of non-consistency in hardness values in the axle-shafts, was solved by modeling the system of manufacturing by using the quality-engineering technique of In the system model, presented in Having modeled the system, the The chemical analysis of the as-received material (SAE-4140 alloy steel) is given in A comparison of the analysis of the as-received material (see The as-received material was an SAE-4140 alloy-steel rolled bar of length 26–40 in. and diameter of 1.2 in. (approx). The forming method involved hammering the ends (heads) of the bar to 1.5 in. diameter. The existing system of heat-treatment cycle for the axle-shaft is shown in Owing to the technical/quality-consistency problems (see The temperatures for heating and holding (800 °C) are not in accordance with Fe–Fe Heating/holding times deviate from the recommended standard heat-treatment for the axle-shaft. No provision for the normalizing pre-heating operation is given to the existing system of heat-treatment. The above-mentioned short-coming in the existing method requires reengineering; the reengineered system is presented in Section The furnace used, for heat-treatment, was a pit-type gas-fired salt-bath furnace. The furnace–pot contained a cyanide salt into which a lot size of four axle-shafts were immersed for heat-treatment. Quenching involved oil quenching in an electrically controlled. An indirect communication with the salt-bath furnace operator indicated that there is a need of improving furnace control practice by precisely controlling the salt bath during the heat-treatment process. Having analysed the existing system, the new (reengineered) system of heat-treatment cycle is now developed to ensure quality-consistency in the axle-shafts. What is important in the new system is that all four variables (material, method, equipment, and man) are properly controlled and managed from engineering stand-point for quality-assurance as per international standards. A look on The as-received material was forged to 1.5 in. diameter shaft (see Section To safeguard the axle-shafts against cracking and distortion, preheat the alloy-steel shafts in a ternary eutectic chloride mixture around 600 °C. Heat to 845–925 °C and hold for 1 h minimum; air cool. More restrictive normalizing temperatures are given in Heat to 830–870 °C and hold for 1 h; furnace cool at a rate of about 15 °C/h to 480 °C and then air cool. Heat to 830–870 °C and hold for 1h; oil quench. Temper at least 1/2 to 2 h at 175–230 °C; air cool. To avoid blue brittleness, avoid tempering between 230 and 370 °C.  The maintenance and operational control of salt-bath equipment is important for assuring quality-consistency and absence of distortion/deformation in axle-shafts. A well-controlled salt-bath furnace would offer a way to minimize the bad effects of non-uniform heating, lack of support, and poor quenching that may cause shape and size distortion. Heating in the molten salt must be uniform. The temperature uniformity in the molten-salt bath was maintained to be between +3 and −3 °C by use of thermocouple. Great care was exercised in checking the cyanide content of the salt-bath throughout the bath. The equipment control techniques that were exercised, to avoid distortion in the axle-shafts, are given in the subsequent subsections.  The flame pattern of burners was adjusted to avoid localized heating of the pot containing the axle-shafts. This control measure also ensured consistency in hardness values. The pot was kept about 2/3 full. It was ensured that the salt is completely changed every 3–4 months. The pot was kept covered most of the times to avoid exposure to air since this results in breaking down of cyanide to carbonate. The axle-shafts were pre-heated so that after charging, the salt temperature did not drop below 100 °C. Pre-cleaning of the axle-shafts was done to make sure that the parts are free of oil, moisture and other deposits. Since left-over salt on parts causes corrosion, the heat-treated axle-shafts were washed without delay in hot water with agitation, and then dried. To ensure absence of distortion/deformation in axle-shafts, good quality-quenching oil was used with the specifications shown in The salt-bath furnace operator was given an exhaustive training to ensure that the heat-treatment practices are well in lines with those mentioned in subsections Mechanical-test results from the new heat-treatment process are encouraging, since almost all hardness values lie around 50 A comparison of data in The graphical plot of The quality-consistency of the automotive component: axle-shaft for the racing cars, was improved by application of the industrial-engineering technique of the