This paper investigates whether blends of platinum ores display linear grinding and flotation characteristics or whether non-linear effects occur, i.e. synergistic/antagonistic effects. Ores from four different shafts are used in the study, i.e. Salene, Waterval UG2, Paardekraal and Townlands. Laboratory grinding and flotation tests are conducted on blends of the four ores using a statistical simplex lattice mixture design. Grinding results show no evidence that blends of ores display non-linear grinding characteristics. Flotation results show significant antagonistic effects in binary blends of the Salene ore with the other ore types. On the other hand, ternary/quaternary blends of ores result in synergistic effects. The study concludes that blends of platinum ores display non-linear (non-additive) characteristics when there are large differences in metallurgical properties between the ore types. The study demonstrates that appropriately designed mixtures experiments are an effective way to study the performance of ore blends in the laboratory.The Waterval UG2 Concentrator is situated in Rustenburg in South Africa. The concentrator treats platinum ore which is mined from the UG2 reef from various shafts in the Rustenburg area. Ores from these shafts are combined in receiving bins at the concentrator, or stored on common stockpiles if bins are full. Consequently, feed to the mill may vary from pure ores to blends of ores from the various shafts. In addition, ores from other mining companies may be tolled through the concentrator in varying amounts. Ores usually differ in their metallurgical behaviour depending on factors such as mineralogical hosting of PGE and PGM, silicate and oxide alteration, and sulfide and discrete PGM grain size. When ores are combined in blends it is commonly assumed that the metallurgical performance of the blend is additive, i.e. equivalent to the weighted average sum of that for pure ores in the blend. For example, the contribution to overall flotation recovery for an ore in a blend is considered equal to the recovery of the pure ore multiplied by its mass fraction. However, there is a perception based on past experience that poor quality ores may control the metallurgical behaviour of ore blends. Here, the poor quality ore produces non-linear or ‘antagonistic’ effects which weight the metallurgical behaviour of the blend towards that of the poor quality ore. This would impact significantly on areas such as production accounting where ores are considered additive in blends, i.e. weighted average sums are used. A number of researchers have investigated the effect of ore blends on metallurgical performance ( Research into the effect of blends on metallurgical performance has generally been conducted using experimental studies designed according to researcher preference. However, in industries such as petroleum, pharmaceuticals and food processing the study of mixtures or blends is a mature discipline and is conducted using statistical mixture designs. A mixture design is a type of factorial experimental design specifically intended to rigorously test the hypothesis that the blend performance is an additive combination of the individual component performances. In a mixture design, the relative proportions of components are used as the experimental variables ( The aim of this paper is to investigate the effects of ore blends on the mineral processing of platinum ores. The study is conducted using a simplex lattice mixture design for a range of ores of relevance to the Waterval UG2 Concentrator. The main aim of the paper is to determine whether blends of ores display linear grinding and flotation characteristics or whether non-linear effects occur, i.e. synergistic/antagonistic effects. Ores from four different shafts were chosen for the study, i.e. Salene ( Laboratory batch grinding tests were performed using a standard Yaskuwa 0.25 Laboratory batch flotation tests were performed using a standard 5 Repeatability was tested only on the pure ores. The relative error based on three replicates ranged between about 1% and 3% for the four ores. For cumulative recovery the error (standard deviation) was 0.88% for Salene, 1.34% for Waterval UG2, 2.76% for Paardekraal and 1.21% for Townlands. For cumulative grade the error (standard deviation) was 1.83 Experiments were performed according to a simplex lattice mixture design which is an arrangement of equally spaced points on a simplex ( A special cubic regression polynomial was generated from the mixture design. This is a predictive model which relates a performance variable (e.g. size, recovery, grade) to the relative proportion of ore in the mixture. The special cubic polynomial is widely used in mixture designs and allows for linear terms, quadratic terms (binary interactions) and cubic terms (ternary interactions). The quality of the regression is evaluated in terms of the residual standard error, adjusted correlation coefficient Results from mixture designs are generally interpreted through analysis of the regression polynomial and graphically using binary and ternary plots for the various components. Antagonistic (or synergistic) effects may be identified in a number of ways. Firstly, by evaluating the sign of the coefficients of the non-linear terms in the polynomial equation, one may determine antagonistic (or synergistic) effects. If the coefficient has a negative sign the interaction is antagonistic. Secondly, binary and ternary plots may be used to graphically identify antagonistic (or synergistic) effects. These plots show the predicated variable (size, recovery, grade, etc.) as a function of the relative proportion of either two (binary) or three (ternary) ores in the mixture. The plots can be generated using either raw experimental data or the regression polynomial equation. Here, straight lines or surfaces indicate linear effects (additive). Downward curvature (concave) indicates antagonistic effects while upward curvature (convex) indicates synergistic effects. This section presents and discusses results from the laboratory grinding and flotation experiments. Results are interpreted in terms of the regression polynomial and, where appropriate, graphically using binary and ternary plots. The section concludes with a discussion of possible reasons for the non-linear behaviour observed in certain blends and some thoughts on the ‘optimum’ ore blend. Note that the recovery and grade results given in this section are for the four major precious metals (4E – Pt, Pd, Rh and Au). Eq. Eq.  Eq. At a 50:50 blend the ‘loss’ of grade would be of the order of 10  The purpose of this study was to determine whether blends of ores display linear grinding and flotation characteristics or whether non-linear effects occur, i.e. synergistic/antagonistic. The study was initiated to test the validity of the common assumption that when ores are combined in blends the metallurgical performance of the blend is additive. Results from the study show that blends of ores display non-linear (non-additive) characteristics when there are large differences in metallurgical properties between the ore types. For example, binary blends of Salene (a ‘poor’ ore) and Townlands (a ‘good’ ore) show strong antagonistic effects. Here, a 50:50 blend results in a ‘loss’ of 4% in recovery and 10 Firstly, metallurgical behaviour is often non-linear and there is no reason to assume that blends of ore should display additive characteristics. For example, grade–recovery curves are highly non-linear and it is perhaps unreasonable to expect combinations of these curves (i.e. blends) to be linear. These deviations are referred to as synergistic or antagonistic in a statistical mixture design, implying good or bad. However, they may be neither good nor bad and merely a predictable consequence of combining non-linear grade–recovery curves. Secondly, there may be genuine synergistic or antagonistic effects which have an underlying physical/chemical mechanism. For example, well-liberated ‘good’ ores may have very brittle flotation froths which can be stabilised by small quantities of a ‘poor’ ore due to the higher gangue recovery. Similarly, harder ores may ‘mask’ the grinding characteristics of softer ores. There are many approaches which could be undertaken to identify actual physical/chemical mechanisms for synergism or antagonism in blends. Thirdly, the optimal operating conditions for blends of ores may be different from those of the pure ores. For example, a blend of ores may require a different collector dosage to that for the pure ores. Here, synergisms/antagonisms would be a consequence of moving to better/worse operating conditions. It is possible to introduce such factors formally into experimental mixture designs and the resulting models, at the cost of considerable additional experimentation. However, in the authors’ opinion synergisms/antagonisms should be identified initially at fixed operating conditions for benchmarking purposes, i.e. to maintain a level playing field. Also, the purpose of this paper is to demonstrate the effectiveness of mixture designs in mineral processing and to show that non-linear effects do exist in flotation and need to be considered in predicting the performance of ore mixtures, rather than to develop a fully comprehensive model of the particular system under study. Process variables were therefore not included in the study. The regression equations for flotation recovery and grade both include fairly large non-linear terms. This suggests that there may be an ore blend, or set of ore blends, which results in optimum performance. The optimum recovery and grade were determined individually from the respective regression equations using Microsoft Excel Solver. An optimum recovery of 85.55% was obtained, which is that for the pure Townlands ore, i.e. 100% It is clear from this figure that the optimum values calculated using Solver lie along the Pareto frontier and that optimum blends are somewhere between these two points, depending on whether higher recoveries or grades are preferred. In practical terms this means that the optimum blend for grade is the appropriate starting point, and that more Townlands ore should be added to the blend if higher recoveries are required. However, in all cases the Salene ore should be left out of the blend. The purpose of this study was to determine whether blends of ores display linear grinding and flotation characteristics or whether non-linear effects occur, i.e. synergistic/antagonistic effects. The study was initiated to test the validity of the common assumption that when ores are combined in blends the metallurgical performance of the blend is additive. Results from the study show that: For grinding no evidence was found to suggest that blends of ores display non-linear grinding characteristics. This is attributed to the ores having similar grinding characteristics, i.e. of a similar ‘hardness’. For flotation clear antagonistic effects were found in binary blends of the Salene ore with the other ore types. For example, a 50:50 blend of the Salene and Townlands ores resulted in a ‘loss’ of 4% in recovery and 10 The optimum blend was found to consist of 21.2% Waterval UG2, 44.2% Paardekraal and 34.6% Townlands. This blend resulted in an optimum grade of 73.82 The study concludes that blends of ores display non-linear (non-additive) characteristics when there are large differences in metallurgical properties between the ore types. The study has shown that appropriately designed mixtures experiments are an effective way to study the performance of ore blends in the laboratory. The authors would like to thank both the Australian Mineral Industries Research Association (AMIRA) P754 project and Anglo Platinum for supporting this research.