Bentonites from different deposits worldwide often show unexplainable differences with respect to their performance in different applications. Examples are the water uptake capacity and bleaching ability (Kaufhold, 2001; Kaufhold et al., 2010). The present study focused on the rheological parameters of bentonite-cement slurries used in civil and underground engineering. By measuring the viscosity and yield point of several different Na+-activated calcium bentonites mixed with blast furnace cement, behavior of a Milos bentonite was detected characterized by an unusual increase of the viscosity after addition of the cement. A detailed mineralogical characterization was conducted to identify the reason. The most striking difference of the samples was the content of soluble silica making up 27mass% of the bentonite (soluble in hot sodium carbonate solution). However, the addition of silica gel to bentonites free of soluble silica proved the effect on the rheological parameters viscosity and yield point.Bentonite-cement suspensions are recently applied in some special fields of civil and underground engineering. In retention walls the bentonite of such a suspension acts as a supporting agent of the trench during excavation and provides low permeability of water after the setting of the cement. The process in which the bentonite-cement suspension remains inside the trench is called the “One-Phase-Method” ( Then, the cement and additives (e.g. mineral filler) were added to the aged bentonite suspension. As an alternative to this method, dry premixes of bentonite, cement, and additives made in special mixing plants of cement factories have become more and more popular. Based on the research of the firms Anneliese Cement AG and Dyckerhoff AG in 1988, a patent was granted to Anneliese (DE 3633736A1) which is exclusively used by Dyckerhoff. In Germany and Austria most of the constructors of retention walls use such premixes. The advantages of this method are: the premixes are easier to handle, they require less site equipment, there is no pre-swelling required, there is better recipe and quality control of the mixture during production. However, the disadvantage is that the recipe cannot be easily modified on site in the case of special site requirements (e.g. special soil properties). The one-phase-retention wall method requires increased performance of activated calcium bentonites, particularly with respect to viscosity and thixotropy during the time of trenching and excavation. Therefore, bentonites with high swelling capacity are required. Activated bentonites are known to lose appreciable swelling capacity in the presence of free Ca Though the term “cement-stability” is not defined exactly, in industrial usage a bentonite is called “cement stable” if it does not significantly change its rheological properties after being mixed with cement and within the time of trenching until the cementation starts. The three economically most important European regions for bentonite production: Milos (GR), Bavaria (D) and Sardinia (I) have been selected in order to compare the rheological properties in cement slurries. Each of the samples was composed of at least 50 individual samples of different horizons and stocks of the deposits. Commercially available hydrophobized precipitated silica “Vulkasil S”, hydrophilic fumed silica “Aerosil 90” and water glass solution were used as additives to bentonites free of soluble silica. The preparation for mineralogical and chemical analysis included crushing to < The mineralogical composition was determined by the XRD-Rietveld technique as described by The chemical composition of the powdered samples was determined using a PANalytical Axios and a PW2400 spectrometer. The samples were prepared by mixing with a flux material and melting into glass beads. The beads were analyzed by wavelength dispersive X-ray fluorescence spectrometry (WD-XRF). To determine loss on ignition, (LOI) 1 The CEC was determined by the so-called Cu-triene method ( The amount of soluble silica was determined by using 0.02, 0.04, 0.06, 0.08, 0.1 The total carbon, sulfur and organic carbon contents of air-dried samples (170–180 To determine the rheological properties, the samples were activated at 30 The guidelines to determine the suspension properties for retention walls are a combination derived from the API Spec. 13 for drilling fluids, the DIN 4126 and 4127 for retention walls and the DIN 18136 and 18310 for geotechnics. The preparation of the suspension has to follow the specific instructions given by each of the cement manufacturers. In the present paper the suspensions were prepared as follows: 80 A 3 To determine the viscosity, a Marsh-funnel according to the API Spec. 13, Sect. 2 (1982) with an outlet tube diameter of 4.76 The yield point relates particularly well to the stability of the trench and the processability of the suspension. The yield point was measured with the “Kugelharfe” (would be “sphere harp” in English), a device which can be easily handled on site (DIN 4126). Ten small spheres with different diameters and densities were held by strings and numbered according to increasing mass and diameter. The slurry was poured into a cup, and after a relaxation time of 60 The guidelines (desired value) for a bentonite-cement-suspension require a yield point of 14–50 The rheological properties of industrially activated bentonites directly correlate with the “chemical degree of activation” (CAG), i.e. the amount of sodium carbonate needed for the cation exchange according to the nature of the bentonite and the “technical degree of activation” (TAG), i.e., the feasibility to activate lumpy raw materials of 30 The maximum values of the rheological properties were reached only if both degrees of activation approach 100%. Any under- or over-activation inevitably leads to a loss of rheological properties, independent of the deposit-related bentonite characteristics. Typical activation curves following the CAG of bentonite from different deposits were obtained with a 5 The suspensions were then screened at 0.075 In order to compare bentonite deposits of different origins the identification of the optimum activation is necessary. The large content of Ca The data in the optimum activation can minimize but not completely avoid the loss of rheological properties upon addition of cement, the assumption which was made up to now, that only Milos bentonites can be used in bentonite-cement slurries is incorrect. At CAG a Milos bentonite was identified which had a comparatively low basic viscosity but obtained high viscosity after addition of the cement. This bentonite fulfilled all the required bentonite-cement slurry properties including Marsh viscosity, “Kugelharfen” yield point, filtration and sedimentation behavior ( The unusual behavior of this Milos bentonite was only observed after activation, i.e. when Na Based on viscosity tests with a pure bentonite suspension, this rheological anomaly could not be related to the type of the montmorillonite. It was assumed that accessory minerals could play an important role. The results of the mineralogical characterization are summarized in ASP and V3 were two samples of the Milos bentonite, showing the anomaly described, V2 was a Milos bentonite with good rheological properties, V4, V5, were Bavarian bentonites with good and bad rheological properties, V6B, V6G were Bavarian and Sardinian bentonites also with good and bad rheological properties. As expected, all samples are mainly composed of smectites with partially significant contents of illite/muscovite. However, the large illite/muscovite content of samples V4 and V5 was attributed to a systematic error of the Rietveld refinement which depends on the quality of the structural models and particularly on the disorder models. Hence considering the sum of 2:1 clay minerals is probably closer to the true composition. The contents of the minerals not needing a disorder model in the Rietveld refinement (carbonates, quartz, feldspar) are supposed to be close to the real contents. The contents of the minerals not needing a disorder model in the Rietveld refinement (carbonates, quartz, feldspar) are supposed to be close to the real contents. This was confirmed by comparing the calcite content calculated with the LECO data. Sample V4 contained ankerite, pyrite was found only in sample V3, and dolomite only in sample V7. Furthermore, the kaolinite content of V5 is particularly large, which is properly reflected by the Al The most striking property of the samples with unusual rheology was the high content of soda-soluble silica of 27 However, CSH phases were not detected by electron microscopy (NanoSEM). One open question is why the unusual rheology was not observed in the case of calcium bentonites. On the one hand, the Na The idea that soluble silica could be responsible for the unusual rheological behavior was tested by using a mixture of activated bentonite free of soluble silica and different types of synthetic silica gels. However, silica gels show strong differences in the rheological properties of the mixtures. This can be easily explained by the different structures and solubilities of the gels. Moreover, some silica gels were hydrophobized which of course decreases the solubility in aqueous solutions. Hydrophobized silica gels such as “Vulkasil S” from Lanxess AG did not show any increase of the viscosity and yield point. Two silica gels, the hydrophyllic “Aerosil 90” from Evonik AG and sodium water glass solution were tested with positive results ( Although the level of the Milos bentonite could not be reached, the significant increase of the viscosity and yield point of the cement suspensions with Bavarian and Sardinian bentonites after addition of silica was evident ( By measuring the viscosity and yield point of several bentonites mixed with standard blast furnace cement, an unusual increase of the viscosity of one of these, a Milos bentonite, was observed. The most striking property of this bentonite was the high content (up to 27