The remelting of automobile scrap in an electric arc furnace (EAF) results in the production of a dust, which contains high concentrations of the oxides of zinc, iron, calcium and other metals. Typically, the lead and zinc are of commercial value, while the other metals are not worth recovering. At the present time, EAF dusts are treated in high temperature Waelz rotary kiln-type processes, where the lead and zinc oxides are selectively reduced and simultaneously reoxidized and a crude zinc oxide is produced. Another alternative processing route is selective chlorination, in which the non-ferrous metals are preferentially chlorinated to their gaseous chlorides and in this manner separated from the iron. In the present research, a detailed thermodynamic analysis of this chlorination process has been performed and the following factors were investigated; temperature, amount of chlorine, lime content, silica content, presence of an inert gas and the oxygen potential. High lead and zinc recoveries as gaseous chlorides could be achieved but some of the iron oxide was also chlorinated. Additionally, the calcium oxide in the dust consumes chlorine, but this can be minimized by adding silica, which results in the formation of stable calcium silicates. The optimum conditions were determined for a typical dust composition. The selectivities achieved with chlorination were lower than those for reduction, as reported in the literature, but there are other advantages such as the potential recovery of copper.In most countries, electric arc furnace (EAF) dust is considered to be a hazardous waste because of the presence of lead, cadmium, chromium and zinc. It is generated when automobile scrap is remelted in an electric arc furnace and about 10–20 There are two major methods for treating the dust: recycling for metals recovery or stabilization for landfilling Although numerous reducing agents have been proposed for EAF dust, such as various carbonaceous materials An alternative method for pyrometallurgical treatment of EAF dust is to utilize chlorine as a reagent to selectively chlorinate both the lead and the zinc and separate them from the iron, which remains in oxide form. The potential advantages of selective chlorination include separation of the non-ferrous metals from the iron, the elimination of carbon as a contaminant of any metallic iron product, the chlorine reagent can be recycled, there are no greenhouse gas emissions due to carbon dioxide and finally other elements such as copper can be recovered. In a manner similar to selective reduction, selective chlorination is achieved by limiting the temperature and/or the amount of the chlorinating agent. In the present research, a detailed thermodynamic study was performed on the chlorination of EAF dust. There is very little information in the literature on the chlorination of EAF dust. Wang et al. performed a thermodynamic study of the reaction of EAF dust with ferrous chloride (FeCl In the presence of sufficient chlorine, the chlorination reactions for lead, zinc, iron, calcium oxide and zinc ferrite would be as follows: The chlorination reactions can be made more favourable by the addition of carbon as follows: The dust was assumed to consist mainly of the oxides of zinc, lead, iron, calcium, silicon and aluminium. In addition, some oxygen and carbon were present as carbon dioxide in carbonates. The control dust composition was as follows (in mass percent): 1.344% C, 14.692% Ca, 27.920% Fe, 28.966% O, 3.500% Pb, 1.603% Si, 0.495% Al and 21.482% Zn. The following species were assumed to be present in the dust (in mass percent): 6.100% CaO, 8.250% 2CaO·SiO The quantitative parameters utilized in evaluating the chlorination process were as follows: For the separation of lead: For the separation of zinc: For the separation of lead plus zinc: The effect of temperature in the range of 298 to 1998 For the zinc-containing species, as shown in As shown in The effect of temperature on the recoveries of lead, zinc and iron in the temperature range of 1273–1873 The selectivity factors for lead, zinc and lead plus zinc in the dust are shown as a function of temperature in The temperatures for significant recoveries of lead and zinc reported in the above discussion are considerably higher than those reported in the literature The effects of the amount of chlorine gas added on the behaviour of the lead, zinc, iron and calcium-containing species at 1473 As shown in  According to reactions A more accurate control of the oxygen potential in the system could be utilized to maintain the iron as iron oxide rather than being chlorinated to iron chloride. An increasing amount of calcium oxide would be expected to result in an increasing amount of calcium ferrites and therefore a reduction in the amount of gaseous iron chloride. On the other hand, more calcium oxide could favour the formation of additional calcium chloride and thus increase the consumption of chlorine gas. As discussed previously, some of the calcium oxide in the dust is converted to either condensed calcium chloride or gaseous calcium chloride and this consumes chlorine. The stabilization of this calcium oxide as calcium silicate should minimize the amount of lime that is converted. Based on the above discussion it would be expected that the optimum conditions for selective chlorination would be achieved by controlling the following factors: temperature, amount of chlorine, nitrogen partial pressure, oxygen partial pressure and the amounts of lime and silica.  There are a number of other non-ferrous metals in the dust and these will distribute themselves between the gaseous chloride, the oxide residue and any condensed chloride phase that forms. Two important non-ferrous metal impurities are cadmium and copper. The additional species utilized in the equilibrium calculations are given in Since copper is generally considered to be a detrimental impurity element in steel, then its presence in the dust lowers the value of the oxide residue or any metallic iron product, resulting from the processing of the dust. There is currently no viable method to recover the copper from the dust or from the oxide residue or from any metallic iron product or ultimately any iron or steel produced using these materials as a part of the feed. Typically, the copper impurity problem is resolved by diluting the copper-containing iron with another source of iron units with a much lower copper content. Gaseous copper dichloride would be expected to be stable and therefore there is some potential to separate it from the iron.  A thermodynamic analysis of the selective chlorination of the lead and zinc in a typical electric arc furnace dust was performed using the SOLGASMIX equilibrium module of Outokumpu HSC Chemistry The author would like to thank the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) for support of this research.