During liquid phase sintering, WC–Co composite is a solid–liquid two-phase system in which the inter-particle spaces between solid WC grains are filled with liquid Co. When there exists heterogeneity with respect to cobalt content within the composite, liquid Co tends to migrate from regions with higher Co content to other regions with lower Co content, thus causing the redistribution of Co within the WC–Co composite. The kinetics of Co redistribution are of great practical importance for the liquid phase sintering of functionally graded WC–Co composite materials. This paper describes numerical simulations of the kinetic process of Co redistribution, demonstrating how the Co gradient in a WC–Co composite changes with time under various conditions.Functionally graded WC–Co offers a solution to the trade-off between fracture toughness and wear resistance in WC–Co composites by establishing a cobalt gradient or WC grain size differences within the microstructure. Although various methods can be used to make functionally graded WC–Co composites, the liquid phase sintering (LPS) process remains the only economically viable manufacturing method. During liquid phase sintering, a WC–Co composite forms a solid–liquid two-phase mixture in which the inter-particle spaces between WC grains are filled with liquid Co. To manufacture functionally graded WC–Co, a gradient of cobalt content must be established, assuming the WC grain size is uniform throughout the material. The cobalt gradient can form during LPS via a number of means. For example, assuming a sample is composed of two layers of WC–Co with the same Co contents but different WC particle sizes, a Co gradient will form during LPS of this sample The cobalt gradient in a fully sintered graded WC–Co composite depends, however, not only on the thermodynamic equilibrium, but also on the kinetic rate of the liquid migration process. For example, assuming a bi-layer WC–Co specimen is made by compacting WC–Co powders with uniform particle size but different cobalt content in each layer, this initial cobalt gradient in the green compact will be completely eliminated during sintering so long as the specimen is held for a sufficiently long time at the sintering temperature. On other hand, if the holding time at the sintering temperature is short, the initial cobalt gradient in the green compact could be maintained in the fully sintered part. In other words, a WC–Co composite with graded cobalt content can be manufactured by controlling the kinetic process of the liquid migration. The challenge is therefore to quantitatively understand the kinetics of liquid phase migration in order to be able to predict the length of time required for obtaining a desired Co gradient rather than the equilibrium Co gradient under various conditions. In another recent study by the present authors As mentioned earlier, in order to quantitatively describe the liquid migration phenomenon, the governing equation that describes the migration process has been established The challenge for establishing the governing equation of liquid phase migration lies in the fact that it is accompanied by the changes in shape and volume of the system. The volume and shape changes result in changes in the length in the direction of the liquid phase migration and the area across which the liquid phase migrates, which in turn leads to a considerably greater complexity for establishing and solving the governing equation. Mathematically, this is a partial differential equation with moving boundary. For WC–Co system, it has been shown The governing equation of the liquid migration, i.e., Eq. In this study, all the numerical simulations were conducted for bi-layers of WC–Co composites with the two layers having the same WC particle size but different initial Co contents. The specimen configuration, the initial Co gradient, and the desired final Co gradient are illustrated in  Needless to say, in order to obtain a desired final Co gradient in a fully sintered specimen, an optimal sintering time must be determined for a given initial cobalt gradient. The optimal sintering time at the temperature depends on the initial Co gradient and the desired Co gradient. It depends also on other factors such as WC particle size and sample thickness. In the following simulations, the effects of these factors on a characteristic sintering time The dependence of the characteristic sintering time on the thickness of a bi-layer WC–Co specimen was examined via three series of simulations – A, B and C. In each series, only the bi-layer thickness was changed, while other factors, such as WC particle size (d The key parameters used in Series A simulations were as follows. The WC particle size was 1  The above equation indicates that the required time length dramatically increases with the bi-layer specimen thickness. It is worth noting that the parabolic relationship between time and thickness is similar to the dependence of diffusion distance on time According to the governing equation of liquid phase migration, Eq. The dependence of the required time for achieving a desired cobalt gradient on the initial amplitude of the Co gradient was examined through two series of simulations (Series F and G). In each series, only the initial amplitude of the Co gradient was varied while the other parameters including the bi-layer thickness ( The values of the key parameters used in the Series F and G simulations are given in  To further examine the dependence of the required time on the ratio of the final-to-initial amplitudes of Co gradients, ΔCo Based on the plot of The dependence of the characteristic sintering time on the average initial Co content (aveCo Based on According to Based on all the previous series of simulations, the characteristic sintering time is dependent on the sample thickness ( Regression of the data from all the simulations in this study leads to a best-fit value for  This study focused on the kinetic process of Co redistribution during liquid phase sintering of WC–Co. The methodology and the results of this study, however, are expected to be useful also for understanding the kinetic processes of liquid phase migration in other materials systems. The governing equation of liquid phase migration is not limited by the type of material system. Further studies of the liquid phase migration in other materials systems are necessary to improve our understanding of this interesting and useful phenomenon. A numerical simulation has been conducted with the aim of quantitatively understanding the kinetic processes in the sintering of WC–Co composite with a Co gradient via liquid-phase-sintering of bi-layered WC–Co composites. For this purpose, the governing equation of the liquid phase migration has been solved numerically to simulate the change of the Co gradient vs. time under various conditions. The effects of key factors, including sample thickness ( The authors acknowledge the financial support of the US Department of Energy under Award No. DE-FC36-04GO14041.