Introduction
                  Lisfranc injuries involve any bony or ligamentous disruption of the tarsometatarsal joint. Outcome results after treatment are mainly evaluated using patient-reported outcome measures (PROM), physical examination and radiographic findings. Less is known about the kinematics during gait.
               
                  Methods
                  Nineteen patients (19 feet) treated for Lisfranc injury were recruited. Patients with conservative treatment and surgical treatment consisting of open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) or primary arthrodesis were included. PROM, radiographic findings and gait analysis using the Oxford Foot Model (OFM) were analysed. Results were compared with twenty-one healthy subjects (31 feet). Multivariable logistic regression was used to determine factors influencing outcome.
               
                  Results
                  Patients treated for Lisfranc injury had a significantly lower walking speed than healthy subjects (P<0.001). There was a significant difference between the two groups regarding the range of motion (ROM) in the sagittal plane (flexion-extension) in the midfoot during the push-off phase (p<0.001). The ROM in the sagittal plane was significantly correlated with the AOFAS midfoot score (r2
                     =0.56, p=0.012), FADI (r2
                     =0.47, p=0.043) and the SF-36-physical impairment score (r2
                     =0.60, p=0.007) but not with radiographic parameters for quality of reduction. In a multivariable analysis, the best explanatory factors were ROM in the sagittal plane during the push-off phase (β
                     =0.707, p=0.001), stability (β
                     =0.423, p=0.028) and BMI (β
                     =−0.727 p=<0.001). This prediction model explained 87% of patient satisfaction.
               
                  Conclusions
                  This study showed that patients treated for Lisfranc injury had significantly lower walking speed and significantly lower flexion/extension in the midfoot than healthy subjects. The ROM in these patients was significantly correlated with PROM, but not with radiographic quality of reduction. Most important satisfaction predictors were BMI, ROM in the sagittal plane during the push-off phase and fracture stability.Lisfranc injuries involve any bony or ligamentous disruption of the tarsometatarsal joint complex. This injury is not very common, with 0.2% of all fractures Multi-segment foot models (MSFM) are available for analysing kinematic parameters during gait The aim of this study was to investigate kinematic parameters of the foot and ankle in a group of patients after bony Lisfranc injury and to compare these with healthy subjects. The kinematic results were further correlated with PROM and quality of reduction. In addition, a multivariable logistic regression analysis was performed to determine factors explaining patient satisfaction. The hypothesis was that patients who suffer bony Lisfranc injury would show decreased ROM (flexion/extension) in the midfoot compared to healthy subjects and that kinematics during gait would significantly correlate with PROM and the quality of surgical reduction. For this prospective observational study (Level II evidence), 19 patients (19 feet) treated for bony Lisfranc injury were recruited. The medical ethics committee of this hospital approved this study, and all study subjects gave written informed consent. All patients underwent computed tomography to determine the extent of the bony Lisfranc injury and were taken to the operating room for fluoroscopic testing of the stability of the Lisfranc joint. If this was stable, patients were treated with cast immobilization. If this was unstable, patients underwent ORIF with plate–screw osteosynthesis, or arthrodesis, depending on the type of fracture, comminution and bone quality. This decision was made by an experienced trauma surgeon. After 8 weeks, full weight bearing was allowed and supported by physiotherapy. Hardware was removed at least 6 months after operation when patients reported complaints about the screws and/or plates. The researcher contacted the patients six months after their initial treatment, as gait studies have shown that most motion progress after fracture treatment takes place between 3 and 6 months after surgery Motion capture was conducted using the VICON MX 3-system (Vicon Motion Systems Ltd., Oxford, UK). The VICON system comprises eight cameras (6 MX3 and 2 T20, running at 200 All subjects were analysed at the movement laboratory separately. Before gait analysis, the following characteristics were measured: height, weight, body mass index (BMI (kg/m Prospective power was calculated with alpha set at 0.05 and beta at 0.80, using a sample size calculation tool Kinematic data was processed with Matlab (version 7.12,2011) and statistical analysis was performed in SPSS (IBM Statistics, version 20). The data comprised of six trials (steps) randomly chosen. The characteristics were analysed using descriptive statistics and the independent samples t-test for differences; a  Trauma mechanism was traffic accident in 4 patients, fall from height in 1 patient, work accident in 2 patients and a low-energy trauma in 12 patients. No patients with a purely ligamentous injury were included. Overall, 5 patients (26.3%) had a stable Lisfranc fracture pattern and were treated conservatively with cast, while 8 patients (42.1%) underwent ORIF with plate and screw osteosynthesis for instability and 6 patients (31.6%) underwent arthrodesis. Only two patients in the ORIF group underwent removal of hardware before gait analysis. Postoperatively, 1 patient (7.1%) developed a deep infection for which surgical wound debridement was required as well as intravenous antibiotics. None of the patients needed revision surgery. Six months postoperatively, 13 of the 16 patients (81%) had returned to their previous work, while the other 3 patients had not been in work before their injury.  Regarding ROM between hindfoot and forefoot, there was a significantly lower ROM in the Lisfranc group in the sagittal plane (flexion/extension) during the push-off phase (t-test p In The ROM between the forefoot and hindfoot during the push-off phase in the sagittal plane (flexion/extension) was significantly correlated with PROM as defined by the AOFAS midfoot score (Pearson test r In a multivariable logistic regression analysis, ASA, age, BMI, kinematic parameters, fixation method and fracture stability per-operatively and quality of reduction were tested as predictors of patient satisfaction reported as the AOFAS ankle midfoot score and FADI. Using the AOFAS as the patient satisfaction outcome parameter, 87% of patients’ satisfaction could be explained using these factors in this predictive model. Best explanatory factors were ROM in the sagittal plane during the push-off phase ( The present study reveals a more detailed analysis of kinematic changes in foot and ankle after bony Lisfranc injury by using a MSFM. This study found that patients who had suffered Lisfranc injury had significantly lower walking speed and significantly decreased flexion/extension in the midfoot during the push-off phase. In addition, this ROM was significantly correlated with PROM but not with the radiographic quality of reduction. A limited number of studies have analysed gait in patients with Lisfranc injuries. In a study by Kösters et al., 24 patients with foot fractures, including 6 patients with a Lisfranc fracture, were examined with PROM, pedobarographic analysis and radiographic examinations. They found significant lower walking speed in patients treated for Lisfranc injury, just as found in our study. However, they did not analyse the ROM in the forefoot Regarding the clinical impact of this study. This study showed that patients after Lisfranc injury have altered gait compared with healthy subjects. We found that altered gait in patients with a Lisfranc injury is mainly caused by a limited flexion–extension movement between the hindfoot and forefoot, while this was significantly correlated with PROM. This indicates that in the post-operative phase a high flexion-extension motion is important for patient satisfaction. However not the primary aim of this study, when analysing our kinematic results between patients treated with cast or ORIF or a primary arthrodesis, multiple differences were found ( In addition, our multivariable logistic regression analysis found the presence of per-operatively stability to be an important explanatory factor for outcome, while the predictive value of the degree of reduction was very low. These results indicate that it is not the quality of reduction but the stability of the Lisfranc joint found during operation which is a major explanatory factor for the outcome of Lisfranc injury. As seen in the results per treatment group, patients with stable Lisfranc fractures, found per operatively, had best PROM and kinematic results. Patients with fixation, because of instability of the fracture, showed lower ROM and lower satisfaction. Also, patients with hardware removal showed lower ROM and kinematic results compared to patients with stable injuries. This indicates that the severity of the fracture with as a consequence instability is important for outcome. The ideal treatment for Lisfranc injuries for achieving and maintaining alignment in the midfoot is under debate. Some studies favor open reposition and fixation Patients treated for bony Lisfranc injury were found to have a greater ROM between the hindfoot and tibia in the frontal plane during the push-off phase leading to more exorotation of the foot. This may suggest a compensation mechanism for the lack of ROM in the sagittal plane (flexion/extension) between the forefoot and hindfoot. Interestingly, this compensation mechanism was not situated between the forefoot and hindfoot but between the hindfoot and tibia (ankle). There was no correlation between this compensatory motion and patient satisfaction and radiographic quality of reduction. A number of comments need to be made on the interpretation of the observations in our study. Our primary aim was to find kinematic differences in patients after bony Lisfranc injury compared to healthy subjects. The group of 19 patients has a wide range of presentations as can be seen in the clinical situation and therefore is a highly generalizable group. The strength of this study is the widespread in range of motion (flexion/extension) found in patients after bony Lisfranc injury and the correlation with PROM. Some patients with stable injuries showed higher range of motion comparable with range of motion of healthy subjects and scored significantly higher scores in PROM while others with more severe injury showed lower range of motion and had lower scores in PROM. This study can be used for upcoming studies to compare different treatment options. Secondly, the OFM does not allow for direct measurement of the motion in the Lisfranc joint. The OFM is a validated technique to estimate intersegment motions of the foot and ankle This study showed that patients who had suffered bony Lisfranc injury had significantly lower walking speed and significantly lower flexion/extension in the midfoot compared to healthy subjects during the push-off phase. Compensation was found in the ankle joint leading to more exorotation in the foot in patients after Lisfranc injury with lower flexion/extension. The ROM significantly correlated with the patient satisfaction reported in the AOFAS, FADI, SF-36 physical impairment and VAS, but not with the radiographic quality of surgical reduction. Important explanatory factors for patient satisfaction as assessed by PROM were the ROM in the sagittal plane during the push-off phase and the fracture stability. This study was approved by the medical ethical board of AZM/UM Maastricht. NL 34131.068.10/MEC 10-3-072. All patients and healthy subject signed informed consent to participate in this study and to publish medical results. Please contact author for data requests. S. van Hoeve: gait analysis, writing, submitting. G. Stollenwerck: writing. P. Willems: technical procedures/matlab/gait analysis. A. Witlox: writing. K. Meijer: data analysis. M. Poeze: data analysis writing. None of the authors have any financial and personal relationships with other people or organizations to disclose that could inappropriately influence their work. There was no funding source for this study.