The evolution of texture in the β-phase of a two-phase (O+B2) titanium–aluminide Ti–22Al–25Nb (at.%) alloy during thermo-mechanical processing in single β-phase-field has been studied. Variations in microstructure and texture have been observed as a result of variation in the amount of rolling deformation for a given rolling temperature. The evolution of crystallographic texture in the β-phase can be understood by considering the increase in dynamic recrystallisation to which is associated a grain size reduction.The discovery of the orthorhombic-phase (O-phase, based on Ti Suitable processing of this alloy is well-known to produce a variety of microstructures with diverse properties and has been summarised in an extensive review by Banerjee In the present work, the evolution of texture and microstructure during hot rolling of the (O+B2) alloy Ti–22Al–25Nb in the β-phase-field has been studied. The temperature of rolling and the amount of reduction have been carefully selected so that the material remained in the β-phase-field throughout the deformation process and, at the same time, a qualitative variation in the microstructure can be tailored due to the differences in the amount of deformation. This is done by imparting 50% and 80% rolling reduction at 1100 As-received alloy with the nominal composition Ti–22Al–25Nb (at.%) in the form of a cast pancake was cut into rectangular pieces with dimensions 30 Although the microstructure has been thoroughly studied with SEM in back-scattered mode, only the results obtained from EBSD will be given in the present study. The EBSD orientation imaging maps with their corresponding IPFs are given in At room temperature, the microstructure of the β-phase in the 50% HR sample mainly consists of large deformed grains characterized by significant deformation gradients with a few small equiaxed grains mostly present at the grain boundaries of the large grains ( Both microstructure and texture are modified as the amount of rolling deformation is increased from 50% to 80%. The observed smoothening of texture with generation of smaller grains separated by high angle grain boundaries could be due to dynamic recrystallisation (DRX). Since a short term annealing was done between the successive passes of rolling (to compensate for a possible temperature drop), it could be argued that these small β grains do not result from DRX, but form by secondary recrystallisation during intermediate annealing. However, the microstructural feature supports DRX, as the materials were not subjected to any annealing after the final pass (20% rolling reduction) and still end up with equiaxed β grains. The microstructure of 50% HR sample at many locations consists of coarse β grains surrounded by fine β grains. The investigations on Ni The most common cold rolling textures of bcc metals/alloys are α fibre ((0 In the 50% HR sample, even the η fibre ( Examination of crystallographic textures and microstructure developed in the β-phase of the Ti–22Al–25Nb (at.%) alloy as a result of hot rolling (50% and 80%) at 1100 Supported by microstructure and texture results, it is understood that hot rolling to a deformation level equivalent to 50% reduction leads to a heavily recovered plus partially recrystallised microstructure. Thereby, the material retains a partial deformation fibre texture. Comparatively, 80% HR deformation results in a dynamically recrystallised microstructure characterised by a finer grain size. The DRX process leads to the build-up of the (1 S.R.D. is grateful to the research council of “Région Lorraine” for the partial financial support of his research stay in France. R.K.R. and S.S. duly acknowledge the financial support by AR&DB, India, in the early stages of this investigation. The authors are also thankful to Titanium Alloy Group, DMRL, Hyderabad (India) for providing the material. J.X.Z. and T.G. would also like to thank the French Embassy in Beijing and CROUS for the provision of a “Bourse Scientifique en Alternance” no. 2004-744.