If anyone thought that the limits were reached when MEI Conferences are characterised by attendance of a range of delegates, practitioners and researchers, from across the world, and attending with different agendas. This was no exception with plenty of sharing and debating from various perspectives. If anything was noteworthy this time, it was the high proportion of excellent presentations by young people, in many cases presenting work arising from post graduate studies. The conference was divided into two, 2-day, symposia; the first on ‘Flotation Fundamentals’ and the second on ‘Applications and Plant Practice’ although many of the presentations could have been in either session, with the point being made that the two are part of the same story. As expected, best value was obtained by those who attended both symposia, as discussion certainly built up through the week, drawing on aspects from various previous presentations and discussions. Between the discussions during coffee and lunch breaks, and the technical sessions, the purpose of the conference was fulfilled in providing a forum for new insights and contacts with the flotation industry for all those who attended. The first keynote address was given by Professor Jim Finch of McGill University, Canada and entitled ‘Bubbles and Flotation’. He noted that ‘without bubbles life is flat’ and that flotation is the largest industrial application of adsorptive bubble techniques. His presentation summarised the latest findings on factors affecting the role of bubbles in the process. Dr. Dan Alexander, CEO of JKTech Pvt. Ltd., Australia gave the second keynote entitled ‘When are flotation models useful?’ He noted that the value of a model is related to how well it fulfils its purpose, akin to that of a cartoon, which, without being a representation, catches the nature of the person. He then went onto discuss the modelling strategy developed by the AMIRA P9 project. The impact of this flotation modelling approach to the minerals industry has been significant and has reshaped the technology transfer relationship between industry and research. A feature of the conference was the number of papers which revolved around new instrumentation or measurement techniques or practices: automated SEM analysis for predicting the flotation response of platinum group minerals; on-line pulp chemistry monitoring of the ball mill discharge in a lead/zinc concentrator; diffuse reflective spectroscopy to differentiate between total and acid soluble copper; a passive acoustic emission monitor for measuring the size of bubbles in Jameson cell downcomers; an electrical resistance tomography probe that measures froth stiffness and the location of the pulp-froth interface; an in-plant automated analytical laboratory with a rapid turn-around time for meaningful process control; to name a few. Allied to this was an emphasis on the importance of data: the collection and recording of good data that can be used and re-interpreted by others; the manipulation of data, and its presentation in a meaningful way (such as in grade-recovery curves); and the use of data to develop new models (a new dynamic model, a new probability model and a new liberation-based model of flotation were all presented). Many papers included quantitative mineralogical analysis data, and used it to understand and interpret the performance of flotation cells and circuits. A number of papers were concerned with the design of industrial experiments, i.e. on how best to gather unbiased data for subsequent analysis. The conference contained strong technical themes which are captured in the papers in this volume. They also point to what we can expect in the future – possibly in The MEI report on Prof. Dee Bradshaw, JKMRC, Australia and Prof. J.-P. Franzidis, University of Cape Town, South Africa MEI Consultants.