Comprising rigid bars and spring systems at the joints and in the cells, the Hencky bar-net model (HBM) has been shown to be a physical structural representation of the finite difference plate model (FDM). In this paper, the HBM is extended for the vibration analysis of rectangular plates with rectangular cutouts. This extension addresses the rotationally elastic and transverse spring stiffnesses for the HBM at the cutout corners. After verifying the HBM model by comparing the vibration results with existing solutions for some plate problems, the model is used to obtain some new free vibration solutions for plates having various boundary conditions including cracked corners modelled by free small rectangular cutouts.Plates with cutouts (or perforated plates) are used in many structures and machines to provide access space or for weight reduction. The design of such plates requires performing free vibration analysis. There are many methods developed for the vibration analysis of plates with cutouts. They include the finite difference method [ The Hencky bar-net model discretises the continuum plate by using rigid segmental bars and frictionless hinges with elastic rotational springs, twisting springs and transverse springs [ the spring rotational stiffnesses at the joints of HBM can be easily modified to simulate local damage, local stiffening/softening of plates. it is easy for computer coding with good convergence behaviour and versatile to accommodate different mixed boundary conditions, discrete loadings, and abrupt changes in plate properties. it could be adopted for optimisation of non-uniform thickness plates against bending, vibration and buckling. For example, Zhang et al. [ it could be applied in the alternating direction implicit method [ Continuing in the development of HBM for plate analysis, we consider herein rectangular plates with cutouts. The inclusion of a rectangular cutout requires the introduction of a special rotational spring at the corners of the cutout. The finite difference method (FDM) will be used to aid in the determination of the rotational spring stiffness at the cutout corners. This work will enable the HBM to handle rectangular plates with rectangular cutouts as well as plates with cracks at the corners of the cutouts where high-stress concentrations occur. The subsequent sections of the paper are organised as follows: Section Consider a rectangular plate with length The problem at hand is to determine the expressions of the rotational and lateral spring stiffnesses of HBM at the cutout corners. The problem will be solved by matching the discrete expressions of governing equations and boundary conditions of FDM and HBM. According to the Kirchhoff (or classical thin) plate theory, the governing equation for the harmonic vibration motion of a rectangular plate is given by [ The two boundary conditions at each elastically restrained edge are given by [ Consider a Hencky bar-net model with a centrally rectangular cutout comprising rigid bar segments of length In addition, the twisting stiffness of the plate is simulated by a spring device that is installed in each unit cell, enclosing four rigid bars of the rectangular net. The spring device has a twisting rigidity of The expressions for the spring stiffnesses for the elastic edge restraints and the corners have been derived by Wang et al. [ Based on this HBM description ( Likewise, the expressions for the rigidities of elastic rotational springs at the corners As for the twisting moment that is represented by four diagonal spring systems in a grid cell as shown in The expression of the strain energy due to bending Likewise, the strain energy due to twisting By considering the assumption of harmonic vibration motion, the kinetic energy     The total energy function According to Hamilton's principle, Similarly, the HBM expression for the typical boundary node Moreover, the HBM expression for the boundary node Likewise, the HBM expression for boundary node The HBM expressions for all other boundary nodes and corner nodes can be found in Refs. [ By assembling the expressions for all nodes in the system, the following matrix equation can be derived So far, the expressions for the stiffnesses of elastic rotational springs at the cutout corners The stiffnesses of the springs at the cutout edges are the same as the ones at the outer edges of the plate. Based on the relations given by By matching the boundary conditions of the FDM given by Eq. It can be seen from Eq. By using Eqs. In this section, we present some plate free vibration problems to verify and illustrate the developed HBM. The considered boundary conditions are combinations of clamped (C), simply supported (S) and free edges (F). For brevity, the boundary conditions for the plate are symbolised by C, S and F. For example, an SFSC plate represents a rectangular plate with a simply supported edge at For the first example, we analyse a simply supported square plate with a central square cutout as shown in The convergence of the natural frequency parameter is examined by taking different HBM segment lengths as shown in More free vibration analysis solutions for plates with various cutout ratios are given in The results in For the second example, we analyse the effect of boundary conditions for a square plate with a central square cutout. In this example, the square plate has a cutout length Both frequency parameter and vibration mode shapes in In this example, we first analyse a rectangular plate with two edges at The results in More free vibration analysis solutions for plates with various boundary conditions are given in Finally, we consider a square plate with cracked cutout corners where high-stress concentrations occur. All cracked corners are modelled as small rectangular cutouts with free edges as shown in Both frequency parameters and vibration mode shapes are computed by using the HBM and presented in The results in The HBM model has been extended for the free vibration problem of rectangular plates with rectangular cutouts. This key extension lies in establishing the spring stiffnesses for the HBM at the cutout corners. Although the spring stiffness for the cutout edges can be easily determined, the spring stiffnesses for the cutout corners are not obvious. By matching the FDM expression and the HBM expression for the neighbouring node at the cutout corner, the HBM spring stiffnesses at the cutout corners are found to be For a plate with uniform thickness, the lumped masses at (a) the HBM edge nodes are 1/2 of the lumped mass for internal nodes; (b) the cutout corner nodes are 3/4 of the lumped mass for internal nodes; and (c) the external corner nodes are 1/4 of the lumped mass for the internal nodes. By using the developed HBM, accurate vibration frequencies and mode shapes for various rectangular plates with rectangular cutouts are presented. Some special cases of these results check out with experimental results and theoretical solutions computed from other semi-analytical or numerical methods. The free vibration results from the HBM always converge from below to the continuum counterpart with respect to decreasing grid size. Some new vibration solutions have been found by using the proposed HBM for rectangular plates containing various boundary conditions and cracked cutout corners. Finally, it is worth noting that HBM is a simple physical structural model for the FDM of plates without fictitious nodes. Owing to its physical representation, analysts can simply adjust the spring stiffnesses to account for local damage (as shown herein) and local stiffening in the plate. Therefore, the HBM helps in understanding the mechanical behaviour; unlike other numerical methods such as meshless methods and differential quadrature method that are abstract mathematical models. By using the first order central difference method [ The spatial discretisation in Eq. Referring to The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at