The evolution of grain boundaries in pure Ni has been studied after sintering at 900, 1100 and 1300°C. It is found that the fraction of low-angle grain boundaries remains more or less constant over this sintering temperature range. However, the fraction of random boundaries decreases and that of Σ3 boundaries increases with increasing sintering temperature. The observations on grain boundary character distribution are found to correlate well with the accompanying microstructural changes. However, grain growth and other annealing phenomena have generally been studied in great detail in materials that have been cold worked prior to the annealing treatment. Interestingly, in sintering, which is also a high-temperature treatment and is employed for densification of powder metallurgically prepared porous compacts, grain growth has been found to play a significant role. However, the evolution of grain boundaries has been studied to a much lesser extent in these materials. This is surprising since powder metallurgically prepared materials are often of near net shape and hence there is a greater need to study the evolution of grain boundaries during sintering in such materials. With this in mind, the current work investigates the evolution of grain boundaries and the accompanying microstructural changes in pure Ni during sintering at different temperatures.   The average grain size was around 6 The grain boundary character distributions (GBCDs) of pure Ni at these three sintering conditions reveal that the fraction of low-angle grain boundaries (LAGBs) is quite low after sintering at 900 The CSL boundary fraction shows almost a reverse trend ( In order to quantify the above observations, unique grain color maps were constructed from the EBSD datasets for these three sintered materials and volume fractions of the parent grains ( It has previously been suggested from experimental evidence In the present study, pure Ni samples consolidated by the powder metallurgy technique have been investigated. Therefore, the complex effects of thermomechanical processing may be neglected and the change in GBCD can be solely attributed to changes taking place at the grain growth stage of sintering. The GBCDs clearly show that there is no significant change in LAGB proportion during grain growth. However, the fraction of random boundaries decreases and the proportion of Σ3 boundary increases with increasing sintering temperature as a result of grain growth. The results indicate that change in low-energy boundary fraction during grain growth can be manifested only by an increase in low Σ (Σ3 boundaries in our case) boundary fractions. This observation can be correlated with the stacking fault energy value of pure Ni. An increase in the proportion of Σ3 boundaries is expected in Ni due to its lower stacking fault energy value and increased susceptibility to forming annealing twins compared to material with a higher stacking fault energy such as Al, in which the Σ3 proportion is found to be much lower In conclusion: The fraction of LAGBs (Σ1) does not change significantly with increasing sintering temperature. The fraction of random boundaries decreases and that of the Σ3 boundary increases with increasing sintering temperatures. The increase in the Σ3 fraction is consistent with the observation of large numbers of twins at higher sintering temperatures. The presence of a high fraction of Σ3 boundaries indicates that a grain boundary texture develops in pure Ni after sintering, although the materials do not possess any prominent crystallographic texture.