A hydrometallurgical process for treating the hazardous jarosite residue from zinc hydrometallurgy was proposed, for not only detoxifying the residue, but also recovering the contained valuable metal components. The jarosite was initially activated and decomposed by sintering at 650°C for 1h. The sintered residue was leached in 6molL−1 aqueous NH4Cl solution at 105°C, followed by filtration. The leaching extraction of Zn, Pb, Cu, Cd and Ag are more than 95%. During reduction with Zn powder, more than 93% of Pb, Cu, Ag and Cd can be simultaneously recovered. Then the NH4Cl leaching residue were leached again in 30wt% aqueous NaOH solution for 1h at 160°C, and about 94% of As and 73% of Si were removed from the residue. The final residue was almost completely detoxified, and contains about 55wt% Fe, which can be used as an iron concentration.Vast jarosite residue was produced from traditional zinc hydrometallurgy process in China. And most of the residue was stored up. According to rough calculation, no less than one million tons of this kind of residue was stored up in China per year. This residue not only takes massive land, but also comes forth great risk of environmental pollution, as it contains significant zinc and lead, as well as some arsenic, cadmium, and such toxic ingredients have the potent of being solved in rain water, as demonstrated The residue has three main phases: jarosite, zinc ferrite and anglesite. Jarosite mainly contains XFe Usually, pyrometallurgical and hydrometallurgical processes are employed for treating such secondaries. Onsan Refinery of Korea Zinc used a Top Submerged Lancing (TSL) Technology to recover the valuable metals in the residue. About 82% Zn, 92% Pb, 86% Ag and 61% Cu in the residue can be recovered by the process Until now, many researchers are still making great efforts to develop cleaner processes. Ruşen et al. In India and Italy, some researchers intend to produce construction and ceramic materials with these jarosite as demonstrated The recovery of lead and silver from zinc leach residues (as PbSO In China, Chen et al. developed a process first leaching with alkali to decompose the jarosite into Fe This work presents a hydrometallurgical route, as shown in The main feature of this process is that using NH For the The fresh sample of potassium jarosite residue was taken from Baiyin Nonferrous Metals Group, one of the biggest smelter of copper, zinc and lead in China. After dried for 12 According to A serial of sintering experiments were conducted to find out the optimal roast condition. Each 10 During NH During reduction by zinc powder, the experiment is conducted in a 250 NH The residue samples were dissolved in HCl, HNO Metal concentrations in solution were determined by Perlivn-Elmer ICP-OES (Optima5300DV type). A LECO analyzer determined sulfur contents. Crystalline phases in solid samples were identified by X’ Pert PROMPD Panalytical, and the result was analyzed by the software of X’ Pert Highscore. pH was measured by a digital pH meter. The result showed that after sintering at 650 The weight loss of residue after roasting at 650 Four serials of the experiments were performed. One is the concentration of NH  At the optimized condition, the extraction of Zn, Pb, Cu, Cd and Ag can reached to 97.5%, 95.3%, 95.4%, 100% and 100%. A simulated leaching solution with a composition listed in the first line of  Alkali leaching was performed in an 500 For checking the effect of this overall process for treating potassium jarosite, under the optimized experimental condition, the result was shown in The apparent data in The process presented in this work for treating jarosite presents the following merits: the leaching extraction of valuable metals in the NH The authors acknowledge the