The rare earth elements (REE) are essential for a wide range of applications, from strategic assets (e.g. petroleum cracking, magnets for wind turbines) to popular merchandise, as smartphones. Since 2010, when China, the worlds close to exclusive REE supplier, imposed export quotas, several old and new deposits have been evaluated to compensate market shortage, taking advantage of significant price rises. The Araxá rare earth elements prospect boast a large reserve (6.34Mt @ 5.01% REO), as well as phosphate and niobium, in a deeply weathered ore of carbonatitic origin. The mineralogy and the ore properties are unconventional for rare earth elements, and require a detailed mineralogical and technological characterisation as starting point to develop a feasible processing route.
                  Rare earths are predominantly carried by monazite (over 70%), and by a solid solution of the plumbogummite group minerals where the barium-rich term gorceixite predominates, while cerianite and bastnaesite account for less than 1% each. Minerals of the pyrochlore supergroup are the main Nb carriers, but phosphate is also due to monazite and the plumbogummite group minerals, as apatite has barely been detected. Goethite, high-Al hematite and quartz are the main gangue minerals, and goethite is thoroughly intergrown with the other phases. Fine particle size (P50 close to 45μm) and 47.4% of the REE in the −20μm size fraction is another feature typical of this kind of ore. The mineralogical and textural complexity of the ore required a comprehensive technological characterisation in order to evaluate processing options.
                  Based on textural measurements, the concentration of monazite, the concentration of the REE carrying minerals and the reverse removal of quartz, as processing option for this ore, have been simulated.
                  Incomplete liberation of monazite does limit its grade in an ideal concentrate to 80%, and its recovery to 70%. The low monazite recovery must be added to the loss of REE carried by other phases, reducing the overall REE recovery to below 45%. Monazite has also a very limited exposition of the mineral on the particle's surfaces, supposed to impair process efficiency enough to keep experimental results significantly far from the simulated ones.
                  The concentration of the REE-bearing minerals might be efficient from the liberation point of view, and over 90% of the REE carriers can be recovered to a 97% grade concentrate. Due to the low REE grade of predominant gorceixite (3.3%), however, the concentrate's grade of 14% REE is just slightly above the double of the ore's grade. For the REE-bearing minerals taken together, the process efficiency might be hampered by selectivity due to the complex mineralogy.
                  The major gangue minerals, goethite and hematite, are strongly intergrown with the other minerals of the assemblage, to an extent that evaluating reverse processing considering these phases was not feasible. The removal of quartz by reverse processing is quite straightforward, and 95% of the mineral might be removed to a high-grade quartz concentrate of 93%, with loss of REE of only 0.14%. The mass discharge of 8.7%, however, rises the grade of the concentrate only to 7.3% REE.
                  Complex mineralogy and the fine crystals and particles with strong intergrowth that characterise the ore hamper efficient concentration for the Araxá REE ore, and direct hydrometallurgical processing of the whole was adopted. The results are in agreement with the few other published attempts to concentrate the rare earth minerals from residual lateritic ores related to carbonatites.The rare earth family consists of 17 transition metals forming Group 3 of the periodic table and comprises scandium (Sc), yttrium (Y), and the lanthanide (or lanthanoid) series, La to Lu. Rare earth elements (REEs) are recognized as the largest group of elements showing a coherent behaviour in Earth systems, what makes it responsible for their technologically challenging separation and their high price ( Although the Chinese government imposed export quotas for rare earths for over a decade, a strong reduction of 40% in 2010 caused consternation and steep price rises, and highlighted the fragility of supply and the volatility of its prices ( The Barreiro do Araxá carbonatite is located close to the city of Araxá, Minas Gerais State in South-eastern Brazil. Two large mining operations exploit resourced related to the carbonatite, VALE's Araxá phosphate mine, and CBMM's niobium mine, the world's largest Nb supplier. The ores are hosted in a very thick lateritic layer, exceeding 200 The plumbogummite group encompasses the hydrated aluminophosphates of Ba, Sr, Ca, REE and other cations, also called non-apatitic phosphates in phosphate mining. Total rare earth oxide resources for the Araxá deposit (TREO, measured and indicated) amount to 6.34 The analysed composite sample was generated by blending the output of several deep exploration trenches fed to a large homogenisation pile. The sample was initially wet-ground in a rod mill to − The Analytical Chemistry Group at CETEM performed the chemical assays. Major elements were assayed by XRF (Panalytical Axios) after loss on ignition determination (Leco TGA701) on pellets fused with lithium borate/tetraborate flux. The other elements, including REE, were quantified by HR-ICP-OES (Horiba Scientific Ultima 2) after dissolution in hot hydrochloric–hydrofluoric–perchloric acids until dryness, and re-dissolution in diluted HCl. Samples for X-ray diffraction were ground for 10 Rietveld method-based mineral quantification with a fundamental parameter approach ( XRD/Rietveld analysis is not affected by fine intergrowth, therefore all minerals, while crystalline, can be quantified. As discussed by For the conciliation of the calculated chemical composition from the mineralogy against the chemical analysis, the individual plumbogummite-group mineral compositions were sourced from the Besides allowing for a visually very good overlap between the measured and calculated patterns, the refinement also provided excellent figures of merit ( Automated mineralogy was performed with FEI's MLA (Mineral Liberation Analyser) operating on a FEI Quanta 400 SEM coupled to a Bruker Quantax 800 EDS system and an XFlash 4030 large-area silicon drift detector. MLA was operated under the XBSE (extended back-scattered electron liberation analysis) routine, 25 As already discussed by The composition of most minerals was the same for the conciliation of the XRD-based Rietveld method quantitative phase analysis or the SEM/EDS-based MLA analysis. Most of them were derived from the The Araxá ore, as usual for deeply weathered ores, is very fine-grained, P  The correspondence between the mineralogy of the measured head sample and the composite sample is excellent for all minerals. Even among the plumbogummite group minerals, whose very similar structures could shuffle the refinement, values match. The good quality of the results is further ensured by the conciliation of the calculated composition of the sample and size fractions, based on phase analysis and mineral composition, against the chemical analysis, graphically represented in Florencite and monazite are the main rare earth element carriers. Florencite is more abundant in the sample, but due to the higher content in monazite (65.9% RE oxides, against 27.59% in florencite) it is the predominant carrier, accounting for 65% of the elements. Moreover, florencite is in solid solution with the other minerals of the plumbogummite group, which accounts to more than 42% of the ore's mass. Plumbogummite group minerals, considered together, are the most abundant phase in the ore, followed by iron minerals goethite and hematite, and quartz. Isomorphic substitutions have been refined for goethite and hematite, and show a very diverse behaviour. The Al-for-Fe substitution in goethite is very low, usually zero or close to. The conspicuous intergrowth of goethite with the plumbogummite group minerals (as pictured in Hematite, on the other hand, contains high levels of Al substituting Fe, between 20 and 35% (mol), coupled to high OH Magnetite is not abundant in the ore, and has mostly been converted into maghemite, as the low refined χ While pyrochlore and its barium-rich variety account for the niobium in the ore, it is important to mention that apatite has not been identified by X-ray diffraction, and the sole carriers of the phosphate are monazite and the plumbogummite-group minerals. The composition of the plumbogummite group mineral, as averaged from EDS analysis, is dominated by gorceixite (43.6%) in the solid solution, followed by goyazite (32.5%), florencite (13.3%) and crandallite (10.2%). The total REE content is 3.27%, or 3.92% REO. As the plumbogummite-group minerals are finely intergrown with iron and titanium minerals, the averaged composition also included 17.4% FeO and 0.65% TiO Mineral quantification through automated mineralogy i.e. backscattered electrons images and EDS chemical data using the MLA system is given in Comparing XRD and SEM/EDS-derived results is not straightforward, as the methods and its limitations are different. Several minerals have been detected by MLA that are below detection limits for XRD, as the REE carriers cerianite and bastnaesite, among others. Hematite and magnetite cannot be distinguished, and are supposed to be accounted for as magnetite, differed from goethite as the latter contains higher Al (and sometimes Si and/or P) content. In our results, however, the hematite's high Al content mostly assigned it to goethite, rather than to magnetite. Due to the fine intergrowth of goethite with several other minerals, it is assayed together with them, and has been accounted for in the chemical composition fed into the MLA databank. As mentioned, the plumbogummite group representing phase gorceixite, for instances, is considered containing 17.4% FeO. Intergrowth even affects minerals like quartz or monazite, usually not prone to it. As for the Nb by-product, MLA has quantified barium- and lead-rich pyrochlore varieties. Regular pyrochlore in the ore is already Na- and Ca-depleted by intense weathering-related leaching, and has been identified as Nb-rich rutile. MLA analysis confirmed the virtual absence of apatite, and together with monazite the plumbogummite-group mineral gorceixite are the phosphate minerals (non-apatitic phosphate). By using chemical compositions that take intergrowth into consideration, the chemical composition for the ore's size fractions and the 300 Conciliation of the results shows a good correlation between calculated compositions and chemical analyses. Most of the cations of the D site occupancy of the plumbogummite group minerals (classification after Concerning the REE carriers, MLA results match XRD/Rietveld method results very closely, as As the main carrier and high-grade REE mineral, monazite concentration is a prime objective of any processing route. The accumulated distribution (over the 300 A grade-recovery simulation based on the data above, the particle size distribution of  The simulations of As gorceixite carries 25.5% of the REEs and accounts for over 60% of the monazite association, being the main responsible for the mineral's bad liberation and exposition, the overall concentration of the REE bearing minerals (monazite, gorceixite, and minor cerianite and bastnaesite) has been considered. When analysed together, the REE carriers have a much better liberation, and there is a clear separation of rich (i.e. > The mineral grade-recovery simulation based on the overall REE carrier data, assuming the particle size distribution of Another processing strategy for this ore would be the reverse concentration, separating gangue minerals from the main ore. The iron minerals goethite and hematite are the dominating gangue minerals, if the plumbogummite-group minerals join monazite as ore minerals. Phase quantification through XRD/Rietveld method and MLA gave very different results, as can be compared in The other abundant gangue mineral is quartz (9% by XRD/Rietveld method, 8.5% by MLA). Quartz liberation, conditional on size, is presented in The quartz liberation process can be followed: low grade particles liberate gangue (not shown) and particles with intermediate composition (20–80% quartz), which with further size reduction tend to break off into quartz-rich particles. The liberation, however, is not complete down to 20 The effect of incomplete liberation can also be measured on quartz surface exposition ( Grade-recovery simulations based on quartz liberation and exposition data converge. As quartz is strongly associated to gorceixite (47.43%) and monazite (2.71%), it is desirable to eliminate quartz as pure as possible by reverse processing, while also maximizing mass discharge. The simulation in Considering the large REE reserves—6.37 From the mineralogy and the simulations based on the textural measurements of the Araxá REE ore, there is no obvious processing route to increase the REE concentration prior to extraction. The most desirable one, concentrating monazite, has its efficiency hampered by low liberation and monazite exposition, does not address REE carried by other phases, and would ultimately only recover less than 45% of the REE. Concentrating all the REE-bearing minerals might be very effective in terms of REE recovery, but the resulting concentrate has a low REE grade of 14%. Reverse processing, by the removal of quartz, might also be efficient from a process point of view, but the mass discharge is small, and the grade of the remaining concentrate only improves slightly, to 7.3% REE. All routes still depend on process efficiency, which can be massively impaired by the mineralogical complexity, and can further be affected by small particle size and concentration of REE in the fines. Based on this study, it was decided to skip any physical concentration, and perform hydrometallurgical extraction on the whole ore (whole REO cracking), followed by solvent extraction ( There are very few mineralogical and technological characterisation reports published for residual lateritic carbonatite-derived REE mineralisations, either in Brazil, e.g. the other important weathered carbonatites from the Alto Paranaíba Province ( While more comprehensive, our results are in agreement with former studies for REE ores associated to phosphates at the Catalão I carbonatite ( The authors thank MBAC Fertilizers Co for permitting the publication of this study. R. Neumann acknowledges financial support by a scholarship from