Turbulence and mechanical flotation cells have been the workhorse of the mining industry to process the high tonnage but low-grade ores for more than a century. However, our quantitative understanding of the effect of turbulence on flotation is still limited. Here we theoretically investigate the bubble-particle collision in flotation in homogeneous isotropic turbulence using the correlation method. We show a novel paradigm that isotropic turbulence can surpass gravity in affecting bubble-particle collision in flotation. Specifically, motions of particles of micrometer sizes and bubbles of millimeter sizes are described using the Basset-Boussinesq-Oseen equation. The drag forces on particles and bubbles are calculated using Stokes' law with a particle-size correction factor and Allen's law, respectively. The correlation method is applied to determine bubble and particle velocity variances and covariances. The collision kernel is then calculated, taking into account the effects of turbulence acceleration and shear, and gravity of the bubble-particle system. We compare our collision model with the available models and investigate the influence of bubble and particle sizes, particle density and dissipation rate of turbulent kinetic energy on the collision kernel. The results show that the bubble-particle collision kernel increases with increasing bubble and particle sizes, and dissipation rate of turbulent kinetic energy. Importantly, turbulence can significantly enhance the collision efficiency, exceeding the ideal rate of collision by gravity and leading to the turbulence collision efficiency greater than unity.numerical constant in Eq. a factor defined by Eq. a factor defined by Eq. numerical constant in Eq. a factor defined by Eq. a factor defined by Eq. bubble diameter particle diameter bubble size correction factor particle size correction factor gravitational acceleration numerical constant in Eq. bubble number concentration particle number concentration time mean square intensity of turbulence particle Archimedes number bubble Archimedes number collision efficiency drag force acting on a bubble drag force acting on a particle particle flux vector Lagrangian integral length scale frequency Morton number rate of bubble-particle collision ideal rate of bubble-particle collision the sum of bubble and particle radii bubble radius particle radius bubble Reynolds number particle Reynolds number Lagrangian integral time scale fluid velocity bubble velocity particle velocity terminal velocity of bubble rising terminal velocity of particle settling Kolmogorov velocity scale bubble-particle relative velocity vector bubble-particle collision kernel turbulence dissipation rate Kolmogorov length scale dynamic viscosity of a fluid kinematic viscosity of a fluid fluid density bubble density particle density surface tension of gas-liquid interface Kolmogorov time scale angular frequency Different types of flotation cells have been invented since the invention of froth flotation ( In a mechanical flotation cell, air is introduced into the cell near the impeller to form fine bubbles of millimeter size under the mixing effect of the impeller. The rising fine bubbles collect and carry hydrophobic particles (valuable particles) to form a froth layer and exit to the launders while hydrophilic particles (gangue particles) sink to the bottom of the cell to be rejected ( In the literature, the model development of bubble-particle collision in turbulent flow is very limited when compared to that of droplet-droplet collision ( There have been many deterministic models for bubble-particle collision efficiency available in the literature ( In the present study, we focus on modeling the bubble-particle collision rate and efficiency by taking into account the dependence of colliding particle and bubble velocities through the covariance of bubble-particle fluctuating velocities. We apply the correlation method to derive new expressions for the bubble-particle velocity covariance and related models. When dealing with turbulent motions, it is customarily to apply the Reynolds decomposition, whereby instantaneous quantities are decomposed into their time-averaged and fluctuating quantities. For turbulent bubble-particle collision interaction, it is shown previously ( The bubble-particle collision rate is defined as the number of particles colliding with a bubble per unit time ( Following the available literature ( For simplicity, we use the following expressions for calculating the particle and bubble terminal velocities ( The velocity vectors of a bubble and a particle with their centers at the position The variance of bubble-particle relative velocity Substitution of Eqs. The real variance of The particle motion equation is written in the absence of the Basset history force and the gravitational force as follows ( The viscous drag acting on a particle is determined by The particle motion equation For simplicity, Eq. The bubble motion equation is described in the absence of the Basset history force and the gravitational force as follows: The drag acting on the bubble is determined by Eq. In Eq. After re-arranging, we have equivalently Since the turbulent flow field is isotropic, the following relation holds ( Substitution of Eq. In the absence of gravity, we can assume the isotropy of particle and bubble motions and the normal distribution of The bubble-particle collision kernel without gravity effect is determined by Substitution of Eqs. If the particles and bubbles have very small inertia ( We refer Eq. For fine particles and small air bubbles in flotation, the correlations of bubble and particle velocities are respectively determined by Eqs. Substitution of Eq. Eq. When the gravitational forces acting on the bubble and particles are considered, we adapt Abrahamson's solution ( In the case of no turbulence, Eq. In the absence of gravity, Eq. The integral time scale in isotropic turbulence is given by ( In the isotropic turbulence Consider For heavier particles, Eq. In order to investigate the effects of shear, acceleration, and gravity on the collision kernel, we determine the following collision coefficients based on the combination of different effects. The variation of the   In this paper, we have developed a theoretical model of bubble-particle collision in the homogeneous and isotropic turbulence flow, taking into account the effects of acceleration, shear, and gravity of the bubble-particle system. The bubble and particle velocity variances are calculated by using Nguyen and Schulze's model, while the bubble-particle velocity covariance is determined based on the Basset-Boussinesq-Ossen equation and the correlation method. We use Stokes' law with a particle size correction factor to calculate the drag force acting on a particle and Allen's law to calculate the drag force acting on a bubble. The present model agrees well with Model 1 for small-inertia particles and agrees well with Nguyen and Schulze's model for large-inertia particles. For low-density particles ( This research is supported by Australian Research Council's Project Funding Scheme (Project number DP150100395). The turbulent velocities of liquid, bubble and particle are expressed using the Fourier integral as follows: The correlation Similarly, we obtain Combining Eqs.  Making use of Eqs. Simplifying Eq. Calculating the integral in Eq.  Similarly, we obtain Finally, combining Eqs.