Total hip arthroplasty has evolved over the past few decades. Minimally invasive hip arthroplasty has been introduced to the orthopedic community, and it has stirred controversy with respect to the purported benefits over the conventional approaches. Studies done by the pioneers or by exprienced surgeons demonstrate that minimally invasive techniques can improve the immediate outcomes of total hip arthroplasty. Less blood loss, shorter hospitalization, and faster return to normal life are potential benefits of any minimally invasive surgery. However, the majority of those studies implement changes in the intraoperative and postoperative protcols that may independently affect the outcome of THA. The literature lacks proper prospective studies that compare conventional and minimally invasive total hip arthroplasty and the effect of different rehabilitation protocols on the outcome. Also, the results of different approaches for minimally invasive hip arthroplasty remain to be studied. The purpose of this report is to review the results of reported short-term outcomes and complications of small-incision total hip replacements performed with several modifications of existing surgical approaches.After being introduced by Sir John Charnley in 1961, thousands of total hip arthroplasties (THA) have been done successfully all over the world. Over the past decade, less invasive procedures based on laparoscopic and arthroscopic principles have been developed, which have inspired orthopedic surgeons to perform THA through smaller incisions. Very generally, minimally invasive total hip arthroplasty can be described as a procedure that has less impact on a patient’s life. Blood loss, transfusion needs, and rehabilitation time are minimized in an ideal minimally invasive surgery. To achieve this goal, the disruption of muscles and periarticular soft tissue is minimized to the extent practically possible. At the very least, a smaller incision with a cosmetically better postsurgical scar is expected. There are several different approaches for doing the minimally invasive total hip arthroplasty. Each is a modification of a previously used, standard surgical approach. The anterolateral and posterolateral approaches are the two most common approaches for standard total hip replacement. The anterolateral (Hardinge) approach was first introduced in 1982. To perform a minimally invasive total hip using the above approach, the patients are placed in the supine position, which makes possible an easy and accurate leg length check after component positioning. An incision ranging from 6 to 10 cm based on patients body mass index, local muscle and fat tissue mass, and anatomy is made to expose the hip joint. The incision can be extended at either end if needed to improve acetabular and femoral exposure. Modified retractors and impactors are designed to provide excellent surgical visualization and component positioning through the limited incision. Many orthopedic surgeons believe that the patient selection is very important to achieve satisfactory results in minimally invasive total hip arthroplasty. Generally, the limited incision length is not considered ideal for patients who need a complex operation. Patients whose body mass index is more than 30 kg/m Chimento and coworkers Howell and coworkers, Berger Some studies reported significant differences between conventional and minimally invasive THA done through the posterior approach in terms of blood loss, De Beer and coworkers Kennon and coworkers Bertin, A faster rehabilitation protocol can possibly affect the results of total hip arthroplasty through either a standard or a small incision approach. With a rapid protocol, patients can begin the postoperative physical therapy in a few hours after the surgery, which should expedite discharge from the hospital. Patients may need special medications to prevent nausea and dizziness after the operation to be able to begin ambulation. Progression from walker to cane may be achieved within a few days after total hip arthroplasty. Berger and coworkers Optimal component positioning has been an important concern in performing minimally invasive total hip arthroplasty. A smaller incision may possibly affect the optimal component position, thereby contributing to complications such as leg length discrepancy, dislocation, and periprosthetic fracture. Woolson and coworkers Dorr Hartzband Some studies have not reported any significant difference between the conventional and mini-incision approaches in the postoperative radiographic evaluation of the components. Woolson and coworkers Fehring and Mason Contrasting data in several other studies The minimally invasive total hip arthroplasty has emerged in an effort to shorten the hospital length of stay and to speed recovery and return to daily activities. Cosmetic results, although important, should not be considered the primary goal of the minimally invasive total hip arthroplasty procedures. The literature is lacking sufficient prospective studies to compare mini-incision versus conventional total hip replacements through the various surgical approaches and to assess the independent effects of modified rehabilitation protocols on the outcomes. Most of the studies cited in this report were done by experienced, high-volume orthopedic surgeons. Many of these present retrospectively collected data or report on a single cohort of patients. Finally, although the early results of minimally invasive total hip arthroplasty have been reported, the long-term outcomes remain to be critically evaluated.