Introduction
                  Zygomatic complex fracture is one of the most frequently occuring injuries to facial structures and often involves damage to the surrounding structures, including the orbital floor and/or medial orbital wall. These complicated injuries can cause both serious opthalmic and aesthetic complcations that make reconstructions more difficult.
               
                  Case presentation
                  A 22 year old male presented with facial asymmetry. On examination, there were neglected fractures of left orbitozygomaticomaxillary complex with various compications. We performed lateral orbitotomy, bone graft, medial and lateral cantopexy with 3D reconstruction models as a guidance. There were some appearance improvements including improved orbital dystopia and corrected facial asymmetry. However, his vision could not be corrected because the reconstruction was too late.
               
                  Discussion
                  Several examinations before reconstruction of the injury has to be done, especially radiological examinations to decide proper diagnosis and reconstruction plans. Some complications may make difficulties in establishing precise time for surgery. Three-dimensional (3-D) reconstrucion model can help increase accuracy of the reconstruction but consume more time.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Severe maxillofacial fracture should be treated immediately to avoid further complications. Multidisciplinary examinations can provide more accurate preliminary recommendations particularly when combine with properly calibrated CT scan imaging.Facial reconstruction surgery is common because the face is a prominent point of injury due to sports injuries and vehicular accidents. The cheek bones and eye sockets often need repair requiring extensive rebuilding [ The orbital floor has a fragile structure, making it easily damaged in a craniomaxillofacial trauma. The area located in medial to the infraorbital groove and canal are main locations of sustained fractures. Sometimes, the fractures involve damage to medial orbital wall because of the reduced bone thickness in that area [ This case report follows SCARE criteria [ A 22 year old male presented to the Division of Plastic, Reconstruction, and Aesthetic Surgery, in the Department of Surgery of our institute with facial asymmetry. He was injuried in a traffic accident 2 years ago and had underwent interdental and intermaxillary wiring by a surgeon at a district hospital. The patient did not feel any improvements and then came to our institute. On the physical examination, there was maxilla deformity on the left side ( We did the reconstruction using bicoronal approach and 3D reconstruction models as a guidance for the surgical procedures ( In the 4th month after operation the cantopexy was still broken causing sagging of the cheek skin to be prominent. The 2nd operation was performed to fix the sagging cheek by mini face lift and orbital dystopia by adding bone wax and orbital mesh, and also reconstruction of nasolacrimal duct. There were some appearance improvements including corrected orbital dystopia and improved facial asymmetry ( Fractures of the orbitozygomaticomaxillary complex are involved in nearly 30% of all facial fractures [ Healthcare providers who take care of these patients have to understand the related physical examinations, including opthalmology findings. Any misdiagnosis or incorrect reconstruction of the preinjury anatomy can cause post traumatic deformities of the orbit that can lead to serious complications, including enophthalmos, diplopia, and visual acuity disturbance [ A variety of defects in the orbital wall can be captured with CT imaging ranging from hairline fractures without displacement to full separation of orbital bones which can cause tissue prolapse in the eye socket and surrounding orbitomaxillary structures including the cheek bone and detached facial muscles. During repair of the injury to the zygoma, early exploration of the internal orbit can provide a foundation for later cosmetic surgery by rebuilding the orbital floor [ According to Nigel et al., orbital floor fractures are considered urgent with following complications: diplopia with restriction of gaze, entrapment of extraocular muscles, enophthalmos >2 mm, fracture that involved over half the orbital floor and the medial wall, and “trapdoor” orbital floor fractures in children [ Opthalmologic findings and CT scan imaging can contribute significantly to recommendations for surgery and may need further evaluations from other disciplines such as neurosurgery for possible traumatic brain injury [ High energy injuries also often require extensive osteotomy, repositioning, and cranial bone graft replacement of displaced, partially resorbed, and comminuted bone. Extended open reduction and rigid fixation techniques in treating high-energy fractures are highly required, since the soft tissue deforming forces overwhelm the limited fixation of comminuted fractures, particularly fixation provided by interfragment wiring. A common combination of procedures is osteotomy and repositioning of the zygomatic arch to decrease facial width and custom onlay grafting of the malar prominence [ Orbital reconstruction in orbital fracture treatment using implant materials is effective, but it is difficult to assess its accuracy during surgery. Therefore, a three-dimensional (3-D) reconstruction model was created as guidance during surgery. The use of 3-D models has significantly aided the surgical planning and treatment outcome of both pathologic and traumatic maxillofacial conditions. The main goal is restoration of the original orbital volume and prevention of long term complications [ We succesfully treated a neglected case of orbitozygomaticomaxillary fracture with 2 years onset that never reported in any literature before. Bone healing process normally involves callus resorption by osteoclast and formation of lamellar bone by osteoblast. There is no any healing of injured bone in the result of imaging in this patient. Our approachment to this case give a satisfying outcome despite of inevitable vision loss. When complex and severe maxillofacial fractures occured especially with high energy injury causing opthamology and aesthetic complications, these cases should be referred to a plastic surgeon immediately. Early reconstruction is recommended although its accuracy has to be performed carefully because the 3-D reconstruction model takes longer time. Multidisciplinary examinations can provide more accurate preliminary recommendations particularly when combine with properly calibrated CT scan imaging. This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. Ethical clearance is not needed in the ethics commission at our institution for a case report. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal on request. SIW is the author conceived the study, and ID, RS, MRH, and ILP did the supervision. DA contributed in data collection. We use registry body from Clinicaltrials.gov with registration number NCT00583856. Siti Isya Wahdini. Not commissioned, externally peer-reviewed. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. We thank the surgical staff and nursing team who were involved in the patient’s care. We are also thankful to a native speaker at English Services Center, Faculty of Medicine, Public Health and Nursing, Universitas Gadjah Mada, for proofreading of our manuscript.