Displaced distal radial fractures with extensive dorsal comminution and plastic cancellous deformation are unstable and frequently cause treatment problems since there is no single, reliable method of treatment, notably in osteoporotic bone.
                  We present a method of holding unstable distal radial fractures with blunt ended K-wires via intrafocal and intramedullary insertion, so modifying the Kapandji technique. Wires were placed dorsally, radially and when necessary from the volar direction depending on fracture configuration.
                  Over a 7-year period (1992–1999) we treated 102 patients with unstable distal radial fractures in this way. Of these, 80 were followed up for 6–42 weeks according to clinical need and scored radiologically and functionally using modified Lidstrom scoring system. Results showed that 92 and 95% of these patients achieved good or excellent results in these scoring systems, respectively. We present this as a useful and reliable method of treating these common fractures, particularly in osteoporotic bone.Over a 7-year period 102 patients were treated using intrafocal, intramedullary wiring for unstable distal radial fractures. Fractures were classified according to the Frykman classification The majority (approximately 95%) of distal radial fractures were treated with manipulation under regional anaesthesia and immobilisation using a below elbow back-slab for a week, followed by treatment with a complete forearm cast for a further 4–6 weeks. All patients were reviewed the day after the fracture and at 7–10 days in clinic where they were assessed clinically and radiologically. If there was more than 12° of dorsal angulation or more than 4 mm radial shortening after reduction, or unacceptable loss of position of the reduction at the later follow up to the same criteria, then further intervention was deemed necessary. These criteria were later refined to more than 2 mm of impaction and 5° of dorsal angulation for younger, higher demand patients A few fractures were deemed unstable in accident and emergency so were referred directly for surgical stabilisation. The technique was not attempted if under GA it was impossible to reduce the fracture to an anatomically acceptable position due to severe comminution. In such cases alternative methods of fixation were used. The fracture is reduced by closed manipulation to an acceptable position under image intensifier control. The first skin incision is made longitudinally on the dorsal aspect of the wrist over the fracture site in line with Lister's tubercle. Care is taken to incise only the skin and using a fine, curved artery clip the fracture line is reached by careful blunt dissection taking care to avoid inadvertant damage to the first and second dorsal compartment tendon sheaths. The artery clip is then placed within the fracture site with the points aiming proximally and the points gently opened. A 1.6 mm K-wire is then taken and bent to a ski-tip at the blunt end and placed in a Jacob's chuck so the blunt end only is exposed. The K-wire is then introduced through the mosquito points into the fracture site and gently rotated through 90° arcs while passed proximally down the medulla of the radius. Blunt-ended K-wires and ski-tipping the wire prevents breach of cortices and facilitates medullary passage. The wire position is then checked with image intensifier to confirm occupation of the medullary canal. The wire is left protruding through the skin where it is cut off and the end looped with wire benders to prevent migration into the medulla and to facilitate removal. The skin incision may need lengthening to prevent skin chaffing by the protruding wire as this can lead to wound infection or skin abrasion. The second skin incision is made over the fracture site in line longitudinally with the tip of the radial styloid. Care is taken to incise only the skin and protect branches of the superficial radial nerve. An artery clip is passed into the fracture site and the tips pointed proximally and opened. A pre-ski-tipped 1.6 mm wire is then introduced in the same manner as previously and position checked with image intensifier. Once both dorsal and radial wires are in situ, the fracture reduction is checked. If there is any over-correction by either wire, then the wire is bent at the level of the fracture site dorsally or radially, respectively. This usually corrects the over-correction to hold anatomical reduction. The fracture site is then checked for stability by screening under image intensifier while maximal volar, dorsal and radial flexion of the wrist. If any instability is suggested in a volar direction then a volar wire is considered. The skin incision for this is made just radial to the flexor carpi radialis tendon over the fracture site and the fracture entered in the standard manner through the bed of flexor carpi radialis taking care to avoid the radial artery and a 1.6 mm wire placed as previously described through the fracture site. In this manner the fracture is held reduced and stability then confirmed. The wounds are closed with nylon sutures and the forearm placed in a below elbow cast in neutral. The wires are removed in clinic at 4 weeks when the cast is also removed. The wires are protruding and have no cortical grip so removal with minimum force and relative ease is possible without the need for anaesthetic. The patient is then encouraged to mobilise with physiotherapy where required.  One hundred and two patients (74 female and 28 male) were treated in this manner between 1992 and 1999, with an average age of 60.5 years (9–94). Follow up was routinely arranged for a period of 6–42 weeks, depending on clinical need. Of 102 patients 22 were lost to follow up due to death Results were therefore, tabulated in Two patients required osteotomy of the radius due to malunion. One had a concommitant scaphoid fracture which required internal fixation. All three were high-energy injuries in young, high demand patients and would perhaps have been better managed by alternative methods from the outset. Six had mild pin track infections, all of which settled with oral antibiotics and wire removal. One further patient developed skin abrasions by the wire due to a tight plaster. Three required carpal tunnel decompression; two early and one at 4 months. Three developed scar adherence and paraesthesia, two of which required scar excision, the other settling spontaneously. One patient had intramedullary migration of a wire due to inadequate proximal looping of the wire. This was left in situ as it was asymptomatic. It should be noted that no incidents of superficial radial nerve palsy or neuroma were noted and there were also no episodes of tendon injury. The comminuted distal radius fracture, particularly in the osteoporotic patient, continues to present a difficult management problem without a clear surgical answer. It is also a common problem and represents one-sixth of all fractures in patients over the age of 50 In radial fracture management, a good functional result is unlikely unless a good anatomical result is obtained Results of manipulation and casting are poor in up to 37% of cases, with 60% of fractures healing in their original position of displacement Surgical methods of fixation are many and Kapandji wiring An intramedullary butress wiring technique, similar to the technique we present but with a radial styloid transfixing wire suggested encouraging results Using the modified intrafocal, intramedullary technique we have achieved excellent or good results in the vast majority of cases according to Lidstrom's scoring and complications have been few and relatively minor. Exceptions to this were where alternative methods should have been used due to high-energy injuries in young patients. We feel that this technique offers the following advantages: It is relatively simple and cheap. Using blunt-ended 1.6mm wires on a chuck handle, following blunt dissection to the fracture site, local soft tissue trauma that can be associated with sharp wires on a power driver is minimised. By using non-fixed butress wires, fracture displacement can be adjusted if wire placement overcorrects the deformity. By bending the wires at the fracture site, anatomical hold is ensured without having to withdraw wires and re-insert. Using the wire as an intramedullary butress removes any reliance of hold on osteoporotic bone for fracture stability and allows multiple wires to form a cone of butresses which minimise collapse, rotation and angulation of the distal fragment. Intramedullary wires have no distal fix so removal involves minimal force, so reducing the chance of soft tissue trauma and obviating the need to remove wires under GA (as recommended by Kapandji to reduce complications We appreciate our technique is not the only method of fixing unstable distal radial fractures but it offers a simple, cheap and effective method with good clinical and radiological results that can prove a useful addendum to any surgeons armamentarium.