The global gold market has recently attracted a lot of attention and the price of gold is relatively higher than its historical trend. For mining companies to mitigate risk and uncertainty in gold price fluctuations, make hedging, future investment and evaluation decisions, depend on forecasting future price trends. The first section of this paper reviews the world gold market and the historical trend of gold prices from January 1968 to December 2008. This is followed by an investigation into the relationship between gold price and other key influencing variables, such as oil price and global inflation over the last 40 years. The second section applies a modified econometric version of the long-term trend reverting jump and dip diffusion model for forecasting natural-resource commodity prices. This method addresses the deficiencies of previous models, such as jumps and dips as parameters and unit root test for long-term trends. The model proposes that historical data of mineral commodities have three terms to demonstrate fluctuation of prices: a long-term trend reversion component, a diffusion component and a jump or dip component. The model calculates each term individually to estimate future prices of mineral commodities. The study validates the model and estimates the gold price for the next 10 years, based on monthly historical data of nominal gold price.In 2008 and early 2009 most metal prices fell and the global economy was in recession. Many mining companies had difficulties surviving during this period. Some reduced their production rates and postponed projects while others switched to hedge instruments or long-term contracts to guarantee commodity prices. Cash flows in mining projects are volatile and are significantly influenced by the fluctuation of mineral commodity prices. Estimation of mineral prices is vital at the beginning of the valuation process as well as in computing total costs and production rates over the entire mine life, and mining companies make decisions to accept or reject a project based on future price expectations. Consequently, it is essential to estimate future prices with suitable models during any appraisal of mining projects. The price and production behaviour of gold differs from most other mineral commodities. In the 2008 financial crisis, the gold price increased by 6% while many key mineral prices fell and other equities dropped by around 40%. The unique and diverse drivers of gold demand and supply do not correlate highly with changes in other financial assets (   Gold reserves in central banks are one of the largest sources of world gold supply. The World Gold Council ( Previous studies show that gold price fluctuations have different effects on gold production and the value of gold mining stocks from country to country and mine to mine (  In the short-term there are two main reasons why gold prices dramatically increase. Firstly, in a period where global financial markets crash and the global economy is in recession, investors are less trusting of financial markets as reliable investments. Consequently, they switch to speculation or to any market that does not have heavy liability or unpredictability, such as the gold market. In other words, the gold market operates as a type of insurance against extreme movements in the value of traditional assets during unstable financial markets. Secondly, the devaluation of the US dollar versus other currencies, and international inflation with high oil prices are reasons why big companies to hedge gold against fluctuations in the US dollar and inflation. This means that gold trading will offset the potential movement of real value in the short-term market against US dollar oscillations and inflation. In the long-term, there are three major reasons for increasing gold prices. Firstly, mine production has gradually reduced in recent years ( The oil price and inflation rate are two main macroeconomic variables that influence the gold market ( As can be seen in  Another variable that influences gold prices is inflation ( There are a number of different price modelling methods that have been discussed in financial literature. The geometric Brownian motion and mean reversion are two classical approaches which form the basis for some newer methods, such as stochastic price forecasting and mean reverting jump diffusion models. These models focus on historical price movements and a random term to estimate future prices. They do not consider price jumps or dips in the models ( Since 1982 when Slade claimed a U-shaped time path for natural commodity prices, there has been controversy about the historical trend of natural resource prices ( The contribution of the proposed model is to add jump and dip variables into the statistical probability distribution of actual data in previous. This will solve their discrepancies. This model adds two dummy variables in the long-trend reverting model as jump and dip. These two variables distinguish long-term trend between normal period with jump and dip period. In analysing the historical trend of gold prices in the previous section, gold prices have different jump and dip sizes, which should be considered when predicting. The jump and dip forecasting is based on an extrapolation of the historical sinusoidal trend and not statistical probabilities jump and dip ( This model uses rational expectations theory to forecast mineral commodity prices in the future. The theory defines expectations as being identical to the best guess of the future from all available information. This theory assumes that outcomes being forecasted do not differ systematically or predictably from the equilibrium results. For example, mining project evaluators assume to predict the gold price by looking at gold prices in previous years. If the economy suffers from constantly rising inflation rates or oil price pressure, the assumptions used to make a prediction are different from that time when the economy follows a smooth growth. The model uses a stationary econometrics model to forecast gold prices. The stationary stochastic process denotes that the mean and variance of a variable are constant over the time. Moreover, covariance in the two different periods depends on gap or lag between the periods, not actual time at which the covariance is computed. For example, if the gold price time series is stationary, the mean, variance and autocovariance in various lags remain the same irrespective at what point they are measured. Therefore, some of the time series will tend to be its mean or median and fluctuate around it with constant amplitude called mean reversion. As Kerry Patterson notes, random walk theory remembers the shock forever and it has infinite memory ( The random walk theory is an example of what is known in economics literature as a unit root process. Eq. One of the possibilities of Eq. This equation in econometrics is called a trend stationary process (TSP). The mean of This study has applied the three components of the new model to gold prices from 1968 to 2008. Following the gold price has been estimated for the next 10 years. The essential question for this model is when the gold prices are in jump or in dip. To evaluate this, the model reviews the historical price trend of jump and dip and then estimates the same trend for the future. Before applying the model, the unit root test for nominal gold price has been experimented. A few empirical researches based on time series data assume that the underlying time series are stationary. In other words, some of the researches ignored autocorrelation in the time series models and thus obtain a very high adjusted In econometrics literature, the unit root test, also known as the Augmented Dickey Fuller (ADF) test, is commonly used for testing stationary behaviour. This test is conducted in three different random walk test forms. In other words, “the terms nonstationary, random walk, and unit root can be treated as synonymous” ( Most econometrics models use time series data associated with nonstationary series. To avoid the unit root problem in regression models, there are two methods available. The first one, difference stationary processes (DSF) uses the first difference of a time series. The second one uses the trend stationary processes (TSP) that simply regresses time series on time. The residuals from this type of regression will be stationary. Eq.  To highlight the jump and dip, In Initially, this section validates the new model. The model uses the data from January 1968 to December 1998 and it then predicts the gold price from January 1999 to December 2008. To predict the gold price in this time frame, parameters in Eq. In this section, the paper uses the historical gold price from January 1968 to December 2008 to anticipate gold prices for the next 10 years. The first component in the model is the long-term trend reversion component. This component demonstrates that the gold price should be reverting to the historical long-term trend. According to historical data, Eq. The second term is the diffusion component, which multiplies random numbers of standard normal distribution for the jumps and dips volatility. The second component has been calculated around 25% of current gold price in each month. The gold price in the next month will increase or decrease by around 25% of the first component. The second component has two advantages. First, the random movements would be between the range of the second component. Second, this range helps the model to accommodate jump and dip within the third component. The third component is the most important component as it is used to predict jump/dip and it will add in the two previous components in predicting for the future. The third component demonstrates jump/dip period.  The first section of this paper analyses the demand, supply and price of the gold market. Analysing the gold supply showed that around 160,000 tonnes of gold has been mined in history up to the end of 2008. Gold demand by jewellery, industrial and central bank reserves equate to approximately 100,000, 30,000 and 30,000 tonnes, respectively. A significant proportion of the demand side of gold is attributed to jewellery, which can in turn be injected into the supply side. From 1833 to 1968 the gold price remained steady for more than a century, then it started to fluctuate. The paper presents the role of important variables such as oil price and inflation in the gold market. There is a high correlation between gold and oil prices at around 85%. However, the study showed the relationship between the gold price growth and cumulative inflation was around −9% over the last four decades, and there was no significant relationship between gold price and inflation. The ratio of the prices of one ounce of gold to one barrel of crude oil was calculated to be approximately 11 in 1968 and 2008. This means 11 barrels of crude oil is equivalent to one ounce of gold in 1968 and 2008. Consequently, this index shows that the range of gold prices to oil prices remained stable over the long-term. In the following section a unit root test was applied to the long-term monthly gold price. This concluded that the gold price in the long-term is nonstationary. A new model proposed a trend stationary process to solve the nonstationary problems in previous models. The advantage of this model is that it includes the jump and dip components into the model as parameters. The behaviour of historical commodities prices includes three different components: long-term reversion, diffusion and jump/dip diffusion. The proposed model was validated with historical gold prices. The model was then applied to forecast the gold price for the next 10 years. The results indicated that, assuming the current price jump initiated in 2007 behaves in the same manner as that experienced in 1978, the gold price would stay abnormally high up to the end of 2014. After that, the price would revert to the long-term trend until 2018. The authors are pleased to acknowledge the contribution made by Peter Knights, Micah Nehring Shuxing Li and Jade Little towards the completion of the manuscript.