Drying shrinkage can cause high performance concrete (HPC) to crack, resulting in a reduction of its overall strength and durability. Creep behavior is also an important property of HPC and it should also be considered in applications. This paper evaluates the time-dependent creep and shrinkage properties of HPC as well as high performance hybrid-fiber-reinforced concretes (HPHyFRC) through experimental programs and the results will be compared with some common prediction models. The authors’ HPC were developed by using certain percentages of silica fume (SF) and ground granulated blast-furnace slag (GGBS) as cement replacement materials. Double hooked-end steel fibers, single hooked-end steel fibers, and polyvinyl alcohol fibers were mixed in different proportions in the concrete to get HPHyFRC. The total combined volume fractions of the fibers were 0%, 0.6%, and 1.2%. The results indicate that the substitution of ordinary Portland cement (OPC) with SF or GGBS improved the properties of concrete. The addition of fibers significantly reduced the drying shrinkage and creep coefficient of HPHyFRC. While the fiber volume fraction had an insignificant influence on the drying shrinkage of HPHyFRC, hybridization of polyvinyl alcohol fiber with steel fibers resulted in the minimum shrinkage strain. The least creep coefficient was attained by the concrete mix containing 1.2% double hooked-end steel fibers. The CEB-FIP 2010 model predicts the time-dependent behaviors of concretes with the best accuracy among different models compared in this study.Generally, the global demand for high performance concretes (HPC) has increased in recent years due to several possible tailor-made advantages when compared to normal strength concrete, such as better workability, higher compressive strength and better durability properties [ Using fibers in concrete is understood to be a promising way to overcome this weakness and it produces a material with higher tensile strength, flexural strength, ductility, and energy absorption by controlling crack propagation [ Despite the advantages of HPC compared to the conventional concrete, the presence of mineral admixtures in HPC may increase the risk of early age cracking that can shorten the serviceability of the concrete structures. Moreover, drying shrinkage is critical for large surface area concrete structures and can reduce the overall strength and durability of concrete as a result of cracks formation. High performance fiber-reinforced concrete (HPFRC) was developed as a material with high ductility and durability properties [ The binder materials employed in this study were ordinary Portland cement (ASTM Type 1) from Lafarge, silica fume from Elkem, and ground granulated blast-furnace slag from EnGro. Their chemical composition and physical characteristics are listed in The water-binder ratio was maintained at 0.25 for all mixes in order to achieve the intended compressive strength of the concrete. The SF and GGBS were added as cement replacements for the amounts of 10% and 30% of cement weight, respectively, to get the HPHyFRC mixes. In addition, binary and ternary mixes containing SF and GGBS but without fiber were also manufactured. Concrete mixes without fiber, mixes with 0.6% fiber volume fraction, and mixes with 1.2% fiber volume fraction are termed as A, B, and C series, respectively. The concrete mix proportions are provided in A universal Instron compression machine with capacity of 3000-KN was used to perform the compressive strength tests on the cylindrical specimens with dimensions of The creep tests were performed on cylindrical specimens were stored at a room with a temperature of 23 ± 2 °C and at a relative humidity of 50 ± 4% until completion of the test in accordance with ASTM The cylindrical compressive strength test results for different fiber-reinforced concretes containing different fiber volume fractions and fiber types are presented in As can be seen in The results shown in The results of drying shrinkage versus time for different specimens that were cured for 7, 28, and 91 days are shown in The results further indicate that the drying shrinkage deformations of HPHyFRC were lower than that of the base concrete without fibers (SF10GGBS30). The hybridization of steel fibers with two different lengths had a positive impact on the restriction of the cracks with different sizes and resulted in a reduction in the drying shrinkage strain over that of the concrete with the use of DHE steel fiber individually. Fibers can reduce the drying shrinkage of concrete either by improving the bond strength between the fibers and the concrete matrix which contributes to physically restraining shrinkage [ The effect of curing age on the drying shrinkage deformation of different specimens at 56, and 448 days is shown in As can be seen in The results of the specific creep for concretes manufactured with different additives and subjected to loading at 28 days are shown in The results of the concretes that were reinforced with fibers reveal that the addition of fibers reduced the specific creep compared to the results of concretes without fibers. The stiffening effect of fibers on the specific creep is visible in mixes that were reinforced with 0.6% fiber volume fraction. However, a greater content of fibers in concrete (1.2%) adversely affected the workability of concrete, and the stiffening effect of the fibers had an insignificant influence on the specific creep due to the lower quality of the concrete matrix. As already discussed, there are several models that have been developed to predict the drying shrinkage and creep deformations of concrete. However, it is well understood that the aforementioned properties are classified among the most uncertain behavior of concrete. The comparisons between experimental drying shrinkage of concrete and prediction models are shown in The comparisons between experimental creep coefficient of concrete and prediction models are shown in This study explores the effects of different fibers and fiber combinations as well as the mineral admixtures, such as SF and GGBS on the compressive strength, drying shrinkage and creep behavior of concrete. Moreover, a comparison between the measured time-dependent behavior of selected mixes and some most common prediction models was carried out. The following conclusions were obtained: The addition of mineral admixtures in the authors' developed concretes without fibers caused an increase of up to 7% in the compressive strength. This slight increase of strength is likely due to the low water-binder ratio of the mixes and consequently lower amount of available water which could take part in the hydration reactions. The addition of silica fume and GGBS significantly reduces the drying shrinkage and creep deformation of high performance concrete. The efficiency of silica fume in reducing time-dependent features of concrete is higher than slag. With the addition of both additives a reduction of up to 21% and 39% in the drying shrinkage and creep deformation of concrete were obtained, respectively. Silica fume and GGBS densify the microstructure of concrete, improve the characteristics of interfacial transition zone, and those subsequently restrain the deformation of concrete. The addition of 0.6% fibers in concrete had an insignificant influence on the compressive strength of FRCs irrespective of the fiber type and fiber hybridization, while an increase up to 14% was attained in the compressive strength of 1.2DHE mix compared to that of companion mix without fibers at 28 days. Hybridization of steel fibers with different sizes and combination with PVA fibers slightly reduces the compressive strength of cylindrical specimens with dimensions of The inclusion of fibers remarkably reduces the drying shrinkage of concrete. However, it is found that increasing the fiber volume fraction has insignificant effect on the results. Partial replacement of DHE steel fibers with HE steel fibers results in a reduction in the drying shrinkage. Additionally, the incorporation of PVA fibers in hybrid fiber-reinforced concretes causes a substantial reduction when compared to monotype fiber-reinforced concrete. It can be attributed to the efficiency of fibers in inhibiting the propagation of cracks of different lengths in the body of concrete. Curing age has a considerable effect on the shrinkage of concrete. The test results of HPHyFRC show that the drying shrinkage reduction ranged from 6% to 23%, 15%–24%, and 17%–39%, respectively, for the specimens moist cured for 7, 28, and 91 days, depending on the fiber volume fraction and combination of fibers. It can be explained by the fact that the efficiency of mineral admixtures increases at later ages of curing and consequently controls the deformation of concrete. Introducing fibers in concrete significantly reduces creep deformation of FRC. Increasing the fiber volume fraction slightly reduces the specific creep of concrete. The best performance among HPHyFRC is obtained by the mix that was manufactured with the inclusion of DHE steel fibers. The reason of that is the higher anchorage capacity of DHE steel fibers compared to other fibers that significantly contribute toward restraining the propagation of micro-cracks and thus maintaining stiffness and reducing creep deformation. Generally, the reduction in the specific creep of HPHyFRC varied from 42% to 51%, depending on the fiber volume fraction and hybridization of fibers. All the prediction models considered in this research, overestimate the final drying shrinkage of concretes. The CEB-FIP 2010 model predicts the shrinkage deformation of concretes without fibers with the best accuracy, while the Kohoutkovā’s model can be applied for FRC with the highest accuracy. The Kohoutkovā’s model caused an error of 8% in the predicted shrinkage strain of the 1.2DHE mix. This model predicts the shrinkage deformation of FRC remarkably well due to considering the effect of fibers on the splitting tensile strength of concrete and modifying the shrinkage strain by introducing a correction factor. Among different prediction models considered, the CEB-FIP 2010 model has the best accuracy in predicting the creep coefficient of HPC considered in this study. An error of only 11% was attained in the predicted value of the plain concrete specimens. The Kohoutkovā’s model cannot predict the creep coefficient of FRC reasonably well. A more accurate model for predicting creep strains should possibly take into account the fiber volume fraction, fiber modulus of elasticity, and expected crack widths. All authors certify that they have no conflicts of interest relevant to this article. This research was made possible by the generous funding from the