The difference between rolling and sliding motion is a good basis for the separation of particles. The principle has already been applied in various shape separators. In this paper, experiments on a new rotating cone separator are presented, which is especially designed to process recycled materials. A simulation model is used to first characterise materials in terms of shape and friction and then predict their separation on the rotating cone.The difference between the rolling and sliding motion of particles on a surface has been used in many separators, such as a tilted rotating disk and a rotating cylinder with blades (see The separator used in this study consists of a truncated rotating cone with an upper diameter of 2 m and a lower diameter of 0.8 m (see Various waste materials qualify for shape separation on the rotating cone, provided that the waste contains both granular as well as flat materials. For example, a substantial reduction of the wire content was realised for a fraction of car shredder residue containing mostly stones and flat metals In all experiments, the cumulative distribution of each of the feed materials was measured as a function of the angle between the input point at the top of the cone and the position of the collecting bins at the base. Such a distribution of a material relates directly to the recovery of the materials as a function of the splitter angle. The less distributions overlap for different materials, the better these materials can be separated. The −4 mm fraction and the +32 mm fraction of building rubble are found to have a consistent, basically mineral composition. In contrast, the fraction with a size between 4 and 32 mm is highly variable and contains next to stones, significant amounts of wood, plaster, and plastics. The first three of these materials were tested on the rotating cone that was covered with fine stainless steel gauze in order to provide sufficient friction to the wood. The stones and plaster have a granular shape, unlike the wood, which consists of rather flat pieces (see  The recycling of glass is generally very successful due to its separate collection in many countries. Despite this separate collection, glass cullet is still contaminated with paper, metal, cork, and plastics from labels, lids, corks, and caps. The light contamination (plastic, cork, and paper) is often removed into a waste stream by air suction, but in this process also part of the glass is lost. In order to find out whether the rotating cone is an option to recover the glass from this waste stream, the behaviour of glass, cork, and caps on the cone was studied. For these experiments, the surface of the cone was covered with rubber. In the previous section, it was shown that the success of shape separation for a materials mixture is very sensitive to the rotation speed of the cone. Two other important variables, next to the rotation speed, are the tilt angle of the cone and the material used for the surface. Since many combinations of parameters are possible, it is worthwhile to try to predict the results of the separation as a function of these parameters and find the optimum. In this section, a simulation model for the rotating cone is presented and then solved numerically to show the relation with experimental results. The model describes the bouncing motion of the granular particles by a polygon approximation. For a detailed discussion of this polygon model, we refer to The first step in developing the complete set of equations of motion for particles on the conical surface is to express Newton's laws in cylinder coordinates with respect to the moving cone. This can be done conveniently in two steps: first by changing from laboratory Cartesian coordinates to corotating Cartesian coordinates, and finally to corotating cylinder coordinates. For all coordinate frames, the For an observer that is rotating with the surface of the cone, the trajectory of a particle moving down the cone is much like the motion of a particle down a flat slope. This latter problem was analysed for polygonal particles in In translating the expressions for the flat slope to the situation for the cone, the constant acceleration of gravity, For sliding particles, the parallel component of the contact force is equal to the frictional force, In case of perfect rolling, the parallel component of the contact force is equal to the frictional force that is required to keep the particle from slipping, For bouncing particles, The equations of motion are solved numerically with initial conditions For a polygon, conditions can be given to decide whether the polygon would roll, slide or keep still. The same conditions were used for the particles considered in this paper. It was therefore assumed that the particles will always start bouncing, when The simulation model describes particles by a shape factor The static coefficient of friction only triggers the motion. If the static friction exceeds a boundary value for a given rotational speed, the particle sticks to the cone and ends up in the last bin via the scraper. The dynamic coefficient of friction and the shape factor not only affect the dynamics of the motion, they also determine the type of motion (bouncing vs. sliding and bouncing with friction vs. bouncing without friction). For each choice of In the previous section, it was shown how the distribution of particles over the various bins is calculated for a given material characterisation. In practice, a good characterisation is not known beforehand, and a way to characterise the material is by performing experiments, and finding the best fit to these measurements. In this section, this characterisation procedure is carried out, first for flat (sliding) model particles, and then for granular (bouncing and sliding) particles. For sliding particles, it was decided to characterise the material by a dynamic coefficient of friction with a Gaussian distribution ( Granular materials are not only characterised in terms of coefficients of friction, but also in terms of their shape. The shape factor In practice, a given material can consist of a combination of granular and flat particles. Such materials need an additional fitting parameter In summary, the calculated distribution Various minimisation algorithms can be found in the literature. For the minimisation of  In order to verify the matching procedure, the dynamic coefficient of friction was measured on a slope covered with the same wire mesh plate (using a CCD camera and image analysis). A coefficient of friction of 0.31±0.01 was found for the brass disk, which corresponds very well to the coefficient of friction found by the matching procedure. For the rubber particle, the directly measured coefficient of friction was found to be 0.61±0.07. This is higher than the friction found by the matching procedure, presumably because the experiments on the rubber particles are dominated by static friction. The dynamic and static friction were coupled by a constant factor, which led to a match with a lower dynamic coefficient of friction. The measured distributions are generally smoother than the matched distributions due to variations of the particle velocity at the feeding point. The model, on the other hand, assumes that all particles enter the cone at the tangential velocity of the cone. Finally, the measured distributions of stones from building rubble were matched. This sample consisted mostly of granular particles but also contained some flat stones with no ability to roll. All parameters of The product recovered in the last bin at the highest rotational speed ( In order to illustrate the types of motion that occur in practice, about 60 stones were selected at random. For various rotational speeds, it was registered how many of these stones slid (or stuck to the cone), and how many stones bounced (rolled). For the rotational speeds used in this experiment, with values for Experiments with a conical shape separator show that wood can be removed from the plaster and stones in building rubble on the basis of the granular shape of the last two materials. A sample from the residue in glass recycling, consisting of caps, corks, and glass was also tested. Part of the glass could be recovered. However, the glass which stuck to the cone was difficult to remove by the scraper, and caused damage to the surface of the cone. In general, the best separation is achieved when one of the materials sticks to the cone, and is removed by the scraper. However, this requires a good functioning scraper. A numerical model was presented that simulates the particle trajectories along the surface of the cone. The model covers the rolling motion of granular particles by the theory of the motion of a polygon. Streams of a single material are characterised by (Gaussian) distributions of the shape factor and the dynamic coefficient of friction, whereas the static and dynamic friction are related by a constant. The final characterisation parameter is the fraction of the material that will always slide. By matching the calculated distribution over the output bins to the measured distribution over the bins for separations at various rotational speeds, a characterisation of the material was obtained that enabled a successful prediction of a rerun of a product fraction. The authors wish to thank TNO Institute of Environmental Sciences, Energy Research and Process Innovation for their financial support for this project.