Intrusive bodies with a wide-ranging geology are distributed in the central part of the Sanandaj-Sirjan zone (C–SaSZ) in southern Ghorveh, western Iran. The zircon U–Pb ages were dated at 154–146 Ma, and were characterized by low 87Sr/87Sr(i) ratios and high 143Nd/144Nd(i) ratios that ranged from 0.7035 to 0.7061 and 0.51245 to 0.51271, respectively (positive εNd(t) values). Magma differentiation and mixing formed different magmatic rocks that range widely from gabbro to granite in the Meiham–Shirvaneh area in southern Ghorveh. However, there was no clear evidence to support the slab role for the enrichment of large-ion lithophile elements (LILEs) and light rare–earth elements (LREEs) in this area. Meanwhile, there is a possibility that some ocean island basalt-like melt, which has been reported in the Ghorveh area for the same period, was involved in the minor enrichment of LILEs and LREEs. The high development of the released depleted mantle melts, with a minor role played by crustal components, accelerated the thinning of the continental crust in an extensional regime such as continental rift in the C–SaSZ during the Jurassic. This rift was responsible for the sequential injection of mafic magma with a wide range of magma mixing and mingling in southern Ghorveh during the Late Jurassic. As a result, we observed a wide range of intrusive rocks from gabbro to granite with different compositions, which included some clear mixing and hybrid textures. This finding demonstrated how the released mantle melt formed a thicker crust in western Iran.Granitoid rocks are the main component of crustal material and have been generated in different tectonic settings since the Early Archean to present day during Earth’s evolution ( Granitoids have represented an important subject in Iranian geology over recent years and involve two main topics: the first concerns the petrology and geodynamics of granite bodies and the crustal evolution of Iran’s microcontinents, and the second concerns precious elements such as gold, copper, and tungsten, which are related to the injection of granite bodies into the continental crust. The Sanandaj–Sirjan zone (SaSZ) in western Iran is located between the Zagros crush zone in the west and the Urmiah Dokhtar magmatic arc (UDMA) in the east, and presents various granite types with different tectonic settings in western Iran since the Proterozoic ( In this research, we clarify the ages and geodynamics of some Late Jurassic granitoid bodies in the central part of the SaSZ (C–SaSZ) in southern Ghorveh. These intrusive bodies are known as the Meiham and Takieh–Shirvaneh bodies, the names of which come from the names of local village. We report on new zircon U–Pb ages for five samples, and the chemical and Sr-Nd isotopic compositions for 26 whole–rock samples that varied from gabbroic to granitic type rock. Based on our results, we suggest a new scenario for the evolution of the granitoid-gabbroic and dioritic bodies in the C–SaSZ that considers the magma processes that occurred in this area, thus illustrating how magma sequential injections may have controlled the rock varieties in the C–SaSZ during the Late Jurassic. The Iranian plateau is part of the Alpine–Himalayan orogenic belt, and is mainly the conjunction of a few microcontinents that are separated by deep faults ( The SaSZ is one of the main granitoid zones in Iran, and is situated between the Zagros thrust fault and the UDMA in western Iran ( The Meiham-Shirvaneh intrusive is a part of the third stage of intrusive that occurred during the Jurassic. Although no radiometric dating has been performed, some chemical relationships to the post-collision tectonic regime and an affinity to S–type granite have been observed. The Meiham-Shirvaneh intrusive is exposed in the southern Ghorveh in western Iran ( The Meiham–Shirvaneh intrusive with a rough morphology and blade shape ( The mafic to intermediate rocks from the Meiham intrusive, which included gabbro, diorite and monzodiorite, showed a granular texture and were mainly composed of plagioclase, clinopyroxene, and alkali feldspars with some hornblende and quartz as minor minerals ( The felsic rocks from the Meiham–Takieh–Shirvaneh area, which included quartz monzonite, monzonite, synogranite, and monzogranite, did not show any mineralogical differences between both groups ( After petrographic examination, 26 rock samples were crushed and powdered for chemical and Sr-Nd isotope analyses. Major oxides were measured by X–ray fluorescence analysis using a Rigaku ZSX Primus II spectrometer at Nagoya University (Japan). Concentrations of trace elements including rare earth elements (REEs) were obtained using an inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer (ICP–MS, Agilent 7700x) at Nagoya University. The Five rock samples were selected for zircon dating. The samples were crushed and then passed through 60 and 80 mesh sieves before being rinsed by tap water and distilled water. After heavy liquid and handpicked separations, the zircon grains were mounted in epoxy resin and polished. In order to examine the internal structure of the zircons and targeting spots for U–Pb dating, cathodoluminescence (CL) and back–scattered electron (BSE) images were obtained with a scanning electron microscope (SEM, JEOL JSM–6510LV) equipped with a CL system (GATAN Mini CL) at Nagoya University. The selected points were shot by laser ablation (LA)–ICP–MS with a spot diameter of 25 μm to measure isotope ratios for Pb, U, and Th. During the measurement, NIST SRM 610 glass standard ( We selected five samples (MOD–1(35° 04′ 15.2˝N, 047 ° 51′ 12.5˝E) SHG–1 (34° 58′ 57.0˝N, 047 ° 52′ 34.5˝E), SHG–7 (34° 59′ 47.3˝N, 047 ° 52′ 09.3˝E), SHG–10 (34° 58′ 45.5˝N, 047 ° 50′ 21.5˝E), and SHG–16 (34° 57′ 43.4˝N, 047 ° 52′ 35.9˝E)) from different diorite–granitoids and collected more than 50 zircon grains for each rock. After selecting good grains and taking BSE and CL images, the shot points were determined before analysis by LA–ICP–MS. The CL images presented prismatic and oscillatory textures for the SHG–1 and SHG–16 samples ( The U–Pb isotope ratios of the zircon grains for the five samples are listed in Supplementary Table DR1. The mean The results of 26 samples from intrusive rocks in the study area are listed in Harker diagrams illustrate the decreases in TiO Additionally, the Harker diagrams in Some gabbroic samples with < 53 wt% SiO For samples (excluding gabbroic rocks) with a higher SiO Sr and Nd isotopes for 26 samples from both of the two groups are shown in For the three gabbroic rocks (SiO The The Nd model ages (T The granitic bodies in the SaSZ were injected in four main stages from the Early Paleozoic to the Late Tertiary. The main magmatic activities occurred during the Middle to Late Jurassic in the SaSZ. Recent works by The Harker diagrams of major and trace elements in Two trends for the evolution of the magmatic rocks can be observed in the Harker diagrams in Some of the gabbroic rocks such as SHG–11, MOG–1 and MOM–3 samples have higher MgO, FeO, Ni, Cr, and Co contents and a lower SiO Based on the discrimination diagrams for the tectonic setting of the main bodies, the Meiham group had an affinity with the volcanic arc field in the Based on the new ages, whole-rock chemical compositions, and Sr–Nd isotope ratios determined in the present study, we propose a new geodynamic model for the evolution of bimodal mafic and acidic rocks of the same age in the C–SaSZ in southern Ghorveh. The propagating rift model was recently proposed for intrusive rocks in the C–SaSZ by Based on the results of the whole–rock chemical and Sr–Nd isotope compositions for the mafic rocks, the depleted mantle represents a good candidate for the rock source. The thinning of the continental crust in an extensional tectonic regime is considered to have been the main mechanism for the development of these rocks in the C–SaSZ as inferred by i) the large sequences of the Multistage magma injection forced the mixing and mingling of magma with a large variety of the rock types in this area. Based on our schematic model ( The granitoid bodies show a ring structure on the The mafic-intermediate and acidic rocks in southern Ghorveh were crystallized 154–146 Ma during the Late Jurassic, which is the same as the formation ages of the main granitoids in the C-SaSZ. In addition, the mixing and mingling of magma are the main events that were suggested by the intermediate rocks, especially in the central part of the pluton, which confirms that magma mixing played a key role in the variation of these rocks. The positive ε The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. We would like to thank A. Maghsodloo, F. Rezaei, and F. Nouri for fieldwork and technical assistance. We also thank S. Wallis for providing support with zircon BSE and CL photos. H. Azizi would like to thank Institute for Space-Earth Environmental Research (ISEE) and Graduate School of Environmental Studies at Nagoya University, Japan. All chemical analyses, U-Pb dating, and discussion were supported by Prof. Koshi Yamamoto at the Geochemistry Laboratory, Nagoya University. All authors would like to dedicate this work to him because he has supported us for more than 10 years. A part of this work was financially supported by the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: 