Paleomagnetic data provide one of the few probes available to interrogate early evolution of the core. Here we apply this probe by examining the latitudinal dependence of paleosecular variation (PSV) data derived from high-quality paleomagnetic data collected from Proterozoic and Neoarchean rocks. These data define a Neoarchean geomagnetic field that was more dipolar than that during Proterozoic times, indicating a change in core conditions. The signals observed may reflect a change in forcing of the dynamo and an early onset of inner core growth. We propose a model that links evolution of the core, mantle and crust in three principal phases: (i) Before approximately 3.5Ga, an entirely liquid core may not have hosted a geodynamo. If heat transport was sufficient across the core–mantle boundary, however, a geodynamo could have been generated. If so, sources in the shallow outer core could have been more important for generating the dynamo relative to deeper convection, resulting in a field that was less dipolar than that generated in later times. (ii) Cooling of the lower mantle between ca. 2 and 3.5 billion years ago was promoted by deep subduction and possibly coincided with inner core growth. The geodynamo during this episode was deeply-seated producing a highly dipolar surface magnetic field. (iii) After ca. 2 billion years ago, continued subduction led to large-scale core–mantle boundary compositional and heat flux heterogeneity. With these changes, shallow core contributions to the geomagnetic field grew in importance, resulting in a less dipolar field.There is currently much debate over the nature of Earth’s early core. For example, estimates for the onset of solid inner core nucleation range from times younger than 1 Although lava flow sequences have yielded high resolution PSV values for the last 5 million years (e.g., We have identified two Precambrian time windows where global igneous units allow a new assessment (  As opposed to the small, select Matachewan dike data set used by In all selected studies, the maximum deviation of VGPs from the mean paleopole did not exceed 35°. Therefore the application of a constant cutoff angle of 45° commonly used to exclude transitional VGPs (e.g., We split the Precambrian dataset into two age groups at ∼2.2 Any individual Proterozoic or Neoarchean Directions from extrusives are usually obtained from spatially limited stratigraphic sections and these may be particularly prone to undersampling of the field due to rapid lava emplacement. In contrast, studies of dikes often represent greater spatial sampling and are less likely to sample extremely short magmatic pulses. To further test our conclusions, we fit Model G to the intrusive data sets only ( According to the Model G (Eq. When compared with data for the last 5 million years ( There are several processes that could be recorded by the PSV signal. Forcing of the dynamo could have changed in the absence of inner core growth (e.g., First, a potential problem with relying on conditions at the core–mantle boundary alone to account for the signal we have observed relates to the overall dipolarity of the signal. Notwithstanding models which do predict dipolar fields (e.g., In contrast to arbitrarily changing forcing, a simpler way to ensure large scale flows consistent with a highly dipolar field is to have a source of compositionally-driven buoyancy at depth, namely the onset of inner core growth. We emphasize that the principal effect of inner core growth we call upon here is buoyancy, not geometry ( We outline the following three-stage scenario of core evolution ( The relatively old inner core age implied by our PSV analysis favors radioactive heat sources in the core ( We thank R.D. Cottrell for discussions and for preparation of figures. We also thank U. Christensen and A.J. Biggin for their constructive reviews. This research was funded by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at  