Computer vision-based flotation reagent control (FRC) is a nonintrusive, cost-effective, and reliable technique for changing a deviated flotation status to an optimal status, which produces a product at the target concentrate grade and recovery. It is known that deep froth image features can depict the complex behavior of the froth layer comprehensively and accurately. However, it is still a major challenge to use high-dimensional deep features to construct FRC controllers. In this study, a novel FRC method based on memory networks is proposed. First, a convolutional neural network-based image encoder is constructed to extract deep froth image features. Then, a key–value structured memory network is designed to learn heuristic rules relating deep froth image features to the corresponding corrective operation actions for the reagents. The proposed method can be incrementally updated without catastrophic forgetting and can explore time-series information and changing patterns of froth surface appearance. Additionally, it can handle input images whose size is variable. Experiments using real-world production data verified the effectiveness of the proposed FRC method. In addition, industrial experiments in a real lead–zinc flotation plant in China demonstrated that the new method could obtain reliable flotation process control.Froth flotation is a vital mineral concentration process. It takes advantage of the hydrophobicity of liberated minerals and causes these minerals to separate from each other and from the slurry they are in. Specifically, small bubbles are used as the medium, which selectively attaches to hydrophobic particles and carries these particles to the pulp surface to form a froth layer. This kind of separation is based on the fact that flotation reagents such as frothers, activators, and collectors can change the bubble size and the hydrophobicity of particles ( Various kinds of hand-crafted image features have been designed to describe froth surface behavior, such as bubble size distribution ( Compared to low-dimensional hand-crafted image features, deep features can depict the complex behavior of the froth layer more comprehensively and accurately. Although the deep features learned by a CNN can be easily utilized to implement flotation process monitoring, such as froth grade estimation and working condition recognition, it is a significant challenge to formulate high-dimensional deep features in an FRC controller. For example, to calculate a control sequence to optimize the objective function of model predictive control (MPC), a quadratic function must be solved ( In this study, a novel FRC method based on memory networks ( There are two more difficulties in implementing memory network-based FRC due to frequent changes in physical and/or chemical feed slurry characteristics: first, in the froth layer movement, the froth surface behavior changes continuously and gradually with certain trends. It is believed that the changing patterns and the changing trend of froth surface behavior are related to the performance of flotation circuits. Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) can be used to analyze the changing pattern of froth surface behavior and write the result to key memories ( The second difficulty is the incremental learning of new flotation working conditions. In the flotation industry, raw ore is usually purchased from different mine sites, and the gangue property of raw ore from the same mine can vary from one location to another location. New ore can result in new working conditions, and thus more and more new working conditions will appear in continuous flotation production. When new working conditions are largely different from the training data of the controller, the control performance will deteriorate heavily ( To handle these two difficulties, a fully convolutional neuralnetwork-based temporal explorer is developed ( In summary, the main contributions of the paper are as follows: (1) a novel framework that uses high-dimensional deep image features to implement FRC is proposed; (2) a novel timed key-value memory network is developed to learn the operational knowledge relating flotation status and reagents. It can be incrementally updated without catastrophic forgetting; (3) a fully convolutional neural network-based temporal explorer is developed, which can exploit time-series information and changing patterns of froth surface appearance. Combining computer vision and intelligent control techniques can provide a nonintrusive, cost-effective, and reliable technique for FRC ( Expert control does not require precise mathematical modeling of the system or complex computations. It requires empirical knowledge to understand system behavior. For example, in The theory of MPC has matured considerably. However, according to its practitioners, difficulties in modeling the dynamic process of flotation limit the performance and applicability of MPC ( The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section Froth flotation plays an extremely important role in the mineral concentration process. It takes advantage of the hydrophobicity of liberated minerals and causes these minerals to separate from one another and from the slurry they are in. Generally, the ore is first ground to a size such that desired minerals can be liberated from the gangue. Next, liberated minerals will be conditioned as the slurry by the injection of moderate flotation reagents. These reagents can change the metallurgical performance of flotation. Specifically, the foaming agent can stabilize small bubbles, the activator can attach itself to the surface of the minerals to allow other reagents to react to it, and the collector can change the hydrophobicity of the mineral surface. The conditioned slurry is transported to a circuit of flotation banks to produce the concentrate product. A schematic of the self-priming flotation bank is shown in    Convolutional layers in a CNN are parameterized according to the size and the number of kernels, skipping factors and parameters of kernels. Each layer has A subsampling layer (typically with average or max pooling) is periodically inserted between successive convolutional layers. Its function is to progressively reduce the spatial size of the feature map to reduce the number of parameters and the computation burden in the network and hence to control overfitting. Generally, at the backend of the convolutional neural network, a global average pooling layer that takes the average of each feature map as output is used to reduce the dimensionality of the feature map from 3D to 1D. This output is usually taken as the learned deep features of the input image. After the global average pooling layer, there may be any number of fully connected layers. Neurons in a fully connected layer have full connections to all activations in the previous layer. In a regression task, the prediction outputs are a linear combination of the outputs of the final fully connected layer. The key-value memory network model has proven useful for a variety of document reading and question answering tasks (  Key Addressing: During addressing, the system assigns each candidate memory a relevance probability by comparing the question to each key: Value Reading: In the final reading step, the values of the memories are read by taking their weighted sum using the addressing probabilities, and the vector   The CNN is trained end-to-end. To learn a deep froth image encoder, the GoogLeNet is trained in a task of froth image-based grade estimation. Since the original GoogLeNet is used for 1000 classes of classification, it cannot be directly used for grade estimation. As shown in Once the grade sensor is successfully trained end-to-end, the output of the last average pooling layer is recognized as a good representation of the input froth image, i.e., the deep froth image features are the output of the last average pooling layer. Thus, the image encoder is the modified GoogLeNet without the single-output fully connected regression layer.     The reliability of the FRC knowledge repository represented by the key-value structured memory depends on the mapping function    The mapping function  In the     By adding flotation statuses that cannot be well controlled to a new assigned memory slot of the controller, the memory size will be incrementally increased. In other words, the dimensions of the inputs ( The control action employing temporal information of the froth surface is: To discuss the convergence of the key-value structured memory, the discrete Lyapunov function candidate is defined as ( To record froth appearance videos in the country’s largest lead–zinc froth flotation plant, an industrial RGB camera was mounted on a flotation machine of the first zinc rougher banks. Videos were delivered to an industrial computer through an optical fiber, and a computer vision-based froth flotation monitoring platform programmed in Visual Studio and MATLAB was installed on the industrial computer. Videos captured continuously from July 10, 2017, to September 24, 2017, were used to train and test the newly developed methods. The concentrate grades (zinc, lead, and iron) in this period were tested by an online X-ray fluorescent analyzer every 20 min. In this period, zinc concentrate grade varied between 44.5150% and 57.4997%. Feed grades, such as zinc, lead and iron, varied between 5.98% and 11.12%, 0.39% and 2.13%, 20.86% and 27.77%, respectively. A total of 5544 industry samples were collected. Three types of chemical reagents (flotation oil, CuSO2, and xanthate) added to the first zinc rougher in this period were also recorded, and their average values were 35.6 ml/min, 2300.1 ml/min, and 3116.2 ml/min, respectively.  To evaluate the control performance, three criteria, maximum absolute error (MAE), root mean squared error (RMSE), and the qualified ratio of concentrate grade (QR), were used; they are defined as follows  In this section, the performance of TKV-MemNN-based FRC is tested by comparing it to two existing typical computer vision-based FRC methods using historical industry data: the least-squares support vector machine-based model predictive controller (LSSVM-MPC) (  LSSVM-MPC – First, an LSSVM-based process model that describes the relationship between flotation reagents and froth surface appearance is constructed. Based on this model, a reagent feedback controller is constructed using the MPC strategy. Then, to compensate for disturbances, a fuzzy control-based feedforward compensator is designed and incorporated into the feedback controller. IT2-FC – First, the addition rates of reagents are preset according to the feed grade type based on the operational pattern method. Then, an interval type-II fuzzy controller is designed to finetune reagents using froth surface appearance. In LSSVM-MPC, reagent dosages are deduced by solving a constrained optimization problem. In IT2-FC, reagent dosages are optimized by a fuzzy logic-based feedback controller. Reagent dosages calculated by these two methods can be different from dosages derived by experienced operators. Thus, the reagent dosage bias between manual control and automatic control cannot be used to evaluate the performance of TKV-MemNN, LSSVM-MPC, and IT2-FC. The purpose of FRC is to control the concentrate grade to the setpoint. If a concentrate grade predictor, which can predict future concentrate grade by giving feed conditions, deep froth image features, and flotation reagents deduced by the FRC controller, is available, the performance of FRC controllers can be evaluated by calculating the deviation between predicted concentrate grade and the setpoint. Based on Detailed results of FRC comparison experiments using historical industry data are summarized in  In this study, a novel high-dimensional deep feature-based FRC method named TKV-MemNN was developed. Heuristic rules relating image features to the corrective operation actions for the corresponding reagents were summarized and stored in the key-value structured memory. In the testing phase, control actions were calculated by addressing and reading relevant memories. The advantages of the proposed method were verified by comparing it with three other computer vision-based FRC methods. Also, industry experiments demonstrated its reliability and effectiveness in practical application. There are four key reasons why the TKV-MemNN performs better than its competitors. First, a CNN network is used to learn deep feature representations for froth images in the image encoding module. Second, the time-series information of feed conditions and image features are fully exploited by the temporal information exploration module. Third, comprehensive heuristic rules are learned by the key-value structured memory. Last and most important, the TKV-MemNN can adapt to time-varying behaviors in flotation processes by incrementally updating its memory. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work is supported by