The McGill consensus statement on overdentures (14) was published following a symposium held at McGill University in Montreal, Canada in 2002. A panel of relevant experts in the field stated that: The evidence currently available suggests that the restoration of the edentulous mandible with a conventional denture is no longer the most appropriate first choice prosthodontic treatment. There is now overwhelming evidence that a two-implant overdenture should become the first choice of treatment for the edentulous mandible (14). In 2009, a further consensus statement was released as a support and follow-up to the McGill consensus statement. This report was jointly created by members of the BSSPD (British Society for the Study of Prosthetic Dentistry) Council and the panel of presenters at the BSSPD conference in York, UK in April 2009 (15). This report also highlighted that since the McGill statement in 2002, uptake by dentists of implant technology for complete denture wearers has been slow.
                  The York statement concluded that ‘a substantial body of evidence is now available demonstrating that patients’ satisfaction and quality of life with ISOD mandibular overdentures is significantly greater than for conventional dentures. Much of this data comes from randomised controlled trials (15).
                  Whilst it is accepted that the two-implant overdenture is not the gold standard of implant therapy it is the minimum standard that should be sufficient for most people, taking into account performance, patient satisfaction, cost and clinical time.The default treatment for the edentulous patient is conventional dentures (complete removable maxillary and mandibular dentures). These factors cause a range of problems. Many patients experience pain when eating and chewing and are often concerned about the denture moving when eating, speaking or laughing and report fears about the negative effect of dentures on social situations. Implant-supported overdentures (ISOD's) offer better stability and retention of the mandibular denture and better chewing function. Patients also report greater satisfaction with aesthetics because the denture is not visibly moving. In 1998, 13% of adults overall and 58% of adults aged 75 and over in the UK were edentulous Whilst rates of edentulism are falling in most Western countries population demographics are changing; as people live longer there will be an increasing proportion of people in the older age group, the group most likely to need dentures. The McGill consensus statement on overdentures The York statement concluded that ‘a substantial body of evidence is now available demonstrating that patients’ satisfaction and quality of life with ISOD mandibular overdentures is significantly greater than for conventional dentures. Much of this data comes from randomised controlled trials’. Whilst it is accepted that the two-implant overdenture is not the gold standard of implant therapy it is the minimum standard that should be sufficient for most people, taking into account performance, patient satisfaction, cost and clinical time. This paper aims to present the current evidence and rationale to support the McGill and York consensus statements. Patient perceptions of treatment outcome are one of the most important factors to take into account when planning treatment programmes. Additionally, the in-depth data obtained from qualitative interviews with patients about their experience of edentulousness and prosthetic rehabilitation with either CD's or ISOD's is presented, along with information about nutritional and economic factors. A recently published systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials A total of 10 manuscripts on 7 randomised controlled trials were included in the meta-analyses. The sample sizes in these trials varied from 60 to 157 participants. The age range of those involved in the studies was 35–80 years. All patients wore conventional maxillary complete dentures and either mandibular implant-retained or conventional complete dentures. Outcomes were included with a follow up period of at least 2 months. General satisfaction of participants in the studies was measured using 100 For the effect of mandibular prostheses on patient-assessed oral health-related quality of life the meta-analysis included only studies using OHIP as the measurement instrument. By contrast for the effect of treatment on perceived general health QoL only one article was found which used a general measurement instrument. The SF-36 questionnaire was used but no differences were found between groups on any subscale. As no other study used a similar scoring method no further processing of the data was undertaken. The analyses illustrate that patient general satisfaction and oral health related quality of life is greater with mandibular ISODs than conventional dentures. However, the authors comment that the studies included ranged greatly in factors such as population, length of the study and assessment of outcomes and that heterogeneity of outcomes was observed. The systematic review discussed above A systematic review of studies with objectively measured masticatory performance as an outcome was published in 2007. This review looked at all studies regardless of the number of implants used for support. In 7 studies, ISOD's were retained by two implants This systematic review concluded that ISOD's provide significant improvements in masticatory performance compared to CD's for both the mandible and maxilla for those having persistent functional problems with an existing mandibular CD due to a severely resorbed mandible. As the McGill and York consensus statements solely relate to two-implant retained overdentures, data from the individual RCT's that have assessed masticatory function with ISOD s have been separated out are presented in The review also reported that the type of implant and attachment system for mandibular ISOD's has limited impact on masticatory function. This conclusion was based on 2 RCT's (3 papers) The benefits of combining both quantitative and qualitative data in health care research are now well-established. Trials that have used patient-based assessment of outcomes usually use instruments developed by clinicians so that the outcomes measured are those that are assessed as important by clinicians, not necessarily by patients. Sometimes, the instruments used to measure outcomes have not specifically been developed for populations with dentures. For example, the SF-36 questionnaire The qualitative data that has been published in relation to edentulousness and prosthetic rehabilitation highlights in particular the social restrictions that dentures can impose on patients. The increased social confidence that ISOD's can provide is the major benefit of ISOD's as perceived by many patients. Being able to eat foods they wish to eat, with people they wish to eat with and in places where they wish to eat are fundamental to day to day life. This is important to patients as it has been well documented that lack of social interaction is related to serious health problems including depression Those with conventional dentures often avoid certain foods because of difficulties with chewing and biting. Poor diet in older people is implicated in cardiovascular disease, arthritis, osteoporosis and cognitive decline. Other studies have shown no differences in food selection between those who received ISOD's or CD's Whilst the cost of ISOD's is more than that of CD's the difference is less when the overall lifespan of the dentures and indirect costs are considered. In a RCT of 60 edentulous patients aged 65–75 (ISOD, It has been shown that the time taken for the prosthodontist to treat a patient with ISOD's is not significantly different from the time to treat a patient with CD's. Arguably ISOD's will have more long term maintenance cost than conventional dentures but conventional denture wearers seek denture replacement more frequently. There is now a large body of evidence that supports the proposal that a 2-implant supported mandibular overdenture should be the minimum offered to edentulous patients as a first choice of treatment. There is evidence from systematic reviews and a large number of RCT's that have used patient-based assessment of outcomes such as patient satisfaction and oral-health related quality of life that consistently shows that patients perceive ISOD's to have benefits over conventional complete dentures. Additional evidence comes from in-depth qualitative interviews with patients. This evidence also shows clearly the real benefits of improved confidence in social situations for patients with ISOD's as well as in eating function. Other evidence for the benefits of ISOD's comes from objective measures of masticatory efficiency that show that ISOD's provides significant improvement in masticatory performance compared to CD's for both the mandible and maxilla for those having persistent functional problems with an existing mandibular CD due to a severely resorbed mandible. There are some methodological limitations in trials of implant therapy versus conventional dentures. However, taking into account these limitations, there are sufficient studies now using satisfaction and oral-health-related quality of life outcomes to demonstrate that the evidence consistently points to real advantages of ISOD's for rehabilitation of the edentulous mandible compared to CD's as assessed by patients. The evidence supports the McGill and York consensus statements that mandibular implants should be the first choice of treatment for the edentulous mandible. Whilst patient choice should be taken into account, The minimum standards of training recommended for dentists wishing to undertake implant treatment have been set out in the document ‘Training Standards in Implant Dentistry for General Dental Practitioners’. There is also a need to fully incorporate the teaching of the skills required for delivering and maintaining implant retained prostheses into the undergraduate dental curriculum so that newly qualified general dentists are confident and competent in the treatment and maintenance of patients with implant retained prostheses. There is now overwhelming evidence to support the proposal that a two-implant overdenture should become the first choice of treatment for the edentulous mandible. The next task is to identify and overcome barriers for the delivery of this care for the benefit of edentulous patients. The authors recognise the support and encouragement provided by Association of Dental Implantology UK in the development of this paper.