The karstic system in Aïn Khamouda (Central Tunisia) has been briefly exploited for its Pb–Zn mineralization in the first 20years of the 20th century. Since then, little work has been dedicated to this system, apart from some detailed mineralogical studies. Here we place the Aïn Khamouda karsts in their regional geological framework, which is marked by the presence of large basinal-scale MVT Pb–Zn deposit (e.g. at the Djebel Chambi, ∼10km to the south of the study area). The karsts are deepening along faults in Turonian–Coniacian limestone (the Douleb Fm), under a Tortonian sandy cover (the Beglia sand) that is withdrawn within the karst infilling. This makes a Tortonian or post-Tortonian age for the karstification likely, as for other comparable karsts located to the northwest of the study area, in the Algerian Constantinois. In Aïn Khamouda, the mineralization sequence is a variant of the classical gypsum→iron oxide→silicates sequence, with some specific characteristics inherited from the regional Pb–Zn background: a 7Å Zn-clay (berthierine) has been identified, mixed with halloysite, and calamine minerals (hemimorphite, smithsonite) are found in voids and fractures within the karstic system. Undersaturated meteoric fluids flowing downward meet pre-existing or recently formed base metals sulphides, in the subsurface. In the Aïn Khamouda area, the downward deepening of karsts along major regional faults brings meteoric fluids in contact with base metal sulphides. The oxidation of base metals sulphides results in the release of sulphuric acid, which also accounts for an increased karstification. Late processes occurring in the Beglia sand appear to be complex, though somewhat anecdotic in terms of volumes. They essentially consist in recurring cycles of reduction (among which biochemical reduction of galena) and oxidation (including the formation of jarosite). The study area offers the opportunity to investigate (1) a karstic system where deepening caves meet pre-existing base metal sulphides, and (2) the consequences this specific setting has, in terms of minerals found within the karst: presence of Zn-bearing clays (berthierine), formation of calamine minerals, minor cycling of lead in the late phases.Aïn Khamouda was known as a Pb–Zn deposit since 1899, and has been shortly exploited between 1902 and 1920. Rapid ore shortage and low metal content led to the abandonment of mining activities ( However, if minerals recovered in Aïn Khamouda have been studied in some detail, no genetic/mineralization model(s) were ever proposed to explain their genesis, nor that of widespread iron oxides. Such a model is proposed in this study, and involves considerations on the karst formation, metal cycling from a regional background stock, and neo-formed base metal minerals associated to the karstification. The purpose of the study is to investigate the karst formation process and the influence of the regional Pb–Zn background on the infilling and the neo-formed minerals in the karstic system. In this context, some attention is paid also to the unusual clay minerals neo-formed in the caves: halloysite and berthierine. The Aïn Khamouda mineralized karsts are located in Central Tunisia, some 15 The study area belongs to a vast area where sulphide Pb–Zn ores and calamine-like deposits were already known in the post-WWII period ( Pb–Zn sulphide ores are known and described in Central and North Tunisia, in the so-called Tunisian Trough and Nappe Zone ( Such a deposit is known in the study area, at Djebel Chambi, some 10 Calamine-like deposits are also known in the study area: they are most generally poorly documented, probably because of their small size and low metal content. These deposits are regionally associated to carbonate rocks (karstified or not), and they often exhibit as much Fe oxides as Zn minerals ( The Aïn Khamouda site lies at the intersection between the north-eastern limit of the Foussana graben and the northern limit of the Djebel Semmama, at the contact between Mio-Pliocene sediments (sand/sandstone) and Cretaceous limestone. The carbonates are Upper Turonian to Lower Coniacian in age, and belong to the Douleb Fm ( The studied caves/karsts are dug within the Douleb Fm limestone, along the F1 fault plane that marks a sharp limit between Djebel Semmama and Oued Aïn Khamouda. Karstification always affects the same lower member of the Douleb Fm, consisting in a thick (several meters) limestone bar with a 15° dip to the SW, whose outcrops are salient in the landscape. The middle and upper members of the Douleb Fm are marly-carbonaceous and virtually unaffected by karstification. The karsts form along two main directions: (1) sub-parallel to the stratification and (2) along fractures, orthogonal to the stratification. Cave 0 ( These karsts are always filled with neo-formed products and Tortonian sands, belonging to the Beglia Fm ( There is unfortunately no more access to the deep mineralization in Aïn Khamouda. However, In this study, we selected 11 caves that were thoroughly investigated and numbered from 0 to 10 ( Petrographic examination of clayey and/or brittle samples required sample induration with a suitable method ( Mineralogy of the studied samples was determined by X-ray diffraction, using a diffractometer with a curved detector (INEL CPS Clay samples were further investigated, using a transmission electron microscopy (Jeol JEM 100 CX II, with an emission source of 100 The studied caves are finger-shaped karsts, developing from the F The karsts form preferentially in the lower massive limestone bar of the Upper Turonian to Lower Coniacian Douleb Fm. This carbonate host-rock is a coarse-grained limestone. Petrographic examination reveals that it is a bioclastic grainstone, with 100–500 As the Tortonian Beglia sand always fills the axial part of the caves, the karst genesis must be synchronous and/or posterior to its deposition, i.e. Miocene or post-Miocene. The specific morphology of the karsts, developing from the F Based on detailed field investigation of the studied caves, it appears that the respective volumes of mineralized layers and sandy infilling are close to 50% for each material. There is furthermore some degree of lateral variation within the mineralized layers. For instance, Fe oxides tend to dominate to the SE (caves 9 and 10), while white clays dominate toward the NW (caves 0, 2 and 4–8). The presence of cavities between the neo-formed crust and the karst wall (e.g. in cave 5) suggests that some karstification still took place after the mineralization process. Apart from these dominant neo-formed mineral phases, several samples from caves 7, 8 and 10 exhibit cm-wide mineral moulds in iron oxide material. These moulds are relics of former gypsum crystals, as confirmed by the occurrence of spearhead gypsum twins, and of pinacoid acicular crystal linings perpendicular to fissure walls. From the carbonate host-rock wall toward the axial part of the mineralized karsts, an iron oxide crust, white clays and the Beglia sand are most generally encountered ( Cave 2 allows for the examination of beige-brown iron oxide crust. This one displays a typical dm-wide boxwork pattern, (similar morphologies are known in Northern Tunisia, with a goethite infilling: Such Zn minerals correspond to the “calamine” ore mentioned by Cave 5 ( A reddish layer, about 7 A yellow powdery layer, about 4 An overall red layer, about 5 About 30–50 The paragenesis described comprises remarkable Al-bearing phases, either hydroxides (norstrandite) or unusual clays (halloysite, berthierine) ( Halloysite occurs either in bluish amygdaloidal pockets (a few cm in diameter) or dispersed within the whole-rock, where it is often mixed with norstrandite (Al(OH) Halloysite identification rests on XRD and TEM examination because XRD alone does not allow for unambiguous discrimination between halloysite and kaolinite. TEM micrographs indeed display the typical tubular and spheroidal morphologies of halloysite particles ( Berthierine [(Fe Metallic mineralization is found also within the Miocene Beglia sand/sandstone, in three settings: (1) between detrital quartz grains and their silica overgrowths (silicification of sand into sandstone); (2) in the residual porosity within the sandstone facies; and (3) in both previous settings. Jarosite (KFe A synthetic mineralization sequence is deduced from the various karsts investigated ( Gypsum is now dissolved in the studied system (contrary to other ones: Clay minerals in such cryptokarstic systems are commonly a mix of predominant kaolinite and accessory halloysite ( Eventually, base metals are also present in the axial part of the karsts, within the Beglia sand, where biogeochemical processes leads to the formation of reduced sulphide Fe- and Zn-phases. Sulphide minerals (pyrite, Fe–Zn sulphide, galena) found within the karst infilling (galena in calamine and white clay; pyrite and Fe–Zn sulphide in leached Beglia sand) are late in the system (mostly void filling). Galena in calamine and white clay results from biogeochemical reduction in overall oxidizing conditions ( The regional mineralization background is linked to the large basinal-scale MVT Pb–Zn deposit that crops out in Djebel Chambi, ∼10 Hence, the model we favour is that undersaturated meteoric downward flowing fluids meet old (pre-Miocene) inherited or recently formed (Serravallian–Tortonian) base metals sulphides, in the subsurface. In the Aïn Khamouda area, the downward deepening of karsts along major NW–SE and NE–SW faults ( Late processes appear to be complex, though somewhat anecdotic in terms of volumes. They essentially consist in recurring cycles of reduction (among which biochemical reduction: The authors benefited from a NATO Collaborative Linkage Grant dedicated to the study of “Special clays in Northern Tunisia” (Ref. 980498) for funding fieldwork. S. Decrée benefited from a FRIA (Belgian National Fund for Scientific Research) PhD Grant. Dr. J. Yans is thanked for providing useful comments in the field and on the manuscript. Dr. M. Corbella and an anonymous reviewer are thanked for their constructive comments.