This work deals with the texture, microstructure and anisotropy in mechanical behaviors of a hot rolled Ti–16Nb alloy. It exhibits low in-plane anisotropy in terms of yield strength, ultimate tensile strength and yield locus. Such an isotropy seems to arise owing to fibers present in (002), (020) and (111) pole figures. The work hardening behavior of the alloy reveals the presence of two slopes indicating that two different mechanisms are operative during tensile test. The work hardening curves follow modified Ludwik equation.Titanium and its alloys, owing to their attractive properties find a wide range of applications in aerospace, automotive, chemical and biomedical industries. Many of the components for such applications are produced by thermomechanical processing. As a consequence of this, typical textures are developed at different stages of processing. The evolution of textures has been explained by a combination of active slip systems as well as by the presence of microstructural anisotropies. The texture and anisotropy in mechanical properties of titanium and its alloys have been discussed in Refs. Titanium and its alloys are by and large processed by hot rolling in order to break the cast structure and to produce the homogeneous microstructure. Hot rolling results in strong texture due to low symmetry of the α (closed packed hexagonal (cph)) phase, which in turn induces pronounced anisotropy in mechanical properties. Such an anisotropy of titanium alloys consisting of α and α The Ti–Nb binary alloys are widely used as superconducting and aerospace applications Six hundred gram of pancake of the alloy Ti–16Nb was prepared by non-consumable arc melting. The charge was melted repeatedly for six times to ensure chemical homogeneity. The analyzed chemistry was found to be Ti 83.6 (atom %), Nb 16.4 (atom %), O 1010 The texture was measured on sheet specimen of the hot rolled material of 25 The 3D-Optical microstructure of the hot rolled Ti–16Nb alloy is shown in The engineering stress–strain curves of the hot rolled alloy in all the three directions show that the flow stress continuously increases till the point of fracture ( The log The two-slope flow behavior and associated deformation mechanisms, as mentioned above has been reported in single-phase materials The yield locus of the experimental alloy is shown in It is evident from Low in-plane anisotropy in hot rolled titanium alloys has been attributed to development of basal texture in α (cph) phase The present alloy mainly consists of the α″ phase, which exhibits low % in-plane anisotropy (0.34%). The (0 A correlation amongst texture, in-plane anisotropy in tensile properties and yield locus has been established. It has been shown that work hardening curves of the alloy in three different sample directions exhibit two slopes indicating the occurrence of two different mechanisms during tensile test and follow the modified Ludwik equation. The authors are grateful to