The effects of varying silicon carbide on the hardness values of heat-treated Al–Si–Fe/SiC particulate composites have been investigated. The 5–25% SiC additions were used for the production of different grades of Al–Si–Fe/SiC particulate composites. The composites samples were solution heat-treated at 500°C for 3h and quenched in warm water at 65°C, aged at 100, 200 and 300°C with various ageing time between 60 and 660min at 60min interval. Hardness measurements were made using Rockwell hardness tester. Experimental correlations obtained between the varying silicon carbide addition, heat-treatment parameters and the hardness values were analyzed using kinetic of ageing and factorial analysis (2K). The results show that hardness increases with increasing percentage of silicon carbide addition in the alloy and decreases with increasing ageing time. These results, which are in agreement with the experimental findings for these ageing time and temperatures. The increases in hardness values during ageing are attributed to formation of a coherent and uniform precipitation of the second phase in the matrix of the metal. A substantial improvement in hardness has been achieved in the reinforced metal matrices produced.The age hardening characteristics of an alloy are generally modified by the introduction of reinforcement. These modifications are due to the manufacturing process, the reactivity between the reinforcement and the matrix, the size, the morphology and volume fraction of the reinforcement The size, morphology and volume fraction of the reinforcement, are factors controlling the plasticity and the thermal residual stresses in the matrix. The sink effect due to interfaces introduced by the presence of the reinforcement may also play an important role in precipitation kinetics. The manufacturing process may lead to different microstructures, which would also modify the precipitation kinetics. The reactivity between the reinforcement and the matrix during the elaboration process and during the high temperature solution treatment may lead to a modification of the composition of the matrix Magnesium is highly reactive with silica in the temperature range 500–550 Ageing heat-treatment is the most commonly used heat-treatment to improve the properties of a conventional alloy, until now, not much is known on the hardening characteristics of metal matrix composites as compared to the conventional alloy. Hence, there is need for research to be carried out in this very important area. The objective of this present study, therefore is to find out correlations between varying silicon carbide, heat-treatment parameters and the hardness values using kinetic of ageing and factorial analysis (2K) to analyze the ageing characteristics of Al–Si–Fe/SiC particulate composites. The experimental materials used in this study are: high purity aluminium electrical wire obtained from Northern Cable Company NOCACO (Kaduna); ferrosilicon, silicon carbide with average particle size of 10 The equipment used in this study included: pyrometer, mechanical stirrer, crucible, electrical resistance furnace, Rockwell hardness tester and metallurgical microscope. The synthesis of the metal matrix composite that was use in this study was produced using double stir-casting method at the Foundry Shop of the National Metallurgical Development Center, Jos, Nigeria. The samples were produced by keeping the percentage of iron and silicon constant and varying the SiC particles in the range 5–25 Ageing of the test samples was carried out at temperatures of 100, 200 and 300 Hardness was determined using the Rockwell hardness test machine. The indenter used was a 1.56 Metallographic specimens were cut from the as cast and age hardened samples of the Al–Si–Fe/SiC particulate composite. The cut samples were mounted in Bakelite, and mechanically ground progressively on grades of SiC impregnated emery paper (80–600 Arrhenius analysis of ageing kinetics in aluminium-based metal matrix composites (MMCs) was used to determine the kinetics parameters The logarithmic form of equation is given as: Two levels of each of the three factors were used for the statistical analysis. The levels for the three factors are entered in The microstructure of both as-cast and heat-treated composites are shown in plates The microstructure reveals that there are small discontinuities and a reasonably uniform distribution of SiC particulates. The ceramic phase is shown as dark phase, while the metal phase is white. However, there an agglomeration and segregation of SiC particles in the microscale with alloy reinforced with 25% SiC particle (see The ageing response (variation of hardness with time) of the composites for all five-volume fractions of the silicon carbide-reinforcing phase in the metal-matrix is shown in In comparison with the unreinforced alloy, a substantial improvement in hardness has been achieved in the reinforced metal matrices. It is noteworthy that in the reinforced aluminium alloy metal-matrix, as the volume fraction of silicon carbide in the aluminium alloy metal-matrix increases, there is a monotonic reduction in the time required to reach peak hardness. The addition of silicon carbide reinforcement to the alloy metal-matrix increases the dislocation density at the particles–matrix interfaces The formation and presence of precipitates at the particles–matrix interfaces may be appreciated by comparing micrographs of the composite in the as-cast state (see Large mismatch in the expansion coefficient of the silicon carbide reinforcement in the alloy matrix, which is responsible for, increased density of dislocations From the result of factorial design, the %wt of SiC appears to be the most important variable with main effect of 5.63 The estimated interactions between temperature and %wt of SiC, temperature and time, %wt of SiC and time, and then between the three factors temperature, %wt of SiC and time are −0.25 From the statistical analysis results, %wt of SiC and time are the most important parameter in the ageing of Al–Si–Fe/SiC particulate composites. From the results of the research, the following conclusions can be made: The result of the hardness values and activation energy of diffusion obtained from ageing of Al–Si–Fe reinforced with silicon carbide increased with increase ins the weight fraction of silicon carbide and accelerate the kinetic to ageing. The increase in the hardness values of the composites is due to the precipitates of the second phase during ageing which cover the surface at the particles–matrix interfaces The results obtained from the statistical analysis are in agreement with the experimental findings for these ageing time and temperatures. It was found that hardness increases with increasing weight fraction of silicon carbide in the alloy and decreases with increasing ageing time after the peak ageing time have exceeded. The Authors acknowledge with thanks the management of the National Metallurgical Development Centre, Jos, Nigeria for allowing us used their equipments. We also like to acknowledge the support and encouragement given by Dr. S.A Yaro and M.U. Suleiman during the production of the research material. See