Preparation of titania compounds by double-reductive hydrochloric acid leaching of ilmenite concentrate is reported. A rod-shaped nanostructure titania compound was obtained via centrifugation of leach liquors as a by-product. The liquors of leaching experiments were subjected to zetasizer test. The suspended particles in leach liquors were investigated using SEM and TEM analysis. The results revealed that the rod-shaped particles were smaller than 100nm in width. The XRD analysis verified the formation of rutile and pseudorutile phases as main phases. Regarding to the XRF analysis, The TiO2 content of ilmenite increased from 33% in ilmenite concentrate to about 80% in the products containing some constituents such as Fe2O3, SiO2 and Al2O3.Rutile is widely used in various industries such as production of white pigment, ceramics and extraction of metal titanium. Due to lack of natural rutile, new processes have been developed to prepare synthetic rutile from ilmenite concentrate replacing natural rutile in TiO Physical and chemical properties of nanomaterials are significantly different from their corresponding bulk materials encouraging scientists to develop various procedures for synthesis of advanced materials in nanoscale. In recent years, scientists have introduced new methods to prepare nanosize synthetic rutile or other titania compounds from low-priced raw materials such as ilmenite concentrate directly. A combination of mechanical activation and reductive leaching of ilmenite concentrate was used to produce nanosize synthetic rutile from ilmenite concentrate ( An ilmenite concentrate sample with a particle size of − The chemical composition of ilmenite concentrate and products of each step were analysed using X-ray fluorescence (XRF) spectrometry (ARL 8410 SEQUENTIAL). The X-ray diffraction analysis was performed by Philips DW3710 instrument applying Cu Kα radiation at 50 The major phase of the ilmenite concentrate characterized by XRD analysis reported in literature was hexagonal structure of FeTiO The extraction of iron and titanium from ilmenite concentrate during leaching and simultaneous hydrolysis of dissolved titanium plays a prominent role in the conversion of ilmenite concentrate to synthetic rutile or a titania compound. The XRF results indicated that the products synthesised had main components such as Fe The mixed leach liquor was analysed by zetasizer to examine the size distribution of suspended particles ( SEM micrograph of separated particles from leach liquors demonstrated that nanorods of titania compound were formed during the reductive leaching steps and were suspended in leach liquors ( The double-reductive leaching of ilmenite concentrate was conducted to convert ilmenite concentrate to the titania compound with about 80% TiO