Solvent extraction of lithium ions from sulfuric acid solutions was investigated using imidazolium-based ionic liquids as diluents and tri-n-butyl phosphate as specific ligand. Aqueous phases used were simulating leach liquors of spent lithium-ion batteries, with lithium, cobalt and nickel ions in acidic solutions. A low acidity and a large amount of extractant can ensure high extraction efficiency. But the better selectivity for the lithium ions over the transition metals is obtained using a low amount of extractant and a low pH (pH<3). The extraction of the lithium ions occurs by cation exchange with the ionic liquid cations. A sacrificial cation was introduced in the organic phase to prevent the losses, but the cation exchange is only reduced by 20%. The increase of the ionic liquid cation alkyl chain length can presumably suppress the cation exchange mechanism, reducing substantially the losses. But the addition of a lipophilic counter-anion in the organic phase is needed to ensure a mechanism of ion pairing with the lithium ion in the organic phase. Using the 1-decyl 3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide ionic liquid associated to tri-butyl phosphate, a satisfying extraction efficiency is obtained for the lithium ion, together with a sufficient selectivity among the transition metal ions.Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) are commonly used for portable electronic devices (laptops, mobile phones, cameras, Moreover, lithium-ion batteries are expected to implement future electric vehicles The recycling of metals from spent lithium-ion batteries could be made using pyrometallurgy However, conventional solvent extraction processes generally employ organic diluents, such as toluene, kerosene or dodecane, First observed in 1914 This work is focusing on the selective extraction of lithium ions from sulfuric acid media. A well-known solvent extraction system based on imidazolium-based ILs associated to tri While using imidazolium-based ionic liquids, a cation exchange mechanism between the metal ion in the aqueous phase and the IL cation is observed during the extraction of the metal. This exchange leads to loss of IL in the aqueous phase, which is unfavorable from both an economic and environmental point of view, knowing the high cost and low biodegradability of the imidazolium cation. This is why our work explores different ways to reduce, if not suppress, the cation exchange mechanism during the extraction of the lithium ions, and to limit the loss of ionic liquid. The hydrophobic ionic liquids, namely 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium The aqueous phases were prepared by dissolving gravimetrically the metal salts into de-ionized water. De-ionized water was obtained after percolation through activated carbon and ion-exchange resins (type ORC and type R3 resin from Thermo-Fischer Scientific). The aqueous concentrations of metal ions were fixed at 50 The phases were shaken at 1500 All of the results shown in this study are the average of three experiments and are reproducible within a 10% error. The imidazolium cation content in the aqueous phase was determined using UV–vis spectrophotometry, with a Shimadzu UV-PC 2401 apparatus. The aqueous samples were analyzed with quartz cells (optical path way of 1 Tri- As can be seen, the distribution ratio values for lithium, cobalt and nickel are dependent on the aqueous phase acidity. A higher content of acid protons in the aqueous phase leads to decline of metal distribution ratios at higher acidity. However, the aqueous acidity is the factor governing the selectivity for the lithium ions. It can be seen that at pH close to 2 the distribution ratio value for lithium is higher than 2, while cobalt and nickel ions are only few extracted. This outcome could be explained by the small size of the lithium ion, which is co-extracted by TBP molecules with acid protons while the other metals are left in solution. However, at an initial pH of 5, this system appears to be cobalt selective with distribution ratios in the order Co Since the extraction of lithium is very low using pure TBP However, the extraction of metals into imidazolium ionic liquids often occurs This mechanism leads to non-negligible losses of ionic liquid in the aqueous phase. The extraction can also occur by formation of ion pairs in the organic phase with the ionic liquid anion ([NTf Even if no clear proof of interactions between the ionic liquid anion and the metal can be found using infrared spectra of the organic phase after extraction The lowering of the distribution ratios for metals with an increase of the acidity is frequently observed when using imidazolium ionic liquids as extraction solvents In order to prevent the loss of ionic liquid in the aqueous phase without reducing the metal ion extraction efficiency, one solution is to introduce a sacrificial cation in the organic phase, as evidenced by Luo et al. It can be seen that the imidazolium cation content in the aqueous phase is considerably lower when sodium TFPB is placed in the organic phase. However, the cation exchange is not suppressed entirely, the absorbance in the aqueous phase is 18% lower with the sacrificial cation rather than without it. This result is in accordance with the results of Luo et al., who found that a higher concentration of sodium tetraphenylborate (0.12 Furthermore, the tetraphenylboron anion is known to have a good ability to form water-insoluble compounds with large cations The extraction of lithium occurs Another mechanism that could be involved in the lithium extraction is exchange between sodium and lithium, thus forming a LiTFPB salt in the organic phase: This exchange is responsible for the diminution of the imidazolium cation content found in the aqueous phase after extraction. The ion pairs formed have a low solubility in water as compared with the ion pairs possibly formed with the NTf The effect of the aqueous phase acidity has been studied with sodium TFPB in the organic phase. The results of the competitive extraction are reported in As already observed without sodium TFPB, a higher aqueous acidity favors the selectivity for lithium. In this case, the distribution ratio values are higher for all the metals due to the presence of sodium TFPB in the organic phase. This effect leads to similar or slightly lower separation factors for lithium over cobalt and nickel, as shown in The TBP proportion in the organic phase is also relevant to favor the selectivity for lithium over cobalt and nickel. Metal distribution ratios at pH As already mentioned, the distribution ratio of lithium is higher with a small proportion of ionic liquid dissolved in TBP. However, the selectivity for lithium is better with a lower content of TBP in the organic phase (TBP The separation factor can reach values up to 14 for lithium over nickel and up to 8 for lithium over cobalt at a TBP proportion of 40% (v/v) in the organic phase. But the separation factors are decreasing for a higher content in TBP in the organic phase. This could be related to a higher content of TBP available in the organic phase to extract the divalent metals. The selective extraction of lithium over cobalt and nickel can be made with TBP associated to imidazolium ionic liquids. A low pH and a low content of TBP in the organic phase will favor lithium extraction upon cobalt and nickel extraction. The selectivity for the lithium ion can be tuned using these two factors but both will result on a decrease of the extraction efficiency. Despite this negative trend on the extraction efficiency, the lithium distribution ratio remains elevated (D The concentration ratio of the metals is an important feature, knowing that the lithium content in leach liquors from spent lithium ion batteries is usually lower than the cobalt content. The effect of the lithium to cobalt and nickel concentration ratio on the separation ability is shown in As can be seen in As it has been concluded previously, the addition of the cation exchanger can be a way to reduce the cation exchange, but not to suppress it entirely. In order to avoid the cation exchange, another solution is to increase the length of the ionic liquid alkyl chain. It will result on an increase in the ionic liquid hydrophobicity, which could prevent the IL cation to undergo the exchange In order to increase the distribution ratio for the metals, a lipophilic counter anion can be added to the organic phase. The distribution ratio of lithium at pH The lithium distribution ratio is increasing with an increasing content of TFPB in the organic phase. The formation of ion pairs between lithium cation and the lipophilic counter anion TFPB allows an increase of the distribution ratio, even with an ionic liquid of longer alkyl chain length. But this distribution ratio is still very low. The formation of ion pairs in the organic phase is not sufficient to obtain a satisfying extraction of the lithium ion. To increase the extraction efficiency of lithium, a solvating agent can be introduced in the organic phase As already mentioned, the distribution ratios are much higher when the pH is higher than 2 in the aqueous phase, and with a higher TBP content in the organic phase. Distribution ratios higher than 20 can be reach with 70% of TBP in the organic phase at a pH higher than 3 for all three metals. Concerning the selectivity, as observed with the [C The direct extraction of lithium from leach liquors of lithium-ion batteries could be considered using this composition of the organic phase. Considering the lowering of the distribution ratio in acidic media, the stripping of the metals can be done by contacting the loaded organic phase with acidic solutions. The high hydrophobicity of the [C The use of molecular diluents instead of ionic liquids could be envisaged to ensure the ion pair extraction of metals The use of ionic liquids based on hydrophobic anions has shown promising results for the extraction of metal ions. The ionic liquid acts as a source of hydrophobic anions, allowing to form neutral ion pairs that are readily extracted to the organic phase using an extracting molecule. However, the large-scale synthesis of these anions remains challenging and will be related to the developments of future lithium-ion batteries, these kinds of anions being used as electrolytes. The type of cation associated to this anion to form the ionic liquid also needs further developments. Imidazolium cations are well known and gives interesting ionic liquids (higher extraction efficiency than other cations associated to the NTf In this study, we investigated the solvent extraction of lithium, cobalt and nickel from synthetic leach liquors of spent lithium-ion batteries. We have demonstrated that the recovery of lithium in the leach liquor is feasible using organic phase composed of TBP extractant and imidazolium-based ILs. Two options can be considered to provide a good selectivity for the lithium ions among cobalt and nickel in sulfuric acid media: the first is to use a larger amount of TBP (>50% v./v.) in the organic phase and a higher acidity (pH The financial support from the