Stiction, permanent but also temporary, remains one of the most critical reliability concerns for micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS). In this paper, we present an investigation of temporary stiction of standard poly-SiGe MEMS. This is done by analyzing the hysteresis in the displacement-versus-voltage characteristics of electrostatically actuated micromirrors. The anomalous widening of the “pull-in window”, caused by stiction-induced delay of the pull-out, is used as an indication of the amount of mirror-to-surface stiction. Differences in the pull-out voltage of micromirrors within an array indicate varying levels of stiction from mirror to mirror. It is shown that a 1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorodecyltrichlorosilane (FDTS) self-assembled monolayer (SAM) can reduce this in-use stiction. Analytical and finite element methods are used to quantify the stiction forces. Also the impact of the relative humidity and of a vacuum thermal treatment is studied. The results show that humidity at the surface is the main cause of the stiction in these devices.Stiction is the term used in the MEMS field to describe undesired adhesion. Because of the large surface area to volume ratio in micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS), surface forces are relatively more important than body forces in determining the functionality and long-term reliability of MEMS devices and they are a serious problem in fabrication and application of MEMS devices This paper is focusing on the in-use non-permanent stiction of standard MEMS devices. We present a new alternative method to quantitatively study the magnitude of the adhesion force using electrostatically actuated poly-SiGe micromirror arrays as a test vehicle. The stiction is investigated by analyzing the hysteresis in the displacement-versus-voltage characteristic of these MEMS. The width of the ‘pull-in/pull-out window’, and mainly the pull-out voltage, is used as an indication of the amount of mirror-to-electrode stiction. The stiction is reduced by applying a FDTS self-assembled monolayer (SAM). The impact of the relative humidity and vacuum thermal treatment to stiction is studied in an environmentally controlled chamber. The approach also uses analytical and finite element methods to validate the experimental results. The devices investigated in this study are electrostatically actuated micromirror arrays made of poly-SiGe, see The micromirrors are laid out in arrays of either 16 When the micromirror is electrostatically actuated by an applied voltage, the micromirror tilts and the angle of rotation depends on the actuation voltage applied between the micromirror and bottom electrodes. The mechanical restoring force is a linear function of the displacement; the electrostatic force is a quadratic function of the same displacement. In static equilibrium state, the electrostatic force and the mechanical restoring force between the micromirror and the electrode underneath are equal. As the applied voltage increases, the micromirror is electrostatically attracted towards the electrode and at a certain value the electrostatic force beats the mechanical restoring force and the micromirror pulls in. The corresponding voltage value is called pull-in voltage. At pull-in, the outer sides of the micromirrors touch the landing electrode. Once the micromirror and the landing electrode come into contact, another factor, namely the adhesion force, may have a large impact on the operational characteristic. When the applied voltage decreases, at a certain value the mechanical restoring force beats the electrostatic and adhesion forces, and the mirror releases. This occurs at a voltage which is called pull-out voltage. One such typical characteristic is shown in A schematic overview of the experimental setup is presented in Surfaces coated with a SAM can be exceedingly hydrophobic. Due to its nanoscale thickness (the SAM layer we used FDTS is about 1.4 There are few articles discussing the surface energy of SiGe in the literature, so contact angle measurements were performed on SiGe films as a quick method to investigate the effect of applying a self-assembled monolayer. Like silicon, there is also a very thin native oxide layer existing on top of a SiGe film, which induces a high surface energy. As shown in The SiGe surfaces with/without a FDTS film were also inspected by angle resolved X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (AR-XPS). The comparisons of spectra of SiGe surfaces with/without a FDTS film are shown in First, measurements were performed on the micromirror arrays without any anti-stiction coatings. Sixteen micromirrors within an array were tested in each measurement. As shown in Therefore, a FDTS self-assembled monolayer was deposited as an anti-stiction coating which can significantly lower the surface energy. The performance of the micromirror arrays is clearly improved after FDTS SAM deposition. As shown in Because the above results suggest that water probably plays a role in the observed stiction, the influence of the relative humidity (RH) on the temporary stiction was studied in an environmentally controlled chamber and the results are shown in To further confirm the main cause of the temporary stiction, i.e. water, non-coated devices were stored in a vacuum chamber at different temperatures and measured in situ in function of time. The pull-out voltages are plotted as a function of time in When two smooth surfaces are brought into close contact, the intrinsic attractive force consists of various sources including capillary forces and Van der Waals forces. Both of these two forces can be comparable to or even larger than the external forces such as the mechanical restoring force in the micromirror. To measure these physical adhesive forces locally on nanoscale, atomic force microscopy (SiN tip, radius 25 To ensure that charging effects could be neglected, and to check the wear-related reliability of the SAM-coating, the pull-in voltage and pull-out voltage of a coated mirror array was measured as a function of the number of switching cycles (with mirror-bottom-electrode contact each time) in atmosphere. No degradation or charging was observed up to 10 The micromirror is actuated by an electrostatic force generated by the actuation electrode underneath. Since the configuration is not complicated, the operation characteristic can be obtained analytically When a voltage At the static equilibrium condition, a mechanical restoring force is generated by the torsion hinge due to the rotation of the micromirror. Its torque is a linear function and proportional to the rotation angle and can be expressed as But as explained in the previous section, as the applied voltage increases beyond the pull-in voltage, the electrostatic torque As the applied voltage decreases, the micromirror will not be pulled back immediately unless the applied voltage is smaller than a value so-called pull-out voltage. Before being pulled out, if there is no adhesion force then, Detailed calculated results obtained for ideal mirrors where no stiction takes place, are listed in In reality, the mirror comes in contact with the bottom electrode, and the torque due to adhesion forces has to be taken into account. The equilibrium then becomes, By comparing the pull-out voltage from the ideal case with the results from experiments, the magnitude of the adhesion force can be obtained. A FEM model was developed using CoventorWare software to study the mirror operations under different actuation voltages. The device 2D layout together with a file which defines the processing steps was imported in CoventorWare to construct the solid model. Tetrahedral elements were used to mesh the geometry of the micromirror structural layer while brick elements were used to mesh the planarized geometry of the bottom electrodes. During pull-in voltage simulation, an increasing voltage will be applied to the micromirror. The built-in CoSolve tool couples the mechanical and electrostatic solvers and calculates the mirror's electromechanical response. The simulated pull-in voltages are 7.82 We used both analytical and finite element analysis to obtain the stiction-free static characteristic of a single micromirror. The comparison of the experimental results of micromirror array A with analytical and finite element results is shown in Adhesion forces in SiGe MEMS were studied indirectly through displacement-versus-voltage measurements, were confirmed by AFM and verified by analytical calculations and a finite element modeling. The experiments prove that the capillary force is the main reason for the temporary stiction observed in the SiGe-mirror arrays, and that it can be reduced either by using a SAM layer, or by annealing in vacuum. On the other hand, as the absorption of water molecules occur rapidly in ambient atmosphere. A FDTS SAM layer can prevent the formation of a water meniscus and enhance the reliability of the micromirror array. The FDTS coating remains reliable for minimal 10 The authors would like to thank Kris Vanstreels for doing the AFM measurement and the support the SBO project ‘GEMINI’ (‘Generic Electronics and Microsystems INtegration Initiative’), IWT-nr 60046, 2007–2011. The authors also would like to thank IMEC REMO and MEMS team for their kind help.