The main goal of this study is to further understanding of the role of rubber particles on deformation mechanisms in PP/EPR blend. For doing this standard tensile specimens were produced using injection molding. The results of microscopic evaluation of tensile specimen after some stretching show that damage forms in some points and then propagates in different directions. Also some elongated voids are observed, those are probably formed due to cavitation of rubber particles or debonding at the interface. With regard to achieved micrographs one may conclude that the deformation mechanism in PP/EPR blend can be massive dilatational shear banding due to repeated cavitation.Many works have been performed to study the mechanical behavior of PP/rubber blends In order to investigate the role of rubber particles on deformation mechanism, PP/EPR pellets containing 20 wt.% of rubber, with the trade name Hifax CA 35 M, were supplied from Montell. The average particle size of EPR was about 3.5 μm with bigger particles measuring approximately 4–6 μm. Standard tensile specimens were produced via injection molding and during the processing stage, the temperature in the four successive zones of the injection molding apparatus (Mono-mat 80) was increased progressively along its length from 200 to 230 °C. Tensile test was done according to ASTM D638 using an 1115 Instron tensile frame at a cross-head speed of 5 mm/min. To investigate the dominant deformation mechanism in tensile test, the side surfaces of some samples were polished prior to the test to achieve a surface roughness of about 5 μm. After some deformation occurred, those surfaces were studied via optical and scanning electron microscopes. To obtain some information about deformation in the bulk of material, after the tensile test some samples were immersed in liquid nitrogen and fractured along the tensile direction. The new fracture surfaces were subsequently investigated via scanning electron microscopy. An Olympus PME3 optical microscope was employed to examine the damage in tensile specimens under reflective light condition. A Jeol JSM-5600LV scanning electron microscope was used to study the side surfaces of the polished tensile bars and the fracture surface of selected samples. The specimens were coated, via a sputter coater S150B, with a thin layer of gold prior to microscopy to avoid charge build up.    The microscopic studies prove that the dominant deformation mechanism in PP/EPR blend is dilatational shear banding caused by repeated cavitation since no crazing is observed in the matrix.