Sedge (Carex riparia) is a weed which produces large quantities of agricultural waste. The objective of the present study was to develop a procedure for obtaining and characterization of amorphous silica from sedge and its application for synthesize of mesopororous silica MCM-41. Combustion of sedge was studied at different temperatures in the range of 500–800°C. The resultant silica and as-synthesized MCM-41 were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD), X-ray fluorescence (XRF), N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms, Fourier-transform infrared (FT-IR) spectrometry, thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and Transmission electron microscopy (TEM). The x-ray diffraction pattern of the resulting silica revealed that 600°C is optimum temperature for obtaining amorphous silica. White ash, containing majority of SiO2 with trace amounts of CaO, K2O, Al2O3, MgO, P2O5, etc., was successfully produced by a combination of heating, leaching and refluxing schemes to facilitate decomposition and gasification of the organic materials while avoiding complete ignition. The XRF results revealed that the highest purity of amorphous silica (98%) was obtained by applying a combination of pretreatment of sedge using leaching and post-treatment of sedge ash with refluxing. SEM results reveals that sedge ash particles are not spherical in shape and exhibit irregularly fragmented particles. The XRD pattern of the resulting MCM-41 revealed a typical pattern of hexagonal mesophase. In agreement with the XRD, the hexagonal structure of pores of MCM-41 was confirmed by the TEM oservations. The N2 adsorption results revealed that synthesized MCM-41 having large pore sizes of about 4.1nm, high surface areas up to 1174m2/g and total pore volume of 0.98cm3/g. Through a combination of XRD, N2 adsorption and TEM methods, porosity parameters were compared.Silica is a basic raw material that is widely used in many industrially important products such as electronics, ceramic, pharmaceutics, detergents, adhesives and polymer materials. Because of their small-diameter particles, ultrafine silica powders have many technological applications, such as thixotropic agents, thermal insulators, composite fillers, In the present study, an attempt has been made to produce herbal amorphous silica from sedge by a combination of heating, leaching and reflux treatments. The structural features of the silica were identified by XRD, XRF and SEM analysis. In the second stage, the extracted silica was applied to synthesize mesoporous MCM-41 by hydrothermal method followed by extensive characterization using various instrumental techniques. Analytical grade hexadecyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB), acetic acid, hydrochloric acid (37%), sodium hydroxide (NaOH) were all purchased from Aldrich and used without further purification. Deionized distilled water was used in the preparation of all solutions. Sedge ( The mesoporous MCM-41 was prepared by modified procedure according to the literature The chemical analysis of the produced silica was performed by X-ray fluorescence (XRF) using a Philips PW 1480 spectrometer. The crystalline structure of produced silica and synthesized MCM-41 samples were examined by X-ray diffraction using GBC-Difftech MMA diffractometer. The nickel filtered Cu Kα (λ The physical and chemical characterizations of fresh sedge are presented in Some studies have been performed to confirm an appropriate temperature for preparing the amorphous silica from the herbal materials Elemental analysis of sedge ash under uncontrolled combustion and also at 600 Many authors The post-treatment process step of sedge ash performed by acid refluxing of white ash removed considerable amounts of metal ion impurities. Besides, acceptable silica purity of 93.82% was obtained by refluxing treatment of sedge ash with the main impurity being K The morphology of the sedge ash was studied by scanning electron micrograph (SEM). The XRD pattern of MCM-41 is presented in The pore sizes can be calculated from the X-ray diffraction interplanar spacing ( The wall thickness of MCM-41 calculated by the following equation FTIR spectroscopy was used to detect the presence of binding groups in the calcined MCM-41 ( The thermograms of the synthesized material are presented in During the aging period of MCM-41 synthesis, the silicate species were gradually crystallized in order to form siloxane network (Si TEM analysis shown in The following salient points have been achieved out of this investigation. High purity amorphous silica (98%) was extracted from sedge ash as agricultural waste. The extracted silica was also successfully applied in the synthesis of Mesoporous MCM-41 by hydrothermal method. The structure of sedge ash in the first part of silica extraction strongly depends on the burning temperature. The optimum combustion temperature of 600 The second part of the study involved the production of MCM-41 synthesis. A mesoporous material based on hexagonal MCM-41 silica was synthesized having large pore sizes of about 4.1 The present research was sponsored by