Purpose
                  External fixation has been associated with a high incidence of complications and poor outcomes due to the instability and difficulty in treating open tibia fractures. We use intramedullary (IM) elastic nails to supplement the external fixator. We compared the results of fractures treated by external fixation with and without IM–elastic nail.
               
                  Hypothesis
                  The combination of external fixation with IM–elastic nails may be used as an alternative to solve problems due to the external fixators alone in open tibia fractures.
               
                  Methods
                  Group 1 included prospectively 26 cases (15 males and 11 females, mean age 37.5±12.4years) treated with external fixation and IM–elastic nails, whereas group 2 consisted of 28 cases (23 males and five females, mean age 30.7±14.0years) treated with standard external fixation. Functional and bone results were made using the criteria proposed by ASAMI.
               
                  Results
                  The mean follow-up period was 3.96±2.0years in group 1 and 3.32±2.1years in group 2. The mean duration to external fixation and mean time to union were significantly lower in group 1 (P
                     <0.001). In addition, bone and functional results were significantly higher in group 1 (P
                     <0.01), however, pin track infections were lower in group 1 (P
                     <0.01).
               
                  Conclusion
                  Our results showed the improvement in outcomes with IM–elastic nails: decreased duration of external fixation need and decreased bone healing delay. Therefore, this method may be a superior alternative for preventing complications related to external fixation in open tibia fractures.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  Level III: prospective comparative study.Although intramedullary (IM) nailing in closed fractures of the long bones is the gold standard, the treatment of type III B&C open fractures of these bones is still controversial. External fixation offers a quick and minimally invasive means of temporarily stabilizing open femur and tibial shaft fractures that might benefit the patient with multiple injuries or severe soft-tissue wounding In unstable diaphyseal fractures, reconstruction is known to be difficult. During surgery, priority should be given to the accurate reduction of axes and rotation and the protection of vascularization of the bone rather than its reconstruction In this study, it was hypothesized that external fixation with IM–elastic nails may be used as an alternative to solve problems due to the external fixators in open diaphysis tibia fractures. The present prospective controlled study aims to demonstrate an alternative method to treat open tibia fractures in order to prevent complications and increase external fixator utility. We compared cases treated with external fixation using IM–elastic nails to cases managed by standard external fixation. This prospective study included 54 open tibia diaphysis fractures that underwent external fixation between March 2000 and December 2009. Written informed consent was obtained from all patients, and approval to use their medical records and to re-evaluate each patient was given by the Local Research Ethics Committee (Ref No.: B.10.0.IEGO.0.11.00.01/007). Inclusion criteria were: one surgeon performed all the operations. All patients had an open injury of the tibia that received a primary treatment of external fixation either with or without the IM–elastic nails, with a minimum follow-up of 24 The soft-tissue injury was classified according to the Gustillo and Anderson In this study of 54 open tibia fractures, 26 were treated with external fixation with IM–elastic nails and 28 with standard external fixation. Both groups were comparable in terms of gender, fracture location, fracture comminution, grade of open fracture, and etiology ( There were 26 cases (15 males and 11 females) and the average age at the time of surgery was 37.5 There were 28 cases (23 males and five females) and the average age at the time of surgery was 30.7 In group 1, we used IM–elastic nails to support the external fixator. In other words, before the reduction with IM–elastic nails, we provided alignment. Then to render the system more stable, we added an external fixator. Therefore, we chose “C-shaped” flexible IM–Ender elastic nails that acted as internal splints, which offered the advantages of good fixation and the control of alignment. We then applied the body of a unilateral frame or the connecting rods of an Ilizarov external fixator using a circular frame in 15 patients and a unilateral fixator in 11 patients ( The frame was statically locked after reduction in all cases, both groups. Pin sites were cleaned with local sterilization. Active hip, knee and ankle exercises as well as isotonic quadriceps movements were begun on the first postoperative day. Patients were clinically and radiographically evaluated at 2-week intervals for the first 2 All statistical analyses were conducted using the SPSS 16 computer program. The mean age, follow-up period, time to union for the tibia, and the duration of external fixation for the tibia were analyzed using the Mann-Whitney U test. Furthermore, pin track infection, shortening, malalignment, translation and non-union were analyzed using the chi-square (χ The mean follow-up period was 3.96 The mean duration of the external fixation was shorter in group 1. The average time for fractures of the tibia was 2.54 In group1, bone results were excellent in 25 cases (96.2%) and poor in one case (3.8%). In group 2, 15 cases (53.6%) were rated excellent, two cases (7.1%) good, five cases (17.9%) fair, and in six cases (21.4%) poor. Twenty-five cases (96.2%) in group 1 and 17 cases (60.7%) in group 2 yielded satisfactory results. Functional findings in group 1 were excellent in 25 cases (96.2%) and poor in one case (3.8%). Fifteen cases (53.6%) were rated excellent, and three cases (10.7%) good, four cases (14.3%) fair, and six cases (21.4%) poor in group 2. Twenty-five cases (96.2%) in group 1 and 18 cases (64.3%) in group 2 yielded satisfactory results. There was difference between two groups according to bone and functional results at final follow-up ( Postoperatively, there were three cases (11.5%) of pin track infection in group 1 whereas there were 15 cases (53.6%) in group 2. In group 1, three cases with grade I infections were treated by local care using Betadine solution and oral antibiotics with resolution of infection. In group 2, there were three cases (10.7%) with grade I and eight cases (28.6%) with grade II pin track infection. These cases also were treated by antibiotic therapy. However, in group 2, the severity of the grade III pin tract infections in four cases (14.3%) led to early external fixator removal. These cases were managed with a cast. In these cases, shortening, malalignment and translation were observed in two cases, and shortening and non-union were observed in one case each. No pin track osteomyelitis occurred. There was a significant difference in terms of pin track infection between the groups ( It was hypothesized that external fixation IM–elastic nails would present some advantages in terms of the maintenance of fracture alignment during healing process. In addition, this combination may be used as an alternative to solve problems due to the external fixators. Our results show that the mean duration to external fixation, mean time to union, and pin track infections were significantly lower in group 1. Additionally, bone and functional results were significantly better in group 1. Therefore, elastic IM–nailing confers several advantages over open tibia fracture treatment with an external fixator. However, our study had major limitations. This study is the limited number of cases and not randomized. There is no homogenous group according to the Gustilo and Anderson classification or the OTA classification. In previous studies, several authors showed that articular complications (stiffness, subluxations, dislocations) are related to the duration of external fixation In our study, before one or two months, external fixators were removed without full union because IM biomechanical support persisted in group 1. Therefore, in group 1, external fixators were removed 3.4 The use of augmented external fixation with a single flexible IM nail is not a new concept. In 2004, Shevtsov et al. Pin track infection is an ordinary problem in external fixation Malunion, loss of reduction and non-union are certainly more commonly seen in patients treated with external fixation, and rates of up to 20% are quoted in the published literature This combined method has synergistic effects in that it involves the advantages of both external fixation and IM–nailing. We believe that the augmented IM–elastic nail with external fixators is a good solution for preventing complications and improving the efficiency of treatment. However, in this paper, we do not claim to have the most accurate indications for treating open tibia fractures. Although this study included types 1, 2, and 3A open tibia fractures, we think that this technique should be used for external fixation for types 3B and 3C open tibia fractures. Furthermore, in the present study, we have used Ender elastic nails, nowadays, obtain these nails can be a problem. For this reason, we think the titanium elastic nails can be used in accordance with according to the same concept. Based on the clinical and radiological results of what is, to our knowledge, the first controlled study of the subject, augmented IM–elastic nails with external fixators seem to decrease the duration of external fixation and the bone healing period and to improve clinical and radiological outcome. Further larger long-term prospective comparative series are needed to support these results. The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest concerning this article.