The N solubility in Fe–Cr–C–N melt was measured by the addition of Cr and C in liquid iron using the metal/gas equilibration technique at 1600 °C under a reduced N2 partial pressure. Cr increased the N solubility by the attraction force between Cr and N, while C showed the opposite effect on N in liquid iron. The present experimental results were thermodynamically analyzed by Wagner's interaction parameter formalism. The existence of the simultaneous effect of Cr and C on the N solubility was confirmed, which was determined as the second-order cross-product parameter of Cr and C on N in liquid iron. This parameter set in the multicomponent Fe–Cr–C–N system can be used to predict the solubility limit of N in the degassing process of stainless steelmaking.Degassing technology is crucial for the production of low C and N ferritic stainless steel having high formability as well as excellent corrosion resistance. The C content dissolved during an Electrical Arc Furnace (EAF) melting can be preferentially removed from Fe–Cr melts by Argon Oxygen Decarburization (AOD) process [ In the authors' recent studies, the effects of Cr and C on N in liquid iron have been determined by measuring the N solubility in Fe–Cr–N [ The N solubility in the Fe–Cr–C–N melt was measured by the sampling method under the reduced N The experimental results of the N solubility in Fe–Cr–C–N melt were summarized in The N solubility data measured in the present study can be thermodynamically analyzed based on the following N dissolution reaction: In the multicomponent Fe–Cr–C–N system, the On the other hand, Cr and C have significant interaction with N in liquid iron. As shown in In As can be seen in Eq. The left-hand side parameters of Eq. Therefore, the N solubility can be calculated by the following relation based on Eq. As can be seen in In order to check the validity of interaction parameters used and determined in the present study, In the present study, the cross-product effect of Cr and C on N in liquid iron was determined by measuring the N solubility in Fe–Cr–C–N melt under the reduced N (Cr ≤ 28.3%, C ≤ 1.74%, The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was supported by the Brain Korea 21 Plus Project in Education Program of