The behaviour of different gases (He, N2 and CH4) in coal was analyzed using a device for treating raw coal, designed for taking samples in the mine. This device was subsequently used to transport the samples and inject them with the gases under study. Experiments were conducted under different pressures, and a clear relationship was found between the drop in pressure and the occupation of different storage levels.
                  On analysing the pressure evolution it was found that helium rapidly stabilised due to the characteristics of this gas. As for the other gases, N2 showed a percentage fall much lower than that of CH4.
                  In order to compare the storage capacity of different materials with respect to these gases, experiments were performed with different materials which form the mine's ceiling and walls. It was shown that the fall in pressure is very inferior.
                  A fitting equation relating the evolution of pressure with time is proposed which may be used to define the time needed for the gas to stabilize in the coal. A normalized equation, very similar to that proposed by Langmuir, is likewise obtained to characterize the adsorption and desorption processes.The presence of gases in coal, and the ease with which degasification occurs in the mine, have major repercussions on underground coal mining production ( The release of certain gases has different causes relating to high gas content in the coal seam, local fracturing or crushing of the seam due to faults intrusions, low gas permeability of the coal, coal strength, and the stress state ( Gas adsorption or desorption is a physical phenomenon in which pressure conditions determine how gases that enter or exit the coalfields situated at greater depths will have a greater storage capacity. Adsorption describes the more or less uniform penetration of gases into the molecular structure of coal. The adsorption of gases like CO This phenomenon is closely related to the pore surface: the greater the internal surface area of the pores, the more molecules may be stored there. Three pore systems may be found in the coal matrix: micropores, mesopores and macropores. From a review of the literature, pore size interval is seen to vary depending on which authors are consulted. For one author ( Besides the pores in coal, there is also a network of fractures roughly perpendicular to one another called cleats, which may be differentiated into two major types: face cleats and butt cleats ( To explain the flow of gas in the coal, some authors ( In “normal” coals with fragile and ductile deformations, the gas is desorbed from the internal surfaces of the micropores to the coal matrix by means of diffusion. Once there, it proceeds towards the cleats, where it attains a laminar regime. Cataclastic coals (fragile deformations) possess a structure with interconnected pores and highly continuous cleats; meaning they are divided into a large number of small blocks which the gas reaches quickly via laminar flow. Finally, mylonitic coals (ductile deformations) are found at specific structural locations, such as high dip areas and in small converging folds. The cracks in these coals are highly compressed, meaning they have less capacity to transport gas and have low connectivity. Therefore, they usually present sporadic accumulations of gas that may cause rockbursts. The amount of gas adsorbed by coals at constant temperature is related to pressure using adsorption isotherms according to the following equation: In a study ( The two theoretical models mostly used to relate pressure to adsorption are that of Langmuir (monolayer), and that of BET (multilayer). The former is the most frequently used model for working with coals and, as will be seen below, the equation obtained is very similar to this equation. Furthermore, in numerous studies carried out with methane, it is demonstrated how this equation can be applied to a wide range of temperatures and pressures ( is the equilibrium gas or vapour pressure. is the volume of gas adsorbed (commonly reported at standard temperature and pressure per unit mass of coal). is the Langmuir monolayer volume. is an empirical constant. This equation does not take into account the possibility of formation of physisorption layers on the initial material, since, at high pressures, a saturation of the surface can occur. When the multilayers are forming, a point would be reached when the growth would be indefinite, and the gas would condense. This model of multilayer adsorption was proposed by is the relative pressure is the constant related to the net heat of adsorption The range of application of this equation is between 0.05 One can also find mathematical functions which correlate the experimental data; examples would be Freundlich's isothermal, or that proposed by Temkin. In this article we will try to develop an equation of this type. Desorption occurs when gas pressure in the pores decreases. At this point, due to molecular diffusion, the gas migrates through fractures or microcracks towards areas of low pressure. This amount of desorbed gas is defined as the gas available for emission when the surrounding gas pressure drops from its raw coal value to atmospheric pressure.   The value of The majority of methods employed to determine the gas content in coal subdivide the total amount of gas in a sample into three parts: lost gas, desorbed gas and residual gas. Lost gas This is the portion of total gas escaping from the sample during extraction and handling before sealing. It cannot be directly measured and is therefore estimated by subtracting the volumes of the other gas types. Being an estimated amount, it is considered to constitute the smallest part of the total gas content. Desorbed gas Gas accumulates in the sample and can be measured directly by different methods ( Residual gas When the aforementioned value is reached, there still remains a small proportion of gas in the sample; this residual gas is considered to be “trapped” inside the coal due to low diffusion speeds. Different studies ( This residual gas can be measured by grinding the sample and subsequently measuring the volume of gas emitted in the same way as for desorbed gas. Given that each method defines the amount of gas obtained from each of the three types in a different way, this leads to errors in many cases, because the methods employed to determine each part of the total gas are not mutually comparable. Possible errors associated with these measurements have been described in numerous papers ( Below will be described the apparatus designed to perform the sampling and analysis. The results obtained will be presented and analysed, and equations for describing the behaviour of these gases will be proposed. This section describes the design of the equipment and experiments, as well as the technique used for collecting data. The type of carbon used is a bituminous coal and the gases were chosen for their special characteristics. Helium is an inert gas that does not chemically adsorb onto the surface of coal and easily accesses the different pores that coal comprises. Nitrogen was used in order to test whether using compressed air improves adsorption in coals. Finally, CH The tests were carried out on coal samples from the Central Coal Basin (Julia Seam) in the Principality of Asturias, Northeast Spain, specifically from the Fourth Cut of Level 10 of the Soton Pit at a depth of 967 A sampling device was designed to obtain coal samples in the mine. This instrument was used to extract, transport and test the samples in the unaltered state; this mode of operation ensured the minimum gas loss when taking the sample. It also served to determine the desorbed and the residual gas, conserving the physical integrity of the sample, as well as its gas content. The main advantage of using this method to determine the gas content, with respect to those previously mentioned in The sampler ( The size of the extracted sample has to be both large enough and unaltered, in order to faithfully reflect reality. For this reason, a core sampler with a diameter of 139 The device extracts a longitudinal sample by being punched into the coal. To facilitate this punching, a cutting head was devised with a 4° bevel which is screwed onto the sampler tube so that the tool can more easily penetrate the ground. The cylinder must be sealed for transportation as the coal and gases that it contains must not suffer any form of alteration. This operation is carried out by extracting the cutting tool and the punching device, and sealing the cylinder with the transportation parts. Once the punch head has been unscrewed and the sample surplus has been removed so that the latter is level with the edge of the cylinder, the airtight lid is placed over the mouth of the cylinder. This lid is comprised of two parts: a piston, and a lid with a rubber O-ring. The details of the device are shown in Samples of N The procedure followed consisted of introducing a specific amount of gas into the sampler until a specified pressure was reached. To study how pressure evolves with time in the experiments, two pressure sensors were coupled to the inlet and outlet of the sampler using a set of adaptors ( The choice of sensors responds to the gas pressure values that best reflect the actual working values in the mine, the full range of these sensors being 2500 The gas flow rate may be related to the storage capacity of coal by monitoring the gas flow introduced into the device in each experiment. A Bronkhorst Hi-Tech digital thermal mass flowmeter was used for this purpose. As regards the mode of operating with the flowmeter, it should be noted that this device is controlled by Bronkhorst's proprietary software, while data recording is carried out using software specifically developed by the authors in order to achieve a suitable correlation with the rest of the data collected. The flowmeter-sampler setup ( Once the gases under study have been injected into the sampler, they are allowed to stabilize for a certain time before discharging the gas. The first tests were carried out with N On average, the test takes around one or two days to fully complete all the stages. The sampling frequency was set at one sample per second during the stabilization stages to obtain representative results. The test commences by introducing a specific amount of gas into the sampler and letting the pressure stabilize at both gas pressure sensors (input and output). There is a slight lag between the signal picked up by the input and output sensors due to the permeability of the coal. It should be noted that this difference is very small and only appears in certain areas of the pressure versus time graphs. At a primary storage level, the gas enters the large cavities, generally linked to macroscopic fractures. As may be observed in Likewise, it can be seen that the pressure starts progressively decreasing When this first storage level is filled, flow commences towards the macropores, which constitute LEVEL 2. As there is no longer any exterior concentration of gas, this flow from LEVEL 1 to LEVEL 2 means a drop in pressure in LEVEL 1. Likewise, once LEVEL 2 has been filled (macropores), the gas starts to flow towards the mesopores, which constitute LEVEL 3, and finally reaches LEVEL 4 (micropores). As the pore size gets progressively smaller and the pressure in LEVEL 1 is also low, the flow gradually slows down, which translates as a decrease in the slope of the curve. The slope of the curve becomes less pronounced as the gas is stored in the different levels.  The aforementioned storage levels include the gas stored both in free form and in adsorbed form, as both CH As regards registering the necessary data in order to subsequently process them, the Ground Engineering Group has designed specific software for this purpose, written in C#. Using this data acquisition system, parameters are continuously monitored by electric sensors which transform the measured physical signal into an analogical electric signal. This analogical signal is sent to a data acquisition card powered by an electric battery, which transform it into a digital signal. The software we developed then processes the signal, displaying parameters in the form of units of physical magnitudes. Analyzing the data obtained in these experiments ( It can be seen that when gas is no longer injected into the sampler, the pressure falls rapidly. In the first tests with nitrogen, a stabilization period of 5 To explain the behaviour of the gases, the aforementioned model, based on the existence of several “storage levels” in the coal, was used. In short, this model established different levels: LEVEL 1 is comprised of fractures in the coal and cleats, macropores are found in LEVEL 2, mesopores make up LEVEL 3, while LEVEL 4 corresponds to micropores. At the beginning of the experiment, a certain amount of gas is introduced in LEVEL 1, where it reaches equilibrium pressure, The results appear to suggest that the fact that the pressure decreases, to a greater or lesser extent, is directly related to the storage level that each gas can attain. The occupation of the different storage levels by the gas is closely related to certain physical parameters. If we compare He and N The molecular diameters calculated by means of Chung's expression ( Considering the results obtained, it can be seen in The molecular weight (Pm) and the density (  Although numerous tests were carried out, only the most representative ones are shown and the results obtained are discussed in general. If the values shown in Of the tests carried out with nitrogen, those shown in It can be seen from As Experiments were also conducted introducing 25 As can be observed, the gas fluctuates after the fourth loading, though it is practically stabilized, while the coal does not admit any more gas at a pressure of around 900 Using the data from the flowmeter and calculating the resulting area of the curve when representing the flow against time, we obtained the mass of gas injected and also that retained inside. Following this procedure, it was determined that 59% of the injected gas exited the coal, 41% being retained by the coal at atmospheric pressure. To study the behaviour of the different gases in the sampler, a test was carried out with each gas in the empty sampler with no coal ( Considering the pressure drop and the stabilization time, the gas takes just over 1  Materials other than coal were also used to compare the obtained results reported previously with respect to coal and no load. In this part we try to demonstrate the behaviour of other materials which have neither the structure or porosity of coal. We chose those materials that are in contact with coal in the mine. The rock walls of the Julia seam were analyzed and were found to present a sandstone–siltstone lithology whose structure lacks the microporosity of coal. These materials were subsequently used in the sampler. The same gases were used in these tests as in the tests with coal. The results are shown for the three gases with the materials from the roof ( As the tables show, the gas pressure decreases only slightly and stabilizes rapidly. These results are very similar to those carried out under no load, while simultaneously very different from those obtained with coal. Taking into account the experimental data obtained for the variation in pressure with time once the gas had been injected into the sampler and this was closed, a fitting may be made by means of the following equation: As can be appreciated in  Using the fitting equation, it was possible to define a parameter denominated “stabilization time”. The stabilization time was defined as the time needed for the slope of the pressure versus time curve to be less than 0.1. These times are given in This parameter gives an idea of how quickly the gas flows between the different storage levels, and of each level's characteristics with respect to the different gases. In order to compare the behaviour of the tested gases in coal, a process of normalization was carried out with respect to the initial injection pressure. Starting off from Eq. Substituting some of the terms It should be noted that this equation is very similar to the traditionally established one for adsorption–desorption processes (  On analyzing the results represented in this figure, the following facts were observed: The lowest drop in pressure with respect to the injection pressure occurs in the case of helium. This is due to the fact that, as the atomic diameter of He is very small, it diffuses very well and reaches the different storage levels very quickly. The stabilization time in the case of helium is also the lowest of all (the pressure needs around 30 N These findings are confirmed on analyzing the most representative tests carried out at different pressures. The device designed to carry out all the experiments was able to obtain a representative sample of coal and retain the adsorbed gases inside it. The experiments were also conducted under very similar pressure conditions to those found in mines. Therefore, it can be expected that the storage capacities obtained for the different tested gases are very similar to what would be achieved if these gases were injected in the mine. The experiments detected that spontaneous reloading takes place in the coal once the gas has been discharged, the valves are closed and the sample is allowed to stabilize. The storage capacity of the three gases employed may be studied taking into consideration the variation in pressure with time. When a drop in pressure occurs, this is due to the gas being distributed throughout the different levels that coal comprises, starting with those of greater size. Comparing the three gases, CH The experiments carried out with no load and with materials from the roof and floor showed very different behaviour to that obtained with the coal, as the pressure decreased very little, and stabilization was very quickly attained. The normalized equation employed served to determine that He needed least stabilization time and CH As regards accessing the storage levels, Helium reached the different levels more quickly; if we compare CH  a constant constants that depend on the type of gas, on the coal itself and on temperature equilibrium sorption capacity of the coal at gas pressure area occupied by each adsorbate molecule empirical constant constant related to the net heat of adsorption constants that depend on the type of gas, on the coal itself and on temperature a constant Langmuir strength of attraction of a gas to be sorbed (kPa a constant to be determined that depends on the type of gas and on the initial pressure, Avogadro's number a constant to be determined that depends on the type of gas and on the initial pressure, gas pressure. equilibrium gas or vapour pressure evolution of the pressure in LEVEL 1 over time (kPa). the initial gas pressure (kPa) the final pressure (kPa) molecular weight relative pressure the amount of gas adsorbed (m the desorption time of 63% of the gas stabilization time volume of gas adsorbed (commonly reported at standard temperature and pressure per unit mass of coal) the volume of methane desorbed after a certain time the critical volume the Langmuir monolayer volume the maximum Langmuir sorptive capacity of the coal sample expressed in (cm a constant to be determined that depends on the type of gas and on the initial pressure, molecular diameter density of the adsorbate normalized time for each test a value that depends on the type of coal (ranging from 0.3 for bituminous coal to 0.5 for anthracite) The authors wish to thank Hunosa and the Principado de Asturias Regional Ministry of Industry and Employment, in particular the Department of Mines, for their collaboration.