In flotation processes, mineral particles are separated based on different surface physicochemical properties. The surface of molybdenite consists of both hydrophobic and hydrophilic faces, meaning this particular structure can lead to a reduction in floatability when molybdenite is treated using long-time stirring and ultrasound. In this study, an acoustic method called high-intensity focused ultrasound was applied to detect the nuclei in a molybdenite suspension before and after long-duration pre-conditioning. The cavitation threshold (liquid pressure at 50% cavitation probability) was then calculated based on numerous cavitation results, which were applied to characterize the wettability of molybdenite particles in water. Additionally, particle size measurements and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy analysis were employed to highlight the differences in particle properties after long-duration pre-conditioning. However, these tests cannot fully elucidate the changes in floatability of molybdenite in water. Nano-bubbles on particle surfaces were determined to be the main cause for the high floatability of molybdenite. This study will present insights into the vital role of pretreatment time on the floatability of molybdenite. We also propose a method for determining the wettability of particles in water.The surface properties of molybdenite are complex based on their dependencies on different sides of crystals ( High-intensity focused ultrasound (HIFU) has been widely used in cancer treatment ( In this study, HIFU was applied to detect trapped bubbles on molybdenite surfaces, which can reflect the wettability of particles. Additionally, the floatability of molybdenite following stirring and/or ultrasonic treatment was studied through micro-flotation experiments. To investigate changes in floatability, we studied cavitation thresholds, particle sizes, and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) results in conjunction with the flotation results. Molybdenite samples for flotation experiments were obtained from the Highland Valley copper/molybdenum mine (Canada). Micro-flotation experiments were carried out using particles sizes in the range of 38–125 µm in a Hallimond tube. The molybdenite samples were washed with ethanol to remove any flotation reagents remaining on their surfaces. These samples have very high purity with X-ray fluorescence (XRF) elemental composition results of 66.18%, 31.97%, and 1.86% for Mo, S, and Fe, respectively. The molybdenite samples were used for both flotation tests and XPS analysis. Lump silica samples were purchased from Gemstone (Canada). XRF results revealed that the elemental composition of Si was 99.2%. The silica samples were crushed, ground, and sieved to obtain particle sizes similar to those of the molybdenite particles (38–125 µm). The resulting hydrophilic samples were used for flotation tests. In this study, a 1.5-g sample was placed in a 100-ml Hallimond tube for each experiment. Each sample was first conditioned for 30 s and stirred at 600 rpm for another 30 s to allow the hydrophobic molybdenite particles to become fully immersed in the water. Stirring or ultrasonic procedures were conducted after the immersion process. For the stirring procedure, experiments were carried out using three different stirring durations (10 min, 30 min, and 2 h) at 600 rpm. For the ultrasonic procedure, the samples were treated with ultrasonic equipment (Qsonica Sonicator Q700) at 35 W for 5 min, 30 min, and 1 hr. Additionally, the samples subjected to 2 h of stirring or 1 h of ultrasonic treatment were dried to perform repeated tests. The pH value of the molybdenite suspensions was approximately 4.5. The stirring rate in the Hallimond tube was set to 700 rpm to ensure that the particles were fully suspended. The aerating rate of N Our HIFU testing system is a custom setup at the University of Alberta. In this HIFU system, an arc-shaped transducer can emit and receive sound waves. In this study, the wave generator (SDG1010, Siglent) and amplifier (2100L RF Power Amplifier) were used to generate and magnify three circular sine waves at 1.1 MHz for each test. An oscilloscope (DS1000Z, Rigol) was employed to record the sound waves. In this study, analysis approaches for particle size and surface chemical properties were applied to the analysis of general particle properties. For particle size analysis, a laser particle size analyzer (Malvern Mastersizer 3000) was used to measure the size distribution of particles before and after stirring and ultrasonic treatment. The particle size distribution was measured in an ethanol solution to ensure that the particles were sufficiently dispersed. The reported results are the average values from three repeated tests. XPS (Kratos AXIS 165) was employed to analyze the extent of surface oxidation of the samples. XPS analysis was performed in the nanoFAB facility at the University of Alberta. A wide scan was performed to identify elements and various elemental regions, including C (1s), O (1s), S (2p), and Mo (3d), were scanned to analyze surface oxidation accurately. The first-order equation of flotation kinetics was used to fit the micro-flotation results. Hydrophilic silica with similar particle sizes was also studied with the no-stirring treatment. However, as shown in To investigate the origin of the large difference between no stirring and long-duration stirring, the molybdenite particles after 2 h of stirring treatment were dried to perform micro-flotation testing again. As shown in   XPS wide-energy spectra of molybdenite samples following different treatments are presented in  The binding energies at the O 1s peaks of the original, 2-h-stirring, and 1-h-ultrasonic samples are 532.13 eV, 532.16 eV, and 532.26 eV, respectively, while the binding energies at O 1s b peaks of the original, 2-h-stirring and 1-h-ultrasonic samples are 529.88 eV, 529.91 eV, and 530.00 eV, respectively. The binding energy of MoO The binding energies of the original, 2-h-stirring, and 1-h-ultrasonic samples at the S 2p 3/2 peaks are 162.37 eV, 162.38 eV, and 162.48 eV, respectively. This sulfur element is present in the form of MoS  It should be noted that sound waves are reflected by bubbles on smooth particle surfaces, but diffused by coarse particle surfaces. Therefore, the HIFU sensor can only receive reflected waves from bubbles. HIFU technology is an acoustic method for measuring the cavitation thresholds of molybdenite suspensions. Additionally, this technology is an effective method for detecting nanoscale bubbles trapped on the surface of molybdenite. As shown in The flotation results revealed that the floatability of molybdenite decreases after long-duration stirring and ultrasonic treatment. One reason for this phenomenon is a reduction in particle size. However, the main reason is the reversible change in wettability of the molybdenite particle surfaces. This finding is in good agreement with oxidized coal floatation studies in that the recovery of porous coal also decreases with stirring time based on the destruction of trapped bubbles in holes on coal surfaces ( Unwetted and wetted particles perform very differently in terms of hydrophobicity and floatability. Contact angles decrease dramatically when water penetrates into holes or crevices on particles ( Flotation recovery was reduced by more than 60% at 11 min following long-duration stirring or ultrasonic treatment compared to untreated micro-flotation tests. The samples under these conditions were dried and used in repeated untreated micro-flotation tests and it was found that high recovery was still achieved. Additionally, reversible changes on particle surfaces occurred during long-duration treatment. This behavior was demonstrated through novel HIFU tests and cavitation threshold results revealed that trapped bubbles are destroyed by long-duration treatment. This destruction of trapped bubbles could be the main reason for the reduction in floatability of molybdenite following long-duration pre-conditioning. Additionally, a decrease in particle size may have some contribution to the decrease in floatability. This work was supported by the Outstanding Innovation Scholarship for Doctoral Candidates of the “Double First Rate” Construction Disciplines of