Introduction
                  Historically routine work up of a patient with a proximal femoral fracture always included anterior-posterior (AP) and a lateral film of the hip. The aim was to define the role of the lateral X-ray in the assessment and surgical planning of proximal femur fractures.
               
                  Methods
                  Radiographs of 320 consecutive patients with proximal femoral fractures who were admitted over a 12 months period were divided into lateral and AP views. Two blinded reviewers independently assessed the AP view alone and then the AP plus the lateral view. Fracture classification was noted for each X-ray and then compared with intraoperative diagnosis which was our study's gold standard. A 2 × 2 contingency square table and Pearson's x2 test were used for statistical analysis.
               
                  Results
                  The rate of correct classification by the reviewers enhanced by the assessment of the lateral X-ray in addition to the AP view for intracapsular fractures (p = 0.018) but not for extracapsular fractures (p = 0.29). Operative management did not change for intracapsular fractures which appeared displaced on initial AP view after reviewing the lateral X-ray. The only advantage of obtaining a lateral view in intracapsular fracture was the detection of displacement were the fracture appeared to be undisplaced on initial AP view.
               
                  Conclusions
                  This study provides statistical evidence that one view is adequate and safe for majority of proximal femoral fractures. The lateral radiograph should not be performed on a routine basis thus making considerable saving in time and money, and avoiding unnecessary radiation exposure and discomfort to the patient.Femoral neck fractures are one of the commonest trauma admissions to orthopaedic departments, accounting for approximately 100,000/year in the UK. Traditionally, radiographs in suspected neck of femur fractures have both included anterior-posterior (AP) and lateral views. An AP radiograph of the pelvis is the standard film employed to delineate the fracture pattern, the quality of the bone and the Garden Classification. The lateral view is useful to evaluate the degree of posterior comminution in these fractures. Introduction of fast track protocols for patients with hip fractures from emergency departments This study was undertaken with the aim to assess the clinical need for routine lateral views of the injured hip and its significance in diagnosis and further management plan of these fractures. The study was conducted in a busy district general hospital serving a population of 200,000. We compiled a list of all patients presenting with a proximal femoral fracture during the period January–December 2014. All patients that were treated surgically were included in our study. Patients were excluded from this study if they had: 1) No surgery for any reason, 2) peri-prosthetic fracture, 3) pathological lesions in the ipsilateral femur, 4) occult fractures of the proximal femur. The X-rays of all the patients included in the study were taken in the A&E department of our hospital. The X-rays were obtained from the hospital PACS system. The lateral views of the X-ray was defined as a horizontal beam perpendicular to the affected femoral neck with the patient in supine and the non-affected hip flexed out of the way. Intraoperative diagnosis of the position of the fracture was taken as the gold standard. The intraoperative diagnosis was made during screening by fluoroscopy for fixation choice or arthrotomy for implant replacement. The X-rays were examined blindly by two of our authors who are experienced orthopaedic registrars. All of the X-rays were presented to the reviewers on a digital PACS viewing monitor so contrast, brightness and magnification could be adjusted to aid with the diagnosis. Each reviewer assessed the X-rays independently and classified the fractures into 5 subgroups: Intertrochanteric Fractures Displaced intracapsular fractures (Garden III and IV) Undisplaced intracapsular fractures (Garden I and II) Fracture with subtrochanteric extension Basal cervical fractures Each fracture type has a different surgical management plan therefore the differentiation of this fracture is imperative. The reviewers were first shown the AP view and asked to record the diagnosis before looking at the lateral view. After seeing the lateral view, the reviewer was allowed to modify the diagnosis if necessary. The correlation between the radiological diagnoses before and after viewing the lateral X-ray and definitive intraoperative findings were calculated. Statistical analysis was performed using Pearson's X 320 patients presented with a diagnosis of a proximal femur fracture between January 2014 and December 2014. 31 patients were excluded from the study. Of these 5 had no accurate diagnosis on the operative note, 16 were deemed too unfit for surgery and 10 had fractures that were not in the proximal femur. This left 289 patients who were operated on for proximal femoral fractures during the time period. Mean age at operation was 81.5 (SD ± 9.3) years, with ages ranging from 38 to 102 years. 150 patients (51.9%) had fractures on the right side. The total number of females was 208 (71.0%). From the operative notes we established that 189 fractures were intracapsular, 67 were intertrochanteric, 9 were basal cervical and 24 had subtrochanteric extension. The method of fixation used to treat these types of fractures are shown in For intracapsular fractures, the addition of a lateral X-ray to the AP view significantly improved the rate of correct diagnosis, p < 0.018. The sensitivity of an AP X-ray alone was 54.3% (41.2–66.7%, 95% CI) with a specificity of 89.8% (87.3–92.1% 95% CI). Sensitivity improved to 92.1% (76.5–98.1%, 95% CI) and specificity to 91.4 (88.3–93.4%, 95% CI) after addition of the lateral X-ray. However the only additional advantage provided by the inclusion of the lateral X-ray was in detecting the displacement of intracapsular fracture when it appeared to be undisplaced on the initial AP X-ray. Operative management did not change for intracapsular fractures which appeared displaced on initial AP view after review of the lateral X-ray. For extracapsular fracture, the correct diagnosis rates were not significantly improved by the addition of the lateral X-ray, p = 0.29. It is important to diagnose the fracture site of a neck of femur fracture correctly pre-operatively to expedite the surgical treatment of a patient. Otherwise attempts at intra-operative diagnosis will prolong anaesthetic time and increase the frequency of patient repositioning, therefore increasing risks to the patient. Intra-operative diagnosis also leads to using more theatre resources. If a misdiagnosis is not realised until after the skin incision, the subsequent difficulties can be greatly exacerbated. These could include extending the incision to accommodate a different procedure, increased infection risk, and increased blood loss. All of these factors increase complications in the population of elderly patients who already have high mortality and morbidity rates. Medical Imaging accounts for 90% of radiation exposure to the UK population. A hip radiograph subjects a patient to a radiation dose of approximately 30 times of a routine chest X-ray. Also, a lateral hip X-ray exposes a patient to a radiation dose of approximately 2.5 times of an AP view of the hip. Roughly £600 million is spent on medical imaging in the UK. Last but not least, it would lessen the discomfort for the patient. Positioning for a lateral hip view can be extremely uncomfortable and distressing for a patient, especially for the elderly group who comprise the largest group undergoing the examination. The standard first radiograph to diagnose a neck of femur fracture is an AP radiograph of the pelvis. These can be obtained with relatively little discomfort to patients. The addition of a lateral X-ray improves the ability to determine the displacement of neck of femur fractures. When considering extracapsular fractures, the fracture pattern is clearly evident from the AP view. Lateral views provide the advantage of evaluating the posterior comminution. We do advocate the need for lateral views in a minority of these cases. In cases of displaced intracapsular fractures, especially where hemiarthroplasty is the best treatment option, AP views alone demonstrate the fracture configuration clearly enough to decide further management of the fracture. However in cases where the fracture is undisplaced or displaced in a younger patient where internal fixation is the preferred surgical option, then lateral views may provide benefit in evaluating the fracture displacement. None of the reviewers altered the diagnosis from a displaced intracapsular fracture after reviewing the lateral X-ray. Therefore the benefit of a lateral radiograph is limited to those fractures that appear undisplaced on the AP view. A previous study concluded lateral X-rays are not needed routinely but did not specify situations in which they are required. The reported incidence of occult fractures in the proximal femur is about 1.6–4.4%. It is often said that every fracture should be visualised in two views, this study has shown with statistical validity that one view is sufficient and safe for the majority of proximal femoral fractures. The lateral view is required only for intracapsular fractures that appear undisplaced on the AP view, otherwise they should not be performed routinely. Our study demonstrated that the lateral view of the extracapsular fracture is not required. Some surgeons may argue that the degree of displacement in these fractures may only be apparent on the lateral film, and if gross displacement is noted then the level of surgeon involvement or supervision may need to be increased. In all extracapsular fractures, a lateral view must be checked intraoperatively using the image intensifier prior to starting the operation. It may be the case that subtrochanteric extension of a trochanteric fracture may only be visible on the lateral view. However in our study, all subtrochanteric extensions were apparent on the AP film and the lateral film did not alter the diagnosis or surgical management. Our study has its limitations in that it only included patients with confirmed proximal femoral fractures, and was conducted retrospectively. We did not look at the total number of radiographs performed for clinically suspected fractures. A prospective study with clinically suspected proximal femoral fractures can be recommended to confirm the findings of our study. On the basis of the above study we recommend that lateral hip radiographs should only be performed in the following cases: Cases of intracapsular fractures which appear undisplaced on AP view. Cases where no clear fracture is seen on initial AP view. Conversely, we advise that lateral hip radiographs are not routinely indicated in the following cases: Cases that are clearly extracapsular fractures on initial AP view. Cases of intracapsular fractures which are displaced on AP view. We advise that radiographers should be trained in recognizing the above points. We believe that following these recommended guidelines would avoid discomfort for patients, expedite their treatment, and save resources and time. No funding was provided for this study. Authors declares that he has no conflict of interest. Ethical approval: This article does not contain any studies with human participants or animals performed by any of the authors.