Several electrode arrangements have been proposed to enhance the efficiency of insulating materials charging by corona discharge. Recent studies pointed out that the presence of metal strips in the proximity of a dual-type high voltage electrode increases the total current measured at the surface of the collecting electrode, decreases the corona onset voltage value and enlarges the reparation of current density as well. The aim of this paper is to evaluate the benefits of using such an electrode arrangement for corona charging of non-conductive particulate materials in belt-type corona-electrostatic separators. The experimental study was carried out with samples of Aluminum and Polystyrene particles in the size class 125–250 μm. The presence of grounded strips reduces the electric wind, which is associated to corona discharge but not tolerated in such processes that involve micronized materials. At the same time, it improves the corona charging conditions of non-conductive materials and as consequence the overall efficiency of the corona-electrostatic separation process. The use of the new electrode configuration is characterized by both high recovery rates and better purities of the separated products.Electrostatic separation is defined as the sorting of solid species by means of the electric forces which act on charged or polarized bodies In the widely-used roll-type corona-electrostatic separator, a high-intensity electric field is generated between a grounded electrode and one or several electrodes connected to a high-voltage supply, which achieve the corona-charging of non-conductive materials and the trajectories control of the electrostatic-induction-charged conductive particles However, these separators are inappropriate for processing finely-grinded wastes or powdery materials, because of the difficulty of controlling the trajectories of micrometric-size particles simultaneously subjected to electrical, centrifugal and aerodynamic forces. According to a recent study Many corona electrode arrangements have been developed and extensively studied in relation with such electrostatic applications In a recent paper The ionic wind flow presents an important disadvantage for the micronized particles corona-separation process; it puts them into motion on the belt surface and causes important product mass loss rates The experiments were carried out using a belt-type electrostatic separator ( The corona discharge was generated by a wire-type dual electrode consisted in a tungsten wire (0.2 mm of diameter) attached to a metallic cylinder (26 mm of diameter) and distanced at 34 mm from its axis The samples used in the experiments were composed of 0.5 g of Aluminum (Al) and 0.5 g of Polystyrene (PS) particles in the size class 125–250 μm. In a first series of experiments, the effect of the presence of the strips on the ionic wind produced by corona discharge was investigated as function of the discharge gap In the second series of experiments, electrostatic separation tests were performed with and without using corona discharge. The corona-charged non-conductive particles stick to the grounded conveyor surface under the action of the image force. The electric field produced by the roll electrode of same polarity enhances their adhesion to the grounded metallic belt of the conveyor and practically all non-conductive particles are retrieved in box n°3 of the collector. On the other hand, the conductive particles in contact with the grounded belt, charge by electrostatic induction and are attracted to the roll electrode of opposite polarity. Most of them are retrieved in box n° 2 of the collector ( All experiments were performed in stable ambient conditions (relative humidity: 40%–50%; temperature: 24 °C–27 °C). The two sets of this series of experiments were performed with the aim of evaluating two factors that might affect the mass loss rates caused by the ionic wind that accompany the corona discharge in the belt-type separator. Effect of the discharge gap In the first set of experiments, the distance between electrodes In presence of strips, the zone affected by corona discharge is larger The presence of the strips present an effective way to reduce the ionic wind losses even is the gap is Effect of the applied voltage In these experiments, the corona electrode was located at This series of experiments was carried out with the dual-type electrode in the presence of the grounded strips, in conditions for which the mass losses due to the electric wind were roughly 7% of the feed, and the electric field strong enough to provide an effective corona-charging of the non-conductive particles (  The mass particles in boxes no. 1 and 2 decreased from 58% of the feed, for the pure electrostatic regime (when the conductive product was polluted by almost 20% of non-conductive particles) to 38% of the feed, in the presence of corona. In the latter case, the purity of the conductive product is higher than 99%. The presence of non-conductive particles in the Aluminum product collected in boxes no. 1 and 2 in the absence of corona can be explained by the fact that part of the PS particles were carrying a residual negative charge, acquired by tribo-electric effect during manipulation, and were attracted by the positive high-voltage roll electrode. Corona discharge annealed this residual charge, so that all PS particles were more or less pinned to the surface of the conveyor electrode and collected in box no. 3. A numerical model for the dual-type electrode with strips was developed using the finite element package COMSOL Multiphysics. The aspect of the equal potential contours with the electric field lines originating from the wire can be examined in The numerical model show that all electric filed lines are concentrated in the gap between the wire and the belt electrode surface, when the distance between the wire and the strips ( Reduction of ionic wind effects represents a major issue for the corona-electrostatic separation of fine and micronized particles. The use of grounded strips associated to the corona electrode could fix the problem in such electrostatic process. The electrode arrangement studied in the present paper may be an effective solution for the recovery and recycle of plastics from fine granular WEEE using corona-electrostatic separation techniques. The separation efficiency depends on the charge acquired by the insulating materials; better results were obtained in the presence of the grounded strips. Numerical analysis of the electric field for this electrode arrangement reveals that these strips have a positive effect on the extension of the corona discharge zone. Further researches are needed to validate the effectiveness of the new arrangement for various other granular mixtures, belonging to different size classes. This work was supported in part by