The coal mine roof rating (CMRR) was developed to bridge the gap between geological variation in underground coal mines and engineering design. The CMRR accounts for the compressive strength of the immediate roof, the shear strength and intensity of any discontinuities present, and the moisture sensitivity of the immediate roof. The CMRR has been widely used and validated in Eastern US coal mines, but it has seen limited application in the Western US. This study focuses on roof behavior at a Western coal mine (Mine A). Mine A shows significant lateral geological variation, along with localized faulting and a laterally extensive sandstone channel network. The CMRR is not used to predict roof instability at the mine. It is, therefore, hypothesized that there are other factors that are correlated with roof instability in underground coal mines that could potentially also be considered in conjunction with the CMRR. This hypothesis was tested by collecting 30 CMRR measurements at Mine A. At each measurement location, a binary record of the roof condition (stable or unstable) was made, and other parameters such as depth of cover, presence of faulting, and sandstone channels were also recorded. ANOVA tests showed that the CMRR values and the roof conditions were not strongly correlated, indicating that the CMRR input criteria are not fully predictive of roof stability at this mine. The CMRR values showed statistically significant correlations (p less than 0.05) with faulting as well as with location at an intersection. For areas that had previously experienced roof fall but were currently stable, faulting was correlated with roof condition (p less than 0.05) only when the condition was classified as unstable.Roof fall is one of the greatest hazards facing underground coal miners The coal mine roof rating (CMRR) classification was developed by U.S. National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) researchers Molinda and Mark to quantify the geological description of mine roof into a single value that could indicate mine roof stability and be used in engineering design Currently the CMRR includes the following parameters as inputs: uniaxial compressive strength (UCS), spacing and persistence of discontinuities, cohesion and roughness of discontinuities, moisture sensitivity, presence of a strong bed on the bolted interval, number of layers in the roof (bolted interval), groundwater presence, and surcharge of overlying beds. The CMRR is focused on the character of the units in the immediate roof. If the roof geology is uniform throughout the mine, the CMRR values throughout the mine should be the similar, thus implying the roof stability is approximately the same everywhere in the mine. The CMRR currently focuses only on geological features. This means that any parameters relating to stress (such as depth of cover) are not included. It is likely that the current CMRR is best used in conjunction with other analyses to fully evaluate the potential for roof instability During a visit to a Western U.S. longwall coal mine (Mine A), significant lateral geological variation was observed in the roof. There was also moisture sensitive mudstone at various locations, as well as locally present sandstone and slickensides. The mine geologists have mapped the sandstone as a network of channels spanning the entire mine, and it has been informally observed that where the sandstone channel is present in the immediate roof, the roof is less stable. The CMRR is not used to predict roof stability at Mine A. The observations outlined above suggest that there may be other factors in addition to those included in the CMRR that could also predict roof instability. Where the input parameters currently considered by the CMRR are constant, there may be other factors that are correlated with roof instability in underground coal mines that could be used in conjunction with the CMRR for roof stability assessment. By investigating a single case study, this paper provides an initial discussion of the CMRR’s comprehensiveness and how it may be improved. A much larger data set would be required in order to make any definitive conclusions. To test the hypothesis that the parameters currently considered by the CMRR do not fully explain roof instability, CMRR values were collected at 30 sites at Mine A. At each site, the roof condition was recorded as stable or unstable. A suite of other parameters were recorded in addition to the CMRR inputs, including slope grade of surface topography, presence of faulting, localization of the faulting, presence of sandstone channels, location at an intersection, rib and floor condition, and evidence of horizontal stress-induced damage. At Mine A, there were eight locations for which drill core and core logs were still accessible. Since the CMRR may be calculated from both drill core and underground exposures, the CMRR at these locations was calculated using both methods. The other sites at Mine A were selected randomly to represent the spectrum of geological conditions at the mine, including the presence or absence of sandstone channels in the immediate roof. The CMRR component values were recorded using the methods outlined by Molinda and Mark The data from Mine A were analyzed for correlation between the CMRR and roof condition. A strong correlation would suggest that the CMRR includes the most influential parameters that are predictive of roof instability at Mine A. If there is little correlation between CMRR and roof condition, it is likely that there are other parameters that influence roof instability at Mine A and merit further investigation. An analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed in Matlab to test the null hypothesis that the roof condition and CMRR are not related. For a Next, the correlation between roof condition and each parameter was evaluated. ANOVA was used to analyze the correlation with depth of cover and surface topography as these parameters were recorded numerically. However, ANOVA cannot evaluate the correlation between two categorical variables. In order to examine the correlation between roof condition (recorded as stable or unstable) and other parameters which were also recorded as binary (e.g., sandstone channel presence as yes or no), the fisher exact test was used Two sets of analyses were performed for the sites where a roof fall had occurred but was now considered to be stable: first, the statistics were run with these locations recorded as stable, and second, the statistics were run with these locations recorded as unstable.   The data presented above show that the CMRR value is correlated with the presence of faulting and the location of the data collection site at an intersection. The CMRR values are not correlated with the depth of cover, gradient of surface topography, and presence of the sandstone channel in the immediate roof. The CMRR does not account for the depth of cover surface topography or large-scale geological features, such as sandstone channels. The CMRR does not explicitly account for roof being weaker at an intersection. However, the roof at intersections may be recorded as having a lower strength, cohesion, and friction angle than the roof in the surrounding area, in which case the CMRR would implicitly capture this parameter. Although the CMRR does not explicitly record fault displacement or slip, these features appear to be captured in the CMRR parameter which records the presence of slickensides. Perhaps the more important question is whether individual parameters are correlated with actual roof condition. In order to address this, the correlations between the roof condition and the non-CMRR parameters were evaluated using the ANOVA analysis and the Fisher exact test. The The statistical results do not show a correlation between roof condition and location at an intersection, or between roof condition and the presence of faulting, despite the fact that these parameters are well correlated with the CMRR. The depth of cover and surface topography also show little correlation with the roof condition; this could be because the geology is the primary control on roof condition at Mine A, overshadowing any effect of stress-related parameters. Lastly, the correlations between roof condition and the CMRR (  For the data points collected from stable sites that had previously experienced roof fall, Faulting was the only parameter to show a statistically significant correlation with roof condition at Mine A, and only for the version of the dataset wherein currently stable areas with previous roof fall were classified as unstable. It is possible that there is insufficient data or a bias in the data collection locations, which resulted in data that is not fully representative of Mine A. It is also possible that the other parameters show more significant relationships with roof condition at other mines. This potential variability between mines makes it difficult to have a “one size fits all” approach. A much larger data set spanning multiple mines is needed to make any definitive conclusions about which additional parameters outside the CMRR could be used to predict roof failure, and how stress-related parameters should (or should not) be combined with the CMRR for roof stability assessment. The data from one Western U.S. longwall coal mine (Mine A) show no statistically significant correlation between the CMRR and the recorded roof condition using a binary stability classification. This implies that there are other parameters in addition to those included in the CMRR that are indicative of roof instability at Mine A. The CMRR values did correlate with the presence of faulting and location at an intersection. Roof locations that are currently stable but had previously been unstable showed a statistically significant correlation with faulting when the unstable condition was used in the statistical analysis. The analyses of areas previously affected by roof fall illustrate the uncertainty introduced as a result of recording a time-sensitive characteristic such as roof condition as binary data (stable or unstable). The data also suggest that faulting is the main control on roof stability at Mine A; and the other parameters did not show any statistically significant correlation with roof condition. The same data collection and analysis procedure should be carried out at other mines to broaden the data pool and allow comparison of results with those obtained at Mine A. In order to determine the sensitivity of the CMRR classification system to each of its input parameters, the CMRR values should be recalculated at each location for all but one of the inputs (e.g. calculate the CMRR without the moisture sensitivity parameter or the discontinuity intensity parameter). The correlation should be evaluated between the according CMRR output and roof condition, as well as with the other parameters. This will give an indication of how each constituent in the CMRR influences the CMRR output values. Lastly, the dataset should be reexamined with gradational rather than binary classification of roof stability. This work was supported by a