Introduction
                  Over the past few years the use of arthroplasty was broadened to treating complex epiphyseal fractures at the shoulder and elbow joints. Similar trends to treat this type of fractures at the knee are less documented. Based on a multicenter retrospective series study, the aims of this work is to evaluate the short term clinical results of total knee prostheses in the management of comminuted epiphyseal fractures around the knee, to identify the technical issues and fine tune the indications.
               
                  Material and methods
                  Following the initiative of the French Hip and Knee Society (SFHG) and the Traumatology Study Group (GETRAUM), 26 charts from eight different centers in France were included in this multicenter retrospective series. Inclusion criteria were: primary total knee arthroplasty (TKA) in the management of complex articular fractures involving the proximal end of the tibia or distal end of the femur. Surgical features were identified and complications were analyzed. The assessment protocol at last follow-up was standardized and included patient demographic data, analysis of the Parker and IKS scores.
               
                  Results
                  During the immediate postoperative period, six patients (23%) reported a general complication and four patients (15%) a local arthroplasty-related complication. At last follow-up (mean 16.2 months), the overall final Parker score was 6.3 (a mean decrease of 1.7) and the mean IKS knee score was 82 points for a mean function score of 54 points.
               
                  Discussion
                  Primary TKA is a suitable management option for complex fractures in autonomous elderly patients suffering from knee osteoarthritis. The key technical details of this procedure should be respected and meticulously planned to achieve optimal results and limit the risk of complications. This risk in these acute complex fractures remains higher than after conventional TKA but comparable to that observed after TKA for post-traumatic arthritis.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  IV; retrospective cohort study.The indications for primary elbow to evaluate the short term clinical results of primary TKA in the treatment of comminuted epiphyseal knee fractures; to identify the technical issues related to the implantation and; to precise the indications. Following the initiative of the French Hip and Knee Society and the Traumatology Study Group (GETRAUM), a national survey was carried out between the 1st of January 2010 and the 30th of September 2010 to gather the observations from primary TKA in the management of comminuted epiphyseal knee fractures. Each of these two societies associated with the “Société Française de Chirurgie Orthopédique et Traumatologique” (SOFCOT) asked its members to retrospectively include the cases. Inclusion criteria were: primary TKA in the management of complex articular fractures involving the proximal end of the tibia or distal end of the femur. Exclusion criteria were: pathologic fractures, fractures occurring close to an already implanted total knee prosthesis, revision procedures for failed osteosynthesis and revision procedures for failed orthopaedic treatment. Therefore, 26 observations from eight centers in France were included in this retrospective multicenter study. The evaluation protocol at last follow-up was standardized and included patient demographic data combined with analysis of the pre- and postoperative, Parker et al. Eight centers provided a total of 26 complete observations from patients operated between 1990 and 2010 ( The mean time between hospital admission and onset of surgery was 7.5 days (range, 1 to 22 days); in three patients, such delay was due to the presence of phlycten at the incision site. Surgery was performed by a senior operator in 20 out of 26 procedures, mainly under general anaesthesia (23 times). Resurfacing prostheses were implanted in 21 cases that is nine conventional resurfacing implants and 12 revision endomedullary implants, all being posterior-stabilized prostheses. Five rotating hinge prostheses ( The mean operative duration (for the 13 informed cases) was 124 Statistical analysis was performed using the Statis programme. The descriptive statistics included mean and extreme values. During the immediate postoperative period, six patients (23%) reported a general complication. One female patient died five days after surgery from a cerebral vascular attack (CVA); this octogenarian reported the lowest Parker score from the series (2/0/0) and her ASA score was 3. Two patients reported a spatial and temporal disorientation and one patient had a cerebrovascular accident, which resolved. Despite systematic prevention, two patients reported a phlebitis, one of which causing pulmonary embolism. Four patients (15%) reported an arthroplasty-related local complication: a wound complication in one case, which resolved and a common fibular nerve palsy. One patient had anterior tibial tubercle avulsion requiring revision. One case of incision site tissue necrosis leading to deep infection required prosthesis removal and secondary arthrodesis. At last, one patient reported a femoral fracture occurring after a fall. Two mobilizations under general anaesthesia were performed during the first postoperative weeks. The results were evaluated in 23 patients, excluding the female patient who died, the patient who underwent arthrodesis and the one patient lost to follow-up. The mean follow-up period was 16.2 months (range, 4 to 36 months); 17 patients were followed up for more than one year. At last follow-up, the place of residence was the same as in the pre-injury period for 19 patients whereas four patients previously living at home had been admitted to a community resident home after surgery. The final overall Parker's score averaged 6.3 that is a mean decrease of 1.7. The pre- and postoperative Parker's score was identical in 10 patients; A 2 to 3 points decrease was reported in 10 patients and three patients reported a decrease of more than 3 points. Over the 21 knees studied, the mean active flexion was 99° (75° to 140°). The mean active extension deficit was 4.1°; 13 out of the 18 evaluated patients did not demonstrate any flessum. The mean IKS knee score was 82 points. The function score was 54 points. According to our hypothesis, primary arthroplasty may be a suitable treatment option for knee trauma lesions in osteoporotic elderly patients. Based on the study of a retrospective multicenter series, the short term clinical results of primary TKA in the treatment of comminuted epiphyseal knee fractures, helped identify the technical-related problems during implantation and precise the indications. However this work reports major structural limitations. First, it is based on important inclusion bias: the number of cases included has probably remained lower than the number of total knee prostheses implanted for this indication in our country due to the limited publicity of this study. Moreover, the population of patients appears inhomogeneous when taking into account the variety of implants used, the time-spread of the study and the number of operators. Finally, all the records could not be assessed with the same exhaustiveness and exactness regarding item collection. However, despite these limitations, this series appears to be one of the most important among those published in the literature about primary TKA in the treatment of acute knee joint fracture. Among a population of elderly patients, the number of distal femoral fractures and/or proximal tibial is quantitatively low. As for the whole limb fractures, there is a peak of frequency from the age of 70 to 80 years attributed to osteoporotic bone fragility and domestic falls due to clumsiness or fainting This series, as those reported in the literature, may not be strictly compared to osteosyntheses performed in the same category of patients and in similar locations. Non-operatively treated lesions were not associated with arthritic damages or did not demonstrate the same degree of comminution and partially involved the epiphysis The functional results achieved in our series are comparable to those reported in the literature that is a loss of autonomy but a well-preserved joint function. These results are all the more confirmed in case of a preoperatively autonomous patient demonstrating a good general status. The rate of general and local complications is acceptable and directly linked to the preoperative status. The technical difficulties related to implantation and in particular to bone cuts are comparable in both lesional categories, one of the two epiphyses being necessarily intact. These issues were resolved individually by the different operators but the details are rarely exposed in the publications. Therefore, Patterson et Earll In case of comminuted epiphyseal fracture of the knee joint, hardly reconstructible in elderly patients reporting satisfactory general and functional status but suffering from pre-existing arthritic lesions, the use of arthroplasty appears as a suitable treatment option as confirmed by this series and shown in the literature. The Parker's score is a simple and practical indicator for functional and cognitive levels: in addition to the previous conditions, the use of arthroplasty is debatable when the preoperative score is higher than 6. By using stemmed revision implants combined with modern cutting instruments, the implantation is accessible thus allowing early rehabilitation and aided walking. The indications for this surgery must be rigorously selected and should only complement osteosynthesis procedures, which remain the reference treatment option. Dr Sarrgaglia receives royalties from B-Braun. The authors wish to acknowledge Dr R Bertin and L Soquet for their contribution in this study and the GETRAUM Group of Trauma Study as well as the Société Française de Chirurgie de la Hanche et du Genou (SFHG).