To improve microalgae harvesting efficiency and to reduce the addition of chemicals in the buoy-bead flotation process, a novel buoy-bead flotation approach has been developed for harvesting Chlorella vulgaris, using surface-layered polymeric microspheres (SLPMs). Next, the detachment of microalgae cell-SLPM aggregates and the reusability of SLPMs were investigated. The experimental results showed that a maximum harvesting efficiency of 98.43% was achieved at a SLPM dosage of 0.7 g/L and a pH of 9, and harvesting efficiency quickly decreased with increasing ionic strength. A detachment efficiency of 78.46% and a concentration factor of 19.56 were achieved at an ionic strength of 700 mM and a mixing speed of 3000 rpm without changing the pH. Reused SLPMs can still reach an efficiency of 72.13% after five cycles. The presented results show that this method can potentially be applied for large-scale microalgae harvesting.Microalgae are single-cell organisms with a wide range of uses, such as for water treatment ( Centrifugation ( Clearly, buoy-bead flotation is a promising method due to its low operating costs, low energy requirements, and high harvesting efficiency. However, the process typically requires the addition of chemicals to promote the attachment of algal cells onto microspheres ( In this study, to improve the harvesting efficiency as well as to reduce the addition of chemicals, positively charged surface-layered polymeric microspheres (SLPMs) were prepared. A buoy-bead flotation process was investigated for the harvesting of In this study, the low-cost hollow microspheres (Shanghai, Mingbo New Material Technology CO., Ltd. China) were composed of sodium borosilicate glass with a diameter of 50–60 µm. Prior to use, the microspheres were cleaned, degreased by ethanol, and carefully washed with deionized water, followed by drying at 25 °C. Multilayer films of organic compounds on solid surfaces have been extensively studied because they allow the production of multicomposite molecular assemblies of tailored architecture ( The freshwater algae The influences of various parameters (with different pH values and SLPM dosages) on buoy-bead efficiency were investigated. For every harvesting test, 1-L samples of algal solution were loaded into the flotation column, which was made from transparent acrylic sheets with an inner diameter of 3.75 cm and a height of 48.00 cm. Subsequently, the prepared SLPMs were added to the algal solution from the bottom of the column. Stirring (200 rpm) was continued for 30 sec to ensure uniform mixing and dispersion, and the solution was then allowed to float for 3 min. The top layer of the floating microalgae-SLPM aggregates was carefully collected without disturbing the subnatant portion of the algal suspension. The remaining part of the subnatant was mixed and a sample was taken to determine algal cell concentration. Harvesting efficiency was calculated as follows: To obtain the final algal biomass and to recycle SLPMs, it is required to detach the microalgae-SLPM aggregates. For this, the collected aggregates were transferred to a 1-L measuring cylinder for volume determination; the pH remained unchanged and the ionic strength of the aggregate solution was adjusted to 700 mM, representing optimum conditions for detachment. Subsequently, the aggregate solution was separated at a series of centrifugation rates (200, 500, 1000, 3000, 6000, and 9000 rmp) for 3 min (Allegra 64R Centrifuge, Beckman Coulter, Inc.); the centrifugation rates were determined according to preliminary screening experiments. The SLPMs were obtained from the top and directly reused for the following buoy-bead flotation. The remaining part of the subnatant, containing algal cells, was mixed and a sample was taken for calculating the biomass concentrations and the detachment efficiency, using the following equations: Microspheres and SLPMs were dried and mixed with KBr at a ratio of 1:100 for FTIR analysis (IL8CERNGI, PerkinElmer, USA). The influence of the SLPM dosage on the buoy-bead flotation behavior was evaluated using an Olympus microscope and a camera. At the end of the buoy-bead flotation, samples were taken from the surface flotation column and pictures of the microalgae-SPLM aggregates were taken; subsequently, the aggregate dimensions were assessed via linear dimension measurement with a calibrated scale. Three random areas were chosen for analysis (at least 25 aggregates) to ensure adequate representation of aggregate distribution ( Prior to the buoy-bead flotation experiments for harvesting microalgae using SLPMs, it is essential to study the surface characteristics of microspheres before and after modification. The presented results show that the zeta potential of microspheres was noticeably reversed after modification (from −20.40 ± 1.37 to 21.40 ± 5.60 mV), possibly because PDDA was adsorbed onto the microsphere surface ( The SLPM dosage plays a significant role in buoy-bead flotation. It is important not only to evaluate the optimum dosage for maximum harvesting efficiency, but also to prevent overdosing of SLPMs during microalgae harvesting. Hence, a series of preliminary experiments were carried out to evaluate the optimum dosage required for the harvest of microalgae via buoy-bead flotation. The effects of different SLPM dosages on harvesting To evaluate the effect of pH on the buoy-bead flotation of SLPMs (0.7 g/L), the pH values 2, 5, 7, 9, and 11 were tested. In buoy-bead flotation, ionic strength is another important parameter. For example, using the magnetic separation technique, From a practical point of view, the uncoupling of algal cell-SLPM aggregates can be of crucial importance for applications where the presence of abiotic SLPMs is undesirable. Here, detachment was carried out at an ionic strength of 700 mM at the initial pH value. Since this ionic strength is the optimum dosage for aggregate detachment, pH has a weaker impact on harvesting efficiency and does not need to be further adjusted for effective detachment, without causing cell lysis. The recovery and reuse of SLPMs are essential steps in the buoy-bead flotation process, and SLPM reusability is an important parameter of the buoy-bead flotation technology for harvesting microalgae. Previous studies reported that the microspheres can be reused numerous times ( This study focused on evaluating the use of SLPMs in buoy-bead flotation at bench scale. Some issues need to be considered, e.g., abiotic SLPMs and surface organic polymers may enter the final algal biomass. Given the SLPM size of 55 µm, any SLPMs carried over with the algal suspension will be captured in the downstream filtration processes ( Buoy-bead flotation using SLPMs is an effective method for harvesting The authors would like to thank the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: