Mixed potential phenomena occurring at the oxide/YSZ electrode in the presence of NO
                        x
                     -containing air is explained in terms of the absolute potential model, which demonstrates how maintaining a non-equilibrium state with gas phase, through catalytic inactiveness of the electrode, is important to obtain a noticeable EMF response to NO2 and NO. The directions of the EMF response of oxide electrodes to NO and NO2 gas are coincident with the prediction from the absolute potential analysis. Simulated results of anodic and cathodic currents for Pt electrode clearly show the insensitivity to NO2 and NO as suggested in the analysis.Catalytically inactive oxide electrodes In the presence of NO On the contrary, introducing NO to the sensing electrode, the following electrochemical reactions are considered to take place, Although the two separate electrochemical reactions proposed for NO Additional insight on the sensing mechanism can be obtained if the mixed potential is described in terms of the absolute potential at the sensing electrode, defined as When cell Here, If the gas contains a significant amount of oxygen together with nitrogen oxide gases at the sensing electrode, which is the case that the most of the mixed potentials for the oxide electrode has been obtained in the experiments, the absolute potential at the sensing electrode also must obey the following relation, In this case, the local equilibrium at the electrode surface requires the relation Two cases can be distinguished: (1) the electrode where NO The absolute potential of the former electrode (  On the other hand, the absolute potential of the latter electrode ( For a perfect equilibrium electrode, both NO/NO The absolute potential analysis indicates that non-equilibrium between the gas phase and the adsorbate plays a critical role in the detection of NO This work is partially supported by a Grant from the Ministry of Education, Science, Sports and Culture of Japan. The authors also wish to thank to Mr. J. Kim for the calculation of currents and to Prof. J. Fergus and Dr. P. Elumalai for reading this article.