Dolomite surface and structure was modified by mechanical activation in a planetary mill. The attention was mainly directed to the role of quartz content (<1, 49, and 72wt.%) in the modification of dolomite. The mechanically activated samples were studied by X-ray diffraction, thermal analysis, scanning electron microscopy and determination of the quadratic square mean diameter. The increased quartz content accelerated the mechanochemical deformation and amorphization of dolomite phase. While the amorphization reduced primarily the relative peak area of the (015) reflection, the deformation mostly increased the lattice strain in the (104) lattice plane. After grinding the dolomite/quartz mixtures, the thermal decomposition of dolomite showed a four- or three-step weight loss, instead of the original two- or one-step one. The mechanical activation of the mixtures produced a favourable state for the formation of calcium magnesium silicates at temperature even as low as 880°C.Dolomite finds widespread application in the ceramic, glass, chemical, pharmaceutical industry, etc. Structural changes and amorphization of quartz as a consequence of mechanical activation has been reported in several papers. Manufacturing processes often require ground products of mixtures of raw materials. One of the possible ways to produce ground mixtures is common grinding. There have been many studies on the dry grinding of dolomite The high-grade natural dolomite from Pilisvörösvár in Hungary was used in the experiments. Its chemical composition in weight % (wt.%) is MgO, 21.34; CaO, 30.58; SiO The natural sand from Fehérvárcsurgó in Hungary was used to produce samples with different quartz contents. Its chemical composition in wt.% is CaO, 0.28; SiO The samples with different quartz contents were made by homogenizing the dolomite with 50 and 75 Samples were ground (mechanically activated) for 0, 2, 4, 6 and 10 The X-ray diffraction (XRD) analyses were carried out on a Philips PW 3710 based diffractometer. The radiation applied was Cu Kα from a broad focus Cu tube, operating at 50 Thermal analyses (DTA, TG) were performed on a Derivatograph, MOM (Hungary) under dynamic heating conditions (10 The quadratic square mean diameter (QSMD) was determined from the Fraunhofer diffraction pattern by Fritsch Laser Particle-Sizer “Analysette 22” type equipment. The diffraction pattern was generated using a convergent laser beam with 632.8 The microstructure of the samples was analyzed with a scanning electron microscope (ESEM, Philips XL31) in the secondary electron mode. The instrument was equipped with an energy dispersive X-ray microanalyzer (EDX). An accelerating voltage of 20 The preliminary examination of the XRD patterns of the original and mechanically treated mixtures shows that the grinding causes a rapid broadening and decrease of the dolomite reflections while quartz peaks is almost not altered. Comparing the XRD patterns of samples with different quartz contents, it can be established that the increase in the quartz content caused an accelerated diminution of the dolomite peaks. For a more exact representation of the amorphization and the structural deformation process through diffraction data, the mean lattice distortions and the relative peak areas were determined for the (1 Rate of mass loss (DTG) curves of the original and ground D, D50, and D25 samples are shown in At the same time, the thermal decomposition of the untreated D25 sample proceeds in only one step owing to the low partial pressure of CO As a result of grinding, the first step (775 To identify the exothermic reaction of the mechanically treated D50 and D25 mixtures, extra XRD measurements were performed after the thermoanalytical investigation of these mixtures. As an illustrative example,  Scanning electron micrographs of ground D ( Different dolomite/quartz mixtures were mechanically activated by common dry grinding. On increasing the quartz content the dolomite phase showed accelerated mechanochemical deformation and amorphization. At the same time the presence of dolomite retards the crystal structural alteration of quartz. The localized deformation of the dolomite structure occurred primarily in the (1