The aim of this article is to study the growth rate of intermetallic compounds at the interface of cold roll bonded Al/Cu bimetal at 250°C and compare the results with a similar study performed on friction welding of Al to Cu. Samples of tri-layered Cu–Al–Cu composite were produced by the cold roll welding process and heat treated at constant temperature of 250°C for 1 to 1000 h. The thickness, morphology and composition of the intermetallic compound at the interface of Cu and Al were studied by optical and scanning electron microscope and EDX analyzer. The presence of various intermetallic compounds (Cu3Al, Cu4Al3, CuAl and CuAl2) was detected and the priority of formation of each compound was studied. The bond strength and electrical resistivity of different samples were measured by peeling test and a high precision micro-ohmmeter, respectively. The variations of resistivity and bond strength versus thickness of intermetallic compound were plotted. It was observed that the strength and electrical conductivity are greatly reduced by increasing the thickness of intermetallic compounds. Moreover, the growth rate of intermetallic compounds in roll welded bimetal composite is lower compared with that reported for similar friction welded specimens.Metallurgically welded Al to Cu is widely used as a transition piece in high direct-current bus systems to transmit the electricity From the point of view of the welding process, Al and Cu are incompatible metals because they have a high affinity to each other at temperatures greater than 120°C and produce brittle, low strength and high electrical resistance intermetallics on their interface Although, according to the reports of previous authors, during both the friction and roll welding processes, the formation of intermetallic compounds are inhibited In both processes, there is a nonequilibrium state or metastable condition at the weld interface. This metastable condition provides a driving force for nucleation and growth of intermetallic compounds and the amount of driving force depends on the history and mechanism of the bond formation. Cold roll welding processes ( The surface treatment of both Al and Cu to remove surface contamination. Aligning and fixing the aluminum and copper strips in a pack. Cold rolling of pack ( The friction welding process, In this article the growth rate of intermetallic compounds at the interface of cold roll bonded Al/Cu bimetal at 250°C is studied and compared with the results of a similar study on friction welding of Al to Cu presented in Ref. In this investigation the electrical grade of copper strips (UNS No. C11000 as annealed) and aluminum plates (UNS A91050-H12) were roll welded at room temperature (20–25°C). The composition and properties of the Al plates and Cu strips are summarized in To produce a satisfactory metallurgical bond by cold roll welding, it was essential to remove the contamination layers on the surfaces of two metals to be joined Detergent washing, degreasing of surfaces, and water rinsing. Final cleaning of surfaces by a powerful solvent (propanon: CH Scratch brushing for removal of oxide film on both surfaces of the aluminum plate and copper strip. The bristles of the brush were made of stainless steel wire with a thickness of 0.3 mm. Horizontal speed of work pieces under the brush, outside diameter and rotational speed of brush were 50 cm/min, 17.5 cm and 650 rpm respectively. After the surface preparation a fixed pack of aluminum and copper was made in order that the pack pass uniformly and adjustably through the roller gap. The rolling of the pack is shown in The last step for making the tri-layer bimetal was to cold-weld the two metals by the rolling process. In this step by applying 72% reduction in total thickness of the pack a sound metallurgical bond between Cu strip and Al plate was achieved. Roll diameter, surface roughness of rolls ( The produced bimetal samples were heat treated at constant temperature of 250°C for 1 to 1000 h with temperature deviation of ±2°C. Then the interfaces of Al and Cu were studied by optical and electron microscopes and EDX analysis to detect the formation, thickness and composition of intermetallic compounds. Thicknesses of intermetallic layers were measured by the computer controlled image analyzer of the electron microscope with a precision of 0.1 micron. For evaluating the bond strength of samples a 10 kN tensile testing machine was used and the mean peeling force of welded layers was measured. All samples were tested by a crosshead speed of 1 cm/min. The repeatability of tests and the sensitivity of the load cell were 0.5 N and 0.1 N, respectively. The peeling force was measured using the following relation: The electrical resistance of Al/Cu tri-layer samples was measured using a high precision micro-ohmmeter with accuracy of 0.01 micro-ohm. The micro-ohmmeter was passing a certain current ( The other dimensions of the sample (width and thickness, 15 mm×4.8 mm) were measured by a micrometer of 0.01 mm accuracy and then the resistivity ( The gradual growth of intermetallic layers with increasing annealing time is observed in the micrographs presented in From the inserted plot in Electron microscopy observations of Al/Cu samples at the interface exhibit five layers between Al and Cu, including four major intermetallic compounds and an intermediate layer of saturated solid solution, For a binary system of Al–Cu and a diffusion-controlled process the composition has to change from low to high Al-content without a decrease in between. Therefore, it is not expected that the solid solution layer, with a low amount of Al content, be situated between the Al-richer compounds (Cu The results of change in resistance of the samples with increasing intermetallic thickness are presented in The proportional constant Another interesting property of the produced bimetal samples was their resistivity. The theoretical values of resistivity of bimetal for parallel current are calculated from the following equation In the absence of intermetallic compounds the theoretical value of bimetal conductivity (inverse of resistivity) is equal to 40.65 m/Ω.mm The results of change in the conductivity of samples with increasing intermetallic thickness are plotted in One can obtain the constants The variation of peeling force versus thickness of intermetallic layer is plotted in The following conclusions may be achieved from the present work: For cold roll welded Al/Cu bimetal the growth rate of intermetallic compound at a constant temperature of 250°C is noticeably smaller compared with that of the friction welding process. For cold roll welded Al/Cu bimetal the relation between annealing time and the square of intermetallic width ( Priority of formation of intermetallic phases in cold roll welding of electrical grade of aluminum and copper samples is such that the intermetallic compounds Cu For the binary system of Al–Cu and a diffusion-controlled process the composition has to change from low to high Al-content without a decrease in between. The fact that a decrease of Al in between Al-richer layers is found might be caused by presence of impurities such as Si and Fe. The relation between conductivity and intermetallic width can be presented by a three-order function as below: Using such a relationship, it is possible to determine the thickness of the intermetallic layer by a nondestructive resistivity test. There is a critical width of intermetallic compound at which the strength of bond is sharply reduced and a ductile to brittle behavior is observed. For the cold roll welding and experiments of this research the critical width is about 2.5 microns.