An effective separation of kyanite from quartz by flotation is a challenge due to their similar surface properties and surface activation by metal ions. This study investigated the effect of pH, Fe3+ and sodium silicate on the separation of kyanite from quartz using anionic collector, sodium petroleum sulfonate (SPS). Zeta potential measurement, infrared spectroscopic analysis and chemical speciation were conducted to identify the underpinning mechanisms. It was found that a good separation of kyanite from quartz was achieved at pH=4.0 due to the selective adsorption of SPS on kyanite. However, the presence of Fe3+ altered the electrical property on quartz which became attractive to SPS, enhanced quartz flotation and hence exacerbated the separation of kyanite from quartz. It is interesting that sodium silicate selectively depressed the flotation of iron-activated quartz by covering the activation sites and prohibiting collector adsorption. Although sodium silicate also interacted with kyanite, SPS still adsorbed on kyanite through reacting with Al atoms and therefore the depression of kyanite flotation by sodium silicate in the presence of Fe3+ was limited.Kyanite is an important metamorphic nesosilicate with a chemical formula of Al The grade of most kyanite deposits in the world is between 10% and 25% and therefore a concentration process is necessary in order to produce kyanite products which can meet industrial needs ( The pH plays an important role in the selective flotation of kyanite from silicate gangue minerals. Another problem in kyanite flotation is the undesirable activation of silicate gangue minerals by metal ions. One of the common ions is Fe The depression of activated quartz is necessary in order to achieve efficient separation of kyanite from quartz. Sodium silicate is used to depress the flotation of quartz activated by metal ions. In this study, the flotation behavior of both kyanite and quartz and their separation were studied at acidic pH in the presence of sodium petroleum sulfonate. FeCl Kyanite and quartz single minerals were supplied from a kyanite mine in Nanyang, Henan, China. High grade kyanite and quartz were handpicked, crushed in a roll crusher, dry ground in a porcelain mill and then screened to collect −0.10 Sodium petroleum sulfonate (SPS) was used as the collector. It is of industrial grade and has an average molecular weight of 480. Sodium metasilicate (Na A laboratory mechanical flotation cell with a volume of 35 Experimental design was conducted to identify the collector dosage and pH to allow the effective flotation of kyanite, Fe For zeta potential measurement, the samples were ground in an agate mortar. The particle size of the ground powder was below 2 Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) analysis was conducted by a Nicolet iS10 FTIR Spectrometer. Slurry samples were collected directly from the flotation cell after conditioning with the reagents and then dried in a vacuum oven. A small amount of mineral samples was mixed with KBr and ground in an agate mortar. The ground powder was pressed into a pellet and then transferred into the spectrometer for measurement. Flotation tests were conducted by using kyanite and quartz single minerals. The effect of pH on the flotation recovery when using 3.0 The effect of SPS concentration on the flotation recovery of kyanite and quartz at pH 4.0 is shown in In real ores, kyanite is often associated with iron oxides which can release Fe  Following single mineral flotation, the separation of kyanite from quartz was further studied by using a 1:1 mixture of these two minerals. The slurry pH was adjusted to 4.0. The concentration of Fe To understand the interaction of SPS with kyanite and quartz, FTIR was applied to measure the adsorption of SPS on mineral surfaces.  To better understand the adsorption of collector on kyanite and quartz, electrokinetic phenomenon of mineral suspensions was also investigated. The different adsorption of SPS on kyanite and quartz may be related to their crystal structure and surface properties. Kyanite is triclinic with space group P1 with each oxygen atom bonded with one Si Quartz belongs to the trigonal crystal system. Each silicon atom is connected to four oxygen atoms in order to form a stable silicon tetrahedron (SiO  Flotation results indicate that the addition of Fe The interaction of Fe Depending on the pH, different iron species may be present in the slurry. The following are the balanced equations and equilibrium constants of iron species in flotation slurry (  At flotation pH 4.0, the main iron species is Fe(OH) The effect of sodium silicate on the adsorption of collector on iron-activated kyanite and quartz was studied by FTIR. Zeta potential measurement was further applied to analyze the effect of sodium silicate on the change of surface charges. Sodium silicate is an alkali salt and strong hydrolysis reaction occurs in aqueous solution ( Based on Eqs. It is important to note that both Si Sodium petroleum sulfonate (SPS) was an effective collector for kyanite flotation against quartz at acidic pH. The presence of Fe FTIR analysis and zeta potential measurement confirm that SPS adsorbs on kyanite but does not adsorb on un-activated quartz. Kyanite surface is positively charged at pH 4 and therefore the adsorption can occur through electrostatic attraction. In addition, SPS may also react with Al The activation of quartz by Fe The addition of sodium silicate produced negatively charged colloidal silica particles and SiO(OH) The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of this study from