Grinding is an important pre-treatment process in mineral processing. Different grinding media produces minerals with different flotation performance. This study investigated the flotation performance of calcite particles of size −74 + 38 μm produced by ceramic and steel media grinding through single mineral flotation experiments, zeta potential measurements, and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) tests. The flotation results showed that calcite produced by ceramic media grinding had better flotation recovery than that produced by steel media grinding. Zeta potential measurement results indicated that the surface of calcite produced by ceramic media grinding had more adsorbed sodium oleate (NaOL) than that produced by steel media grinding. XPS results revealed Fe, specifically, Fe(0), Fe(II), and Fe(III), on the surface of calcite produced by steel media grinding but none on that produced by ceramic media grinding.Grinding is a pre-treatment process used in flotation for achieving sufficient mineral liberation and particle size reduction. In the grinding mills, ground minerals intensively interact and collide with grinding media. The particle sizes of these minerals decrease as fresh surfaces are exposed under such interaction and collision, and different grinding media produces mineral surfaces with different properties ( In grinding mills, abrasion, impact, and corrosion wear gradually degrade the grinding media, especially in steel media grinding ( Calcite, a typical non-sulfide and calcium-bearing mineral, usually coexists with scheelite and fluorite. Worldwide, steel media is normally the first choice for grinding because of its low cost. The dissolution and corrosion of steel will also affects the flotation behavior of calcium-bearing minerals. Therefore, this study aims to investigate the effects of grinding media on flotation performance of calcite. It is hoped that this study can provide further knowledge about calcite flotation and contribute to the flotation separation of calcium-bearing minerals. Calcite (99% pure) was obtained from Jiangxi, China. Large calcite crystals were ground with steel and ceramic media in parallel in a 1.5 L ceramic pot using a roller ball mill with grinding concentrate 50% and media filling rate 50%. The grinding products were dried in a vacuum oven below 35 °C and sieved to collect particles with size of −74 + 38 μm for single mineral flotation tests. Particles further ground to −5 μm in an agate mortar were used for zeta potential measurements. Sodium oleate (NaOL), a typical collector for calcium mineral flotation, was purchased from Shanghai Maikun Chemical Co., Ltd., Shanghai, China. HCl and NaOH were used as pH regulators. All reagents were of analytical grade. Deionized water was used in all tests. Single mineral flotation tests were conducted in a XFGC flotation machine (Exploration Machinery Plant, Changchun, China) at 1680 rpm with a 40 ml cell ( Zeta potential measurements were conducted at 25 °C using a Malvern Zetasizer Nano ZS90 (Malvern Instruments, UK). The zeta potentials of the minerals with and without reagent (NaOL) treatment were measured. For the measurements, 100 mg of purified −5 μm calcite particles were suspended in 35 ml of deionized water. The pH of the pulp was adjusted using HCl or NaOH solutions. Flotation reagents were added at a desired concentration, and the condition time for each reagent was set at 10 min. The tests were repeated three times with good reproducibility, and the average results were chosen and considered to be accurate. Calcite particles (−74 + 38 μm) ground by ceramic and steel media were used as the test samples. The X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements were performed using a Thermo Escalab 250 XI (Thermo Scientific Co., USA) with Al Ka radiation (12 kV and 6 mA) at pressure of 5.0 × 10      From the results of this investigation, the following conclusions can be drawn: Calcite particles produced by ceramic media grinding adsorb more NaOL, resulting in a better floatability than those produced by steel media grinding. In the case of steel media grinding, the hydrophilic Fe(0), Fe(II), and Fe(III) species were found on the calcite surfaces, which could decrease the floatability of calcite particles.. This work was financially supported by the