The interactions of serpentine with talc and implications for talc depression by carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC) have been investigated through flotation tests, sedimentation tests and zeta potential measurements. Talc is a hydrophobic mineral and CMC is effective for talc depression. At pH value 9, where flotation of nickel sulfide ores is routinely performed, the two magnesium silicate bearing (MgO) gangue minerals are oppositely charged and therefore attract through an electrostatic mechanism. Slime coatings of serpentine adhere to the surface of talc, reducing talc flotation recovery to some extent, but also causing problem to its depression by CMC as serpentine is a hydrophylic gangue mineral which cannot be depressed by CMC depressant. Pretreatment of serpentine with acid leaching results in a shift of the zero charge points, from pH value 10.2 to 6.8 and the leached serpentine is negatively charged at pH 9. The negatively charged serpentine does not interfere with the talc depression by CMC. Adsorption of sodium hexametaphosphate (SHMP) at the serpentine/solution interface also compensates the positive charge on the serpentine particle and its zeta potential is rendered negative. When the serpentine surface is negatively charged, a repulsive interaction energy generates and serpentine slimes drop off from the surface of talc, allowing talc to once again be depressed by CMC.In nickel sulfide processing, magnesium silicate bearing gangue minerals often report to the concentrate causing downstream processing problems as well as increased smelting costs. Talc and serpentine are gangue minerals commonly encountered in complex sulfide ores ( Depressants play an important role in effecting selective separation of minerals from ores by flotation. Polysaccharides and their derivatives are effective depressants for talc and other magnesia-bearing minerals. There are numerous reports ( In the present study, the interactions of serpentine with talc and their influences on the depression of talc using CMC as depressant were studied. Moreover, the method that uses SHMP to eliminate the interactions is also discussed, providing a reference for further study. The serpentine used for all experiments was obtained from Donghai, Jiangsu Province, China. Mineralogical and X-ray powder diffraction data confirmed that the serpentine sample was of high purity with trace amounts of chlorite. The sample was dry ground and screened. The grain size distribution is shown in Leached serpentine was prepared by leaching pure serpentine sample in solution at pH 3 for 24 The sample of CMC used in the study was obtained from Tianjing Kermil Chemical Reagents Development Centre, Tianjing, China. The molecular weight of CMC is 700,000 and degree of substituent (DS) is 0.9. The CMC solution was prepared by dispersing a known weight of sample in cold distilled water and then dissolving it in boiling distilled water. The solutions were prepared fresh each day. Potassium nitrate was used to maintain the ionic strength and hydrochloric acid (HCl) and potassium hydroxide (KOH) were used as pH regulators. All the reagents used in this study were of analytical grade. Deionized double distilled water was used for all tests. Single mineral flotation tests were carried out in a mechanical agitation flotation machine at a constant rate. The mineral suspension was prepared by adding 2.0 Coagulation and dispersion between serpentine and talc were studied using the sedimentation tests. For the sedimentation tests, 0.1 Zeta potential measurements on talc and serpentine were carried out using a zeta plus zeta potentialmeter. Potassium nitrate was used to maintain the ionic strength at 10 Heterocoagulation is usually described by the DLVO theory ( The model used to describe the EDL interaction energy is based on the Poisson–Boltzmann equation, which describes the electrostatic potential in an ionic solution as a function of position relative to the particle surface and has been found to be accurate down to separations of a few nanometres ( The van der Waals interaction energy is The Hamaker constant for talc/water/serpentine, is not available in literature. For talc ( When medium 3 is water ( The effect of pH on the floatability of talc and serpentine in the absence and presence of CMC is shown in Sodium hexametaphosphate, also known as Calgon, has widespread use as a dispersant in the minerals industry. The effect of sodium hexametaphosphate on the flotation of talc and serpentine was also studied and the results were presented in The experimental results described above show that serpentine is a hydrophilic gangue mineral and its flotation is not depressed by CMC, which is effective for talc depression. In order to investigate whether or not serpentine interferes with talc depression by CMC, talc and serpentine were mixed by 1:1 (mass ratio) and floated at pH 9 using CMC and SHMP as depressants, and the result is presented in These results illustrate that some interactions exist between serpentine and talc, which lowers the flotation recovery of talc and interferes with talc depression by CMC. SHMP can eliminate these interactions and allow talc to once again be depressed by CMC. In order to investigate the reason for the decreased CMC depression effect on talc in the presence of serpentine, one needs to evaluate how the serpentine interacts with the talc particles. To ascertain this, the zeta potential of talc and serpentine particles were analyzed. It can be seen from The acid leaching changes the surface characteristics of serpentine and shifts the PZC of serpentine from pH 10.2 to 6.2. At pH 9, both talc and leached serpentine are negatively charged, so the interaction between talc and serpentine will be negligible. Turbidity technique, due to its non-invasive, non-contact properties, is well suited to studies of colloidal suspensions. The turbidity value of suspensions reflects the particle numbers of colloidal suspensions. A decrease of turbidity value indicates a decrease in particle number, which is the result of particle aggregation. The sedimentation tests results in As a result of serpentine adsorption, the surface characters of talc become similar to that of serpentine, which is less hydrophobic and therefore its flotation recovery decreases ( Addition of a negatively charged regulator, such as SHMP, has been found to disperse fine particles from the target mineral surface ( Particle interaction energys in aqueous solution are commonly described through application of DLVO theory, which allows quantitative prediction of the interaction energy. The zeta potential values for the serpentine and talc surface can be obtained from the electro-kinetic results in Evidence of the attachment and removal of serpentine particles onto talc are shown in Addition of a negatively charged reagent, SHMP, has been found to render the zeta potential of serpentine negative and change the interaction forces between a talc and serpentine particle from attraction force to repulsive force. From From the results of this investigation, the following conclusions can be drawn: At pH 9, where flotation of nickel sulfide ores is routinely performed, the two magnesium silicate bearing (MgO) gangue minerals, talc and serpentine, are oppositely charged and therefore attract through an electrostatic mechanism. As serpentine is naturally hydrophilic and cannot be depressed by CMC, the formation of serpentine slime coatings on talc surface reduces the flotation recovery of talc to some extent, but also interferes with talc depression by CMC. The attraction between the two minerals is changed to an electrostatic repulsion as the result of serpentine becoming negatively charged as SHMP (a negatively charged modifier) adsorbs preferentially on its surface. SHMP therefore acts as a dispersant of the hydrophilic serpentine slime particles from the talc surface, which results in the improved talc depression. Acidic leaching has the same effect as SHMP does. The authors acknowledge the support of the National Basic Research Program of China (2007CB613602).