The review paper deals with the results of the utilization of mechanical activation in hydrometallurgy. The definition of mechanochemistry is given as well as physicochemical changes in mechanically activated minerals are described. The enhancement of the leaching processes in hydrometallurgy is illustrated. The chemical and bacterial leaching of sulphide minerals are given as examples. A brief description of the established technologies (LURGI-MITTERBERG, ACTIVOX™, MELT) applying mechanical activation for metals extraction is given. In these processes, the introduction of mechanical activation step into technological cycle significantly modifies the subsequent processing steps.“Mechanochemistry is a branch of chemistry which is concerned with chemical and physicochemical transformations of substances in all states of aggregation produced by the effect of mechanical energy”. This general definition has been formulated by The term mechanochemistry was introduced by However, the traces of this science with many applications in hydrometallurgy go deep in the past The term mechanical activation was introduced by The multistage character of mechanical activation requires the application of mills with different working regimes. In fact, there are various factors affecting the operation of the grinding process in mechanical activation The primary effect of mechanical activation is comminution of mineral particles that results in changes in a great number of physicochemical properties of a particular system. This disintegration by high-energy grinding is accompanied by an increase in the number of particles and by generation of fresh, previously unexposed surface. The measurement of specific area, particle size analysis and particle morphology To appreciate the disordering in the bulk of minerals as an consequence of mechanical activation, the method of X-ray diffractometry is frequently applied. The diffraction line (002) of mechanically activated MoS The disordering of surface layers of minerals occurs during mechanical activation in the presence of air oxygen Among the physicochemical changes in minerals, a mechanically stimulated phase transformations was also identified The traditional scheme of metals extraction from minerals involves some processes of mechanical character ameliorating the accessibility of the valuable component by the leaching agent. Leaching represents the key stage in the extraction scheme and its course may be affected by selection and choice of the method of leaching and/or by convenient pretreatment of the solid phase. Thermal and mechanical activation belongs to the most important pretreatment methods that influence mineral leachability. The mechanical activation of minerals makes it possible to reduce their decomposition temperature or cause such a degree of disordering that the thermal activation may be omitted entirely Generally, the mechanical activation of mineral leads to a positive influence on the leaching kinetics. It has been documented by If It was In the third case where Hydrometallurgical treatment of CuFeS The influence of conditions of the mechanical activation on physicochemical changes in chalcopyrite and on kinetics of the  the first step is the dissolution of surface layers formed by mechanochemical surface reaction, the active sites, which are characterized by the presence of β-CuFeS Ferric chloride oxidative leaching of mechanically activated CuFeS The leaching of galena PbS with ferric chloride follows the equation The reaction produces elemental sulphur in solid state which is a great merit of this process when compared with the classical pyrometallurgical method which forms gaseous SO The leaching curves for galena mechanically activated for 5 and 10 min in a planetary mill as well as for a nonactivated sample are presented in Among acid nonoxidizing leaching agents, HCl and H Leaching of sphalerite by dilute H The mechanically activated samples of silver bearing tetrahedrite were subjected to thiourea leaching. Thiourea CS(NH Enargite belongs to a group of minerals with very low extractability of copper. Both acid and ammonia leaching were examined for copper extraction, however, these processes were not selective because the arsenic passed into solution with the copper. On the other hand, the leaching of enargite in alkaline sodium sulphide solutions offers the possibility of selective leaching Bacterial leaching is based on processes that occur at atmospheric pressure and low temperatures. The leaching medium is primarily composed of diluted H One of the drawbacks of the application of bacteria is the time of leaching which is typically days as opposed to minutes or hours for chemical leaching. Mechanical activation may give an increase in the rate of leaching due to an increase in the surface area where the attachment of bacteria can occur and by disordering the mineral structure resulting in an overall increase in reactivity. The process of bacterial leaching of mechanically activated pyrite has been studied by The structural disorder of pyrite increases with time of mechanical activation. In addition to an increase in overall surface, new boundaries and cracks, accompanied by the formation of lattice defects and imperfections of a submicroscopic scale, come into existence. From the energetic point of view, a sufficient supply of sulphur on these sites (supported by increased diffusivities), produces an increased metabolic activity of bacteria which manifests itself by pitting on the surface of pyrite. Such explanation can be used for the samples mechanically activated for up 30 min, where the rate of bacterial leaching increases with grinding time Mechanical activation is an innovative procedure where an improvement in hydrometallurgical processes can be attained via a combination of new surface area and formation of crystalline disorder in minerals. The lowering of reaction temperatures, the increase of rate and amount of solubility, preparation of water-soluble compounds, the necessity for simpler and less expensive reactors and shorter reaction times are some of the advantages of mechanical activation The method of mechanical activation has been tested for many ore concentrates in order to develop the proper technological flow sheet. Sulphide concentrates with Fe, Cu, Pb, Zn, Ni, Mo, As, Au and Re content were tested in order to utilize the advantage of mechanical activation The verification of the effect of mechanical activation has been applied also for the concentrates of rutile A few of the activities have been tested on industrial scale and brief outlines of these processes are given below. According to the proposes of the process, the leachability of copper from chalcopyrite concentrate can be improved by mechanical activation of the concentrate in a vibration mill. If the performance of the mill is sufficient, a complete extraction of the copper can be achieved in single step at temperatures below the melting point of sulphur. The flow sheet of the process is represented in The product obtained after grinding the concentrate is mixed with the recycled electrolyte from the extraction of copper. The electrolysis proceeded at pressures of 1–2 MPa and residence time of 2 h, the efficiency being 0.6 t m The process was developed in Australia as an alternative to the pretreatments of sulphidic concentrates by roasting and bacterial oxidation Alkaline sodium sulphide leaching of tetrahedrite (Cu The data presented in the review paper show that hydrometallurgy, aimed at wet production of metals from sulphidic ores, is an area suitable for successful verification of the knowledge accumulated by mechanical activation of minerals. Physicochemical changes in minerals, their chemical and bacterial leaching are given as examples. Several commercially processes are examined and their flow sheets are presented. In these processes, the introduction of a mechanical activation step into technological cycle significantly modifies the subsequent operations. The author would like to thank Deutscher Akademische Austauschdienst (DAAD) and Prof. Dr.-Ing. habil. E. Gock for the support during his stay at the Technical University Clausthal. The help of Dr. E. Godočı́ková by preparation of the manuscript is appreciated. The research activities were kindly supported by the Slovak Grant Agency for Science (Grant 2/2103/22).