A bioflocculant produced by Azotobacter chroococcum, a natural polymer containing sugar and protein, can be used to flocculate coal waste slurry, but electrostatic repulsion impacts the flocculation of quartz attached to the solid coal particles. In this work, cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) combined with this bioflocculant were used to flocculate coal waste slurry. The adsorption and zeta potential of CTAB on quartz, kaolinite, and organic matter were investigated in aqueous media. The results show that the data for CTAB adsorption fit the typical Langmuir adsorption model, and that the CTAB adsorption level is higher in an alkaline medium than in an acidic medium. The electrostatic interaction and formation of π-complexes contributed to the adsorption of CTAB on minerals and organic matter. Zeta potential measurements demonstrated that the point of zero charge values shifted to higher pH values after CTAB adsorption on mineral and organic matter surfaces. Furthermore, the behavior of the bioflocculant with the addition of CTAB was investigated to determine the effect of CTAB on the flocculation of coal waste slurry; quartz, kaolinite, and organic matter were used for comparison. Flocculation tests indicated that the optimum CTAB dosage for obtaining higher flocculation rates and clearer suspension of organic matter, quartz, and kaolinite was 50, 100, and 40 mg/L, respectively. A higher flocculation rate and clearer suspension of quartz were obtained in a very acidic medium, while organic matter suspension continued to increase in the pH range of 2.2–6.2 and remained almost constant in an alkaline medium. In addition, there were no significant changes in the flocculation rate or turbidity of kaolinite with an increase in pH. CTAB exhibited significant enhancement in terms of flocculation of coal waste slurry when the bioflocculant was used as a flocculant. Finally, surface tension measurements were taken to confirm the interaction between the bioflocculant and CTAB. The results show that CTAB could bind to the bioflocculant and form complexes.The flocculation technique is a method most commonly used for the dewatering and settling of fine solid particles. In this process, polymers are indispensable agents. Bioflocculant, a natural polymer, has the ability to flocculate kaolin According to previous studies, metal cations play an important role in flocculation using a polysaccharide bioflocculant. Cations can destabilize the colloid suspension through a bridging mechanism, and by neutralizing negatively-charged solid particles The present paper aims to investigate CTAB enhancement for coal waste slurry dewatering using the bioflocculant produced by Coal waste slurry with a solids content of about 6.85% was obtained from the WP Coal Preparation Plant, China. A proximate analysis indicated that the total ash content of the solid particles in the coal waste slurry was 31.70%. An X-ray diffraction analysis of the solid particles was conducted and is shown in Pure kaolinite and quartz minerals were obtained from Hebei, China. The results of the X-ray diffraction pattern ( Organic matter was extracted by eliminating the minerals of the solid particles in the coal waste slurry. The coal waste slurry and dilute HF and HCl solutions were added to a flask. Afterward, the flask was placed on a thermostat at 50 °C, and the mixtures were stirred for a period of time. The reaction mixtures were filtered and washed five times with deionized water. Then, the obtained organic matter was filtered and dried, and finally the ash content was analyzed using the proximate analysis method. The above steps were repeated until the ash content was reduced to 0.1%. The bioflocculant was produced by a strain of The surfactant CTAB has a molecular weight (MW) of 364.45 g/mol. Its critical micelle concentration (CMC) is 9.2 × 10 Flocculation experiments were conducted in a 250 mL graduated cylinder. The pH value of the suspension (organic matter, kaolinite, and quartz) was adjusted by HCl or NaOH solutions in beakers. The desired amount of CTAB solution was added to the suspension, followed by stirring at 150 rpm for 5 min. Then, the bioflocculant with known values of concentration and volume was added to the suspension and magnetically stirred for 5 min. The mixture was then transferred to a graduated cylinder. The supernatant in the upper three quarters of the cylinder was suctioned off for optical density determination (550 nm) and turbidity measurement after settling for 12 h. The effects of pH and CATB concentration were investigated. Adsorption experiments were carried out on organic matter, kaolinite, and quartz. In each case, 0.5 g of sample was added to 500 mL of aqueous CTAB solution (200 mg/L) at the required pH. The suspension was then shaken using a 500 mL flat-bottomed flask immersed in a thermostatic magnetic shaker bath (25 °C) at a speed of 600 rpm. The effect of the mixing time on the adsorption was investigated at pH 7.0. Similarly, the effect of pH on the vortex shaker was studied after 120 min of mixing, and appropriate amounts of HCl or NaOH were added to achieve the desired pH. At the end of the adsorption period, the supernatant was centrifuged for 20 min at 3662 Zeta potential measurements of organic matter, kaolinite, and quartz were carried out. A suspension containing approximately 0.1 g organic matter or minerals and 100 mL of CTAB solution (50 mg/L) was stirred, and its pH was adjusted to the desired value using NaOH or HCl. Then, electrophoretic measurements were carried out separately, after conditioning and upon standing the suspension to equilibrate the pH. The surface tension of CTAB in the presence and absence of the bioflocculant was recorded using a QBZY-3 pendant-drop profile analysis tension meter (Shanghai FangRui Instrument Limited Company, China). Each measurement was performed at 25 °C five times, and the average value was calculated. The equilibrium surface excess of CTAB on organic matter, kaolinite, and quartz as a function of contact time at pH 7.0 is illustrated in The pH of a solution is a major factor affecting the surface electrical properties of particles, especially those that possess highly charged groups in hydro-solvents. The adsorption of surfactants on charged solid particles is affected remarkably by a change in the pH of the solution. In order to investigate the effect of pH on the amount of CTAB adsorbed, experiments were conducted with an initial CTAB concentration of 200 mg/L and an adsorption time of 120 min. The results are shown in The changes in zeta potential of the kaolinite, quartz, and organic matter suspensions before and after interaction with CTAB as a function of pH are shown in In our previous study The effects on the turbidity of the suspension were observed with an increase in the CTAB dosage. When CTAB was initially added, turbidity values decreased rapidly, but the turbidity values did not decrease at higher CTAB concentrations. The turbidity values of quartz and organic suspensions decreased to 16.1 and 17.49 NTU, respectively, when the CTAB dosage was 50 mg/L. However, with increased CTAB dosages, the turbidity increased drastically. The optimum CTAB dosage is expected to be 50 mg/L for both quartz and organic matter. This result is similar to that of a previous study on enhancing sludge dewatering by CTAB and cationic flocculants The pH of the suspension is a critical factor in flocculant and surfactant adsorption at the particle–water interface, and can determine the extent of the flocculation effect  The flocculation rates and turbidity values of the organic matter suspension continued to rise in the pH range of 2.2–6.2, but were almost constant in an alkaline medium. An excellent flocculation rate (96.2%) and low turbidity value (18.6 NTU) were obtained at a pH of 6.2. The change in particle surface charge caused by the pH is not beneficial to the adsorption of bioflocculants by organic matter, because anionic bioflocculants are adsorbed by the negatively charged organic particles via a bridging mechanism as a result of hydrophobic forces  In order to confirm the interaction between CTAB and the bioflocculant, surface tension measurements were taken. The bioflocculant alone has a limited effect on flocculation behavior, because flocculation occurs mainly owing to the electrostatic repulsion between the negatively charged bioflocculant and quartz. The literature implies that CTAB is an ideal reagent for flocculation owing to its easy adsorption. The CTAB molecules or positive ions are adsorbed on the solid particle surfaces by their hydrophilic group, neutralizing negative charges, while their hydrophobic part orients away from the solid particles. The CTAB adsorption isotherms of the solid compositions in coal waste slurry were discovered to be a representative of the Langmuir adsorption model for monolayer coverage, and the adsorption levels were determined according to the following order at pH 7: organic matter > kaolinite > quartz. The adsorption level of CTAB was seen to be higher in an alkaline medium than in an acidic medium. Furthermore, the zeta potential evaluation showed that CTAB could neutralize the negative charges on the quartz, kaolinite, and organic matter surfaces. A combination of CTAB and a bioflocculant was investigated in flocculation tests by analyzing the flocculation rate and turbidity. The addition of CTAB was effective in the flocculation of kaolinite, quartz, and organic matter. The pH of the suspension had less effect on the flocculation of kaolinite and organic matter than on quartz. CTAB significantly enhanced the flocculation of coal waste slurry when used with a bioflocculant. The flocculation rate increased by 22.86% when 20 mg/L of CTAB was added to the coal waste slurry with the bioflocculant. The charge regulation of the solid particles, binding of CTAB to the bioflocculant, and formation of complexes were the main mechanisms for improving coal waste slurry flocculation with CTAB and the bioflocculant. The authors acknowledge the financial support of the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: