Pellet-flocs are the result of modified flocculation performance. They are spherically shaped and can reach several millimeters in size. Since pellet-floc aggregates are created from macroflocs and these from microflocs and these, in turn, from primary solid particles, it can be expected that the total porosity is composed of porosities resulting from spaces between all these sub-elements. Accordingly, micro- and macroporosity can be distinguished in the interior structure of pellet-flocs.
                  Although considerable attention has been given to total aggregate porosity measurement, no reports can be found about the full morphological characteristics of different types of pores. Moreover, there is no single reliable method that can accurately obtain values for the respective fractions of pore volume (microporosity, macroporosity) within a relatively big floc aggregate.
                  This work is an approach to probe the porosity within pellet-flocs at different size levels by combining the outcomes from different examination methods.
                  Pellet-floc aggregates were investigated using the following techniques: free settling, light microscopy of resin-embedded microtome slices and scanning electron microscopy (SEM).
                  The results confirmed that the biggest portion of porosity is composed of micropores in the size range of a few microns, which were first visible by SEM image analysis. Light microscopy of resin-embedded microtome slices is an accurate method to obtain so called macroporosity of a whole agglomerate with equivalent pore diameter above 50μm. The study of free settling data revealed satisfactorily the total porosity of pellet-flocs. Finally, a multilevel porosity model of pellet-flocs could be obtained.Flocculation processes form an integral part of water and waste treatment as well as the processing of mineral suspensions. A knowledge of floc characteristics is of great importance for further optimization of flocculation processes. For example, floc size, porosity and density can be controlled by the flocculant attributes Particularly the analysis of the inner and outer morphology of floc aggregates may yield important information about process performance. In the past, real systems were described with the help of simple models, which postulated a correlation between floc porosity and floc size The evaluation of porosity of flocs on microtome sections using an optical microscope has the potential to overcome the problem mentioned above. The porosity is then usually calculated as a ratio of the area occupied by pores to the total cross section of floc. In general, the porosity coming from image analysis is much lower than the porosity estimated on the basis of Stokes law. The values may vary sometimes by a factor of 10. For example, Gorczyca and Ganczarczyk Another technique to evaluate porosity by measuring wet volume of flocs and then their dry mass, yields values in the range of those calculated using Stokes law The combination of several techniques seems to be the most effective way to gather information about the real porosity of floc structure. For example, in the case of pellet-flocs presented here, one can distinguish the existence of different pore systems that come into their own when detected by different techniques. Due to their extremely stable structure, these pellet-flocs can be examined in different ways without much danger of being broken. Conventional flocculation processes are usually carried out by high energy gradients; this results in the formation of irregular and fluffy flocs. Consequently a large floc may have sub-components, also called clusters Sludge conditioning by pelleting flocculation is a technique that causes relative motion of neighboring clusters, resulting in additional points of contact, and consequently, the densification of aggregate structure. Moreover, the size of flocs so achieved, termed here pellet-flocs, can reach a magnitude of several millimeters. The key parameters in the process performance are the construction and operation of the pelletizing reactor, the velocity gradient, and the presence of high molecular polymers as bridging materials. The reactor geometry rests upon the theory of pelleting flocculation and the mechanisms responsible for formation of pellet-flocs Furthermore, the theory of pelleting flocculation postulates two different growth models of pellet-flocs. The so called series system occurs, when in the first steps flocculation takes place and finally sludge is densified by means of mechanical syneresis. This model was realized by Ide and Yusa The second, the parallel system, provides simultaneous flocculation and densification. As a result pellet-flocs with regular attached solid layers around the central “mother floc” resembling an “onion” like structure should be the result. This idealized layer-by-layer growth mode is certainly possible, but it is associated with an enormous expenditure of time and process maintenance Thus, physical reasoning According to the “raspberry” model, porosity consists of many small pores (microporosity) between primary particles that build small flocs and macroflocs. The latter group themselves into pellet-flocs ( In this porosity model, the pore systems can be described by the following relationship originating from the characteristics of bulk good In this work the porosity and interior structure of pellet-flocs with “raspberry” like structure only are examined, as this buildup is more common in a real flocculation process. After several experiments the adequate form and shape of construction elements of the pelletizing reactor for this study were found ( The optimum global velocity gradient was found to be in the range of 25–35 At lower values sedimentation occurred, and too high velocity gradient caused the breakup of pellet-flocs before the maximal densification degree was reached. Kaolin slurry was used as the model colloid. The median size was found to be 6.5 In experiments, 150 Random samples of pellet-flocs were gathered from the pelletizing reactor at respective points in time and transferred carefully into a water container in order to avoid any disruption prior to further investigations. After that, the porosity could be estimated based on the following techniques: free settling (total porosity), image analysis of resin-embedded slices with the help of a light microscope (macroporosity; pores with eq. diameter >50 image analysis of resin-embedded slices with the help of a scanning electron microscope (SEM; microporosity; pores with eq. diameter <50 Free settling belongs to the classical methods for particle characterization. The evaluation of the density and further total porosity of agglomerates requires the application of Stoke's Law. In experiments the terminal velocity was obtained by modified Camsizer equipment (Retsch, Germany) based on computer-controlled digital CCD camera and image analysis software. The lower detection limit for Camsizer was about 0.5 The apparatus used is depicted schematically in The accuracy of the settling column was tested in settling experiments using individual PVC beads ( Pellet-flocs were transferred individually by means of a bright-mouth pipette into the center of a rectangular sedimentation cell (10 The density of the pellet-like flocs was evaluated according to Eq. In these experiments, pellet-flocs were considered as impermeable solid spheres. Merely the sphericity ( A possible influence of drag force changes due to flow through the structure could not be proved in control tests and hence is not taken into consideration since pellet-flocs hold a closed pore system and very spherical outer appearance. The drag coefficient Imaging by light microscope is one of the oldest particle characterization methods Aggregates for micro- and macroporosity study were stabilized by means of a Leica Embedding Kit (Leica, Germany). The resin components were basic resin (2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate), activator (dibenzoyl peroxide) and hardener (dimethyl sulfoxide). Prior to the embedding procedure, aggregates were immersed for 12 The macroporosity was examined by means of a light microscope (Leica DMRMF), detected with a digital camera ( The SEM analysis enables the micro structure observation of the aggregates studied. Additionally, complementary quantification on microporosity could be gained. For SEM analysis, a small resin block was used, with embedded agglomerates left after slicing. The subsequent procedure required polishing and coating with gold. About 10 images for 30 For both microscopy techniques, the ratio of detected pore area and area of whole agglomerate or measurement area yielded surface porosity ( Provided that the pores were randomly distributed in the agglomerate, the surface porosity ( Already after 1 The calculation of total porosity were carried out for data sets obtained at each sampling time. One sampling contained the settling values of at least 200 pellet-flocs resulting from three experiments. The size varied between 0.5 and 4 The size of pellet-flocs in the experiment reached up to 4 Having calculated porosities according to Eq. The porosity in initial process stages, e.g. 1 The alteration in mean total porosity for all sampling intervals is presented in The second data set (black squares) pertains to microporosity which is discussed in Section Pellet-flocs represent the type of flocs that are subject to consolidation during moderate mixing, which is reflected in the reduction of porosity. The rate of densification decreases with pelletization time until constant porosity is reached. The porosity reduction can be described by an empirical relationship (Eq. A cross sectional porosity and equivalent diameter were determined for about 12 pellet-floc slices taken at each sampling time. The magnification of the light microscope was 25× in order to record the whole sample at once. The minimal detected equivalent pore diameter was set to 50  Both the graphs and the exemplary images ( The very large pores with equivalent diameter >300 When presenting the pore amount (detected pores >50 One must thereby note that agglomerate surface outside of macropores looks very compressed; however, it consists of undifferentiable micropores and solid phase. Considering the total porosity and macroporosity, it becomes clear that the greatest amount of free spaces within pellet floc is occupied by micropores which become visible under SEM. First the SEM images bring to bear the relationship of size dimensions and arrangement of particles and micropores ( The analysis of images for 30 Pellet-flocs hold pore systems in different size ranges. Their existence and evaluation can be carried out using different experimental techniques. Light microscopy is a satisfactory method to deal with relative macroporosity. The areas that appear under light microscope as compacted solid phase are in truth sub-elements consisting of flocs with extremely high microporosity that can be detected only by SEM or indirectly by settling analysis. A complete multilevel pore model based on real images is presented in As pelleting flocculation progresses, medium and macropores are affected mostly by compaction and almost disappear over time. The content of micropores is also reduced; however, the total change is from ca. 91 to 87%. Recapitulating, the results of this study confirm the theoretical porosity model of pellet-flocs and indicate the multi-step agglomeration mode, in which pellet-flocs consist of macroflocs (large clusters) and these of flocs up to micron size range as cluster sub-elements.