Background
                  Radial glia cells comprise the principal population of neural stem cells (NSC) during development. Attempts to develop reproducible radial glia and NSC culture methods have met with variable results, yielding non-adherent cultures or requiring the addition of growth factors. Recent studies demonstrated that a 2-μm patterned poly-methyl methacrylate (ln2 PMMA) grooved scaffold, by mimicking the biophysical and microtopographic properties of the embryonic NSC niche, induces the de-differentiation of glial cells into functional radial glia cells.
               
                  New method
                  Here we describe a method for obtaining cultures of adherent Bergmann radial glia (BRG) and cortical radial glia (CRG). The growth substrate is ln2 PMMA and the addition of growth factors is not required.
               
                  Results
                  Postnatal glia obtained from mouse cerebellum or cerebral cortex and grown on ln2 PMMA adopted a BRG/CRG phenotype characterized by a bipolar shape, the up-regulation of progenitor markers such as nestin and Sox2, and the down-regulation of vimentin and GFAP. Neurons cultured over the BRG/CRG aligned their processes with those of the glial shafts, thus mimicking the behavior of migrating neuronal cells.
               
                  Comparison with existing methods
                  The ln2 PMMA culture method offers an ideal system for analyzing both the biochemical factors controlling the neurogenic potential of BRG/CRG and neuronal migration.
               
                  Conclusions
                  The ln2 PMMA method is a reproducible system to obtain immature BRG/CRG preparations in vitro. It can be used to study the properties of CNS progenitor cells as well as the interactions between radial glia and neurons, and supports cultured progenitors for use in different applications.Radial glia cells are bipolar, with a long basal process that reaches the outer pial surface and a shorter apical process in contact with the ventricular lumen and serve as a scaffold for neuronal migration ( The ability of radial glia to provide a substrate for neural migration is difficult to study In this study, we describe an easy and reproducible Here we show that ln2 PMMA substrates also support cultures of BRG and likewise obviate the need for the addition of soluble factors. This method confirms the suitability of our PMMA sheets (125 The patterned PMMA films were characterized by white light interferometry (WYKO NT1100) and the software Vision 32 V2.303 (Veeco Instruments, Inc., USA) to confirm replication fidelity and repeatability. Four different PMMA film batches were used. For cell culture, the PMMA films were sterilized with 70% ethanol for 15 Cortical or cerebellar glia were obtained from Swiss albino mice at postnatal day 0 (P0) or day 6 (P6), respectively. Cerebellar neurons were obtained from P2 mice. All animal housing and procedures were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee in accordance with Spanish and EU regulations. Primary glial cells were prepared essentially as described ( For western blotting, the cells were cultured for 5–7 or 15 P2 cerebellums were isolated in dissection buffer, digested with trypsin-DNAse I, dissociated and preplated for 30 Total protein extracts were separated by SDS-PAGE and electrotransferred to a nitrocellulose membrane. Then, membranes were blocked in 5% non-fat milk and incubated with primary antibodies (listed below) overnight at 4 The cells were fixed for 20 The following primary antibodies were used (WB/ICC): rabbit polyclonal anti-GFAP (mature astrocyte marker, 1:8000/1:3000, Dako, Denmark), mouse monoclonal anti-GFAP (mature astrocyte marker, –/1:2000, Covance, USA), mouse anti-vimentin (glial cell marker, 1:1000, Santa Cruz Biotechnology), rabbit anti-Sox2 (NSC/Bergmann glial marker, 1:500, Abcam, UK), rabbit anti-GLAST (glial glutamate transporter, 1:1000, Abcam), mouse anti-nestin (radial glia marker, 1:250/1:500, Abnova Corporation), goat anti-actin (loading control, 1:2000/–, Santa Cruz Biotechnology), rabbit anti-Ki67 (proliferation marker, –/1:500, Abcam), mouse anti-S100β (mature astrocyte/Bergmann glia marker, –/1:1000, Millipore, MA, USA), mouse anti-Tuj-1 (neuronal marker, 1:1000/1:3000, Covance), rabbit anti-calbindin (Purkinje and GABAergic interneuron marker, –/1:8000, Swant, Switzerland), rabbit anti-BLbP (radial glia marker, 1:1000/1000, Chemicon, MA, USA), rabbit anti-Olig2 (oligodendrocyte marker, 1:1000/–, Abcam), mouse anti-PDGFRα (oligodendrocyte precursor marker, 1:500/–, Biolegend, USA), and goat anti-AKT (loading control, 1:2000/–, Molecular Probes, USA). Micrographs were captured with a Leica TCS-SL Spectral confocal microscope (Leica Microsystems, Germany). The images were assembled using Adobe Photoshop (v. 7.0), with identical adjustments for contrast, brightness and color balance to obtain optimum visual reproduction of the data. Quantitative image analysis was performed using Image J software (National Institutes of Health, USA). Statistical analysis was performed using the Statgraphic-plus software. For comparison of the results, a one-way ANOVA and During embryonic development, the NSC niche is characterized by the linear topography of radial glia cells. Radial glia shafts of ∼1–2 The 2-μm line patterns were imprinted on PMMA by NIL as described in Section Glial cells were isolated and cultured as described in Section After 5–7 Supplementary Figure 1 related to this article can be found, in the online version, at  Western blotting ( Since there were no major differences in cell shape and the expression of glial differentiation markers between cultures grown on glass/tissue culture plastic and NP PMMA (Suppl. Fig. 1), we mainly used the former as reference controls for all ln2 PMMA experiments. Quantitative data obtained by western blotting and densitometry analyses ( By contrast, cerebellar Bergmann glia co-expressed GFAP with Sox2 and S100β. As expected, double-labeled GFAP After 15 To demonstrate that substrate topography signaling is sufficient to induce the radial glia phenotype three successive passages on ln2 PMMA were conducted ( Taken together, these results show that our ln2-PMMA-based method is reproducible and can be used to induce and maintain, over several passages, the CRG and BRG morphology and molecular signature. Under the culture conditions tested in this work, neurons did not directly adhere either to PMMA or to glass surfaces, but only to glial cells. Early postnatal cerebellar neurons were identified based on their expression of neuronal β-tubulin III (Tuj-1) and the calcium-binding protein calbindin (Purkinje cells and GABAergic interneurons) ( With the method described in this work, CRG and BRG can be easily obtained from cerebral cortex and cerebellum by using ln2 micropatterned PMMA as the culture substrate. Unlike other methods, there is no need for previous cell sorting or exogenously added extracellular matrix molecules or growth factors. The robust and reproducible results obtained in this study suggest that our method can also be used for the growth of radial glia from other sources, such as retinal Müller glia or spinal cord. The induced CRG and BRG obtained in this study exhibited a radial glia signature but never generated neurons. This finding provides further support for the use of ln2 PMMA as the substrate in This study was supported by grants from