Our main objective was to trace and to quantify the stabilization of nitrogen released from litter decomposition in different functional soil organic matter fractions. To identify the fate of nitrogen in a free-range experiment, 15N-labeled beech litter was deposited on the bare soil surface of three 2 m × 2 m plots on a Rendzic Leptosol under beech (Fagus sylvatica L.) with mull humus form near Tuttlingen (Swabian Jura, Germany). The 15N composition of bulk soil and soil fractions was monitored for three years by sampling the litter layer and the Ah horizon (0–5, 5–10 cm) after 140, 507, and 876 d. A combined density and particle size fractionation procedure allowed the isolation of different functional soil organic matter fractions: free light fraction, occluded organic matter, and organo-mineral associations. The first flush in the 15N enrichment was observed in the bulk soil within 140 d, due to plant debris transferred to the free light fraction by probably bioturbation and soluble compounds being leached from the litter directly to the clay fractions. The observed rates within the first 140 d indicated a quick transfer of 15N-enriched compounds from litter into the free light fraction, with a rate of 0.07 μg kg−1 d−1, and to the clay fractions, with a rate of 0.31 μg kg−1 d−1. In contrast, transfer to the occluded light fractions was delayed, with rates of 0.01 μg kg−1 d−1 (> 20 μm) and 0.001 μg kg−1 d−1 (< 20 μm), respectively. After 876 d, we recovered 9% of the added label in the 0–10 cm soil horizon, of which more than 4% was found in the organo-mineral fraction (0–5 cm), nearly 3% in the light fractions (0–5 cm), and another 2% unspecified in the bulk soil of 5–10 cm depth. We therefore conclude that the clay fractions act as the main sink for the recovered 15N. The rapid incorporation and the high preservation of 15N in the clay fractions revealed the dominant role of organo-mineral associations in the stabilization of nitrogen in the investigated soil.Litter decomposition and mineralization of soil organic matter are two of the main sources of bioavailable nitrogen (N) in forest soils and thus play a key role in the nutrition of forest trees. Most studies using labeled organic material investigated N processes in agricultural systems ( To study the decomposition and distribution of We used the application of This study was conducted at the Tuttlingen Research Station (8°45′E, 47°59′N) in the Swabian Jura, a low mountain range in southwestern Germany. According to the International Union of Soil Sciences Working Group In April 2008, three 2 m × 2 m plots were selected from a backslope with different relative altitudes with distances of at least 20 m. The litter layer was removed from each plot and replaced by an equivalent amount of The Samples of Before To obtain data reflecting N stabilization in different SOM pools, we separated bulk soil samples into seven SOM soil fractions. Fractionation was performed on the samples harvested at the outset of the experiment and in autumn of three consecutive years, namely in September 2008, 2009, and 2010 (i.e., after 140, 507, and 876 d). Bulk soil samples of 0–5 cm depth were subjected to a combined density and particle-size fractionation. Twenty grams of air-dried soil material (< 2 mm) were saturated with 200 ml of sodium polytungstate solution with a density of 1.7 g cm For chemical analyses, bulk soil samples and soil fractions were homogenized using a vibrating ball mill with zircon-grinding tools (Pulverisette 23, Fritsch, Idar-Oberstein, Germany). For the subsoil samples (5–10 cm), the bulk soil was only analyzed for the last two samplings. The subsoil was not fractionated because results from previous studies indicate that only small amounts of Analysis of bulk soil texture was conducted according to the method described by Soil pH was determined with a pH measuring instrument (WTW 197i, Weilheim, Germany) in 0.01 M CaCl  Mean values and standard errors were calculated using Microsoft Excel (ver. 14.0; Microsoft, Redmond, WA, USA). Further statistical analyses were carried out with SPSS (ver. 19.0; IBM, Ehningen, Germany). Figures were created either by Sigmaplot 11.0 (Systat Software GmbH, Erkrath, Germany) or Xact (ver. 8.05f, SciLab, Hamburg, Germany). Data were analyzed for homogeneity of variances by applying the Levene test, and the analysis of normality was performed using the Shapiro–Wilk test. Because a normal distribution was not guaranteed for the whole dataset, we tested for significant differences ( Significant differences were found in mass concentrations, with the fLF varying between 11.3 and 59.0 mg (g soil) The mass distribution of the organo-mineral fractions showed no variation over time. The clay-sized fractions accounted for nearly 50% of the bulk soil mass ( The lowest concentrations of N and OC were detected in the sand-sized fraction, whereas the coarse clay fraction showed the highest concentrations. The contribution of N and OC from the fractions to the bulk soil showed that the clay-sized fractions accounted for 64–75% of N and for more than 41% of OC, respectively ( Because the recovery rate of N summed over all seven fractions ( The A significant increase in bulk soil The fLF showed the highest 9.4 μg We calculated mean transfer rates from the litter to the mineral soil by dividing the excess in μg per kg soil for every fraction by the number of days between the sampling dates assuming constant rates. The mean rates of We studied the concept of N dynamics by tracking our By summing up the seven fractions in the upper 0–5 cm of the soil ( The litter-derived N of our study accumulated mainly in the top mineral soil, progressively increasing the topsoil's The comparably slight The During the first vegetation period, the In similar leaf litter experiments, Although the Our results revealed a specific response of the different SOM fractions in a highly aggregated clay-rich Rendzic Leptosol with a mull humus form. During the experiment, Incorporation of litter-derived We thank Marlene Ausfelder and Sigrid Hiesch for technical assistance and Werner Häusler for XRD analysis. We are grateful to the