In an ideal world, transportation networks and services would be adapted to the specific travel needs of each individual and would perfectly fit the corresponding desire lines (direct lines between origin and destination points). However, in practice, networks cannot be designed to accommodate each individual trip. Still, it is possible to optimize transportation systems from a collective demand point of view. To move from an individual to a collective scale, individual demands need to be encapsulated into demand corridors.
                  Although current spatial tools and data mining techniques are able to identify corridors from numerous movements by using linear or non-linear trajectory data, their limitations—from a transportation point of view—include the use of non-intuitive parameters and the application of some aggregation processes that make it difficult to retrace the attributes of individual input data that could benefit the richness of the available data after processing. For that reason, we propose a new algorithm called Trajectory Clustering for Desire Lines (TraClus-DL), which can identify corridors from Origin-Destination (OD) information with simple parameters, such as spatial location, angles between lines, and sampling weights. The functionality of TraClus-DL as a diagnostic tool for transportation supply was assessed and tested using data from the 2013 OD travel survey conducted in the Montreal area. The sensitivity of the results, with respect to parameter settings, was evaluated, and a comparison with an existing algorithm was proposed.
                  The results of this study demonstrate that transportation specialists can benefit from the convenience of using TraClus-DL as a corridor identification tool, which includes its potential to perform deep analyses at the corridor level. In addition, this study provides new insights into the possible uses of demand corridors as relevant tools for transportation planning, and in the decision-making processes in which a neutral reference is needed to evaluate how much the transportation supply differs from the collective travel demand.In a historical review of urban transportation planning, Many researchers have benefited from these advances to better understand mobility and improve their studies using OD data. Some have aimed to improve transportation services ( Any OD survey set carries basic information about individual trips through the origin and destination points. The direct line connecting the origin and destination points represents the theoretical shortest path for an individual, which is called a Since most of the research regarding In the available literature, we observed two recurring elements: the use of processed data to simplify the complexity of OD sets, and the use of a pre-identified network and optimization techniques to adjust corridor location. Most of those optimization techniques rely on operational concepts such as optimizing travel distance or travel time. In a different context, One of the main objectives of the present study is to contribute to the limited existing literature by proposing a well-defined method and practice to define and identify corridors from demand. Furthermore, this study highlights some of the potential benefits of using demand corridors to assess the adequacy of transportation supply with respect to demand. To identify demand corridors, we propose an improved process of trajectory clustering called Trajectory Clustering for Desire Lines (TraClus-DL), which has been adapted to identify demand corridors from desire lines. The functionality of TraClus-DL as a diagnostic tool for transportation needs was tested using a set of data from the greater Montreal OD survey. The remainder of this study is organized as follows. Transportation corridors can be classified mainly into supply corridors and demand corridors. Whereas supply corridors are identified based on transportation supply elements and characteristics such as services, location, and capacity; demand corridors typically are identified based on transportation demand elements, without the direct influence of any administrative or environmental constraints. Supply corridors can be used in long-range transportation planning and the decision-making processes ( Desire lines are a simple way to represent demand; therefore, directly identifying corridors from desire lines leads to identifying the corridors that most closely match the demand. A summary of the main corridor features is an essential step in designing an algorithm that can identify corridors from desire lines. We build on the transportation literature ( As a starting point, a minimum number of trips is required to identify the corridor zone that is characterized by a high trip concentration. This The The Finally, corridors are seen as zones in which similar trips (desire lines) are encapsulated together. These zones are defined by their location, length and width. Thus, a corridor will continue as long as a sufficient number of similar trips are present, and it may be characterized by a minimum length. The width of a zone, called the With respect to demand corridors, the elements that should be used to identify corridor width ( It is important to be aware that an acceptable collective distortion may differ from one study to another. In network design, this indicator should be minimized. Hence, the ultimate value will not be < This section presents the global TraClus-DL structure with its inputs and outputs, which is followed by a brief overview and detailed description of the algorithm used. The application of data mining techniques to travel data has led to many successful discoveries about travel patterns and behaviors. The literature includes two kinds of trajectory clustering using travel data: (a) Using TraClus on desire lines raises some challenges. First, TraClus was designed for complex trajectories such as hurricanes or animal migrations, and experience has shown that it does not perform segmentation on straight lines. Another challenge is related to the fact that parameter selection is neither particularly intuitive nor coherent with typical urban and network design rules. More information about TraClus parameters is provided in The proposed algorithm (TraClus-DL) has a similar general structure to that of the existing TraClus; it divides desire lines into equal segments to build corridors based on these segments, rather than using the entire desire lines, which makes corridors more specific and fine-grained. The inputs of TraClus-DL are a plain text file containing a unique trip identifier (observation ID), the origin and destination coordinates, and a weight (corresponding to the number of trips represented by each observation, if applicable as in the case of sample data), as well as four simple parameters adapted to transportation planning: Width of the influence area represented by half the width of the expected corridor ( Maximum angle allowed between the main corridor path and the desire lines ( Minimum number of observations (or sampling weight) required to create a corridor ( Segmentation length ( The output is a set of demand corridors with information about clustered segments. Since the observation ID is preserved and linked to its segments and corridors, it is possible to perform deep analyses at the corridor level by using all the available information related to each OD observation. The core of TraClus-DL is a clustering algorithm adapted to spatial data, which relies on a standard algorithm called the Density-Based Spatial Clustering of Applications with Noise (DBSCAN). DBSCAN is a clustering algorithm that can identify areas with a minimum number of points by using two parameters as input: (a) the maximum distance between the two points to be considered in the same neighborhood and (b) the minimum number of points in the neighborhood to be considered as a cluster. With DBSCAN, an arbitrary point is chosen as a seed and then points in the neighborhood of this seed are selected. If this neighborhood is sufficiently dense, the selected points create a cluster. The algorithm then expands from these points, and scans for the presence of other points within the maximum distance to be added to the original cluster, and so on. Due to the way that DBSCAN works, and as a general rule, the final set of clusters will be the same regardless of the sequence in which the arbitrary points are selected as seeds. Detailed information about the DBSCAN algorithm can be found in ( Inspired by the DBSCAN algorithm, we developed an adapted version called DBSCAN-Seg that deals with segments instead of points to integrate the directions by using the angle (direction) of the desire lines. Adding the angle condition prevents segments that differ by more than a specified angle from being assigned to the same corridor. The DBSCAN-Seg algorithm has the ability to expand and thus to encapsulate nearby demand segments beyond the fixed exact width; this ability makes the corridor width slightly flexible. TraClus-DL contains three main stages: (a) Pre-processing, (b) DBSCAN-Seg processing and queue formation, and (c) Final corridor assignment. Each stage is described below, and the three pseudo-codes (algorithms) are presented in the The pre-processing stage reads each desire line from the input file and divides each line into segments of size This sophisticated stage aims, by its three sub-functions, to identify the location of demand corridors; its pseudo-code is presented in  The sum of the weights of the neighbor segments in the candidate cluster is calculated as follows: if the sum is greater than the minimum weight (   In this final stage, the top priority cluster is popped from the queue and it is considered as a corridor segment. Then, the member segments belonging to the top priority cluster are removed from each remaining cluster in the queue, and the queue ranking is adapted accordingly. Any cluster whose sum of weights falls below the The aggregation of consecutive corridors with the same direction (smoothing) can make it easier to understand travel patterns. TraClus-DL does not deliberately include a smoothing phase, since we think it is important to visualize the corridor identification raw results and then decide how the corridor pieces should be connected. In the following sections, consecutive corridors with similar angles are connected to obtain a clearer visualization (smoothed corridor); in other words, two consecutive corridors will be connected if they have a variance of angle less or equal to the The experimental part of the research consists of two case studies that demonstrate the use of the TraClus-DL algorithm to identify demand corridors. The first case study aims to clarify TraClus-DL functionality and implementation by using a small number of OD pairs. The second case study applies TraClus-DL to a large number of disaggregated data from the Montreal OD survey, and then illustrates some of the demand corridor's potentials for transportation planning. The remainder of the present study presents the TraClus-DL parameters by using the following notation: TraClus-DL is applied to a small set of experimental data (12 desire lines).  This case study, aiming to clarify the corridor identification methodology, consists of the following steps: objective identification; data selection; data preparation and processing; visualization and analysis of results. In this analysis, the objective was to identify demand corridors to highlight some of their potentials, such as synthetizing a large amount of OD data, identifying major mobility flows, and diagnosing the supply structure from a collective point of view. Disaggregated data from the latest available survey in the Montreal area, the 2013 OD survey, were used. In Montreal, such surveys, carried out every 5 For this research, we used a set of observations that represents 132,867 trips made in the morning peak period (06:32 TraClus-DL was applied to all of the selected OD pairs using a All these chosen parameters may be modified based on planners' objectives. The effects of parameter selection are discussed in As result of corridor identification, a total of 9390 trips were clustered with the chosen parameters. A GIS tool was used to visualize the TraClus-DL outputs. As seen in To better visualize dense mobility axes, the consecutive corridors with the same direction were connected as presented in As mentioned earlier, the TraClus-DL algorithm is designed to respond to a planner's vision regarding trip similarity, and does not aim only to optimize the number of clustered trips. After the identification of the mobility patterns, more analyses could be done at the demand corridor level. Corridors could be characterized based on the features of the clustered desire lines. For example, an analysis of corridor D, which clustered up to 1229 trips, revealed that the main trip purposes are study and work, with 51% and 31% shares respectively. Such a corridor could be characterized as students and professionals' corridors, since such a characterization may help a planner to propose adapted strategies and actions (e.g., promoting and offering some collective services on this axis during a specified period of the day). Corridor A and corridor B presented a more sophisticated case than corridor D, since some trips were associated with both corridors as illustrated in To go further, all trips associated to corridor A and B will be analyzed with a broader vision of trip similarity. By using a In addition to identifying the shape and location of dense mobility axes, demand corridors could be used as a reference unit to better understand how far transportation networks are from the theoretical collective design. Thus, we used the Since the network usually is designed to satisfy collective demand, and not simply individual demand, we adapted the distortion indicator to reveal the collective standpoint by using the demand corridor concept. This adaptation uses the demand-corridor-based network rather than desire lines, and the person-km unit rather than just the distance unit, which allows us to assess how far the supply is from the collective demand. Consequently, the collective distortion indicator is calculated as the ratio between the sum of the itinerary distances using the actual network (  To demonstrate the potential of demand corridors, one simple scenario was formulated regarding the trip mode of transport. The scenario supposes that all trips are made by car, and an online path calculation tool was used to identify the shortest path for each OD pair ( Confronting the supply and the demand networks results in a collective distortion of 1.12, which indicates that potentially the collective distance could be reduced by up to 12%. This information is useful for planners and decision makers looking for improvement targets, and as a priority ranking strategy. In addition, corridor location may give some indication as to where improvements are needed. It should be noted, depending on planners' objectives, that other scenarios could be proposed and discussed with other types of indicators. This section aims to evaluate TraClus-DL's function and performance. As a density-clustering approach, TraClus-DL faces two challenges regarding the validation and the absence of well-defined tools to measure output quality. In the absence of a well-defined method, we used a set of desire lines (2951 trips) located in Nun's Island in the Montreal area to evaluate the effect of different parameters on the TraClus-DL outcome ( In this section, our objective is to evaluate the sensitivity of TraClus-DL with respect to the input parameters. The indicator selected is the percentage of total person-km that are clustered during the process; this indicator is selected because it combines the number of trips and the clustered length. The calculation results and their visualization are presented in the the the the TraClus and TraClus-DL share one similar parameter— With small distance parameters ε With high distance parameter values (ε It should be noted that we attempted to add some constraints to the TraClus code to avoid the clustering of lines with different directions, but they were not effective with high values of ε. At the beginning of the present study, we presented the main demand corridor features, with guidelines to identify corridors. Then, we proposed our density-clustering framework, TraClus-DL, which we adapted to identify demand corridors from the unprocessed demands represented by desire lines. With its simple parameters, TraClus-DL is well-adapted for use in transportation and urban planning. The TraClus-DL structure may be seen as an adaptation of the TraClus structure to include desire lines, with the main differences being: TraClus-DL segments all desire lines into equal segments to simplify the detection of similarities, and it also takes the weight for each desire line as one of its inputs, so no line multiplication is required when using survey data with sampling weights. The input parameters of TraClus-DL are more adapted to cluster transportation demand, since they require the width of the influence area, the minimum trips required, and the maximum angle between desire lines inside a corridor. The TraClus-DL outputs are small corridors, where each corridor carries information about the number of trips clustered and trip features. This information is convenient for transportation specialists, since deep and detailed analyses can be performed directly at the corridor level. By using two case studies, we clarified the demand corridor approach, and we demonstrated the possibility of using demand corridors as a collective reference unit in transportation planning and the decision-making processes. This was done by identifying and characterizing the dense mobility axes and by utilizing the collective distortion indicator that diagnose how supply meets collective demand. We argue that the many indicators used to assess the transportation supply structure at the individual level could benefit from the demand corridor approach to reflect the collective standpoint; such indicators—e.g., the Maximum Height indicator, the Angular Cost indicator, or the Pi index—are widely used in mode choice and route choice modelling to diagnose and assess an itinerary ( The challenges related to density-clustering approaches include validation and parameter selection ( Visualization needs to be an important part of corridor-based analysis and the decision-making processes, and we made use of GIS tools to better understand our results. TraClus-DL's output files enable the linking and the mapping of every desire line segment to the corridor to which it was assigned. This approach provides analysts the option to better understand precisely which desire lines have contributed to a given corridor, and to perform further analyses based on desire line properties such as age, occupation, mode of transport and gender. Smoothing is not a part of TraClus-DL's algorithm, but we tested many smoothing algorithms, including the smoothing incorporated in the TraClus framework ( Finally, we adopted a partition-and-group trajectory clustering framework. While this approach may increase the processing time, it makes possible the use of parameters that reflect transportation planners' visions regarding corridors. This study has shed some light on a possible systematic methodology to define and identify corridors using disaggregated transportation demand. It provides new insights on the possible uses of demand corridors to identify and visualize dense mobility axes and to diagnose the quality of transportation supply, making it possible to evaluate how much a transportation supply differs from the collective demand. Demand corridor identification using TraClus-DL could be conducted by using any source of past, current, or even forecasted OD data, since the algorithm only requires the OD coordinates and some simple parameters. The results would be a useful tool to identify potential development axes to improve mobility, accessibility, and even network design. Even in the absence of a well-defined validation method, as in most density-based clustering approaches, TraClus-DL has the advantage of keeping its outputs linked to input data, which provides traceability, a better understanding of the results, and more possibilities to perform enhanced analyses. Finally, research is currently in progress to propose new indicators that can demonstrate the full potential of demand corridors, as well as assess the integration of the temporal dimension directly to The TraClus-DL framework to provide a new spatio-temporal algorithm. The authors wish to acknowledge the contribution and support of the Mobilite Chair partners ( TraClus-DL code is available on GitHub or upon request.  Pre-processing stage. DBSCAN-Seg processing and queue formation stage. Final corridor assignment.