W–Al2O3 nanostructured composite has been produced by mechanical milling of ammonium paratungstate (APT) and Al powder mixture at room temperature. The milled products have been characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD), and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) equipped with energy dispersive spectrometry (EDS). The XRD and EDS results confirmed that direct reduction of APT to α-W took place after 25min milling. It was observed that α→β phase transition took place after 24h mechanical milling. SEM micrographs showed that alumina matrix composite reinforced with W could be obtained by one step MSR (mechanically induced self-propagation reaction) process. X-ray diffraction peak broadening equation confirmed that the mean grain size of these particles was in nanometer range which gradually decreased with increasing the milling time.Ammonium paratungstate (APT), (NH Mechanochemical synthesis of pure tungsten using magnesium and tungsten trioxide powder mixture has been reported by Ricceri and Matteazzi In the present work, direct reduction of APT to W via mechanochemical route has been investigated. Al has been used as reducing agent, which has high amount of oxidation heat. According to authors' claim the process is a very attractive technique, and has potential commercial applications. It needs low-cost starting materials, and takes place under room-temperature conditions. Ammonium paratungstate (NH In order to reduce the effect of surface oxidation, Al was used 10 The crystal structures of the ball-milled powders were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD) with Cu Kα (λ Morphology of the produced powders was studied by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) model VP 1450 equipped with energy dispersive spectrometry (EDS).  As seen in By increasing the milling time up to 24 The SEM micrographs and corresponding EDS analysis before and after reactions are shown in With increasing the milling time up to 2 Based on XRD and EDS results in the present research, it can be concluded that single-stage reduction of APT to W takes place in an MSR process. W–Al