Binders are widely used to modify the interfacial characteristics and improve the ballability of iron ore particles. Funa is a natural polymer binder. It was developed and used in the production of iron ore pellets in China. In this paper, the interfacial interactions between Funa and a magnetite concentrate were investigated by measurements of surface tension, contact angle, wetting heat, zeta potential as well as by Infrared Spectroscopy (IRS) analysis as compared to bentonite binder. Results show that Funa behaves like surfactants and possesses the characteristics of colloid particles. It decreases the surface tension of water from 73 to 65 dyn cm−1. The binder reduces the contact angle of the concentrate sharply from 46° to 0° at a dosage of 0.6% and hence greatly improves the hydrophilic character of the concentrate. Zeta potential measurements show that the surface of the magnetite concentrate is negatively charged and the addition of Funa causes more negative surface charges. IRS analysis shows that the binder adheres to the concentrate surface by chemical adsorption. It was also shown that bentonite has little effects on the surface tension, contact angle, wettability and Zeta potential. No chemical adsorption of bentonite on the concentrate was observed.Binders are used to modify the interfacial characteristics of iron ore particles and improve the qualities of agglomerating products in the iron and steel industry. Bentonite is the most widely used binder in iron ore pelletizing. However, there are some drawbacks with the use of bentonite. It contaminates the product with gangue and produces dry pellets of low strength compared to most of organic binders. In past years, many organic binders have been reported as substitutes for bentonite Funa was developed as a binder for iron ore pelletisation at Central South University in China. It is a natural polymer binder with humates as its major adhering constituent It is noted that there are few reports on the interfacial interactions between binders and iron ore particles although a lot of organic and inorganic binders have been proposed. J. Lyklema and R. Hogg studied the colloidal and interfacial aspects of agglomeration The iron concentrate used in this research is a magnetite concentrate obtained from Luzhong Metallurgical and Mining, Shangdong, China. Its chemical composition and size distribution are listed in The chemical compositions of the two binders, Funa and bentonite, are shown in The capillary rise method was used to measure the surface tensions of water and binder solutions. The dynamic capillary penetration or Washburn method The apparatus designed in the laboratory for measurement of powder materials is shown in A C80 type heat measuring device was used to determine the wetting heat of various materials. The procedures include: loading the weighed sample into the heat measuring cylinder, hanging a thin plastic tube filled with binder solution or water above the concentrate sample inside the cylinder; piercing the tube and allowing the solution to contact the sample after the system reaches equilibrium. The recorder recorded and printed the instantaneous (differential) heat flow rate automatically. The integral heat was obtained by integration of the differential heat. A ZetaPALS zeta potential analyzer was used to measure the zeta potential of particles. The sample to be tested was ground to about 10 μm. The Funa solution was prepared by centrifugal sedimentation followed by the separation of insoluble impurities. The test sample was ground to 2 μm and mixed with the binder solution of 10% concentration. The suspension was stirred for 10 min. After that, the sample was recovered from the slurry by filtration and rinsed three times with deionzed water. After being dried under an infrared lamp, 0.1 g of dried sample was weighed and compacted under vacuum into a tablet for IRS detection. The data in It has been shown that Funa is composed mainly of organic humates, which have been reported to form a thin layer at the air/water interface The above results show that Funa possesses the characteristics of surfactants and colloids. Bentonite was not found to possess these characteristics. From The effects of binders on the wetting heat of the concentrate are shown in The measurements of contact angle and wetting heat indicate that Funa can greatly change the wettability of the iron concentrate and make the surface much more hydrophilic, while bentonite has an insignificant effect on the wettability of the iron concentrate. The great effect of Funa on the hydrophilic character of iron concentrate is attributed to the presence of lot of hydrophilic groups. There are no such groups in bentonite. The zeta potential obtained for the iron concentrate is shown in  The relationships between binder dosage and the surface charge characters of the concentrate are shown in Bentonite causes a slight reduction of the zeta potential of the concentrate probably due to its own negative charge. The IRS spectra of the Funa-concentrate system are shown in The similar spectra peaks of curve (c) to curve (a) imply that the carboxylic groups in Funa are chemically adsorbed on the surface of the concentrate. The IRS spectra of bentonite-iron concentrate system are shown in Funa has been developed and used in the production of iron ore pellets as an organic polymer binder. The effects of this binder on the interfacial character of magnetic concentrates have been investigated in this paper and compared to bentonite binder, leading to the following conclusions. Funa is an organic polymer binder which behaves like surfactants and colloids. It reduces surface tension of water. Bentonite does not show these properties. Funa sharply reduces the contact angle of the iron concentrate from 46° to 0° and increases the wetting heat of the concentrate, and consequently it greatly improves the hydrophilic ability of the concentrate. Bentonite does not significantly reduce the contact angle but does cause a small increase in wetting heat. The fact that zeta potential of the concentrate becomes more negative with addition of Funa indicates that the iron ore particles are not likely to adhere together through electrostatic attraction when Funa is used as binder. IRS investigation shows that Funa molecules are bound on the surface of iron concentrates by chemical adsorption and bentonite is not. The financial support from the National Ministry of Science and Technology of China for this project is acknowledged.