Background
                  A radiolucent carbon fiber-reinforced polyetheretherketone (CFR-PEEK) plate was recently introduced for fixation of proximal humerus fractures. Prospective clinical and radiographic results of patients treated with a CFR-PEEK plate are compared with those of patients treated with a conventional locking plate.
               
                  Methods
                  Twenty-nine patients (mean age, 66 years) were treated with a CFR-PEEK plate for a 3- or 4-part proximal humerus fracture. Patients were clinically and radiographically re-examined at 6 weeks, 6 months, 12 months, and 24 months with the Simple Shoulder Test, Constant-Murley score (CMS), and Oxford Shoulder Score (OSS) as well as with simple radiographs. In addition, results were compared with a matched group of patients treated with a conventional locking plate.
               
                  Results
                  At the final follow-up examination at 24 months, patients achieved a mean Simple Shoulder Test score of 58%, a mean CMS of 71.3 points (range, 44-97), and a mean OSS of 27.4 points (range, 8-45). Bone union was confirmed in all patients. Compared with patients treated with the conventional locking plate, patients treated with the CFR-PEEK plate achieved significantly better results with regard to the CMS and the OSS (P = .038 and .029, respectively). Furthermore, loss of reduction with subsequent varus deformity was less frequently observed in the CFR-PEEK plate group.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Fixation of proximal humerus fractures with a CFR-PEEK plate provides satisfying clinical and radiographic results after 2 years of follow-up. The results are comparable to those achieved with conventional locking plates.Fractures of the proximal humerus are common in daily clinical practice and account for approximately 45% of all humeral fractures and 10% of all fractures in patients older than 65 years. Although they are currently widely used in spine surgery, there are few reports of CFR-PEEK implants being used in trauma. The aim of this study was therefore to report clinical and radiographic results of patients treated with a CRF-PEEK plate for a proximal humerus fracture. Prospective data were collected for 2 years and are presented here. In addition, the results were compared with those of a previous group of patients treated with a conventional locking plate, and these patients were matched on age, gender, and fracture type. The hypothesis was that fixation with a CFR-PEEK plate produces outcomes similar to those of patients treated with conventional locking plates. Between February 2012 and April 2013, 29 patients (22 women, 7 men) were treated with a CRF-PEEK plate (DiPhos-H; Lima Corporate, Udine, Italy) for a proximal humerus fracture and prospectively observed for 24 months. The mean age of the patients at trauma was 66.4 years (range, 23-87 years). The right shoulder was affected in 16 patients, and the left shoulder was affected in 13 patients. Fractures were classified according to Neer, The DiPhos-H plate is a 30% CFR-PEEK implant. It is the first application of PEEK in trauma. The corresponding screws are made of titanium (Ti6AI4V) and are designed as polyaxial self-tapping locking screws that allow individual placement (3.5- and 4-mm screws). Furthermore, 3.5-mm cortex screws are available for shaft fixation. Bending strength is comparable to that of pure titanium and stainless steel. However, the elastic modulus is almost identical to that of cortical bone. Because PEEK is inert, cold welding between the plate and the titanium screws does not occur, which may make implant removal easier. The plate design is similar to other plates (i.e., PHILOS; Synthes, Umkirch, Germany; The surgical procedure for fixation of proximal humerus fractures with the CFR-PEEK plate does not significantly differ from the standard procedure for locking plate fixation of proximal humerus fractures by a deltopectoral approach; therefore, the surgical procedure is not described in detail. However, in all cases, a 3-hole 90-mm DiPhos-H was applied laterally to the bicipital groove and fixed to the shaft with 2 or 3 cortical screws. At least 5 self-tapping 3.5-mm screws were placed into the head fragment over a special aiming device under image intensifier control to achieve stable fixation of the fracture ( According to the hospital's standard care for the treatment of proximal humerus fractures, patients were re-examined at 6 weeks, 6 months, 12 months, and 24 months after surgery. A clinical examination was performed, and the Simple Shoulder Test (SST), the age- and gender-related Constant-Murley score (CMS), and the Oxford Shoulder Score (OSS) were obtained from all patients. Complications and revisions were analyzed separately and subdivided into implant-related (impingement due to improper plate position, primary screw perforation, and loss of reduction defined as varus displacement of >10° without any signs of avascular necrosis) and general complications (postoperative hematoma, stiffness, avascular necrosis, and infections). In addition, a case-control study was performed to compare the 2-year results of the patients treated with the CFR-PEEK plate to a historical series of patients treated with a conventional locking plate (PHILOS). The latter group consisted of patients treated with a conventional locking plate before the introduction of the CFR-PEEK plate. Data from these patients were also prospectively collected in accordance with the hospital's standard clinical follow-up protocol. Patients were matched according to age, gender, and fracture type, and the functional and radiographic outcome was compared between the 2 groups. Complications were also analyzed. The same surgeon performed all operations in both groups. SPSS 22.0 (IBM, Armonk, NY, USA) was used for data analysis. Descriptive statistics were used to summarize characteristics of the study patients (i.e., score results) including means and ranges. The Wilcoxon test was used to detect significant differences in the evaluated scores at different follow-up examinations in the CFR-PEEK plate group. Results of the CFR-PEEK plate group and the conventional locking plate group were compared with the Mann-Whitney All 29 patients were available for the 6-week, 6-month, and 12-month follow-up examination. Results from the 24-month follow-up were obtained from 23 patients. Of the patients lost to follow-up, 4 relocated, 1 was unavailable because of work responsibilities, and 1 died. The mean range of abduction increased from 75° (range, 61°-90°) after 6 weeks to a mean of 145° (range, 120°-150°) after 24 months. Similarly, range of flexion increased from 80° (range, 65°-90°) after 6 weeks to 170° (range, 150°-180°) at the final follow-up. Six weeks after surgery, patients in the CFR-PEEK plate group had an SST score of 36.3%, a mean CMS of 57.3 points (range, 38-84), and a mean OSS of 19.4 points (range, 4-38) for the affected shoulder compared with an SST score of 81.7%, a mean CMS of 92.8 points (range, 72-98), and a mean OSS of 42.2 points (range, 22-54) for the nonaffected shoulder. The score results of the affected shoulder increased to a mean SST of 46.9%, a mean CMS of 66.4 points (range, 42-96), and a mean OSS of 25.2 points (range, 7-44) at the 6-month follow-up. The difference between the 6-week and 6-month follow-ups was significant for the CMS ( At the final follow-up examination at 24 months, patients achieved a mean SST score of 59%, a mean CMS of 71.3 points (range, 44-97), and a mean OSS of 27.4 points (range, 8-45). No significant differences were found in comparison to the 12-month follow-up ( All fractures in the CFR-PEEK plate group healed until the 6-month follow-up. However, because radiographs were obtained only at 6 weeks and 6 months postoperatively, we cannot distinguish between normal and delayed union. The mean head-shaft angulation was 137° (range, 129°-150°) directly after surgery compared with 138° (range, 127°-153°) at 6 weeks, 139° (range, 129°-153°) at 6 months, and 139° (range, 129°-146°) at 1 year. No significant differences were found, indicating that no significant loss of reduction occurred over time. The 2-year results for the SST, CMS, and OSS in the 2 groups are shown in Statistically significant differences were found between patients treated with a CFR-PEEK plate and those treated with a conventional locking plate for the CMS and the OSS ( At the 2-year follow-up, a total of 6 complications (21%) were observed in the CFR-PEEK plate group and 11 complications (38%) were seen in the conventional locking plate group. In detail, a varus malalignment was observed in 4 patients (14%) in the CFR-PEEK plate group within the first 6 weeks after surgery and in 7 patients (24%) in the conventional locking plate group, with 4 patients presenting with loss of reduction after 6 weeks. In these patients, no signs of avascular necrosis were observed. Avascular necrosis of the head fragment or the major tuberosity was observed in 1 patient (≈3%) in the CFR-PEEK plate group and in 3 patients (≈10%) in the conventional locking plate group. No other complications, such as hematoma or infection, were observed. Implant removal was performed in 7 cases (24%) in the CFR-PEEK plate group (in combination with arthrolysis in 2 cases [≈6%] or for patient request) and in 8 patients (28%) in the conventional locking plate group (4 patients [14%] underwent additional arthrolysis). The results of this study demonstrate that satisfying functional and radiographic results can be achieved when proximal humerus fractures are treated with a CFR-PEEK plate. Furthermore, in a matched analysis, the reported results are superior to those achieved with conventional locking plates. With regard to the CMS, patients treated with a CFR-PEEK plate showed significantly better results after 2 years of follow-up. There is no consensus in the literature regarding the optimal treatment for proximal humerus fractures. Because of the lack of prospective randomized controlled studies, the superiority of surgery over conservative treatment has not yet been proved. Recently published comparative studies have found no significant differences in outcome parameters after either surgical or conservative treatment, but they revealed higher short-term complication rates after surgical procedures. A lack of primary stability and medial comminution can cause loss of reduction with subsequent varus deformity and screw cutout with glenoid destruction. Although PEEK implants are frequently used in spine surgery, there are few clinical reports from trauma surgery. A comparative study of PEEK and titanium plates for valgus-producing medial open-wedge high tibial osteotomy was performed by Cotic et al. To our knowledge, this is the first study to report prospective clinical and radiographic outcomes after fixation of a proximal humerus fracture with a CFR-PEEK plate. However, some limitations apply. The number of patients is small (N = 29), and only preliminary results from a single center are reported. This was a consecutive series of patients with a 3- or 4-part proximal humerus fracture who were treated with the CFR-PEEK plate. Although an additional comparison was made to a group of patients matched by age, gender, and fracture type who were treated with a conventional locking plate fixation, the results must be analyzed with caution because the comparison group is historical. A prospective randomized trial would provide more reliable data and will be the subject of further investigations. In addition, the follow-up period was short, but further data will be provided at a later stage. In this context, Ockert et al A potential strength of the study is that it consists of a consecutive series of patients who were treated for a proximal humerus fracture with a single surgical procedure performed by the same surgeon with the use of a single implant. Furthermore, the same surgeon also performed all surgeries among the comparison group of patients who were treated with a conventional locking plate. The learning curve of the surgeon may have an influence on the results. A study by Solberg et al Fixation of proximal humerus fractures with a CFR-PEEK plate provides satisfying clinical and radiographic results after 2 years of follow-up. These results are comparable to those achieved with conventional locking plates. Typical complications, such as screw cutout and loss of reduction with subsequent varus deformity, seem to occur less frequently among patients treated with a CFR-PEEK plate. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundation with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.