The cratering process in brittle materials under hypervelocity impact (HVI) is of major relevance for debris shielding in spacecraft or high-power laser applications. Amongst other materials, carbon is of particular interest since it is widely used as elementary component in composite materials. In this paper we study a porous polycrystalline graphite under HVI and laser impact, both leading to strong debris ejection and cratering. First, we report new experimental data for normal impacts at 4100 and 4200 m s−1 of a 500-μm-diameter steel sphere on a thick sample of graphite. In a second step, dynamic loadings have been performed with a high-power nanosecond laser facility. High-resolution X-ray tomographies and observations with a scanning electron microscope have been performed in order to visualize the crater shape and the subsurface cracks. These two post-mortem diagnostics also provide evidence that, in the case of HVI tests, the fragmented steel sphere was buried into the graphite target below the crater surface. The current study aims to propose an interpretation of the results, including projectile trapping. In spite of their efficiency to capture overall trends in crater size and shape, semi-empirical scaling laws do not usually predict these phenomena. Hence, to offer better insight into the processes leading to this observation, the need for a computational damage model is argued. After discussing energy partitioning in order to identify the dominant physical mechanisms occurring in our experiments, we propose a simple damage model for porous and brittle materials. Compaction and fracture phenomena are included in the model. A failure criterion relying on Weibull theory is used to relate material tensile strength to deformation rate and damage. These constitutive relations have been implemented in an Eulerian hydrocode in order to compute numerical simulations and confront them with experiments. In this paper, we propose a simple fitting procedure of the unknown Weibull parameters based on HVI results. Good agreement is found with experimental observations of crater shapes and dimensions, as well as debris velocity. The projectile inclusion below the crater is also reproduced by the model and a mechanism is proposed for the trapping process. At least two sets of Weibull parameters can be used to match the results. Finally, we show that laser experiment simulations may discriminate in favor of one set of parameters.Debris shielding against hypervelocity impact (HVI) is a major concern for many applications such as spacecraft technology and high-power laser facilities. Indeed, meteoroids can impact satellites at several kilometers per second, possibly damaging or destroying some vital equipment The range of materials exposed to HVI continuously increases. Metals have been widely studied, both experimentally In this paper we focus on experiments leading to crater formation in EDM3 We study the case of a 0.5-mm-diameter stainless-steel sphere (its precise grade is unknown) which orthogonally impacts a 30-mm-diameter, 15-mm-thickness graphite target. The samples were made of EDM3, which is a porous isotropic and homogeneous graphite from the POCO Company The projectile is launched by MICA, a two-stage light-gas gun located at CEA CESTA and represented in An impact was recorded at 43,000 images per second with a high-speed camera. The video, from which The crater appearance and dimensions were given by tomography and contact profilometry. However, the projectile being buried into the sample suggests that the apparent crater may not be sufficient to characterize all the damage process. Because the projectile dazzles around itself on tomographies, this aspect is more evident when the latter are correctly thresholded, analyzed and transformed into volumetric objects. The volume of the projectile is significantly reduced by thresholding but its validity is confirmed by Projectile trapping has already been reported by Tanabe et al. In view of the fact that strain rate dependency on tensile failure stress is a key feature of dynamic failure Pirri If we consider a steel projectile and a 20% porous graphite target, shock pressure We used the LULI 2000 high-power laser facility (see It yields  In this section, we try to analyze the effects of an impact at 4 km s Semi-empirical scaling laws have shown their efficiency to capture crater depth and diameter in case of ductile targets. Amongst the most popular, one can notice models from Cour-Palais Semi-empirical models such as Eqs. For a 0.5-mm-diameter steel projectile with an impact velocity  The energy stored in the projectile after impact merely consists of a thermal part which includes shock-release path Thus, the thermal energy of the projectile only represents 1.4% of the input energy. However, it should be noted that, since the energy required to entirely melt the projectile is around 0.6 J The maximum fragment velocity The target mass was 18.6 g, hence its velocity is The fragmentation energy The fracture toughness is unknown for EDM3. Nonetheless, many previous studies  In order to estimate the energy consumed by compaction in the target we use the confined compression curve of EDM3 presented in Thus, there is no more compaction beyond a radius The energy partitioning in our experiment significantly differs from Gault and Heitowit To conclude, one can say this first approach gives orders of magnitude of the effects of hypervelocity impacts on EDM3. But it cannot predict the ejected fragments volume because of the difference between the orders of magnitude of the various energy consumption phenomena. It does not take account of surface spalling and neither explains why the projectile remains in the target after impact — even if the latter phenomenon has already been observed by Tanabe et al. The following models were implemented into Hésione Eulerian hydrocode developed at CEA. It deals with multi-material flows in explicit mode on Cartesian 2D or 3D grid using the BBC numerical scheme Pressure: calculated by means of an EOS; Deviatoric stress tensor: given by an incremental constitutive relation. However, Hésione has no laser-matter interaction model. In order to simulate the LULI 2000 shot, we used Esther, a 1D Lagrangian hydrodynamic code developed at CEA. It numerically solves laser wave propagation into plasma along with thermal diffusion and hydrodynamic processes. It enabled us to extract equivalent dynamic loading, The steel projectile is described with a classical model for 304 stainless steel: a Mie-Grüneisen EOS associated with an elastic-perfectly-plastic constitutive relation. A failure model is included, with thresholds for both principal stress (tensile) and plastic deformation. The behavior of EDM3 is described with the POREQST model, which supplies EOS and constitutive relations for porous materials and it is implemented into Hésione Eulerian hydrocode presented in Section The damaging process representation needs to define criteria and treatments. In case of a hypervelocity impact of a small steel sphere onto a target, the main damage is due to tensile and shear strength. Senft and Stewart The brittle failure is included in our model In this expression, Following Denoual This section presents 2D-axisymmetric numerical simulations of MICA shots performed with the Hésione Eulerian component and models described in the previous section. We examine the sensitivity of numerical results to cell size and unknown parameters In a first simulation, we used a Weibull modulus The bottom part of First we note that radial cracks predicted by simulation are not observed on tomography and SEM images. This discrepancy can come from an inaccurate modeling or healing may have occurred  The velocity of ejected fragments mainly goes from 20 to 180 m s The steel sphere is trapped by a damaged material flow which comes after crater creation (see white arrow in In addition of the crater depth and diameter, we note that the last simulation also reproduces the crater shape. However, remembering that fragments still move at the end of the simulation, this point should be addressed with caution. In the damaged area, the cell size used for computations was 12.5 × 12.5 μm. It ensures both a good convergence level and a reasonable computation time — two and a half hour on an eight-core computer. The mesh convergence of this simulation is illustrated on Finally, the sensitivity of our numerical results to the choice of Weibull parameters has been investigated. A comparison is made between simulations using sets W1 and W2 on To conclude, the selected cell size seems to be adapted. Without experimental values of the Weibull parameters, a numerical fitting is useful and gives good results whatever the choice of the quasi-static-to-dynamic transition strain rate. To test the validity of these choices with a different loading, we simulated the laser-induced shock of the LULI 2000 shot. From experimental intensity, Esther simulation provides pressure loading on sample surface (see The vertical expanse of the damaged zone for W1 is in good agreement with the observed crater depth, whereas the simulation with W2 strongly overestimates it; For W1, the radius of the outermost crack is consistent with the experimental spall diameter and is much alike the subsurface crack discussed in The radius of the highly damaged zone for W1 is ∼1.2 mm, which is close to the experimental value, whereas the simulation with W2 (∼1.5 mm) overvalues it. As expected, maximum strain rates obtained in the simulation (∼10 In this paper, various experiments have been reported on EDM3, a commercial grade of porous, macroscopically isotropic polycrystalline graphite. In the case of HVI tests, performed above 4000 m s The authors would like to express their gratitude to Claude Bianchi for reviewing the English of this paper.