Open reduction and plate osteosynthesis is occasionally indicated for dorsally displaced distal radius fractures. We reviewed our medium term results with the Forte plate, one of the recently introduced purpose-made implants.
                  Twenty-five patients operated on during the first year were reviewed 19 (12–24) months after surgery. Median age at operation was 53 (28–80) years. There were seven high energy and eighteen low energy injuries. Fourteen fractures extended into the radiocarpal joint.
                  Three patients had a poor clinical result and were re-operated on before review with an arthrodesis, ulnar shortening, or Sauve–Kapandji operation. The remainder had six excellent, twelve good, and four fair results. Irritation of the extensor tendons was a minor problem.
                  Initial radiological correction of deformity was satisfactory, but increased volar angulation of the distal radius was seen at follow up in twenty patients — by more than 10 degrees in nine. Seven patients had 20–30 degrees volar tilt at final review and tended to have a poorer clinical result than other patients.
                  In our patients use of the Forte plate seems to have given satisfactory clinical results, but the increase in volar tilt after surgery is a cause for concern.The great majority of dorsally displaced distal radius fractures may be adequately treated with reduction and plaster immobilisation, but very displaced, comminuted, or intra-articular fractures remain a problem. In many such cases external fixation, or percutaneous pins and plaster of Paris may be sufficient, but occasionally open reduction and plate-osteosynthesis is required. Two purpose-made plates have been introduced during the last few years. We have used one of them, the Forte plate A total of twenty-seven patients were internally fixed with the Forte plate during the first year of its use in our department. Two lived in other parts of the country. The remaining twenty-five patients constitute the material of this study. There were nineteen women and six men with a median age of 53 (range 28–80) years. All fractures had been sustained during a fall. Seven had fallen from a higher level and eighteen on the same level. Three fractures were Older When the Forte plate is in place the screw heads are flush with the plate and should thus cause little irritation of the extensor tendons. This is possible because the screw holes are recessed ( An initial attempt at non-operative treatment was made in many fractures and the patient only scheduled for operation when this failed. The median time between fracture and operation was seven (0–20) days. The operations were performed by a total of thirteen surgeons. The median operation time was 130 (70–205) min. Bone transplant from the iliac crest was used in all but three cases. No postoperative immobilisation was used in seven cases. The remainder was immobilised with a plaster of Paris splint for a median of 18 (6–43) days. Most patients subsequently wore a removable plastic splint for a variable period. All twenty-five patients were reviewed a median of 19 (12–24) months after operation. Pain and subjective evaluation of the cosmetic and general results were quantified with the aid of visual analogue scales (VAS) which were converted to point scores where 0 indicated no pain or a normal hand and 100 indicated the worst imaginable pain or result. VAS scores up to 15 were arbitrarily taken to indicate a satisfactory result. Both hands were measured for grip strength with a Jamar (J.A. Preston Corp., Clifton, NJ) dynamometer. Three measurements were made and the median value recorded. A 10% correction was made for dominant/non-dominant hand The injured wrists were x-rayed in the antero-posterior and side projections. The “length” of the radial styloid was measured in the AP view as the distance between the base of the ulnar styloid and the tip of radial styloid Wilcoxon’s rank sum test was used for statistical evaluation and At the first reviews after operation there was a tendency for supination and thumb extension to normalise more slowly than other movements. There was one postoperative seroma that cleared up uneventfully. One patient developed reflex sympathetic dystrophy. A haematoma in a patient on warfarin became infected. This patient underwent a Sauve–Kapandji operation before final review. One patient had a surgical shortening of the ulna. One very comminuted fracture in a patient with a concomitant subdural haematoma re-dislocated soon after operation and a wrist arthrodesis was performed after 3 At final review, six patients reported no pain in the wrist, thirteen some pain on activity, and three always pain on activity. The median VAS score for average pain during the last week was 2 (range 0–62; 18 satisfactory) and for worst pain during the last week also 2 (range 0–67; 16 satisfactory). Only one patient used analgesics occasionally because of pain in the wrist. One plate had been removed and one was scheduled for removal due to irritation of the extensor tendons. A “reverse dinner fork” deformity with volar translation of the wrist was seen in six patients. It was severe in one and moderate in two wrists. One patient had a slight extension deficit of all four fingers, and three had flexion deficits of up to 3 cm nail to flexor-crease distance. All patients could extend the thumb when the palm was placed on a flat surface, but this ability was reduced compared with the opposite hand in six. Median grip strength in the injured hand, corrected for dominance, was 80% (range 56–111) of that in the contralateral hand. Only three patients had more than 30% loss in grip strength. Five of the twenty-two patients who were evaluated clinically had also had a fracture of the opposite wrist. In the remaining seventeen there was a considerable median deficit in flexion, extension, and supination compared with the uninjured side ( The clinically reviewed patients’ median VAS recording for the general result was 20 (range 0–63; 8 satisfactory) and for the cosmetic result 9 (range 0–46; 14 satisfactory). Gartland and Werley’s functional scoring system was difficult to apply accurately, particularly for the subjective demerit points. The three re-operated patients were arbitrarily taken to have had a poor clinical result. Of the remainder, six results were graded as excellent, twelve as good, and four as fair. The radial styloid length was fairly well preserved from surgery to final review ( Six of the seven patients with more than 20 degrees volar tilt of the distal radial surface were also reviewed clinically. The median VAS scores indicated that they were statistically significantly less satisfied with the cosmetic (VAS 23 vs 5; As this was a new procedure in our department, many surgeons performed the operation for the first time. In spite of this, and in spite of the procedure seeming complicated on paper, few difficulties were reported and most of the postoperative reductions were satisfactory. There was, however, a worrying tendency for the fractures to angulate volarly during the postoperative period. The osteosynthesis material itself will not prevent this. It is presumably due to significant comminution of the volar surface of the radius. Our patients were not randomly selected with regard to postoperative immobilisation, and it is likely that the fractures that were considered most unstable postoperatively were the ones selected for a postoperative plaster of Paris. With this proviso, our results do not indicate that volar angulation is reduced by a postoperative splint. It is possible that it occurs less frequently with the pi plate It was gratifying to see that irritation of the extensor tendons, which had been a problem with the AO plates we had used previously, seemed far less pronounced with the present low profile plate. Our overall clinical results seem satisfactory for these fairly severe fractures with eighteen out of twenty-five results falling into the excellent and good categories on the Gartland and Werley scale. We were, however, not able to reproduce the very good results reported by Carter and co-workers