The separation features of the floatex density separator (FDS) are investigated through experimental and computational approaches. It has been shown that the performance of the FDS can be predicted reasonably well using a slip velocity model and steady-state mass balance equations. The approach for the formulation of the slip velocity model makes a difference in the prediction of FDS performance. The computed data from four different slip velocity models have been compared and contrasted with the experimental observations. It has been shown that a slip velocity model based on the modified Richardson and Zaki equation, in which the dissipative pressure gradient is considered to be the primary driving force for separation, predicts the performance more accurately than the other three. A deslimed feed is recommended for better performance of the FDS.The floatex density separator (FDS) is a gravity concentrator in which liquid fluidization is effectively used to concentrate fine minerals. Hindered settling along with the formation of an autogenous dense medium in the form of a teeter bed are the primary physical phenomena in the FDS. The slurry of mineral fines is fed to the FDS from the top through a feed well. The teeter water (TW) is introduced from the bottom uniformly throughout the cross section. The heavier particles settle through the autogenous dense medium generated while the lighter particles are hydraulically transported to the overflow. Detailed description of the FDS and its operation are discussed elsewhere ( Some initiatives were taken to study the performance of the FDS (  Details of mathematical formulation are available in a previous paper published by the same group ( The slip velocity of a particle can be decomposed into three different components, namely, (i) the terminal settling velocity, (ii) the inter-particle distance, and (iii) the suspension density (   For multi-solid suspensions, the bed voidage can be generalized considering the average diameter of the particles as follows: For accurate estimation of the slip velocity of the particles in a concentrated suspension, the particle–particle interactions may be characterized for each particle species. ε   The above four different empirical slip velocity correlations are chosen for the description of separation in the FDS. A similarity is seen in all four slip velocity correlations though they are based on different physical consideration. The The use of slip velocity correlations developed by Component mass balance and overall steady-state mass balance over the unit is expressed by the two-product relationship: A simultaneous solution of the slip velocity and steady-state mass balance equations gives an adequate description of the FDS performance. The slip velocity of each particle is estimated first. If the slip velocity of the particle is greater than the interstitial fluid velocity, it will report to the underflow. On the other hand, the particles with slip velocities lower than the interstitial fluid velocity will be carried to the overflow stream. If the particle slip velocity is equal to the interstitial fluid velocity, it has equal probability of reporting to either the overflow or the underflow stream. Knowing the size and density distribution of the particles in the feed and applying the mass balance equations, then, the prediction of the size and density distributions of the FDS products, the partition curves and overall estimation of the performance can be made ( The suspension density is highest at the bottom and it decreases with height. Consequently, the voidage is the lowest at the bottom and increases along the axial direction. Although, considerations for the suspension density and voidage distribution certainly enhance the accuracy of prediction, these increase the complexity many-fold. In order to account for the pressure losses due to particle-wall and fluid-wall friction, the system is assumed to be equivalent to a Newtonian flow through smooth pipe in which the total pressure loss is due to liquid-wall friction alone ( The solid–solid frictional loss is assumed to be negligible. Therefore, Eq.  The interstitial teeter water velocity may, then, be obtained by dividing the superficial teeter water velocity by the bed voidage. It may be noted here that depending upon the solid concentration and particle size distribution, the suspension may exhibit non-Newtonian flow behavior. However, since the bed is fluidized, a Newtonian behavior is a reasonable approximation at most locations in the bed. Moreover, a relative assessment of the four models in a simplified flow regime is the main focus of the work. Hence, a rigorous non-Newtonian analysis is not attempted. The estimation of the necessary parameters such as Richardson and Zaki index ( Experimental test campaigns were undertaken using a laboratory model FDS at NML pilot plant with coal as the feed material. Details of the feed characteristics, experimental procedures and test campaigns are discussed elsewhere ( The four tests selected for detailed comparison are listed in A computer program was written in VC++ in order to solve the slip velocity and mass balance equations. The details of the feed matrix used and the details of computational procedure are available elsewhere ( These studies refer to tests T1 & T2 as shown in In the present study, an effective suspension density and average bed voidage are assumed. However, at a low bed pressure the actual suspension density is lower and the voidage is higher due to inadequate development of the bed. Therefore, the estimated interstitial slip velocities are different from the actual slip velocities. The slip velocities of coal particles of different size and density for feed F1 are calculated using Galvin slip velocity model and are shown in It can also be seen from In the absence of density based separation at a low bed pressure, the predicted ash values are higher than the experimental value. However, at a higher bed pressure the predictions of the clean coal grade are reasonably close to the observed values. In fact, the Galvin model predictions are within 5% of the observed grade. At a low teeter water rate (T3), all models over-predict the yield. However, the Galvin model offers the closest prediction under these conditions ( It may be summarized from In the development of the Patwardhan & Tien model it is assumed that the particles are surrounded by a liquid envelope. An effective particle size, larger than the actual particle size, is considered based on an average bed voidage. This results in an increase in the frictional force when the particles settle against the rising teeter water. As a result, the particles experience enhanced upward force that leads to a greater transport of the heavier particles to the overflow stream. This explains why this model always tends to over predict the clean coal yield and ash. At a high bed pressure, the Galvin, Masliyah and Van der Wielen models lead to under prediction of the yield for feed F1 (Test T2). However, they provide an over prediction of the yield for feed F2 (Test T3, T4). These observations may be attributed to the difference in the size distributions of feed F1 and F2. Under any set of conditions, the bed voidage with feed F1 is less than that with feed F2 since feed F1 has a wider size distribution. Moreover, the average density of feed F1 is higher than that of feed F2. A lower bed voidage along with the high density of particles imply a higher effective suspension density. In the present study, the bed voidage and suspension density are incorporated in the averaged form into the model formulation. Thus, for feed F1, a lower suspension density and a higher bed voidage are used, which result in the under prediction of the yield. Whereas, with feed F2, slightly higher values of suspension density and lower bed voidage are used that result in somewhat over prediction of the yield values. In the development of the Galvin model ( The Masliyah model is developed based on the steady-state momentum balance principle, whereas Van der Wielen's slip velocity model is developed from a steady-state force balance. Thus, both these slip velocity models are developed under similar physical considerations, viz. force and momentum balance. Therefore, the performance predictions using these two slip velocity models are similar under all conditions studied. The partition curves are generated from the size and density distributions of the two products and the feed. The size based partition curves are presented in The overall density based partition curves are presented in It can also be seen from In order to investigate the separation features the density partition curves for narrow size classes are plotted in The poor separation at a lower bed pressure is investigated further from the density partitions of narrow size classes as shown in The performance of the FDS is computed using all four slip velocity models to understand the effect of the bed pressure and teeter water flow rate on the yield and grade of the product. The predictions using all four models follow a similar trend qualitatively with some variation. The predicted performances of the FDS for the beneficiation of coal fines of feed F1 are presented in The overall performance prediction against the experimental data for the Galvin model is shown in The performance of the FDS is investigated through experimentation and detailed simulation studies. Four different slip velocity models are considered for this study. The salient features of all four models are discussed with reference to their ability to predict the performance of the FDS. The computed data using all four models are compared and contrasted with the experimental observations. The difference between the computed performance and experimental results are discussed in the light of the formulation of the slip velocity models and the assumptions made in this work. It is shown that although all four models are capable of capturing the essence of the separation features in the FDS, their accuracies in predicting the performance of the FDS are different. At a low bed pressure, the relatively poor predictions are also addressed. It is established that the model proposed by The financial assistance from the