Rock burst is a dynamic process of sudden, rapid and violent release of elastic energy accumulated in rock and coal masses during underground activities. It can lead to casualties, to failure and deformation of the supporting structures, and to damage of the equipment on site; hence its prediction is of great importance. This paper presents a novel application of Bayesian networks (BNs) to predict rock burst. Five parameters —Buried depth of the tunnel (H), Maximum tangential stress of surrounding rock (MTS) (σθ
                     ), Uniaxial tensile strength of rock (UTS) (σt
                     ), Uniaxial compressive strength of rock (UCS) (σc
                     ) and Elastic energy index (Wet
                     )— are adopted to construct the BN with the Tree augmented Naïve Bayes classifier structure. The Expectation Maximization algorithm is employed to learn from a data set of 135 rock burst case histories, whereas the belief updating is carried out by the Junction Tree algorithm. Finally, the model is validated with 8-fold cross-validation and with another new group of incomplete case histories that had not been employed during training of the BN. Results suggest that the error rate of the proposed BN is the lowest among the traditional criteria with capability to deal with incomplete data. In addition, a sensitivity analysis shows that MTS is the most influential parameter, which could be a guidance on the rock burst prediction in the future.Rock burst is a sudden and violent release of elastic energy accumulated in rock and coal masses that occur during the underground activities. It produce ejection of rock fragments, which could lead to casualties, to failure and deformation of the supporting structures, and to damage of equipment ( Rock burst prediction can be divided into two categories: long-term and short-term predictions ( Data mining methods and artificial intelligence have often been applied for long-term prediction of rock burst since the seminal work of One of the main difficulties to predict rock burst with existing methods is that data are difficult to obtain and often incomplete. To overcome this problem, we propose a Bayesian network (BN) ( Several theories —such as the ‘strength theory’, the ‘rigidity theory’ and the ‘energy theory’— were proposed since the 1950s to explain the mechanism leading to rock burst occurrence, and for its long-term prediction considered herein. After that, new ‘burst liability’ theories that employ the elastic energy index, the burst energy release index and the duration of dynamic fracture to predict rock burst were developed ( Observations in real cases indicate that rock burst occurs mainly in deep rock engineering and most works consulted during the literature review agree in the observation that tunnel depth is an important factor that can affect rock burst. Therefore, and although in-situ rock stress would probably be a better predictor, the lack of information about in-situ stress in many projects, as well as the difficulties to accurately estimate in-situ rock stress at early stages of a project without expensive and time consuming in-situ tests, make us to select the buried depth of the tunnel as an alternative. (Note also that, as the excavation depth increases, the in-situ stress —which is often estimated by The maximum tangential stress is often used to predict the fracture angle of rock ( The uniaxial compressive strength and the uniaxial tensile strength are two other parameters that can influence rock burst, and they have often been applied for such task. Both are also commonly available parameters, and only one UCS and twelve UTS values are missing from the database. The Elastic energy index, Many rock burst case histories comprising data from different types of underground projects from all over the world have been compiled by In addition to the parameters discussed in Section The burst energy release index is a measure of the energy released at the time of rock fracture, being therefore related to the elastic energy index discussed above. In fact, the linear relation between them indicates that they can be both similarly related to rock burst ( The duration of dynamic fracture is the time elapsed since a rock specimen reaches its ultimate strength until it is completely destroyed under an uniaxial compression state in the lab ( The stress coefficient Bayesian networks are graphical models that handle probabilistic relationships among a set of variables in the form of directed acyclic graphs. The nodes in the network represent random variables. If two nodes have direct causal influences (i.e., if they are dependent), they will be linked by an arrow; similarly, the lack of an arrow between two variables indicates their conditional independency ( The first step of BN modeling is to define the structure of the network, so that the conditional independency and dependency relationships between the variables that will be employed as inputs should be carefully considered. Once the structure of the BN is defined, the intensity of the relationship —or, in other words, the conditional probability of one variable given the other— needs to be defined. For discrete variables, this is accomplished using conditional probability tables (CPTs), which quantify the conditional probability of the outcome or ‘end node’ having one of its possible values, given that the ‘origin node’ has one of its possible values. BNs have the additional feature that they can be updated as new evidence is obtained, in a process referred to as “belief updating”. (The Junction Tree algorithm, discussed in Section BNs can be constructed so as to predict the probability of a complicated rock engineering hazard such as rock burst. To that end, we divide the data set into two categories —rock burst and non-rock burst—, so that the two categories of the outcome can be denoted by Given these observations, and the preliminary results obtained, it was apparent that the Naïve Bayes classifier was not the optimum structure in this case. For that reason, the Tree augmented Naïve Bayes classifier proposed by The five parameters employed are continuous. However, although theoretically possible, the practical capability of BNs to deal with continuous data is limited ( Defining the discretization intervals is a delicate task. In this study, the equal frequency binning algorithm available in the software package WEKA is employed; its goal is to divide the data into intervals containing approximately the same number of cases ( With the BN structure defined in After the CPTs are obtained with the EM algorithm, the posterior probability distribution given a set of observations (evidence) is the next main aim. This process is referred to as belief updating ( We use the software Netica ( After BNs are trained, additional belief updating can be conducted with the JT algorithm, for new observations about the input vector that become available. As an example, let us imaging that we get data from an underground excavation project, such as: H The trained BNs can also be applied to predict the rock burst hazard of the case histories used for training (A 50% probability threshold is employed to differentiate between rock burst and non-rock burst prediction). The confusion matrix for all the 135 case histories is presented in We can also compare the predictions of our method with those of other classic methods to predict rock burst reported in A k-fold cross-validation can be further employed to validate the model and to test BN accuracy. We have 135 case histories in the initial database, which can be divided into 8 groups. For each group, the BN is trained using the other 7 groups, and the originally selected group is then used to predict rock burst occurrence with the trained BN, and to compare observations and predictions. If this process is repeated to all groups of data, an 8 cross-validation exercise is obtained. Results are reported in An additional validation can be conducted employing new case histories. Therefore, another 15 new case histories with missing data are collected from the literature. (Some cases are from tunnels, and some are from metal and coal mines.) Their observed rock burst occurrence (or not), as well as the prediction obtained with the BN and other four methods in An additional useful feature of BNs is that they can inform about the influence of parameters on rock burst prediction. To that end, we can use indicators provided by mutual information (  A novel application of Bayesian networks to predict rock burst occurrence is presented. The Tree augmented Naïve Bayes classifier is proposed to predict the probability of rock burst given information on five parameters —buried depth of the tunnel, maximum tangential stress of surrounding rock, uniaxial tensile strength of rock, uniaxial compressive strength of rock and elastic energy index— that we employ as inputs, and based on which the prediction are obtained. The BN is trained with the Expectation Maximization algorithm, using the 135 case histories included in the database that we complied from the literature; and the Junction Tree algorithm is employed for Belief updating when new information is available or to make prediction based on information about the input parameters. The trained BN has been validated using cross-validation and the original database. In addition, 15 new cases with incomplete information are employed to test the performance of the BN’s prediction. Results show that the error rate on rock burst prediction of the trained BN is among the lowest of the commonly employed methods considered; and that it is probably low enough so as to be acceptable for practical engineering. This suggests that the BN methods provide useful information about the likelihood of rock burst during tunneling or mining process. The proposed BN has the additional advantage of being able to deal with, and to make predictions in situations in which, as it often happen in practice, information about source of the parameters is not available. In addition, a sensitivity analysis is conducted to identify the input parameters with a stronger influence on rock burst. Its results suggest that the maximum tangential stress is the most influential parameters, with other factors such as UCS and UTS having also a large influence on rock burst prediction. Other factors, such as the buried depth, have only a secondary influence on the rock burst outcome, and it could probably be considered as an external reference factor. It is expected that these results can lead designers to focus their characterization efforts forward those factors that have been identified as more relevant. Finally, a cautionary note should be added. The reason is that, although the proposed BN is considered as a useful tool to preliminarily anticipate and evaluate rock burst hazard and to guide subsequent control and prevention measures, it should not be a substitute for other methods such as numerical simulation ( The project was funded, in part, by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 