The aim of this paper is to understand the factors that influence copper leaching from electronic scrap. It is revealed that the bioleaching is greatly influenced by process variables such as Fe3+ concentration, quantity of stock culture added, and pH. Before starting the leaching process, A. ferrooxidans was cultivated for 3–4 days as stock culture, until the concentration of Fe3+ ions had reached about 7.00 g/L, which was considered strong enough to dissolve metallic copper. The results show that high leaching rates of copper could be achieved in the presence of 6.66 g/L of Fe3+, 100% addition quantities of stock culture, and pH 1.5. It is concluded that bioleaching copper from printed circuit boards (PCB) using Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans (A. f.) is feasible.In China, it is estimated that the number of personal computers now exceeds more than one billion. While computers have helped industry and commerce, there has been a dramatic increase in electronic waste. If obsolete computers are discarded randomly in waste dumps or just thrown out there is a risk of environmental damage and a loss of valuable metals. Printed circuit boards are part of computer and their compositions are quite varied, containing polymers, ceramics and metals which are distributed as follows: plastics 19%, bromine 4%, glass and ceramics 49%; the base metal content is around 28% – copper: 10–20%, lead: 1–5%, nickel: 1–3%. The precious metal content of circuit boards is 0.3 to 0.4% ( The existing process for re-cyclicing printed circuit boards is either pyrometallurgical or hydrometallurgical both of which generate atmospheric pollution by releasing dioxins and furans into the atmosphere ( The use of microorganisms to recover metals from wastes may well be a low cost practical alternate to these processes. Though this process has been successfully applied for the leaching of metals from ores ( The present study was undertaken to evaluate the potential of pure mesophile bacteria culture The microorganism The standard used to grow To obtain metal adapted cultures, 100 mL of this solution was prepared in 300 mL Erlenmeyer flasks. Stock solutions (1 M) of each of Ag Finally the medium in logarithmic phase of growth as stock culture was prepared for inoculation. The PCB scraps used in this study were obtained from Powder Technology Laboratory of Beihang University. They were shredded using stainless steel blades with no special pre-treatment. The “< Fe At the beginning of the bioleaching experiment, 10 ml of In order to investigate the influence of pH on leaching PCB, 1.5 g of PCB shreds were respectively placed into three 250 ml conical flasks which contained 100 ml of mineral salts medium. The pH of solution was adjusted to 1.5, 1.7 and 2.0 by adding H In order to investigate the influence of different inoculation quantities of stock culture on leaching the PCB. The effect of Fe After leaching for 12 h, there is a significant decreases in the concentrations of Fe  In the leaching process, the leaching mechanism of copper from PCB shreds by The regeneration of Fe  Without the addition of the microorganism and ferrous ion in the solution and relaying just on acid, it can be seen that when the pH is adjusted at 2.0, the mobilization rate of copper into solution was only 21% after 120 h of copper. This indicates that pH alone yields very slow leaching of copper. Showing that low pH itself is contributing factor in leaching copper. Electronic scrap has been reported to be alkaline in nature, resulting in increase in the pH of the solution ( As shown in Ta  It can be observed in Present fundamental studies for the microbial leaching of copper from PCB generated from waste computers have demonstrated the possibility that the valuable metallic components contained in wastes can be mobilized effectively through a bioleaching process. Fe