Background
                  There have been reports of total radial head allografts showing variable outcomes. This case series reports the novel use of an allograft for partial radial head replacement in the treatment of elbow fracture-dislocation.
               
                  Methods
                  Eight patients underwent partial radial head allograft reconstruction to restore stability for complex fracture-dislocations involving fractures of the coronoid and radial head, with collateral ligament disruption. Two patients were treated acutely. Six were referred from other centers 2 to 48 weeks after injury following failure of primary treatment. In each case, it was not possible to perform stable open reduction–internal reduction of the radial head fracture, or the fracture fragment had already been excised. A fresh-frozen partial radial head allograft was used to replace the defect and restore the joint surface. The coronoid fracture and injury to collateral ligaments were also managed surgically. Patient charts, surgical records, and radiographs were reviewed. Patients were contacted at a mean of 79 months after treatment to answer questions to determine the Mayo Elbow Performance Score and the score on the shortened version of the Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand (QuickDASH) questionnaire.
               
                  Results
                  Clinical and radiologic reviews confirmed union of graft in all cases. None resorbed or collapsed. Three patients had resorption of the coronoid fragment resulting in poor outcomes, with one patient ultimately undergoing total elbow arthroplasty.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Partial radial head allograft may be a useful alternative to radial head prosthesis in unstable fracture-dislocations in which the radial head cannot be restored fully.Partial radial head excision, ORIF of olecranon Annular ligament reconstruction Open arthrolysis Total elbow arthroplasty 1. Coronoid allograft, LCL allograft, hinged external fixation 2. Hardware removal Allografts are widely used for reconstructive procedures around the hip and the knee. Their use around the elbow so far has been limited. The management of fracture-dislocations of the elbow has been disappointing at times. This is especially true in the management of what has been termed the “terrible-triad” injury: an elbow dislocation associated with fractures of the coronoid and radial head. For fracture-dislocations, the goal of treatment is to restore all of the osseous and articular components that contribute to elbow stability. This will convert a complex fracture-dislocation into a simple dislocation (ie, a ligamentous injury only). In general, it is preferable to preserve the radial head when possible. After institutional review board approval was obtained, computerized records were searched to identify all elbow fracture-dislocations that had been treated in our clinic using a fresh-frozen partial radial head allograft. From September 1997 to December 2002, 9 patients, 1 of whom was lost to follow-up, underwent reconstructions of their radial heads with partial fresh-frozen allograft replacement (by the senior author [S.O.D.]). The medical record was reviewed in detail for demographic data and for preoperative, intraoperative, and postoperative information. When possible, a recent follow-up examination was conducted in our clinic (n = 4). Nonlocal patients were contacted by phone or mail, completed a survey, underwent radiographic examination locally, and sent the films to us for review (n = 4). Objective assessment was achieved by use of the Mayo Elbow Performance Score (MEPS) and the score on the shortened version of the Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand (QuickDASH) questionnaire. Nine patients underwent a partial radial head allograft replacement. Of these patients, 1 was lost to follow-up, leaving 8 (6 men and 2 women, aged 32-65 years). Six patients with persistent instability were referred to our institution from other centers at 2 to 48 weeks after surgical attempts (5 patients) or closed reduction (1 patient) had failed to manage the instability. The 2 local patients underwent surgery acutely. Three of the six patients referred from other centers were referred to our unit 8 or more weeks after injury. They had all previously undergone surgery, and the radial head fragment had been excised. Two were having problems with pain, instability, and contracture. The patient referred 8 weeks after injury had undergone a lateral collateral ligament repair and excision of bone fragments, but persistent subluxation developed. For cases of fracture-dislocation, the treatment strategy was to restore stability so that rehabilitation would make possible a functional range of motion. This involved 3 essential components: (1) restoration of the integrity of the ulnohumeral joint, which required open reduction or reconstruction of the coronoid; (2) reconstruction of the radiohumeral joint; and (3) early active and passive range of motion as soon as possible, which in some cases was protected by a hinged external fixator. In the 6 cases performed within 2 months of injury, the lateral collateral ligament was repaired primarily. A semitendinosus tendon graft (autograft in 1 and allograft in 1) was used for lateral collateral ligament reconstruction in 2 chronic cases performed more than 6 months after injury. In cases of chronic radial head deficiency, preoperative planning consisted of measuring the size of the fractured radial head or of the opposite, nonfractured radial head. A comparable sized radial head allograft was obtained for use in the reconstruction. In acute cases, these preoperative radial head size measurements were not done because the consideration of an allograft was first made intraoperatively. (Our hospital’s bone bank has sufficient resources to permit this.) The radial head was exposed through the interval created by splitting the extensor digitorum communis. If the coronoid required reconstruction or fixation of its anteromedial facet, an additional incision was made on the medial side, elevating part or all of the flexor-pronator mass. After mobilization of the ulnar nerve for anterior transposition, the coronoid was fixed with threaded K-wires and a precontoured plate or by multiple screws. In 1 patient, in whom the coronoid was absent because of prior fragment excision, the coronoid was reconstructed with the remaining portion of the radial head allograft by a technique that has been previously described by van Riet et al. The final decision to proceed with radial head allograft reconstruction was made intraoperatively. It was used in cases where the bone fragments had been previously excised or were too comminuted to allow fixation that would restore radiocapitellar stability. In each of the cases, between 30% and 50% of the radial head was missing. The fractured surface principally involved the safe zone, as described by Smith and Hotchkiss. Patients were reviewed clinically and radiologically. All patients were interviewed by telephone by an independent reviewer (R.G.T.), and the Mayo Elbow Performance Score and QuickDASH score were calculated. Any patient whose condition had deteriorated since the last clinical assessment underwent clinical review locally or at our center, and had new radiographs obtained, which we then reviewed. The mean interview follow-up was 79 months (range, 51-114 months), and the mean clinical review was 54 months (range, 12-98 months). The results are summarized in None of the patients required an additional surgical procedure because of an issue with the radial head. In all cases, there was obliteration of the interface and evidence of bridging trabeculae on plain films at the last follow-up, and the radial head had clinically united. It is difficult to interpret time to union of the host-donor interface radiographically with certainty. Six cases had further confirmation of union. In the 2 patients who were treated for acute injuries, computed tomography scans were performed at the last follow-up (51 weeks and 98 weeks, respectively), and these confirmed bony union ( Patients 6, 7, and 8, who were all referred for management of persistent instability after a delay in treatment, did not achieve good outcomes. In addition to partial allograft radial head replacement, each underwent repair of the coronoid and lateral collateral ligament. One had repair of the medial collateral ligament as well. All 3 required hinged external fixators despite reconstruction of bone and soft tissue. What distinguishes these 3 cases from the others is that the coronoid fragment did not unite and it subsequently resorbed. This led to chronic posteromedial rotatory instability and post-traumatic arthritis. For patients with coronoid resorption/displacement, the final mean arthritis grade was 2.3; mean MEPS, 62; and mean QuickDASH score, 46. For patients without displacement, the final mean arthritis grade was 1.2; mean MEPS, 88; and mean QuickDASH score, 9. The following complications were noted, and 6 of the 8 patients required further surgery: Patient 2 had a superficial wound breakdown that healed by secondary intention and had an ulnar nerve neurapraxia that resolved spontaneously. Patient 3 had sustained an open fracture-dislocation that was treated with debridement and external fixation at another hospital before transfer to our unit for definitive surgery. A deep infection developed 6 weeks after surgery, which was treated by debridement and latissimus dorsi flap. Ultimately, he achieved a good result. In patients 5 and 8, recurrent posterolateral rotatory instability developed, requiring reoperation. A coronoid displacement developed in patient 8 at 6 weeks. Patient 5 had initially undergone imbrication of the lateral collateral ligament, but this became stretched and required reconstruction with a tendon graft. Patients 4 and 7 underwent arthrolysis to gain motion. A neuropathic joint subsequently developed in patient 7, which required total elbow replacement. Coronoid nonunion and resorption developed in patients 6, 7, and 8. All 3 had had hinged external fixators applied because of instability issues. This article reports on the outcome of the use of partial radial head allograft in the treatment of elbow fracture-dislocations, including delayed reconstruction for persistent instability. Incorporation of the small osteochondral allografts, as well as union with the host bone, was consistently seen. Reconstruction for complex post-traumatic instability of the elbow, especially persistent instability after trauma, requires stable restoration of the osseous constraints. If the coronoid is deficient, the radial head becomes critical. Radial head fractures associated with elbow dislocation, ulnar collateral ligament injury, proximal ulnar fracture, or ipsilateral wrist injury generally require operative intervention with preservation of the radial head mechanics by either open reduction–internal fixation or arthroplasty. In type 2 radial head fractures or in cases in which comminution, resorption, or prior excision of fracture fragments precludes fixation, reconstruction of the radial head with an allograft will restore the anterior buttress of the radial head and radiocapitellar concavity-compression stability. The long-term concern about allografts includes resorption and collapse. When we first started using the partial radial head allografts, we assumed that resorption and collapse might occur. They were considered a temporary measure to restore stability, because there were no acceptable metal radial head prostheses available in the United States at that time. The fact that resorption and collapse of these small allografts have not been seen deserves discussion. It is our opinion that such collapse did not occur because the grafts were (1) rigidly fixed, (2) anatomically reduced, and (3) load bearing. We do not believe that their small size is a factor. This thinking would be consistent with the observed longevity of small osteochondral allografts in the knee. A recent study using fresh partial osteochondral allografts for post-traumatic knee defects showed 95% graft survival at 5 years and 85% at 10 years. Although the focus of this report is the novel use of partial radial head allografts, the importance of the coronoid and collateral ligaments as primary stabilizers of the elbow is still paramount. Despite successful reconstruction of the radial head in our series, the failure rate overall was still high because of coronoid nonunion leading to resorption and persistent joint incongruity and/or instability. Coronoid fractures in acute injuries can usually be fixed, but reconstruction options for chronic structural compromise of the coronoid due to malunion or nonunion are not yet consistent or reliable. Partial allograft reconstruction of the radial head may be a reasonable alternative to a prosthetic implant in acute or chronic cases when radial head fixation is not possible and a substantial part of the radial head and neck is intact. Radial head reconstruction with partial allograft replacement restores the anterior buttress of the radial head and its concavity-compression properties, providing stability in all positions of forearm rotation and allowing for early motion of the elbow. Use of a partial allograft produces immediate stability and may be preferable to internal fixation that is tenuous. Shawn W. O'Driscoll and The Mayo Foundation receive royalties from Acumed, which is indirectly related to the subject of this work. The other author, his immediate family, and any research foundations with which he is affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.