Gallium (Ga) is extensively employed in integrated circuits and advanced electronic devices as it provides the benefits of low energy consumption and high computation speeds. However, the Ga-bearing host minerals are scarce in nature. Ga occurs in combination with several minerals, mainly including aluminum, zinc, iron ores and coals, of which bauxite, zinc ores and coals are the primary original sources of Ga currently. Mining minerals for the sole extraction of Ga is not economical due to the low concentration of Ga. Accordingly, Ga is mainly recovered as a by-product from the processing of minerals. The current main commercial resources of Ga are Bayer liquor and zinc residue, which contribute to nearly all of the worldwide Ga production. The production of low-grade (99.99% pure) Ga has been increasing at an average rate of 7.4% p.a. for the past four decades and amounted to 375tons in 2016. It is estimated to increase by 20-fold by the year 2030 compared to the yield of 275tons in 2012. The mounting worldwide demand for Ga necessitates the search for additional resources and recovery technologies for this particular element. Apart from the Bayer liquor and the zinc residue, there are several other Ga-resources, which include red mud, coal fly ash, Ga-bearing electronics industrial waste, and flue dust from electric furnaces at phosphorus factories. Based on the chemical properties of Ga, it is evident that both strong acidic/basic conditions and high temperatures favor the efficient extraction of Ga from its corresponding minerals. Several hydrometallurgical processes based mainly on acid/alkaline leaching along with solution purification and recovery (e.g. ion exchange, solvent extraction and precipitation) have been proposed for Ga extraction from these resources. In this paper, the current status of Ga recovery was reviewed and specific examples were utilized for each resource to discuss the extraction methods, the recoveries and the optimum Ga-recovery conditions for each resource. Additional research appears to be necessary to establish a highly efficient and environmentally friendly process to recover Ga from these resources.Gallium (Ga), a soft and silvery-blue metal, was discovered in 1875 by the French chemist Paul-Émile Lecoq de Boisbaudran ( In addition, six Ga isotopes have been identified, of which only The industrial utilization of Ga began in the US in the 1940s; however, it significantly increased in the 1970s when the semiconducting properties of Ga compounds with elements of group 15 were discovered ( It is worth mentioning that Ga-bearing host minerals are rare. The majority of Ga is currently produced as a by-product of bauxite processing and the remainder produced from zinc-processing residues ( Efficient recovery techniques for Ga extraction from it sources have attracted intensive interest; however, few of these techniques have been developed into practical industrial methods. While there are a few previous literature reviews on Ga processing exist ( The worldwide demand for Ga is increasing and is expected to expand by 20-fold in 2030 compared to the yield of 275 Currently, mining any mineral solely for Ga extraction is not economical due to its low concentration; thus, Ga is mainly recovered as a by-product from the processing of minerals. The commercial Ga is the by-product from Bayer liquor obtained from the bauxite leaching process and zinc residue generated by hydrometallurgical treatment of zinc concentrates ( It is critical to reserve Ga resources and develop efficient extraction technologies to guarantee the current and future demands for the material. In addition to the Bayer liquor and zinc residues, Ga is also found in small amounts in industrial waste products, such as red mud ( The waste produced from the Bayer process for alumina extraction from bauxite ores is called ‘red mud’ and it contains high amounts of trace metals ( The investigation of Ga extraction methods from Ga-bearing minerals requires knowledge of the chemical properties of Ga, especially for regarding its aqueous species and the solubilities of related compounds. The chemical properties of Ga are reviewed in this section to provide a better understanding of the processes of Ga recovery. It is known that Ga forms anionic complexes and exists in ionic form in solutions ( In addition to Ga-hydroxide complexes, Ga is also prone to form complexes with chloride, sulfate, fluoride, and phosphate due to its high charge. Ga(III)-chloride complexes in aqueous solution are present as [GaCl] As mentioned earlier, bauxite is the major source of Ga currently. Ga frequently substitutes for Al in the mineral due to their similar ionic radii (Ga The solubility results of α-GaOOH(s) are depicted in From the above discussion of Ga chemical properties, it is evident that strong acidic/basic conditions and high temperatures are favorable for highly efficient extraction of Ga from its minerals. The extraction methods of Ga from Ga-bearing resources are discussed in the following section. Ga recovery techniques in the Bayer process are well studied and include fractional precipitation, electrochemical deposition, solvent extraction, and ion-exchange processes ( The first ion-exchange process for direct Ga extraction from Bayer liquor was patented by The Bayer liquor in the plant contained 73 The resin, which has an amidoxime group [ The overall recovery of Ga was 46.47% in the above system. The obsolete carbonation method produced only 10 In addition to Bayer liquor, several other by-products in the aluminum industry such as red mud produced from alumina extraction in Bayer process, electrostatic precipitation dust generated from aluminum hydroxide calcination and scrubber dust obtained from fume extraction aluminum electrolysis also contain accumulated Ga. Ga recovery from these by-products has attracted significant interest. Recovery techniques of base metals, including alumina, soda, ferric oxide and titanium oxide, from red mud are of much interest ( One approach to recover Ga and V from red mud is using the Bayer-hydrogarnet process, as is illustrated in The Ga leaching solution (Ga as [Ga(OH) Apart from the Bayer-hydrogarnet process, a bioleaching process has also been investigated for Ga recovery from red mud with the fungus The authors' research group has been exploring a novel technique to extract Ga from the red mud of Guizhou Province, China. The sample containing 33 Electrostatic precipitator dust generated during aluminum hydroxide calcination contains concentrated Ga (occurring as Ga Ga recovery from the dust of aluminum electrolysis plants has received some interest. The dust tends to accumulate Ga (as Ga Among the aforementioned Ga resources, Bayer liquor is the primary Ga resource in the aluminum extraction industry, from which approximately 90% of the worldwide Ga metal is produced. Ga extraction from the other by-products of the aluminum industry is difficult, and most methods are not suitable on an industrial scale due to high costs and complex processes. However, with the depletion of bauxite resources and the development of novel technologies, the red mud, which is one of the most important by-products of the aluminum industry with sizable production quantities, is expected to become a vital source of Ga. Apart from Bayer liquor, the zinc residues are also considered an important commercial resource of Ga. The Ga element mainly exists in zinc ferrite (ZnO·Fe Continuous counter-current foam separation method was proposed by Recently, Although the recovery rates are high for the aforementioned routes, they are highly limited to the laboratory scale due to high costs and technical problems. Therefore, the high-efficiency methods for Ga recovery from zinc residues require further study. Considerable effort has recently been devoted to the extraction of Ga from the fly ash generated by coal-fired power plants. For example, The result demonstrated that over 95% of Ga in the ash could be leached into solution.  A pilot plant producing 4000 As mentioned previously, coal is a significant source of Ga. Therefore, coal fly ash as a by-product of coal combustion should attract significant attention for Ga recovery, due to its large volume and rich grade. Fortunately, the above mentioned pilot plant was able to successfully extract Ga from fly ash, which is a big step forward in the process industrialization. Compared to silicon, GaAs has about five times faster signal transmittance speed, better optical properties and higher radiation hardness due to its energy band structure. > LED waste is mainly of two types: the waste dust generated during the manufacturing of LEDs and the end-of-life LEDs. The waste contains significant amounts of gallium and indium, where Ga exists as GaN. The results showed that 73.68 The end-of-life LEDs are more complex than GaAs scraps. In contrast, the chips containing GaN in LEDs are combined more closely with quartz substrates. The Ga-bearing electronics industry waste is an extremely important source of Ga. However, most of the waste has not been utilized on an industrial scale except the new GaAs bearing scraps. Further investigations should be made for Ga recovery from old GaAs bearing scraps and the end-of-life LEDs on the basis of economic feasibility and practicability. Ga is also found in flue dust generated during the electric furnace smelting of phosphate to produce elemental phosphorus. Therefore, the phosphorus flue dust is another potential source of Ga. n The results suggested that the Ga recovery rate increased with increase in temperature, sulfuric acid concentration, and L/S ratio. The acid-soluble Ga could be completely extracted with 20% sulfuric acid at 80 The pyrometallurgical smelting of phosphorus, however, has been almost entirely replaced by a hydrometallurgical process, due to high contamination and energy consumption ( The aforementioned Ga-bearing resources and the corresponding extraction processes, optimum recovery efficiencies, end products and applied scales are summarized in The economic importance of Ga has increased significantly in recent years due to its extensive applications in high-tech industries. Ga-bearing host minerals are quite scarce ( Bayer liquor is the major commercial resource for Ga extraction. Many methods have been developed for Ga recovery from this solution, among which the ion-exchange technology has been proven as one of the most efficient methods. This is due to its simplified process, high recovery rate, fast reaction kinetics, easy operation, excellent Ga selectivity and no negative effect on alumina processing. The second most important commercial resource for Ga extraction is zinc industry waste in the form of zinc residues. Currently, the main disadvantages of recovering Ga from the residue on a commercial scale are low recovery efficiency, high energy consumption, and secondary pollution. Accordingly, a higher efficiency process is still under investigation. Coal ash fly should be the most promising Ga resource due to its tremendous volume and rich grade. This is supported by the successful operation of the pilot-plant-scale extraction of Ga from coal fly ash in Ordos, China. Therefore, it is believed that coal ash fly would increase the Ga supply. Red mud is expected to become another important resource of Ga, due to its increasing production and recoverable concentration. Simultaneous recoveries of other valuable metals from coal ash fly and red mud should also be considered during the Ga recycling process, which would make the technology even more economically feasible. Ga-rich electronic waste is an additional attractive Ga resource with a high content of Ga. New scrap containing GaAs is being successfully utilized, whereas substantial quantities of the old scrap and LED waste are still not utilized for Ga extraction. Efficient processing of the electronic waste requires further study. Other resources from the aforementioned industrial by-products for possible Ga recovery currently have little commercial significance due to uneconomical technology and insufficient quantity. Finally, Ga-extraction processes from Ga-bearing resources can be mainly classified into two different types: hydrometallurgy and pyrometallurgy. The former is predominantly employed in most recovery cases. The review of chemical properties of Ga presented in The fund supports are from the