Implant-related infection of biomaterials is one of the main causes of arthroplasty and osteosynthesis failure. Bacteria, such as the rapidly-emerging Multi Drug Resistant (MDR) pathogen Acinetobacter Baumannii, initiate the infection by adhering to biomaterials and forming a biofilm. Since the implant surface plays a crucial role in early bacterial adhesion phases, titanium was electrochemically modified by an Anodic Spark Deposition (ASD) treatment, developed previously and thought to provide osseo-integrative properties. In this study, the treatment was modified to insert gallium or silver onto the titanium surface, to provide antibacterial properties.
                  The material was characterized morphologically, chemically, and mechanically; biological properties were investigated by direct cytocompatibility assay, Alkaline Phosphatase (ALP) activity, Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM), and Immunofluorescent (IF) analysis; antibacterial activity was determined by counting Colony Forming Units, and viability assay.
                  The various ASD-treated surfaces showed similar morphology, micrometric pore size, and uniform pore distribution. Of the treatments studied, gallium-doped specimens showed the best ALP synthesis and antibacterial properties.
                  This study demonstrates the possibility of successfully doping the surface of titanium with gallium or silver, using the ASD technique; this approach can provide antibacterial properties and maintain high osseo-integrative potential.The increasing clinical use of implanted orthopedic medical devices, owing partly to the aging population, has lead both to the emergence of new diseases and to rising public-health costs. Infections related to biomaterial implantation are a major clinical problem, bringing high rates of morbidity and mortality It is thus a clinical imperative to prevent bacterial colonization and subsequent biofilm adhesion. Since the surface of implanted biomaterials plays a crucial role in early bacterial adhesion phases, a number of natural and synthetic materials have already been investigated: titanium and titanium alloys have been demonstrated to be biocompatible and to have appropriate mechanical properties Alongside its direct action on osteoclasts, gallium can also stimulate bone formation by acting on osteoblasts; a gallium nitrate formulation (Ga(NO Based on these premises, in the present study biomimetic antibacterial silver and gallium surface modification treatments were developed for titanium implants. In particular, the morphological, physico-chemical, biological, and antibacterial characterization of silver- and gallium-modified titanium surfaces are reported, in order to investigate their anti-bacterial effectiveness against the emergent MDR Pure grade 2 titanium disks (medical grade ISO 5832-2, diameter: 12 mm; thickness: 0.5 mm) were cleaned by ultrasonic rinsing (Elma Elmasonic S 60/H, Germany) in acetone for 10 min and rinsed in Millipore water for a further 10 min. The disks were then dried in a thermostatic oven at 37 °C for 2 h. The titanium surface was modified by biomimetic treatment, capable to improve the osteointegration of titanium implants, using the Anodic Spark Deposition (ASD) technique, as described elsewhere Different antibacterial surface modifications were achieved by adding antibacterial species (gallium or silver) to the electrochemical solution used to treat the SiB disks Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was used to investigate the resulting coatings. Briefly, specimens were sputter-coated with gold and analyzed with SEM (Zeiss-Evo 50 EP, Zeiss, Germany). Profilometric analysis was also carried out, using a laser profilometer (LP) (UBM-Microfocus Compact, NanoFocus AG, Germany). Three 3 × 3 mm The chemical composition of each coating was qualitatively investigated by Elemental Dispersive X-Ray Spectroscopy (EDS); specimens were prepared as described above for SEM analysis, and analyzed with a Stereoscan 360 (Cambridge, UK). The EDS analysis was carried out on 500× acquired images (Oxford, Inca energy 200) that corresponded to surface portions of approximately 170 μm × 230 μm. X-Ray Diffraction (XRD) was used to analyze the structure of the materials. The X-Ray diffractometer (Philips PW 1710) was set at V = 40 kV and A = 40 mA. The angular range investigated was 0–70°, with a scanning speed of 2°/min. Analyses were run at a source wavelength of 1.54056 Å using a Ni-filter Cu Kα1 radiation, on the titanium disks modified by the ASD treatments. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was done using a Thermo VG Thetaprobe spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc., Waltham, MA, USA), equipped with a microspot monochromatized AlKα source. The AlKα line (1486.6 eV) was used throughout the analyses, and the base pressure of the instrument was 10 Data from different elements were made comparable by correction with empirically-derived atomic sensitivity factors The static contact angle (SCA) was measured to investigate surface wettability. Three drops (2 μL/drop) of ultrapure distilled water (MilliPore) were expelled from a micrometric syringe and deposited on each specimen surface analyzed; three specimens per material were tested. The wettability studies were performed with a contact angle video based system (Contact Angle System OCA15 plus, Dataphysics, Germany) and analyzed with the SCA20 software (Dataphysics, Germany). Indentation tests were run to determine the elastic modulus (E) and hardness (H) of the ASD film To analyze the susceptibility of the coating to delamination, a three-point bending test was performed: the treated specimens were placed on a support span with two rollers, and a single upper roller with a 5 mm section applied the load. Rollers were mounted on the electromechanical INSTRON machine (mod. 8062, Norwood, MA, USA) operating in the position control method. The distance between rollers was 40 mm. A force was then applied with a slow speed (10 mm/min) until a flexion of 30° was attained. The scratch test was used to evaluate the adhesion of the modified oxide coating to the underlying substrate. The scratch test was conducted using a MCTX S/N: 50-00223 (CSM Instruments, Switzerland) scratch tester with a linear and progressive load, with the following test parameters: scratch pre-load of 0.03 N, load speed of 5 N/s, maximum load 30 N. The scratch length was 3 mm. The scratch test consisted of generating scratches using a Rockwell C diamond tip with 200 μm radius (serial number V-264) maintained at a constant speed over the surface under different test loadings. The critical load was here defined as the smallest load at which a recognizable adhesive failure to the underlying substrate occurred. Using the critical load, the corresponding shear stress τ Inductively Coupled Plasma - Optical Emission Spectrometry (ICP-OES, Perkin Elmer Optima 2000DV OES, Wellesley, USA) analysis was used to investigate the release of antibacterial agents. To determine release of Ag and Ga from the surface, 15 specimens for each treatment were incubated in 5 ml of calcium-free D-PBS (Dulbecco's modified Phosphate buffer solution, Sigma, Saint Louis, MO, USA). They were fixed vertically in 15 mL falcon tubes with conical end, to allow release of the antibacterial agents from both sides of the specimen. The tubes were maintained at 37 °C in a thermostatic oven under constant gentle shaking (50 rpm) (VDRL DIGITAL MOD. 711/D). After 1, 4, 7, 14 and 21 days, the pooled solution from three specimens per treatment was analyzed by ICP-OES, to determine the concentration of the elements released. The D-PBS solution was also analyzed by ICP-EOS to standardize the data. The human primary osteogenic sarcoma Saos-2 cell line (ECACC 89050205, European Collection of Cell Cultures, distributed by Sigma–Aldrich, Milan, Italy) was cultured in McCoy's 5A medium (Gibco, distributed by Life technologies, Milan, Italy) supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS, Sigma–Aldrich), 1% sodium pyruvate, penicillin, streptomycin, and gentamycin (all from Sigma–Aldrich) in an incubator at 37 °C with a 5% CO Cells in direct contact with the modified surfaces were evaluated. Treated disks (six/treatment) were placed in 24-well tissue culture plates, and 1 × 10 To test osteogenic activity, four samples of cells from 4, 7 and 21 day time-point treatments were removed and washed three times in 500 μL of 37 °C PBS, dried and examined for Alkaline Phosphatase (ALP) activity. ALP activity was determined colorimetrically with the Alkaline Phosphatase Assay Kit (Abcam, Euroclone, Pero, Milan, Italy) and standardized on the total protein concentration calculated with the Thermo Scientific BCA Protein assay reagent (Pierce, distributed by Thermo Fisher Scientific, Italy). One day after culturing the Saos-2 cells on the surface of the disks, the cell morphology was examined by SEM. Briefly, after supernatant removal, cell samples were gently washed with sterile PBS1x and fixed in 2.5% glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M sodium-cacodylate buffer at pH 7.4 for about 2 h. After fixation, the cells were gently washed three times with 1 mL of sodium-cacodylate buffer. They were then dehydrated in ethanol (25, 50, 75, 96, and 100%), freeze-dried overnight, mounted on SEM stabs, sputter-coated with gold, and analyzed by SEM (ZEISS-EVO 50 EP, Italy). Immunofluorescent morphological staining was also assessed. 10,000 cells were seeded onto each disk and incubated for 24  h at 37 °C in complete medium. After 4% paraformaldehyde fixation, cells were permeabilized with 0.1% Triton x-100 at 4 °C for 30 min, and stained with mouse anti-α-Tubulin-Alexa 488 (2 μg/mL, EX/EM maxima 495/519 nm, Invitrogen, Life technologies, San Giuliano Milanese, Milan, Italy) for 45 min at RT. After rinsing, cells were stained with 50 μg/mL tetramethylrhodamine B isothiocyanate (TRITC) phalloidin conjugate solution (EX/EM maxima 540/575, Sigma–Aldrich, Milan, Italy) for 45 min at RT. They were mounted after counterstaining the nuclei with Hoechst 33342 (2 μg/mL, Sigma–Aldrich). The images were acquired with a digital image capture system (Olympus, Italy) at 20 and 40× magnifications. One strain (DSM 30007), obtained from the Leibniz Institute DSMZ-German Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures (Braunschweig, Germany), and two clinical isolates (named One mL of the standardized cell suspensions was applied to the surface of 1 cm diameter disks placed in 24-well tissue culture plates (PBI International, Milan, Italy). The cells were left to adhere uniformly for 90 min at 37 °C at 120 rpm. Non-adherent cells were removed by gently washing with 1 ml of PBS. After adding fresh culture medium, controls and treated disks were incubated for 72 h at 37 °C at 120 rpm The colorimetric assay 2,3-bis (2-methoxy-4-nitro-sulphophenyl)-5-[(phenyl amino) carbonyl]-2H-tetrazolium hydroxide (XTT, Sigma, St Louis, MO, USA) was used to determine the dehydrogenase activity, as an indicator of the metabolic state of the 72 h biofilm cells Seventy-two hours after culturing on the disk surface, Statistical analysis was performed using Origin Pro Software. After having verified the normal distribution of variance, the one-way ANOVA test followed by Bonferroni's multiple comparison test were performed for the profilometric data analysis, while the biological data were analyzed using the one-way ANOVA test, followed by applying the independent two-sample two-way Student's t-test to the data for group comparison (significance level p = 0.05). The results are expressed as means ± standard deviation. Two-way ANOVA tests (different treatments and release times) were performed for the indirect cytotoxicity variance evaluation; after which the Student's t-test was applied to the data for group comparison.  Surface characteristics, among them average roughness (Ra, The TF-XRD analysis for the different ASD treatments showed in all cases the presence of the crystallographic structure of titanium oxide (TiO The qualitative elemental composition obtained by EDS analysis (images not shown) highlighted the presence of calcium, phosphorous, and silicon on the SiB–Na control, as well as on all the ASD-modified specimens, with the exception of GaOss, on which the calcium signal was not detectable. Moreover, the SiB–Na control also showed the presence of sodium, ascribed to the post-treatment alkali etching after ASD. Ag was detectable by EDS analysis only in correspondence with a white spot visible on the SEM image, confirming the presence of silver nanoparticles within the AgNPs specimen, whereas Ag was not detected on the AgCis specimen. Conversely, EDS detected gallium both on GaCis and GaOss specimens; in particular the gallium peaks on GaOss were higher than those on GaCis. XPS was used to characterize the surface of specimens obtained by the proposed ASD treatments. The surface chemical composition of controls (SiB and SiB–Na) and antibacterial treatments (silver-based: AgNPs and AgCis; gallium-based: GaOss and GaCis), is given in terms of atomic percentages ( The presence of calcium and phosphorous on the treated surfaces is significant: the Ca/P signal area ratios were found to be 0.8, 0.93, 1.06 and 0.96, in SiB, AgNPs, AgCis and GaCis specimens, respectively. The binding energy of calcium (347.5 eV) and phosphorus (133.3 eV) in the specimens were in agreement with those of Ca(H As far as the Ti2p signals are concerned, the curve fittings of Ti2p for SiB, SiB–Na, and the silver- and gallium-containing specimens are in Static contact angle measurements revealed that all the ASD surfaces possessed higher hydrophilicity than untreated titanium (p < 0.01) ( The thickness of the ASD modified titanium oxide layers was evaluated by metallographic analysis on disk cross-sections ( The elastic modulus and the hardness were measured by nano-indentation on the titanium oxide cross-sections, as used (above) to analyze the thickness of titanium oxide on the different ASD surfaces ( The coating's susceptibility to delamination after tensile stress was evaluated by the three point bending test. SEM analysis was performed on the tensed parts of the surface (“stretched fibers” area). Although some cracks could be detected by SEM on SiB–Na, AgNps, GaCis and ACis (images not shown), no delamination was observed for any of the ASD treated surfaces. Critical loads ( The release of silver from AgCis, measured by ICP-EOS, occurred during the first 24 h, and was as low as 23 μg/(Lcm GaCis showed a very low and gradual release of gallium ( The metabolic activity of the cells in contact with the treated surfaces increased from days 1–21, as detected by the Alamar Blue assay ( ALP synthesis incremented progressively from day 1 to day 21. In particular, at day 1, no significant difference was found between treated and untreated surfaces (p > 0.05). At day 7, the trend was still comparable (p > 0.05), though lower ALP synthesis (p < 0.05) was found in the untreated controls ( As shown by SEM analysis, after 24 h culture SaOS-2 cells that had attached onto the treated surfaces were completely flattened, with a branched shape and a morphology intimately following the porous structure of the modified titanium surfaces ( In general, after 72 h, all treated specimens differed significantly from untreated titanium controls (p < 0.05, These data suggested that gallium treatment provides higher efficacy in comparison with silver; antibacterial activity studies on GaCis and GaOss were thus extended to include two Results for the second clinical isolate, All the above results were obtained by cultivating bacteria with LB medium; this is a source of iron that competes for gallium in exerting antibacterial activity. Therefore, to clarify the activity of gallium in greater depth, all three Clinical isolates were also more sensitive to gallium when cultivated in an iron-chelated medium. Lastly, the strongest antibacterial effect was achieved with the The study examined the morphological, physico-chemical, biological, and antibacterial properties of some innovative biomimetic antibacterial silver and gallium surface modification treatments for titanium implants, in order to determine their anti-bacterial effectiveness toward the emergent MDR Contact angle measurements showed all ASD treatments to be highly hydrophilic compared to untreated titanium. This effect was not related to the ASD surface roughness, since the Ra value was similar to that of the Ti surface ( The chemical composition of the outer few nanometers of the different coatings tested by XPS analysis was very uniform, as expected of this electrochemical technique Surface enrichment with Ca, P and Si species plays a fundamental role in enhancing the mineralization process of titanium implantable devices The absence of calcium in the GaOss specimens is probably due to a set of factors: (i) the different voltage applied creates dissimilar pore morphology; (ii) the presence of oxalic acid, as chelating agent for gallium nitrate, might have a competitive embedding effect in the titanium oxide layer at the anode between calcium and silicon (markedly more silicon was found in GaOss than in GaCis specimens). In regard to the silver-based antibacterial treatments, XPS analysis detected more Ag in the AgCis than in the AgNPs specimens, as evidenced by the Ag/Ti ratios. As far as the chemical nature of silver in the analyzed treatments is concerned, the XPS Ag3d signals recorded do not distinguish between Ag(I) and Ag(0), due to their similar BE values. The relevant Ag MNN Auger signals could provide this information, but the intensity of these signals was below the detection limit of the technique, since the amount of silver present in both AgCis and AgNPs was very low. Conversely, for the gallium-based treatments, XPS revealed a slightly larger amount of gallium on the GaOss than on the GaCis surface, as evidenced by the Ga/Ti ratios. The experimental BEs associated to Ga2p are typical of gallium (III) compounds Analysis of the titanium oxide cross-sections showed that the thickness was constant along the line of analysis, with no significant discontinuities or irregularities. AgCis and GaCis, with different antibacterial agents but the same chelating agent (cistein), showed similar morphology and thickness; thus the markedly reduced thickness observed for GaOss might reasonably be ascribed to the presence of oxalic acid in the electrolytic solution, which radically modifies ion transport and film growth conditions. Considering that, for a given deposition system, film thickness may affect adhesion to the substrate With the ASD technique, thick and hard ceramic coatings can be deposited on titanium Delamination did not occur on any of the ASD treatments at the bending test. The cracks observed on AgNPs surface were mainly around the pores, while in AgCis and GaCis, cracks mainly ran across the pores. GaCis had fewer cracks than AgCis or AgNPs, while no cracks were observed on GaOss. This latter observation might reasonably be attributed to the reduced thickness of the titanium oxide layer improving its mechanical performance, and to the compactness of the anodic oxide growth. In all cases, the scratch test findings indicated high shear stress values, including in the case of AgNPs, which had the lowest critical load values. It is interesting that the critical shear stress of the ASD coating was five times the average load acting on the hip joint when walking (i.e. 35 MPa) The release test of the antibacterial agents from the ASD treated surface, performed in 5 mL of D-PBS calcium-free solution, provided the results shown in Although the gallium content of GaCis was similar to that of GaOss, as the XPS data showed, the release kinetics of the two surfaces was completely different, gallium being released from the GaOss surface more than fifty times more abundantly quickly than from GaCis. The amount of calcium found in GaCis samples could explain the low gallium release from these systems, probably due to the interaction between gallium and CaP species It should also be stressed, however, that in this preliminary study the release mechanism was determined in D-PBS solution, with stable and fixed pH, whereas release kinetics may differ at different pH values, or be influenced by different The human epithelial-like primary osteogenic sarcoma Saos2 cell line, used for the biological characterization, possesses some markers and a phenotype typical of primary human osteoblasts cultured on metallic surfaces The cells were found to adhere more closely to the antibacterial surfaces than they did to simple titanium; their morphology remained unaltered, and their viability good. It might be hypothesized that the elevated hydrophilicity and surface energy provided by the ASD coating favor osteoblastic cell adhesion; additionally, the porous morphology offers preferential sites for cell attachment and spreading, versus untreated titanium; this confirms what has been reported in other studies It is interesting that, especially on ASD coatings, there were many cells in the replication phase, together with cell-to-cell interactions, well defined focal points, and stress fibers In general, there was no marked difference in cell viability between the different coatings tested; however, a direct cytotoxic effect caused by the antibacterial element present on the sample surfaces could be ruled out. ALP synthesis, which is one of the most important markers of osteogenic activity and new bone formation, was significantly higher in Saos2 cells cultured with ASD samples than with untreated titanium controls. The ASD coatings stimulated Saos2 osteogenic activity; this activity was comparable between antibacterial coated samples and SiB–Na controls, despite the presence of antibacterial agents. Interestingly, GaOss treatment showed significantly higher ALP activity than the other ASD antibacterial treatments, being better than the optimum control SiB–Na. Thus not only did the presence of gallium as antibacterial agent not interfere with ALP production, it apparently determined a stimulating effect on osteoblastic activity toward new bone matrix formation. This effect was more evident in the case of GaOss treatment, because of the presence of gallium, and gallium release from the surface was higher than for the GaCis treatment. The high level of ALP for the gallium-based treatments was in line with some Many factors may affect the initial attachment of microorganisms to substrata, and their subsequent retention or removal/detachment, including the physico-chemical nature and location of the substratum, the type of organic material and microorganisms potentially fouling the surface, and the nature of the interface As expected, in MM9 the antibacterial activity of gallium against all three SiB–Na treatment also showed more intense antibacterial activity against Recent findings suggest that gallium-iron competition can lead to a cellular iron deficiency status, thus inducing the expression of pathogenic factors able to increase the virulence at least of In the model employed here, Ga competition with Fe for binding to siderophores did not increase the virulence of The emergence of MDR bacteria, and the reduced effectiveness of antibiotics, along with the increasing number of failures of arthroplasty and osteosynthesis due to implant-related infections of biomaterials, have generated increasing demand for different strategies to counteract infections. This study demonstrated the possibility of successfully using Anodic Spark Deposition (ASD) to develop biomimetic treatments on titanium substrates, as a valid antibacterial strategy, offering the advantage of locally-controlled delivery of gallium or silver ions, with no danger of developing new bacterial resistance, while maintaining high osteointegrative potential. These substrates were found to possess properties appropriate to favor the production of new bone tissue, with results comparable to the SiB–Na control already in clinical use. Moreover, the antibacterial agents embedded in the ASD-modified titanium oxide, released over a long period of time, gave the treated titanium bacteriostatic and bactericidal properties, in particular strongly inhibiting the formation of biofilm by In the light of these considerations, it may be concluded that the proposed ASD treatments possess all the credentials for use as adaptable preventive and therapeutic antibacterial agents, and are promising candidate techniques, offering antibacterial capabilities together with high osteointegrative properties, thus being appropriate for dental and orthopedic applications. Among the treatments tested, the gallium-based treatments, in particular GaOss and GaCis, showed peculiar and interesting properties, and are thus the best candidates for future studies. This work clearly shows, for the first time to the authors' knowledge, the potential use of the Anodic Spark Deposition (ASD) technique for doping titanium surfaces with gallium or silver ions to stimulate osteointegration, thanks to its efficacy in blocking osteoclast resorption, combined with its marked antibacterial activity against the test bacterium As further confirmation of these data, the antibacterial properties of gallium should be evaluated, in combination or not with silver, on other hospital MDR and biofilm former clinical isolates, mainly those belonging to the “ESKAPE” pathogens. B. A. was supported by “Fondazione Cariplo 2013” (prot. 2013-0954); A. C. and B. A. were supported by The authors thank Eurocoating S. p. A. We are grateful to P. Vaghi (Centro Grandi Strumenti, University of Pavia) and D. Picenoni (Politecnico di Milano, Milano, Italy) for technical assistance in the CLSM and SEM studies, respectively. Finally, authors would like to thank Frances Cooper for language revision.