In this investigation the froth zone of an industrial column (4m “diameter”×12m “height”) in rougher circuit was characterized. Experiments were carried out at Miduk copper concentrator, Iran. Miduk is a unique copper processing plant which utilizes columns in rougher circuit. Cleaning and selectivity actions in the rougher froth were illustrated using solids and grade profiles along with RTD data. The impact of froth depth (FD) on overall rate constant (k) and k–S
                     b relationship was evaluated. Dependency of overall flotation kinetics on froth depth and gas velocity (J
                     g) was modeled by k
                     =4.97(FD)−0.87(J
                     g)0.80. Froth recovery (R
                     f) was estimated and modeled in terms of froth residence time of slurry (FRTSlurry) as R
                     f
                     =
                     R
                     f,maxexp(−k
                     ×FRTSlurry). Finally, the correlation between k, S
                     b (indicative of the collection zone performance) and FRTSlurry (indicative of the froth zone performance) was modeled by k
                     =0.02 (FRTSlurry)−0.62(S
                     b)0.82.Flotation is a process which is widely used for beneficiation of both metallic and non-metallic ores. Nowadays flotation columns are widely utilized not only as cleaner but also as rougher and scavenger. A key feature of the flotation columns is the cleaning or froth zone. Wash water is normally added on top of the columns which not only stabilizes the froth zone by increasing the froth liquid hold-up and preventing bubble coalescence but also eliminates the entrained hydrophilic particles to be recovered into the concentrate. The role of the froth zone in flotation performance of both mechanical and column cells has been widely investigated by various authors from different aspects. Froth zone studies can be summarized as (1) characterizing the froth structure and transfer mechanisms ( Different operating conditions of rougher circuit (i.e. solids content of slurry, particle size, accompanied gangue minerals, pH, reagents, etc.) cause a significant difference between froth characteristics of the rougher and cleaner columns. Owing to limited industrial application of columns in rougher circuit, studies made on froth zone of these vessels particularly at industrial scale are scarce. Industrial experiments were performed on the rougher columns at Miduk copper concentrator in south-east of Iran. Over 18,000 tpd crushed ore with copper grade around 1% (mainly chalcocite) is processed to produce a concentrate with copper content over 30%. Miduk is a unique copper processing plant which utilizes five parallel Metso Minerals CISA Microcel columns (4 One of the rougher columns (column #2) was chosen for the industrial experiments. All the operating variables including gas velocity ( To depict grade and solids percentage profiles along the collection and froth zone of the rougher column, samples were taken at different levels from top to bottom. The collection zone was sampled at intervals of 1.5 Feed water penetration into the froth is an indicative of fine particle entrainment. The main objective of measuring the concentrate RTD was to quantify the feed water entrainment. A liquid radioactive tracer (Br-82) was employed to trace liquid reported to tailing and concentrate. External scintillation detectors were placed on the tailing and concentrate discharge pipes to record radiation intensity. More details of the experiments have already been reported elsewhere ( RTD studies (with radioactive tracer) in the rougher columns had already confirmed that in spite of the presence of baffles, the mixing condition was closed to well mixed and could be characterized by large and small tank-in-series model ( Mean residence time ( Bubble surface area flux ( To predict gas hold-up two pressure gauges were installed in the collection zone of the column. The distance between the pressure taps was 2 As mentioned earlier, samples from the collection zone were taken at 1.5 The solids in the collection zone are reasonably well mixed, showing a relatively flat profile, at about 24% solids, whereas a continuous increase of solids content in the froth zone (above 60 Profiles of chalcocite and silica grade along the collection and froth zones of the rougher column are plotted in These results are in agreement with findings of  The results confirm that at the operating condition employed, a considerable portion of feed water is reported into the concentrate stream particularly at higher gas velocities. From the areas under the tailing and concentrate RTDs, the portion of the tracer (added to the feed) reporting to the concentrate can be calculated. The ratio between the areas under the concentrate to tailing RTDs curves is proportional to water ratio reported into these two streams. As a result, even though the entrainment can be negligible for cleaner columns with deep froths (around 1 Industrial experiments were performed at three froth depths, i.e. 25 Based on the results, by increasing the froth depth the overall rate constant is reduced exponentially and this effect is more evident at higher gas velocities. In other words, by increasing the gas velocities the influence of froth depth on flotation kinetics increases. Maximum flotation rate was observed at high gas velocities and low froth depths. The flotation rate constant at zero froth depth can be an estimation of the collection rate constant ( The Gas velocity and froth depth are key variables affecting the rate of production in flotation plants. These variables can be used for stabilizing control (i.e. to regulate the mass flow rate of concentrate) or optimizing control (i.e. to move the operation of the circuit along the grade-recovery curve at the desired point). To quantify the relationship between overall rate constant, froth depth and gas velocity, different non-linear regression models were examined using STATISTICA software (Version 6). For each model residual analysis was performed by plotting predicted versus observed values. Finally, the model with the highest correlation coefficient between observed and predicted values was chosen as the target model as follows: The  Froth recovery has a significant influence on overall performance of the rougher columns. As previously mentioned, a number of techniques have been utilized to date to estimate the froth recovery in both mechanical and column flotation cells. In the present study a similar approach used by In this approach it is assumed that by varying the froth height, the flow of particles and water reaching the pulp–froth interface (at FD  From the data shown in Froth residence time of slurry is very useful for modeling the froth zone in flotation systems. Finally, based on on-site data obtained in the rougher column, the relationship between   As a result of the present study the following findings were achieved for the industrial columns in rougher flotation: Solids and grade profiles along the froth zone indicated that most upgrading took place just above the interface where the major loss of bubble surface occurred. Liquid RTD analysis confirmed that a considerable portion of feed water was reported into the concentrate particularly at higher gas velocities. In other words, the rougher columns are a compromise between grade and recovery. Overall rate constant increased with Non-linear relationship between overall rate constant (  Froth recovery was estimated and modeled in terms of froth residence time as Froth recoveries obtained were in the range 46–80% for the present rougher columns. Non-linear dependency of Authors would like to thank National Iranian Copper Industries Company (N.I.C.I.Co.) for supporting this research. Special appreciation is extended to the operating, maintenance and metallurgy personnel of Miduk Copper Concentrator and R&D of Sarcheshmeh Copper Complex.