Rotary Kiln - Electric Furnace (RKEF) process is the most commonly used pyrometallurgical technique for processing nickel laterite ores and is mainly suited for saprolite deposits. Sulfur is one of the harmful elements in crude ferronickel obtained via the RKEF process. Typically, laterite ores contain insubstantial sulfur content; hence, it is hypothesized that most of the sulfur in crude ferronickel originates from the coal added as the fuel and the reductant during calcination in the rotary kiln. This study investigates the role of sulfur content of rotary kiln fuels on the composition of the calcine. The calcination-partial reduction experiments were conducted at 900 °C for a 2-h residence time. Various reducing gas mixtures representing combustion products of rotary kiln fuels (e.g., coal) were contacted with the ore. At constant PCO, the sulfur content of the calcine increases linearly with an increase in PSO2 in the input gas mixture. Similarly, at fixed PSO2, the percentage of sulfur in the calcine and the percentage of sulfur deportation increase with PCO. However, an exceptional case is observed at PSO2 = 0 atm in the input gas mixture; the sulfur content and sulfur deportation slightly decrease by increasing PCO in the input gas. The sulfur content and the percentage of sulfur deportation drop at a lower input flow rate of the reducing gas mixtures.Nickel is a critical alloying element in stainless steel due to its excellent corrosion resistance, workability, and strength ( Nickel ores are divided into two main categories, sulfide and laterite. The total reserves for nickel are estimated to be approximately 100 million tonnes ( There are two notable sub-divisions in a laterite profile; limonite and saprolite. These are separate layers of the same deposit but sub-divided based on the nickel-bearing host minerals. Generally, limonite ores are treated using hydrometallurgical processes due to their high iron and low magnesia and nickel content. On the other hand, saprolite ores are economically processed using pyrometallurgical methods because of their relatively low iron and high magnesia and nickel content ( The rotary kiln-electric furnace (RKEF) process is the primary method for extracting nickel from saprolite ores. In this technique, the ore is first calcined and pre-reduced at 850–1000 °C in a rotary kiln followed by smelting in an electric furnace at 1500–1600 °C ( Sulfur is one of the most harmful impurities in ferronickel. It can form non-metallic inclusions, which deteriorate the mechanical properties of the alloy ( Typically, laterite ores contain an insignificant amount of sulfur ( There is limited literature available on the behavior of nickel laterites in reducing gas mixtures that contain SO Bolsaitis and Nagata studied the kinetics of gas-solid reactions between Fe At 700 °C, the authors found very similar TGA curves for X Nagata and Bolsaitis conducted a similar study for hematite contained in a laterite ore and compared the results with those obtained for pure hematite. The time for sulfide nucleation was identical in both cases; however, no reduction was observed in the case of the laterite. The absence of reduction was attributed to the inhibition of magnetite nucleation, possibly due to impurities in hematite grains. Furthermore, the sulfurization rates were found to be faster for the laterite samples, probably because of the higher specific surface area ( Previous studies on reduction-sulfurization of iron oxides were conducted with the ultimate goal of selective removal of iron from various minerals such as bauxite or ilmenite to increase valuable metal content of the ore. It should be noted that the partial pressure of SO The laterite ore used in this study was provided by FLSmidth and was originally obtained from a Brazilian deposit. Potassium hydroxide (KOH, 89% purity) and nitric acid (HNO The chemical assay of the raw ore is given in The proximate analysis of coal was carried out according to ASTM standards D3175, D3174, and D3173, to determine volatiles, ash, and moisture contents, respectively. The fixed carbon was found by difference. The total carbon and sulfur contents were determined using LECO analysis. The difference between the total carbon and the fixed carbon is associated with the organic carbon present in the volatile hydrocarbons. The chemical composition of coal is given in The as-received laterite ore was dried in an oven at 70 °C for 24 h to remove free moisture. The free moisture was found to be 29% in the raw ore. The ore (3 kg) and the coal (500 g) were ground in a Fritsch Pulverisette Mortar Grinder Mill separately for 4 min. A sieve of 300 µm opening (no. 50 mesh size) was used to screen the ground material. Any oversize particle was crushed again until 100% of the sample passed through the sieve. The particle size distribution analysis was carried out by dry-sieving 200 g of the ore through a sieve stack with the following screen openings (µm): 710, 600, 500, 425, 300, 212, 180, 125 and 75. A Nabertherm RSRB 80–750/11 furnace was used to conduct all experiments. The furnace had a 1400 mm long quartz reactor with tapered ends. The heated zone of the reactor was 750 mm in length and 76 mm in diameter. A gas supply system was designed and connected with the furnace to provide a mixture of the following gases: carbon monoxide (CO), carbon dioxide (CO The prepared feed samples composed of 50 g of the ore and 5 g of coal were fed to the quartz reactor at room temperature. The feed was heated to 900 °C at 450 °C/h under a neutral atmosphere. The neutral atmosphere inside the reactor was maintained by flowing 1 L/min of N Inductively Coupled Plasma – Atomic Emission Spectroscopy (ICP-AES) was used to measure the concentration of sulfur in the calcine. The calcine was first ground in a ball mill grinder for 15 min. Since silicates are not acid-soluble, an alkali salt fusion process was carried out at high temperature to achieve near-total digestion. Approximately 0.2 g of the ground calcine was mixed with 3 g of potassium hydroxide and added into a zirconium crucible. The crucible was covered with a lid and heated in a muffle furnace to a temperature of 500 °C for 1  h. After heating, the crucible was allowed to cool to room temperature in a desiccator to avoid exposure to air and humidity. 100 ml of 6 M nitric acid was used to digest the fused calcine. The solution was filtered using Whatman No.1 cellulose filters. A Varian 725-ES ICP spectrometer was used to analyze the solution. The concentration of sulfur was measured directly by analyzing 10 ml of the solution. The calcine was analyzed by x-ray diffraction to characterize its mineralogy. The equilibrium module of HSC Chemistry 6.0 ( The input stream consists of raw ore, coal, and a gas mixture containing CO, CO It should be emphasized that the simulations are based on pure thermodynamic modeling, which does not account for kinetics, since the module used, only minimizes the Gibbs free energy of the system. As a result, kinetics considerations are not accounted for appropriately. This model also does not consider the continuous supply of the gas mixture from outside the system and the removal of the gaseous compounds from the furnace. The model predicts that NiS and FeS are the only thermodynamically stable sulfide species in the calcine. It further inferred that the sulfur in the input stream that may exist either as gaseous or in solid phase is completely converted to iron and nickel sulfides. In other words, the amount of sulfur that reports to the off-gas is negligible.  HSC software was used to obtain equilibrium partial pressures of the input gas mixtures (containing CO, CO  Sulfurization of the ore using various reducing gas mixtures has been investigated. The gas mixtures are intended to simulate the combustion products of rotary kiln fuels (i.e., coal). The sulfur content of the calcine is measured at various P  The increase in the sulfur content of the calcine by increasing P It is noteworthy that the slope of the regression lines in The % S in the calcine at P  A model is developed to predict % S in the calcine as a function of both P  The gas-solid mass transfer coefficient, k The X-ray diffraction analysis was performed on three different calcine samples to ascertain the mineralogy of the product, as shown in The only sulfur-containing compound found by XRD analysis was pyrrhotite, Fe The behavior of Ni laterite ore in the CO-CO At constant P The x-ray diffraction analysis confirmed the presence of forsterite, fayalite, ferronickel, and pyrrhotite in the calcine. The intensity of the obtained peaks for pyrrhotite and ferronickel increase with P  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors wish to express their thanks to Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: