CO2-EOR in a geological formation not only increases oil production but also ensures geological sequestration of CO2. The capillary pressure is an essential factor during the process of immiscible CO2-EOR in fractured media. Two classical capillary pressure models are adopted to investigate the effects systematically based on a unified pipe-network method. The identical capillary pressures in fractures and the rock matrixes have little effect on the fluid flow and saturation distribution of CO2. This implies that the capillary pressure can be neglected in this condition. The effect cannot be ignored when different capillary pressures are assigned for fractures and rock matrixes. The saturation of CO2 reaches its highest value at the fracture outlet tip if the capillary pressure in a fracture is smaller than that in the rock matrix. The phenomenon of saturation concentration of CO2 at the fracture tip is caused by the capillary pressure difference. For non-connected fractures, the saturation concentration causes CO2 to enter the adjacent fractures more easily. Thus, the capillary pressure difference enlarges the effect of fractures on the CO2 flow, and shorten the breakthrough time of CO2. Hence, both the storage amount of CO2 and the production of oil in geological media are reduced.Carbon dioxide (CO The process of CO Capillary pressure is the pressure difference across the interface separating two immiscible fluids. At the microscale, it is mainly a function of the fluid interfacial tension and pore geometries and can be calculated with the Young-Laplace equation [ It should be noted that the above two capillary pressure models are for porous media. For capillary pressures in fractures, many related studies have also been carried out. Pruess and Tsang [ Although fractures and rock matrices could use the same capillary pressure model as a fractured porous medium, the fractures’ capillary values are usually different from those of rock matrices because of the differences in the hydraulic properties of the two media [ Besides, fractured porous media also challenge the current numerical methods because of their discontinuity. Numerous efforts have been devoted to developing a suitable numerical method for fractured porous media, including the finite element method The primary goal of this study is to investigate the effects of capillary pressures on the two-phase flow of immiscible CO In the current mathematical model, the following assumptions are adopted: (1) the temperature in the fracture medium is constant, (2) the permeability of the fracture is larger than that of the rock matrix, (3) the capillary pressure of the fracture is not higher than that of the rock matrix under the same saturation, (4) the fluid flows in fractured media obey Darcy’s law, (5) the density and dynamic viscosity of the oil phase are constant, (6) the compressibility of CO A fractured porous domain Ω is often composed of two subdomains, the porous domain Ω In the present study, the wetting phase pressure Relative permeability for two-phase flow in fractured rock media is generally expressed as a function of the saturation of the wetting phase. Some theoretical models based on the capillary pressure saturation relationship and conceptual models of porous media have been proposed. In this study, Burdine’s model is adopted to derive the relative permeability for simplicity [ It can be seen that the relative permeability is dependent on the capillary pressure-saturation relationship from Eq. Capillary pressure is another critical parameter of two-phase flow in fractured rock media. As discussed in Section Inserting the BC and VG capillary pressure models into Eq. Correspondingly, the relative permeability equations for VG model are expressed as In this study, the same capillary pressure model is adopted for the rock matrix and fractures in a fractured porous medium. In order to simulate the two-phase flow behaviour in fractured rock appropriately, interface conditions between fractures and rock matrix should be considered. In this study, the extended capillary pressure condition is adopted to describe the relationship between the rock matrix and the fractures along the interface [  For the BC model, there is a threshold saturation In the UPM, both the matrix domain and the fracture domain are equivalent to 1D virtual flow pipes. The pipes are generally formed by manipulating the finite element mesh for the fracture porous domain. In order to compensate for the complicated geometry, unstructured tetrahedral mesh for 3D and angular mesh for 2D are adopted to generate the pipes [ For the mass term The mass flow rate in a pipe can be calculated by the following equation: For the stability of the numerical simulation, an upwind method is adopted to calculate the relative permeability in pipe The equivalent conductance coefficient can be calculated, as follows: The UPM discrete equation of a node for the two-phase flow can be expressed as The above governing equations are solved by a fully coupled and implicit time scheme, which has the advantages of robustness and stability. For a time step Δ The equations are solved by the Newton-Raphson method with appropriate initial condition and boundary conditions. The Jacobian matrix is calculated by the numerical derivatives with respect to variables In this study, an adaptive time step and an open boundary condition are developed, which are presented in To verify the accuracy of UPM for solving the above governing equations, two-phase flow in a porous medium is computed by the UPM and compared with the Buckley-Leverett solutions. The computational model is shown in The computational model is discretised as two sets of pipe networks with different mesh densities. The node number for the first mesh is 132, and that for the second one is 955, as shown in In this section, the effect of capillary pressure on immiscible CO Two single-fracture media respective with rectangular fracture and circular fracture are considered in the study. The computational model of the rock mass with a single rectangular fracture is shown in Two different capillary pressure models, BC and VG, with different parameters are adopted, which are divided into six cases as listed in For Case B1, the non-wetting phase can enter the rock matrix and fracture at any differential pressure, as there is no capillary pressure. Because the fracture has greater permeability than the rock matrix, the non-wetting phase in the fracture moves faster than that in the rock matrix as shown in  For Case B3, the saturation distribution of the non-wetting phase is different from that in the aforementioned two cases when the non-wetting phase reaches the fracture zone, as shown in Comparing cases B1, B2, and B3, the non-wetting phase arrives in the position of The results from Case B4 are shown in The results for Cases V1 and V2 are shown in From the above analysis, one can find that the saturation concentration of non-wetting phase occurs in Cases B3, B4, V1, and V2. The reasons could be that: (1) the capillary pressure of fractures is smaller than that of rock matrixes, (2) and the intrinsic permeability of the fracture is larger than that of the rock matrix. They cause the non-wetting phase flow along the fracture more easily under the same pressure gradient, further lead to the accumulation of the non-wetting phase at the fracture tips. Besides, from the results of Case B3, B4, V1, and V2, it also can be found that the saturation of the non-wetting phase at the two corners of the outlet boundary is the highest for the single rectangular fracture. Taking Case B3 for example, the saturation of the non-wetting phase along the selected line segment from the point (6 m, 2.5 m, 0 m) to the other point (6 m, 2.5 m, 5 m) at In order to investigate the effect of fracture shape on the saturation concentration, a circular fracture computational model is adopted, which is shown in Comparing the VG and BC models, it is found that the basic features in VG capillary pressures are commensurate to those in the BC capillary pressure model. Thus, in the following study, only the effects of BC capillary pressures on the immiscible CO The computational model is shown in The BC model is adopted to calculate the capillary pressure. The pore-size distribution indices for the rock matrix and the fracture are the same, i.e., For the above capillary pressures, the injecting pressure of CO As the processes of two-phase flow for the four situations are the same, the Case with 5.0 kPa entry capillary pressure is picked representatively to show the saturation distribution of CO The BC model with different parameters is adopted to discuss the effects of capillary pressure on the two-phase flow in the fractured porous medium. The parameters are listed in The computational results of the average saturation of the non-wetting phase in the domain are shown in The saturation of the CO Immiscible CO The variations of CO In the first situation, the saturation of CO In the second situation, the rock matrix and fractures have the same porous distribution indices, whereas the rock matrix has higher entry pressure. Thus, CO The effects of capillary pressures on the two-phase flow of immiscible CO For the immiscible CO When the capillary pressure of a rock matrix is higher than that of a fracture, the injected CO For non-connected fracture networks, when the capillary pressure of a fracture is smaller than that of a rock matrix, the injected CO The research is supported by the  The selection of an appropriate time step is crucial to solve Eq. Both Dirichlet and Neumann boundary conditions are applied in the current study. The Dirichlet boundary conditions can be assigned directly to each boundary node, including wetting-phase pressure and non-wetting phase saturation. The Neumann boundary conditions can be assumed as the source term at each boundary node, which includes the flow rates of the wetting phase and non-wetting phase. A flow rate boundary condition of the non-wetting phase and a pressure boundary condition of the wetting phase are applied to the inlet and outlet boundaries, respectively. However, the non-wetting phase cannot flow out from the outlet boundary under the only pressure boundary condition. Thus, along with the pressure boundary condition, a Neumann boundary condition of the non-wetting phase is also applied, which is named as open boundary condition in this study. The flow rate boundary condition at the outlet boundary is variable. In order to the make the non-wetting phase flowing into the boundary flow out, the following Neumann boundary condition are imposed on the outlet boundary nodes: The state of CO The density and dynamic viscosity of CO Note that the unit of viscosity in Eq. Fluid compressibility is defined as a measure of the relative volume (or density) change of a fluid in response to a pressure change. The fluid compressibility Note that, in the unified pipe network method, the pressure obtained by the governing equation In Eq.