The stability of colloidal kaolinite dispersions in the presence of NaCl and AlCl3 was studied by measuring turbidity, electrophoretic mobility and adsorption. The kaolinite particles coagulated at pH 2.5–3.5 and were dispersed at pH >4.5. These results well obeyed the classic DLVO theory if the mean zeta potential of the kaolinite particles in aqueous solutions was taken into account in the computation of potential energy of electrical double layer repulsion, which suggests that the kaolinite particles might coagulate in the same way as normal colloidal particles. The kaolinite particles in aqueous aluminum salt solution only coagulated at a medium AlCl3 concentration, and formed a stable dispersion at a high salt concentration. This is caused by Stern-layer adsorption of hydrolyzed aluminum species, probably adsorbed on the kaolinite surfaces through hydrogen bonds between the hydroxyl groups of the aluminum species and the oxygen atoms on the kaolinite surfaces.Kaolinite particles consist of about 50 silicate layers, which are held together by hydrogen bonds and van der Waals interaction. Each layer is composed of a tetrahedral SiO Kaolinite is applied in many areas, such as myths, art, medicine, agriculture, construction, environmental engineering, mineral processing and biological engineering. It is an important functional material for paper, paint and plastics, and is also a catalyst support in the chemical industry, as well as an adsorbent for heavy metal ions ( There were numerous studies on the stability of aqueous clay mineral dispersions ( The kaolinite sample was collected at the Silicatos y Derivados plant in the state of Jalisco, Mexico. It was purified in our laboratory by using a high-intensity magnetic separator to remove iron mineral particles, and by screening to remove coarse particles. The kaolinite particles of the < The particle size distribution was determined by a Shimadzu SALD-1100 laser diffraction particle size analyzer (Japan). D The X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern was obtained with a Rigaku 2200 X-ray diffraction meter (Japan) with Cu Kα radiation. The XRD pattern indicated ( A Quantachrome Autosorb gas adsorption analyzer (USA) was used to determine the specific surface area of the kaolinite by N Sodium chloride and aluminum chloride of analytical purity were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich Corporation (USA). Sodium hydroxide and hydrochloric acid from the same company were used for adjusting the pH value of the dispersions. The water was first distilled then passed through resin beds and a 0.2 The stability of the aqueous kaolinite dispersions was evaluated by turbidity measurements in a Beckman DU 650 spectrophotometer (USA) with a cell of 1 Adsorption was determined through a batch depletion method at 22 The turbidity and adsorption measurements were done in duplicates, and the arithmetic average values were reported. The Colloidal Dynamics ZetaProbe Analyzer (Australia) with electroacoustic technology was used to determine the electrophoretic mobility of the kaolinite particles in aqueous solutions. The detailed description for the instrument and the measurement can be found in our previous paper ( A Philips XL30 scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (Netherlands) was used to observe the form and size of the coagulated kaolinite particles. The attached energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) was used to derive the mineral composition. For SEM observation, a drop of the kaolinite dispersion was carefully put on a pin-type mushroom specimen mounts, dried at room temperature before the particles were coated with 20-nm thick gold film (  The SEM image of coagulated kaolinite particles at pH 2.5 ( According to the DLVO (Dejaguin-Landau-Verwey-Overbeek) theory ( The van der Waals interaction between two homogeneous particles is expressed by ( Based on the DLVO theory, the total potential energy of interaction between kaolinite particles in aqueous solutions as a function of distance between the particles was calculated at various pH (which responded to the values of the zeta potentials of kaolinite particles) in the absence of salt (   The electrophoretic mobility of kaolinite particles as a function of the salt concentration is shown in According to Several studies were related to the adsorption of hydrolyzed metallic species on oxide or clay mineral particles by measuring the electrophoretic mobility and adsorption (  The equilibrium diagram of the main aluminium species as a function of pH is shown in If the concentration of aluminum ions in the aqueous dispersion is high enough to coat completely the kaolinite surfaces, the particles would behave like Al(OH) The minimum turbidity of kaolinite dispersions in aqueous NaCl and AlCl  Kaolinite particles in aqueous dispersions coagulated at pH 2.5–3.5, and stable dispersions were formed at pH > The degree of coagulated particles increased to a constant value with increasing NaCl concentration. In the presence of aluminum ions, the degree of coagulated particles increased with increasing AlCl The financial supports for this work from the