An Indo-French Workshop on ‘ The topics included characterization of various interfaces such as: (a) solid/gas interfaces (surface heterogeneity as determined by low pressure quasi-equilibrium pressure volumetry and controlled rate thermal analysis), (b) solid/liquid interfaces (streaming potential, electrophoresis and potentiometric titration), (c) of gas/water interfaces (dynamic surface tension) and (d) the adsorbed layers (ellipsometry, in situ external reflection IR Spectroscopy, microcalorimetry). Synthesis and testing of novel surfactants for targeted applications in pharmaceutical, paints and paper industry were also discussed. Physical chemistry of surfactants in solution including dissolution and solubilization of surfactants in aqueous and non-aqueous phases, phase diagrams (binary and ternary), rheology (shear thinning and thickening) were amongst the selected themes for in-depth discussion. Advances in basic understanding of adsorption/abstraction of ionic/non-ionic surfactants and polymers, structure and organization of the adsorbed layers in patches, monolayer, hemi-micelles, bilayer and micellar aggregates, theoretical models, thermodynamics and numerical simulation of surfactant adsorption were also included as topics for the deliberations. Modeling of electrical double layer phenomena at solid/liquid interfaces including modeling of macroscopic film thinning based on the understanding of inter-molecular forces and application of lipid films in the electrostatic organization of charged nano-particles and bio-macromolecules at interfaces were also emphasized. Relatively recent developments in molecular modeling (force field and quantum chemical computation) techniques for quantifying adsorbate–adsorbent interactions, particularly towards developing a novel paradigm of rational design of surfactants were also illustrated by a few speakers with appropriate examples. Several investigators presented experimental results on the adsorption on a variety of surfaces such as minerals, clays, latex and cellulose materials. Developments in design of surfactants for applications in different industries such as mineral processing and bio-beneficiation, paints, paper, soaps and detergents were stressed by several speakers. This successful meeting thus provided an excellent opportunity for professionals involved in diverse areas of surfactant science but investigating the same basic phenomena from different perspectives, to come together, exchanges ideas, share the knowledge and most importantly, build lasting personal contacts for professional collaboration. All the participants appreciated the efforts of the organizers and the kind sponsorship from the Indo-French Center (IFCPAR) council for facilitating this interaction. It was decided to bring out a special issue of Colloids and Surfaces, containing selected papers presented during this workshop, after due process of rigorous peer review. We are grateful to Professor P. Somasundaran, Editor-in-Chief, Colloids and Surfaces and Elsevier Science Publishers, for agreeing to publish this issue. Pradip wishes to thank all his colleagues at the TRDDC, Pune, for their kind cooperation, time and efforts in organizing this wonderful event in Pune, India. Excellent cooperation, timely advice and help received from Dr P.G.S. Mony, the director, from the IFCPAR and his colleagues in successfully conducting the workshop are gratefully acknowledged. We wish to place on record our sincere gratitude to all the speakers at the workshop and to all the authors as well as the reviewers for their valuable contributions towards the publication of this issue. We are also thankful to Anupama Jadhav for her expert secretarial help in putting together this special issue for publication.