Many studies have used numerical models, analytical models and laboratory models to investigate the factors influencing the shear strength of bolted rock joints. This study presents the preparation of a reinforced standard cylindrical specimen containing a joint; the jointed specimen was reinforced with a 3D printed (3DP) rock bolt and planting-bar anchorage glue. The surface profile of the 3DP rock bolt was identical to that of an actual rock bolt, and the strength of the 3DP bolt was satisfactory. Afterwards, the digital image correlation (DIC) method was applied to capture the changes in the strain/displacement fields on the surfaces of the specimens during testing. In addition, two pressure sensors (PSs) were attached to the external threaded sections of each 3DP bolt; these PSs recorded the changes in the load at the bolt ends positioned in the upper section above the joint plane and in the lower section below the joint plane. The influences of the joint plane and joint angle on the cracking process, DIC changing pattern, and stress-strain evolution were comprehensively discussed. The research approaches proposed in this study provide new methods with which to investigate the reinforcement effect of bolts on jointed rock masses, the results of this study can be used as a reference in engineering areas where jointed rock masses must be reinforced by rock bolts.Selective laser melting Prototype Pressure sensor Digital image correlation 3D printed Polylactic acid A blocky or jointed rock mass presents a rather complex design problem for engineering practitioners, and joints and other fractures of geological origin are ubiquitous features in a rock mass [ Studies involving the shear behaviour of bolt-reinforced rock masses are very common, and the methods used in such studies include numerical approaches [ However, simulations of small-scale rock bolts lack standard principles, and the most popular approach is to utilize aluminium bars, steel bars, or even long screws to replace rock bolts in the laboratory. Wu et al. utilized steel bars that were 70 mm long, 3 mm wide and 1.2 mm thick to simulate rock bolts and investigate their performance under tensile loading [ Normally, the realistic geometry of a bolt is not replicated in such simulation approaches, and the threaded section (the surface geometry) of the bolt is often ignored. Two identical specimens reinforced by a smooth bar or bolt scaled down from an actual bolt certainly bring about different mechanical responses, as reported in a previous study that showed that the shear behaviour was controlled by the interfacial bonding capacity of a rock bolt without ribs [ From another perspective, existing studies on the reinforcing effects of bolts on joint-separated rock specimens have mainly selected cuboid specimens because a transverse joint plane can be very easily formed by simply inserting a plastic sheet into the mould at the beginning of the cement setting stage. Preparing a cylindrical joint-separated specimen to a high precision is difficult, especially when the joint separates the specimens into at least two sections or the rock is soft or has water-sensitive properties. Although cylindrical specimens with internal defects have been shown to be attainable by 3D printing [ The above analyses motivated the objective of this study. First, we propose a 3D printing method to prepare a mould by which joint-separated standard cylindrical soft rock specimens can be fabricated, so that the joint plane can be created with high precision. Second, a bolt with identical geometry to that of a real bolt is manufactured by 3D metallic printing, and the strength of the bolt is measured. Third, for a rock-like specimen reinforced by the manufactured bolt, the corresponding coupling law is discussed for different joint angles. During the process, the mechanical properties, the full-field displacement, and the loading on the bolts are comprehensively discussed. The results of this study may provide some insights into relevant studies and can also be referred to in practical engineering. 3D printing technology has demonstrated certain advantages in geomechanics and engineering [ The printing material was stainless steel powder [ The specimen preparation procedure was assisted by the mould fabricated by the 3D printing method, and the printing material was polylactic acid (PLA) [ The next step was to pour the cement into the mould, and the water-to-cement ratio was 0.13. The detailed steps are as follows. First, the two asymmetrical halves of the upper section were bonded together by applying hot glue along the seam, and this same process was performed for the lower section. Then, the joint plane was placed between the upper section and the lower section, and hot glue was applied along the external rim of the joint plane. Afterwards, rods were inserted into the holes of the upper section, joint plane and lower section. This system, except for the mould base, is presented in the bottom middle sketch in Digital image correlation (DIC) is an innovative non-contact optical technique for measuring strain and displacement. DIC is simple to use and cost effective compared to other techniques, such as speckle interferometry, and more accurate than manual measurement methods, leading to a wide range of potential applications [ In view of the aforementioned procedure, a total of 14 specimens were prepared, as shown in the bottom right photograph in   The DIC test was controlled with stereo Match ID software, which was developed by the University of Leuven, Belgium. Two 5 megapixel industrial cameras (AVT GT2450, Germany) were used to capture a 3D view of the specimen. Notably, the accuracy of DIC can be impaired when environmental changes such as weathering, oxidation, and temperature effects are encountered; however, the influence can be largely ignored at room temperature in a laboratory. A video recorder was located at the middle of the beam that also fixed the cameras at its two ends (see enlarged view in The strength of the intact specimens, the planting-bar anchorage two-part epoxy glue and a 3DP bolt should be tested in advance to determine their respective mechanical properties. The two intact specimens were prepared as standard cylindrical specimens with a diameter of 50 mm and a height of 100 mm.  The mechanical properties of the planting-bar anchorage glue utilized for the specimen were important to the shear behaviour and tensile behaviour of the 3DP bolts;  The testing results for all the specimens are plotted in In  For specimen S15-2 in In general, the above interpretation regarding the PS load values shows that a joint angle of 15 For specimen S30-3 in The above phenomena indicate that, normally, at the linear increasing section along the load-time curve, the axial force on the specimen was sustained by the bonding capacity of the bolting system, the resistance of the bolt rod at the joint-borehole intersection, and the small resistance of part of the joint plane. After reaching the peak axial force, the PS load increased considerably, normally producing a fluctuating section of the axial force-time curve. Once the axial force stopped fluctuating and started to decrease, the PS load decreased. For specimen S45-1 in For specimen S60-1 in Due to the similar mechanical results, S15-2 was selected for DIC analysis.  At 32 s, a leftward rotation of the vectors is observed near the left side of the lower section (red dashed ellipse), indicating a dilation inclination in this area. The purple area in the upper section is not considered for further analysis due to the lack of speckles in this area. At 45 s, both the left side and the right side of the lower section exhibit a detaching trend, as indicated by red dashed ellipses. At this time, a vertical penetrating crack is visible along the central axis of the lower section. At 55 s, the aforementioned detaching trend becomes prominent, and the crack width increases. At 68 s, a large flake pops off of the specimen, and the DIC capturing process is terminated due to missing speckles. Overall, the Exx strain field in the upper section is relatively stable compared with that in the lower section (note the colour difference between the upper and lower sections), and the swelling effect in the lower section is more drastic than that in the upper section. These results explain, from another perspective, why the load values recorded by PS No. 1 are lower than those recorded by PS No. 2 for all the specimens (  In the top row of In the middle row of  For the vertical displacement, the overall displacement field in the upper section exhibited little change. The greatest change in displacement occurred in the lower section; changes started at 30 s and became significant after 50 s. At 140 s, roughly the entire lower section plotted as purple, indicating large displacements. In general, the change in displacement in the lower section was also quite uniform, and no abnormal concentration was observed.  Regarding the vertical displacement field (middle row in The ultimate failure patterns for all the specimens are shown in  In The geometry of the joint plane is vital to the shear performance of a specimen; oftentimes, an irregular or jagged plane can incur additional resistance to the shear capacity. In this study, the surface of the joint plane was controlled by a 3DP separator, and the smoothness was guaranteed with a high precision and low deviation. The shear concentration areas can be located from the shear strain field of the specimen. For S15-2 at 68 s, no concentrated zones of shear strain were observable. At 68 s, the axial force decreased to 7.5 kN, and this value was much lower than the peak force of 48 kN ( For S30-3 at 67 s, the peak axial force was 31.1 kN ( For S45-1 at 143 s, the axial force dropped to 4.58 kN ( For S60-1 at 120 s, most of the specimen exhibited weak shear behaviour, except in the zone near the joint plane. The green area may indicate shear deformation. The axial force on the specimen dropped to 0.75 kN at 120 s ( In summary, the joint angle plays a vital role in controlling the distribution of the shear zone on the specimen surface. A specimen with a small joint angle is unlikely to exhibit shear behaviour throughout the uniaxial compression test. As the joint angle increases, the movement between the upper section and the lower section is simultaneously controlled by the bonding effects of the bolting system, the locking effects of the nuts, and the shear resistance capacity of the bolt rod at the joint-borehole intersection. The axial force is largely sustained by these parts, rather than by the joint plane; therefore, the shear moment plays a contributing role in absorbing the displacement. This finding explains why the shear strain near the joint becomes increasingly concentrated as the joint angle increases, whereas the rest of the area tends to experience no shear behaviour. The load value recorded by the PS is very important in predicting the splitting of a specimen or the decoupling of the bonding interface inside the bolting system. If the strength of a specimen was too weak, splitting failure of the specimen would occur prior to decoupling along the bonding interface. A sharp increase in the PS load seldom occurred before the peak axial force was reached. After reaching the peak force, the specimens exhibited crack development and extension. Afterwards, the fragments tended to move horizontally under vertical compression, and this process extruded the PS, leading to an increase in the corresponding PS load-time curve. Additionally, the joint angle had some impact on the PS load, and specimens with higher joint angles were more likely to induce a fluctuating pattern in the PS load-time curves. As the joint angle increased, the shear movement became more evident. The more evident the shear movement became, the more likely it was that the nuts would undergo slippage. For example, the PS load of the specimens with joint angles of 15° experienced no fluctuating pattern ( In this paper, standard cylindrical soft rock specimens containing transverse joints of different angles were prepared, wherein each joint-separated specimen was reinforced with a 3DP bolt and planting-bar anchorage glue. The 3DP bolts had geometrical surface details identical to those of the PT bolt because 3D laser scanning method was used. Then, each complete specimen was transferred to the MTS machine for uniaxial compression testing, during which the influences of the joint angle on the mechanical properties, DIC changing pattern on the surface or rock, and bolt load were comprehensively discussed. The research approaches proposed in this study provide new methods to investigate the reinforcement effect of bolts on joint-separated soft rock masses. The main conclusions of this paper are as follows: 3D printing technology is an effective way to prepare standard cylindrical specimens containing joint planes, and the utilization of a 3DP bolt is a promising approach for rock bolt simulation. Therefore, specimens containing joint planes can be fabricated and the geometry of real bolts can be reflected at a higher precision. If a transverse joint plane exists in a bolt-reinforced soft rock specimen, the shear trend at the bonding interface prior to failure of the specimen is weak, and the bolt will control the post-peak deformation. The movement of the upper section above the joint plane relative to the lower section below the joint plane is closely related to the joint angle. For the specimens with 15° joint angles, the movement in both sections is mainly vertical. For specimens with joint angles of 30° or larger, the movement in both sections is mainly horizontal. For the simulated soft rock specimens in this study, the strength will first exhibit a linear decrease and then approach a certain value as the joint angle increases; the turning point for the above characteristic is a joint plane angle of 45°. Notably, when the joint plane angle is less than 15°, the shear movement is small, and the specimen failure process is more likely dominated by compression than shear. However, when the joint plane angle is larger than 30°, the shear movement becomes increasingly evident. In addition, the shear strain near the joint becomes increasingly concentrated, whereas the rest of the specimen tends to experience no shear behaviour as the joint angle increases. A fluctuating changing pattern in the results of the PSs mounted on the two ends of the bolt is quite common for all the specimens apart from the specimens with a joint angle of 15°. In most circumstances, this phenomenon emerges during the post-peak process, and it is mainly caused by periodic slipping of the nuts or progressive cracking of the rock.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support for this study from the The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at