The beverages coffee, cocoa, and tea can be considered complex mixtures of naturally occurring substances (for example, methylxanthine alkaloids, flavonoids, organic acids, pigments, and nutritional elements) and compounds generated during industrial processes, such as roasting, fermentation, and decaffeination. This article will provide a brief overview of the major chemical components commonly encountered in coffee, cocoa, and tea, together with the standard procedures for the extraction and analyses of these major components. The major analytes of coffee include caffeine, chlorogenic acids, and flavor and volatile aromatic components. The major analytes in cocoa are methylxanthines, mainly theobromine and trace amounts of caffeine, cocoa fat, and lipids. Other analytes of interest in cocoa are tannins, pigments, and aroma components. The major analytes of tea are the methylxanthine alkaloids, including caffeine and theophylline, polyphenols (catechins, tannins, and related flavanols), and volatile and aromatic components. Analysis of black tea would also include theaflavins and thearubigens, which are oxidation and condensation products of polyphenols. Green coffee beans are ground to pass a No. 40 sieve before extraction and analysis. Roasted coffee beans and tea samples are ground to pass a No. 30 sieve before analysis. Soluble coffee solids, instant tea, and cocoa powder are analyzed after thorough mixing to ensure homogeneity. Cocoa products other than cocoa are extracted with petroleum ether to remove fat before extraction and analysis of alkaloids and other nonvolatile components. The Bailey–Andrew method, the Power–Chesnut method, and the Levine method have been adopted by the Association of Official Analytical Chemists (AOAC) for the extraction and determination of caffeine in coffee and tea. In the Bailey–Andrew method, 5–10 In the Power–Chesnut method, 10 The Levine method is used in preparing samples for the spectrophotometric determination of residual caffeine in decaffeinated coffees. An acidic Celite column is prepared by adding 2 The Wadsworth method is used for the extraction of theobromine from cocoa powder or defatted cocoa products. Ten grams of sample is put in a porcelain dish and mixed with 2–3 An aqueous extraction method is used to extract both the theobromine and caffeine from defatted cocoa products for analysis by liquid chromatography (LC). In this method, 0.6 One gram of roasted ground coffee is transferred into a 750 The lipid components in cocoa are extracted into petroleum ether by either the Knorr Tube method or by Soxhlet extraction. Both are adopted by AOAC, and the latter method by both AOAC and the Office International du Cacao et du Chocolat. In the Knorr Tube method, 2–3 In the Soxhlet method, 4–5 Tannins and coloring matters in defatted cocoa powder and related products can be extracted by shaking consecutively with 150 Catechins and related flavanols are water soluble, and can be extracted by boiling with water, or by shaking with aqueous acetone. Volatile and aromatic components in coffee are concentrated by passing purified helium gas directly over the sample (50 Volatile and aromatic components of tea and tea infusion are also concentrated by aqueous distillation and the cold-trapping method. In this method, the sample is suspended in water in a 2 The analyses of methylxanthines in coffee and tea are conducted: (1) by measuring the total nitrogen in extracts, either derived from the Bailey–Andrew extraction in the case of caffeine or by the Wadsworth method in the case of theobromine; (2) by spectrophotometric methods; and (3) by chromatographic methods, including thin-layer chromatography (TLC), LC, and gas chromatography (GC). The major advantage of chromatographic methods over spectrophotometric methods is the ability of the former to separate and quantify several methylxanthines (caffeine, theophylline, and theobromine) simultaneously. Caffeine is quantified spectrophotometrically by measuring the ultraviolet (UV) absorbance at wavelengths between 270 and 280 Methylxanthines analysis by TLC has the advantages of high sample throughput and low cost. The major disadvantage of TLC methodology is its nonquantitative nature. Separation is achieved by chromatography on silica gel plates, using a variety of organic solvent mixtures as eluting solvents. Some typical solvent mixtures are: chloroform–methanol (9:1; v/v); benzene–acetone (3:7; v/v); chloroform–carbon tetrachloride–methanol (8:5:1; v/v/v); chloroform–ethanol–formic acid (88:10:2; v/v/v). Separation of methylxanthines has also been achieved using paper chromatography or with cellulose plate using a butanol–hydrochloric acid–water (100:11:28; v/v/v) mixture. Analysis of methylxanthines by LC is carried out with C The AOAC method for the analysis of caffeine by GC uses a packed glass column, 6 Spectrophotometric determination of total chlorogenic acid content in green coffee extract is conducted by measuring the absorbance at 324 The complete separation and analysis of chlorogenic acids by capillary GC requires derivatization of the phenolic or carboxylic acid functions by silylating agents, such as hexamethyldisilazane or Analyses of chlorogenic acids are carried out with reversed-phase LC systems, both in gradient and isocratic modes. The typical analytical system employs C Separation of volatile components is achieved on either fused silica capillary columns or packed columns. Individual volatile components are detected with a FID and identified by the use of reference standards. Methods using specific detectors, such as the NPD, sulfur-specific flame photometric detector, and mass-selective detector (MSD) have also been used. The MSD has the additional advantage of providing structural identification of the individual components. Separation and quantitative analyses of theobromine and caffeine are carried out using C In AOAC methodologies, the composition of fat and fatty acids in cocoa fat extracts are analyzed and characterized by physicochemical methods, including refractive index, melting point, saponification value and unsaponifiable material, iodine number, Reichert–Meissl and Polenske values. Cocoa volatile and aromatic components are analyzed by capillary GC, with samples derived from headspace enrichment or cold-trapping techniques. Analysis is similar to that of coffee volatiles; FIDs are used and identification is by the use of reference compounds. The amount of caffeine in tea is determined by spectrophotometric and chromatographic methods, as described above for coffee. Separation of caffeine from theophylline is achieved by chromatographic methods. Flavanols and tea polyphenols are commonly analyzed using paper chromatography, TLC, and LC. GC has also been used, but derivatization of the hydroxyl groups with silylation is required to increase the volatility of these analytes. Tea flavanols can be separated by two-dimensional paper chromatography, using water as the first dimension solvent, and a mixture of butanol–acetic acid–water (4:1:5; v/v/v) as the second dimension. A similar procedure can be carried out using TLC with cellulose plates. Different flavanol components are visualized by fluorescence under UV radiation, either before or after exposure to fuming ammonia. Other visualizing agents are bis-diazotized benzidine and vanillin. Separation and quantitative analysis of flavanols and polyphenols may be conducted by C The utility of GC for the analysis of catechins and polyphenols is quite limited, given the polar and nonvolatile nature of these compounds. Derivatization of a polyphenol extract with silylating agent and subsequent separation of the trimethylsilyl derivatives of flavanols can be achieved by chromatographing on a glass column 5 Tannins and theaflavins are pigmented products in black tea formed after oxidation and condensation of green tea flavanols during the fermentation process. These compounds are analyzed by spectrophotometric, colorimetric, and chromatographic methods, using LC and GC. Spectrophotometric analysis of theaflavins is carried out at 380 and 460 Separation and quantitative analysis of theaflavins and thearubigens has also been achieved by gel permeation chromatography on Sephadex LH-20, monitoring the eluting peaks at 380 The flavor and aroma qualities of the common coffee beverages are dependent on the source of the coffee bean used, soil and climatic conditions, as well as the duration and temperature of roasting. The determination of the quality of roasted coffee is mainly by tasting of the brew by professional tasters. Such processes are qualitative only. Chemical analysis of coffee quality is based on headspace analysis of the aroma components of roasted or brewed coffee. For instance, drastic decreases in methylfuran and methylethylketone in coffee aroma have been observed in roasted and ground coffee within a few days, which may be correlated to coffee staleness. A decrease in the ratio of 2-methylfuran to 2-butanone in coffee aroma with time has also been observed. However, the use of such ratios of individual aroma components as measures of coffee quality has not been officially established. Quality evaluation of cocoa bean and cocoa powder is by visual inspection for contamination, moldiness, and by aroma/flavor and tasting. Physical analysis of cocoa bean and cocoa powder includes analysis for total moisture (<8%) and fat (<55%). Additionally, the quality of cocoa is characterized by the iodine number (degree of unsaturation of the fatty acid components), unsaponifiable matter, and GC analysis (for volatile and aroma components). Quality assessment of tea is conducted by evaluation of the color and appearance of the tea leaves and the tea infusion formed, as well as by GC analysis of the aroma of both the tea leaves and the infusion. For example, ( Despite the fact that major components in coffee, cocoa, and tea can be analyzed and measured by the methodologies outlined above, there are many minor components in these beverages that have not been extensively studied. For example, roasting of coffee induces caramelization, condensation, pyrolysis, and Maillard reactions; the nature and composition of these reaction products (collectively termed melanoidins) are dependent on the temperature and duration of roasting. Although these reaction products in roasted coffee constitute as much as 30% of dry weight, their chemical identities are largely unknown. The relationship of melanoidin content to quality, taste, and flavor of the product is not well understood and analytical procedures for determining these components are lacking. The manufacturing processes of black tea involve extensive oxidation and polymerization of polyphenols and results in the formation of theaflavins and thearubigens. The formation of these condensation products is dependent on the duration of oxidation during fermentation. Analytical methods for the characterization of aroma components remain to be established and the relationship between individual components and product quality has yet to be elucidated. 