Due to the high oxygen content (275ppm) of prealloyed powder, the hot isostatically pressed (HIPed) superalloy 718 consisted of prior particle boundary (PPB) networks affecting the tensile ductility and stress rupture properties adversely. To improve the mechanical properties, the HIPed alloy was hot rolled at two different temperatures, viz. 1150°C and 950°C with a reduction of 40% in each case. The material rolled at 1150°C was heat treated as per the conventional schedule consisting of solution treatment at 995°C/1h, followed by water quenching (WQ) and ageing treatment at 720°C/8h/furnace cooling (FC) to 620°C and holding at 620°C/8h/air cooling (AC) to room temperature, while the alloy rolled at 950°C was directly aged without solution treatment. Optical and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) studies revealed that while these treatments eliminated the PPB networks, the fine-scale precipitation of γ″ and γ′ phases was similar to that of the HIPed and heat-treated alloy. Hot rolling at 1150°C followed by conventional heat treatment offered a very good combination of yield strength (YS; 938MPa), ultimate tensile strength (UTS; 1033MPa), ductility (18% elongation (EL) and 36% reduction in area (RA)) and excellent stress rupture properties at 650°C. On the other hand, rolling at 950°C + direct ageing treatment showed tremendous improvement in YS (1185MPa) and UTS (1277MPa) with acceptable level of ductility and stress rupture properties required for critical components.Inconel 718 (IN 718) is a nickel–iron-based superalloy, used widely in the manufacturing of commercial and military aircraft engine components The microstructure and mechanical properties of as-HIPed and HIP + heat-treated (as per the AMS 5662 standard schedule for conventional wrought IN 718) alloys were studied by the present investigators in detail The chemical composition of inert gas-atomized IN 718 alloy powder of −150 ASTM mesh fraction used in this study is given in Optical microscopy and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) specimens from the as-HIPed, HIP + hot-rolled, HIP + hot-rolled and heat-treated samples were mechanically polished and etched with a solution consisting of 50% HCl, 10% HNO The microstructure of as-HIPed alloy presented in The HIPed alloy rolled at 1150 The room-temperature tensile properties of the HIPed alloy after rolling at 1150 The 650 The stress rupture properties evaluated at 650 The room-temperature tensile-fractured surfaces of the HIPed alloy for different rolling temperatures and subsequent heat treatments are presented in To correlate the structural changes with the relevant mechanical properties of the HIP + thermomechanically worked alloy 718, TEM studies were carried out on the tensile samples deformed at room temperature and at 650 The TEM micrographs of the room-temperature tensile-deformed sample corresponding to the HIP + rolled at 950 In the present study, the HIPed alloy was soaked at 1150 Solution treatment of hot-worked conventional alloy 718 is a necessary and important step in obtaining the desired combination of mechanical properties The tensile properties of the HIP + hot-rolled and heat-treated alloy both at room temperature and at 650 The stress rupture life and ductility of the HIP + hot-rolled alloys are vastly improved and exceed the levels of wrought alloy 718 ( To meet the requirement of high tensile and fatigue strength in aerospace applications, direct-age processing is necessary for wrought alloy 718 components The present investigation shows that thermomechanical working eliminates the PPBs in HIPed alloy completely and improves the strength, ductility and stress rupture properties comparable to those of wrought (cast + hot worked) heat-treated IN 718. The fine-grained microstructure of the HIPed alloy consisting of PPBs decorated with highly stable oxides and MC carbides facilitates hot working at a temperature as high as 1150  Rolling of as-HIPed alloy 718 at 1150 At room temperature and at 650 HIP followed by rolling at 950 The authors gratefully acknowledge the Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO) for providing the financial support for this study. The authors would like to thank Dr. D. Banerjee, Director, DMRL, for constant encouragement for this study. Special thanks are due to Shri Mahendra Kumar, Head, powder processing group, for extending needful support during the course of this work. Thanks are also due to Mr. S.M. Hussain, Shri P. Ravinder Rao, Shri P. Raja Rao, Mr. John David, Shri V.V. Rama Rao, Shri D.V.V. Satyanarayana and Shri D.S.K. Murali for their assistance in the experimental work.