This book describes the extraction of copper from its ores. The starting point is with copper ores and minerals and the finishing point is the casting and quality control of electrical grade copper. Techniques for recovering copper from recycled scrap are also discussed. The main objectives of the book are to describe the extractive metallurgy of copper as it is today and to discuss (qualitatively and quantitatively) the reasons for using each particular process. Arising from these descriptions and discussions are indications as to how copper-extraction methods will develop in the future. Control of air and water pollution is of tremendous importance when considering future developments and these are discussed in detail for each process. Likewise, the energy demands of each process are dealt with in detail. Costs are mentioned throughout the text and they are considered in depth in the final chapter. The book begins with an introductory synopsis (for the generalist reader) of the major copper-extraction processes. It then follows copper extraction in a stepwise fashion beginning with mineral benefication and advancing through roasting, smelting, converting, refining, casting and quality control. Hydrometallurgy and its associated processes are introduced just before electrorefining so that electrowinning and electrorefining can be discussed side by side and the final products of each method compared. The last two chapters are not in sequence – they are devoted to the sulphur pollution problem and to economics. As far as possible, the length of each chapter is commensurate with the relative importance of the process it describes. Blast-furnace copper smelting is, for example, given a rather brief treatment because it is a dying process while newer techniques such a continuous copper-making and solvent extraction are given extensive coverage because they may assume considerable importance in the near future. A word about units: the book is metric throughout, the only major exception to the Standard International Unit System being that energy is reported in terms of kilocalories and kilowatt-hours. The principal units of the book are metric tons (always written tonnes in the text), kilograms and metres. A conversion table is provided in Appendix I. A knowledge of thermodynamics is assumed in parts of the book, particularly with respect to equilibrium constants. For concise information on the thermodynamic method as applied to metallurgy, the reader is directed to The text of the book is followed by four appendixes which contain units and conversion factors: stoichiometric data; enthalpy and free energy data; and a summary of the properties of electrolytic tough pitch copper. Copper is one of man's most beautiful and useful materials. It has given us great satisfaction to describe and discuss the methods by which it is obtained. Both of our universities have had a long association with the copper industries of our countries, and it is hoped that, through this book, this association will continue.