A rapid high-performance liquid chromatographic (HPLC) method for determining the organic acids in Bayer liquors is reported. It is the first time that high-performance liquid chromatography was used to separate and determine organic acids in Bayer liquors. Oxalic, tartaric, acetic, succinic, glutaric and butene dicarboxylic acid were identified and quantified in 10min. First time repeatability, reproducibility and recovery were determined out for these acids in Bayer liquors. The organic acids were removed from Bayer liquors by using a solid-phase extraction procedure with ion-exchange cartridges. Previously, the solution of Bayer liquor was adjusted to pH 7.50 with 8mol/l HCl. Then, this solution was adjusted to pH 2.00 with 0.1mol/l HCl. The chromatographic separation was achieved with a Kromasil RP-C18 column and thermo stated at 25°C. Potassium dihydrogenphosphate buffered at pH 2.10 with orthophosphoric acid and methanol were used as mobile phase at a flow-rate of 1.30ml/min for the whole run. Organic acids were detected with a UV–vis detector at 215nm. The precision results showed that the relative standard deviations of the repeatability and reproducibility were <2.80% and <3.74%, respectively. The accuracy of the method was confirmed with an average recovery ranging between 85.2% and 114.7%. Under optimum conditions the detection limits ranged from 0.0023 to 10.36mg/l.The Bayer process can be summarized as the digestion of bauxite with caustic liquor and the subsequent precipitation of hydrated alumina. Most bauxite contains organic matter in various amounts. The major sources of organic matter are from the bauxite in the form of humic substances. During the digestion, the organic matter is dissolved, degraded and oxidized with the results that the liquors darken, and notable amounts of oxalate and carbonate are formed. Due to the acidic nature of the humic substances, more than 50% of the organic matter contained in the bauxite is extracted into the liquor. The principal degradation products are sodium oxalate and sodium carbonate. Depending upon the digestion conditions, typically 5–10% of the organic carbon is converted to sodium oxalate ( In the Bayer process the caustic liquor is recycled, and because of this the organic matter builds up to an equilibrium level, typically to 10–30 From an analytical chemistry perspective, Bayer liquor is a most challenging matrix consisting of alumina, sodium hydroxide, sodium carbonate, sodium chloride, sodium sulphate, sodium oxalate as well as unknown organic acid anions all at varying concentrations ( A variety of techniques have been used to determine the organic acids in Bayer liquors including titrimetry ( The analysis of organic acids in Bayer liquors by HPLC method is a difficult task due to high ionic strength and pH value. Our particular interest concerns on the development of a simple HPLC procedure for the determination of organic acids in Bayer liquors. It is the first time that high-performance liquid chromatography has been used to determine organic acids in Bayer liquor samples. Analytical standard-grade oxalic, tartaric, acetic, succinic, glutaric and butene dicarboxylic acid were obtained from Sigma (St. Louis, MO, USA). Stock standard solutions were prepared by dissolution of organic acids in Milli-Q water; they were stored at 4 The samples were filtered through cellulose membrane filters Whatman (0.45 Chromatographic analyses were carried out on a Waters liquid chromatograph equipped with a Waters ILD on-line degasser, a Waters 600E pump, a Waters 717 plus auto sampler and a Waters 996 diode-array UV detection system (Waters). The detector signals were recorded on a chromatography data system MILLENNIUM 32 A 10 The chromatographic separation was carried out on a Kromasil RP-C The individual standard was dissolved in methanol and injected to determine individual retention times. Stock solutions of 3000 First of all, working with standard solutions, six organic acids (oxalic, tartaric, acetic, succinic, glutaric and butene dicarboxylic acid) were separated and identified by the present chromatographic method. In this study an isocratic chromatographic program was developed to give sufficient separation of organic acid with others in a short period of time. Any reports at analyzing the humic acids by HPLC had been restricted to the quantitative analysis of the humic acids present. Our particular interest concerns the development of a simple HPLC procedure for the determination of organic acids levels in Bayer liquors. It is the first time that high-performance liquid chromatography has been used to determine organic acids in Bayer liquor samples. A variety of techniques have been utilized for the determination of sodium oxalate in Bayer liquors. In contrast to these methods, the present method is simple, rapid and requires only extraction steps. A good separation can be achieved in a short separation time of 10 The levels of oxalate found in Bayer liquors by HPLC are in agreement with the volumetric analysis (VC): potassium permanganate titration. Deviation was 3.1–6.3%. The oxalate levels determined by VC are always higher than the result of HPLC. It was concluded that potassium permanganate was a versatile and powerful oxidant that could be used to determine many substances by direct or indirect titration. Some other compounds in Bayer liquors reacted with potassium permanganate. The column was thermo stated at several different temperatures. The best results were obtained at a temperature of 25 Solutions of potassium dihydrogenphosphate buffered with orthophosphoric acid and sulphuric acid, recommended in the literature ( Several mobile phase flow-rates (0.5–1.5 Several wavelengths from 205 to 245 The detection limit was calculated as Calibration curves were determined for seven different concentrations of a mixture of organic acids standard solutions. Each calibration sample was injected in triplicate. Calibration graphs for each compound were obtained by plotting concentration against peak area and applying the least squares method. The precision study was comprised of repeatability and reproducibility studies. These were developed in five different Bayer liquors which contained low, medium and high organic acids levels. The repeatability was established by injecting the Bayer liquor samples five times. The reproducibility was determined by analyzing each sample of Bayer liquor on three different days over about 1 month. The relative standard deviations (RSDs) of the repeatability and the reproducibility are <2.46% and <3.74%, respectively. These results indicate that the present method can be used for quantitative analyses of organic acids in Bayer liquors. To establish the efficiency of the organic acids extraction, the procedure was applied to a mixture of standard solutions. The results are shown in In this work, the average of the recovery percentage varies between 85.2% and 114.7%. The low recovery percentage maybe due to the sample preparation. This procedure involved acidification, filtration and solid phase extraction. The solid phase extraction was performed by ion exchange. But it is suitable for low concentrations of organic acids in Bayer liquors. And it is excellent for rapid determination in factory. The organic acid contents of five Bayer liquor samples are shown in The analysis of organic acids in Bayer liquors with HPLC systems is a difficult task due to high ionic strength and pH. The present method allows the quantification of oxalic, tartaric, acetic, succinic, glutaric and butene dicarboxylic acids in Bayer liquors. It is the first time that high-performance liquid chromatography has been used to determine organic acids in Bayer liquor samples. The present method has the advantage of measuring organic acid in a single run, thus simplifying the analytical procedure. The analysis is simple, rapid and does not require any complicated sample preparation and only one reversed-phase column is used for the chromatographic separation in less than 10