Fe–B–C composites were produced using iron and boron carbide powders. The powders were mixed to produce various compositions, ranging from 1vol.% Fe to 80.1vol.% Fe. Spark plasma sintering (SPS) was used to densify the composite powder green compacts. The sintering temperatures used ranged from 900°C for the composites with a high iron content to 2000°C for those with a high boron carbide content. It was evident that during the sintering process the iron reacted with the boron carbide. XRD analysis showed the presence of FeB, Fe2B, Fe3C, Fe3(B0.6C0.4), Fe23(B,C)6 and residual carbon as reaction products. The composites were found to have hardness values between 9.8 and 33.1GPa with the higher hardness being associated with the higher boron carbide contents. The fracture toughness values determined were in the range of 2.8–5.3MPam0.5. With increasing iron content from 1 to 5vol.%, it is evident that the FeB formed begins to embrittle the material rather than increase the fracture toughness as a result of the high residual stresses between the B4C and FeB phases.Boron carbide is a fascinating technical ceramic with mechanical properties suitable for several technological applications, including cutting tools and armour The main attraction of the Fe–B–C alloy was the ability to manipulate the microstructure, by varying the composition, according to the needs of the application Pure B The purpose of this study was to investigate the effect of various iron additions to boron carbide powder sintered compacts which will eventually be used in cutting tool and armour applications. The mixed powders were spark plasma sintered. The density, hardness and fracture toughness of the composites produced were investigated, along with a careful analysis of the phases present in the sintered composites. Fe–B–C composites were produced using iron and boron carbide powders. Carbonyl-iron, low in magnesium and manganese compounds with a reported average grain size between 6 and 9 The B The composites were produced using a spark plasma sintering furnace (FCT HP-D5, Germany), which sintered discs with a diameter of 20  The composites were ground and finely polished. The densities of the sintered composites were measured using the Archimedes' principle in water. The hardness tests were carried out using a FV-800 Future-Tech Macro Vickers hardness tester with a load of 5 SEM analysis was carried out using a Carl Zeiss Sigma FE SEM. A Bruker D2 phaser was used to perform XRD analysis, using Co Kα radiation. A 2θ range of 35° to 80°, using a step size of 0.02(°2θ) and a scan step time of 3.2 The densities and respective open porosities of each of the composites are shown in   From X-ray diffraction was carried out on the starting powders as well as each composite sintered. This was used to provide an understanding of the behaviour of the materials during sintering. Specific attention was paid to the effect of the amount of iron on the phases produced in order to better understand how this affects the properties of the sintered composites. The compositions selected for the higher Fe containing composites were based on the following reactions expected to occur during sintering: Eq. XRD analysis of the composites with the higher iron contents showed significant differences in the phases present with varying iron content. The effects of the composition as well as the dwell time were investigated, as shown in   The hardness and fracture toughness of each composite were determined and shown in The fracture toughness ( As observed in  Both the hardness and fracture toughness of the low iron composites ( When comparing the hardness and fracture toughness of the low Fe composites sintered at 2000 Fe and B The higher Fe containing composites could be sintered at lower temperatures (900–1100