This paper is a complete overview of the reverse problem in the breakage matrix context. The procedure for calculating the input particle size distribution to a milling operation in order to obtain the desired output particle size distribution is given. The reverse problem was solved by the “precision” and “approximation” approaches. For the precision case, a detailed algorithm is presented, where in every step a precise range for the current output is provided. This approach is limited with a number of output size fractions that can be freely chosen. On the other hand, the approximation approach gives the best-fit solution which corresponds to the desired output particle size distribution. In this case the problem is solved by the orthogonal decomposition and non-negative least squares method and by semilogarithmic loss function. Applicability of the proposed methods was confirmed by examples related to wheat milling.Over the years, various modeling approaches (such as discrete element method, finite element method, population balance models, breakage matrix approach, etc.) were used for the analysis of particle breakage in the comminution processes. Population balance type of modeling (PBM) is probably most often used to mathematically describe the comminution process (for examples refer to The breakage matrix is associated with the PBM concept and it is effectively a combination of the selection function and the breakage function. The selection function is a mass fraction of particles that are selected and broken in time (during the process). The breakage function is a mass fraction of breakage products from size Breakage matrix approach was first introduced by Broadbent and Callcot Broadbent and Callcott The breakage matrix approach described in Eqs. Usually, the PSDs of the feed and milling output occur in different size ranges. Also, under the compressive crushing forces, it is entirely possible for a wheat kernel to break so as to produce flattened bran flake with dimensions larger than the kernel from which it came In a retention-type of mills multiple breakage events are likely to occur and PBM models are preferred In spite of the advantages of the breakage matrix method, there are some limitations as the breakage matrix determined for one set of conditions cannot be used for another set of conditions Considering Eq. Examples given in the paper are related to roller milling of wheat. Therefore it is assumed that the particle breakage is independent of any inter-particle interactions. Also, it is presumed that the PSDs of the input and output occur in different size ranges. The study is carried out as a general case where a number of inputs and outputs could be different and the elements of the breakage matrix are arbitrary values between 0 and 1. Fistes et al. The other possible approach is to find a best-fit solution which corresponds to desired Thus, there are two possible ways for solving the reverse problem, namely “precision” and “approximation”. Both of them have been extended and thoroughly discussed in this paper. In the “precision” approach, instead of choosing In the “approximation” approach different numerical methods could be used such as: LU and Cholesky decomposition, modified Gram–Schmidt orthogonalization, SVD and QR decomposition with many modifications Let us recall Eq. By direct computation Eq. Case with more outputs then inputs ( First, the case Let Having chosen the value of The procedure given in the case The intersections of hyperplanes Eq. The In the approximation approach the case However, the results provided by this method could have negative values. With non-negative requirements for the input PSD, the Eq. On the other hand, the non-negativity condition could be incorporated in a different norm whose nature does not allow negative solutions. For this purpose norm defined by the least semilogs So, by Wheat was separated into fractions using Sortimat (Perten AB, Sweden). Slotted sieves were used to separate the grains by thickness into four different size fractions: > In the first step batches of 0.5 The conditioned samples were milled on the laboratory roll stand Variostuhl, model C Ex 2 (Miag, Braunschweig, Germany). Fluted rolls 100 The proposed breakage matrix approaches were tested by examples related to wheat milling. The output size distributions represent the columns of the breakage matrix, Breakage matrix By (8) the set of acceptable outputs is the interior of a tetrahedron ( The maximum and minimum values in corresponding rows of the breakage matrix are Considering Eq. Intersection points of the lines By Eq. Set of acceptable values for outputs To satisfy the condition Complete algorithm for this example is given in Problem The best-fit solution On the other hand, for some other As can be seen the negativity of the input size fraction Coefficients of determination for approximations obtained in Eq. Considering wheat flour milling it is well-established in literature that wheat millability is highly influenced by the dimensions of individual wheat kernels and the kernel size distribution The paper represents an improvement of the recent studies of the reverse problem in the breakage matrix context (defining the input PSD to a milling operation which would give the desired output PSD). We propose two ways for solving the problem, the “approximation” and the “precision” methods. The solution of the reverse problem could be useful in milling operations where the possibility of controlling the input PSD exists. This paper provides a solving procedure for the reverse breakage matrix problem via algorithm making it practically applicable because it could be implemented (as illustrated by The “precision” approach is limited to The “approximation” approach is not limited to Finally, let us conclude that the precision and approximation approach gives the complete overview of the reverse problem in the breakage matrix context. The work presented is supported by the