Dissolution kinetics of the (010) face of dicalcium phosphate dihydrate (DCPD) and the transformation of DCPD to hydroxyapatite were observed using in situ atomic force microscopy. Step velocities for [201]- and [101]′-oriented steps were measured in pseudophysiological solutions. The latter step was inclined 5–7° toward [001] from [101] directions. The step kinetic coefficients calculated for the [201] and [101]′ steps were, respectively, 0.70×10−4 and 1.43×10−4
                     m/s, values comparable to those for soluble inorganic crystals. The solubility product for DCPD accurately estimated from the relation between the step velocity and the undersaturation was (4.13±0.1)×10−7, a value 1.6 times larger than that previously reported. It was shown that the precipitation of hydroxyapatite occurred after the dissolution of DCPD, and no evidence of direct structural transformation from DCPD to hydroxyapatite was observed. This indicates that DCPD acts as a simple heterogeneous growth center for hydroxyapatite without requiring any structural resemblance.Dicalcium phosphate dihydrate (CaHPO Several researchers have investigated the dissolution kinetics of DCPD by measuring dissolution rates of polycrystals In this study, we therefore used AFM to observe the dissolution of DCPD single crystals under pseudophysiological solutions of various concentrations. From the relation between step velocity and undersaturation, we calculated DCPD single crystals were prepared by means of a wet process. Under a N The pseudophysiological solution that has the highest ionic concentrations contains 210 The following equation was used to calculate the undersaturation with respect to DCPD, A NanoScope III-a (Digital Instruments, Inc.) was used for observation of and kinetic measurements on the (0 The precipitates were characterized by X-ray powder diffraction (Rigaku Denki Co., Ltd.). They were plate like with typical size from 0.5 to 1.5 After a seed crystal was etched in a 1 We found that the dissolution proceeded via nucleation and the growth of triangular pits with step flow. No spiral dissolution was observed under the present conditions, and the step velocity depended on the orientation of the steps. The growth of triangular pits was mainly controlled by the movement of [2 The [2   The volume diffusion cannot be the rate-determining process for dissolution under the present conditions, because the step velocity strongly depended on its orientation. We identified the rate-determining process by calculating activation energies for each surface process (i.e., detachments of molecules and surface diffusion) assuming that the detached molecules pass through the surface diffusion process as discussed by Zhang and Nancollas We observed the transformation of DCPD to hydroxyapatite by monitoring the dissolution of DCPD in the solution at This study was carried out as a project of JSPS Research Fellowships for Young Scientists.