Background
                  The radius has a sagittal bow and a coronal bow. Fractures are often treated with volar anterior plating. However, the sagittal bow is often overlooked when plating. This study looks at radial morphology and the effect of plating the proximal radius with straight plates and then contoured plates bowed in the sagittal plane. We report our findings and their effect on forearm rotation.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  Morphology was investigated in 14 radii. Attention was paid to the proximal shaft of the radius and its sagittal bow; from this, 6-, 7-, and 8-hole plates were contoured to fit this bow. A simple transverse fracture was then made at the apex of this bow in 23 cadaver arms. Supination and pronation were compared when plating with a straight plate and a contoured plate. Ten cadavers underwent ulna plating at the same level. The effect on rotation of fractures plated in the distal-third shaft was also measured.
               
                  Results
                  A significant reduction in rotation was found when a proximal radius fracture was plated with a straight plate compared with a contoured plate: 10.8°, 12.8°, and 21.7° for 6-, 7-, and 8-hole plates, respectively (P < .05). Forearm rotation was decreased further when a longer plate was used. Ulna or distal shaft plating did not reduce rotation.
               
                  Conclusion
                  This study has shown a significant sagittal bow of the proximal shaft of the radius. Plating this with contoured plates in the sagittal plane improves rotation when compared with straight plates. Additional ulna plating is not a source of reduced forearm rotation.The radius consists of a sagittal bow and a coronal bow. Altering normal anatomy will affect the biomechanics of rotation between the radius and the ulna. This has been shown extensively with regard to rotation with alterations of the coronal bow. Furthermore, most fractures present in the trauma setting, in which heavy comminution and complex fracture patterns can impede accurate fracture reduction. Our goals were 4-fold: (1) to study the morphology of the radius using cadaveric forearms, (2) to investigate the effect on rotation when contoured plates were used rather than straight plates, (3) to determine whether straight distal radius plating reduced rotation, and (4) to determine whether ulna plate impingement was a factor in forearm rotation. We hypothesized that plating the proximal radius shaft with a straight plate reduces rotation, because this straightens the normal sagittal bow of the radius. This in turn affects the axis of rotation and the normal relationship of the forearm bones. Therefore the use of contoured plates should restore a greater range of rotation. The distal-third shaft of the radius is not bowed. This is an experimental-type biomechanical study with 2 parts: (1) computer-based morphology testing of the radius and (2) cadaver-based testing of contoured plating versus straight plating of the proximal radius and their effect on rotation. Three-dimensional models were formed from 10 dry bone radii with the Faro arm coordinate measuring device (FARO Technologies Inc, Lake Mary, FL, USA). Four specimens were examined manually. Data were then analyzed with the Blender (Blender Institute Software; Entrepotdok, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) and ImageJ (National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA) software programs. From the data, we were able to record the morphology of the radius ( Dry bone measurements were obtained with a handheld caliper (accuracy of 0.5 mm). A list of measurements and their definitions are shown in Different-length plates were then contoured to accommodate the sagittal bow of the radius. In 23 cadaver arms standard LCP plates (Synthes New Zealand Ltd, Auckland, New Zealand) were used for plating. Plates were contoured by use of a large AO plate bender (Synthes New Zealand Ltd). From our results, a 5° angle bend was used for contouring the plate for the proximal radii ( A custom-made jig was used to measure rotation ( The radial shaft was dissected by a Henry (anterior) approach. Simple transverse fractures were made with a bone saw. This was done at the apex of the sagittal bow in the proximal radius, which was assessed clinically during dissection. Ulna fractures were made at the same level. Distal radius fractures were made at the junction of the distal and middle thirds of the radius. All incisions were then closed with No. 2.0 Vicryl (Ethicon, Somerville, NJ, USA) (deep sutures) and then No. 3.0 nylon interrupted sutures to skin. Rotation was measured from the neutral (midrotation) position. Maximum supination and pronation were recorded. The forearms were then plated and rotation measured again. A repeated-measures analysis of variance with a Tukey-Kramer multiple comparisons test was used to determine significant differences between the groups. The level of significance was set at In the coronal plane the radius has a bow of 10.33°. The apex is located approximately in the middle third of the radius. In the sagittal plane there is also a bow, with the apex dorsally. This began distally, on average 11.74 cm from the tip of the radial head. The sagittal bow is located within the proximal two-thirds of the radius. Toward the radial tuberosity, it flattens out to become the radial neck. The 3 surfaces of the radius shaft form a prismoid shape in cross section. The interosseous crest begins at the radial tuberosity, extending distally, and divides into 2 ridges. Using 6-, 7-, and 8-hole straight plates on the volar surface of the proximal radius resulted in a significant decrease in forearm rotation for all when compared with contoured plates ( Forearm fractures comprise an increasing workload for the trauma surgeon. Our study showed that the proximal radius has a significant sagittal bow (mean, 4.66°). The curve is most pronounced between the bicipital tuberosity and the midshaft of the radius. Plating proximal radius shaft fractures with a straight plate on the volar surface alters the sagittal bow and reduces forearm rotation. This was supported by the significant reduction in forearm rotation when a proximal radius fracture was plated with a straight plate rather than a contoured plate. This effect was exaggerated when a longer plate was used, because it would straighten a longer portion of the bowed radius. We cannot comment on how altering the coronal bow of the radius affects forearm rotation because contouring the plate to also accommodate the coronal bow was not done. Many studies have shown that an alteration of the coronal bow reduces forearm rotation. The volar surface of the distal radius is flat and straight. Thus a straight plate would re-create normal anatomy and allow a more accurate reduction in this portion of bone. When distal radius shaft fractures were plated with a straight plate applied on the volar surface, this did not significantly reduce rotation. Volar plating was used because the volar approach is most commonly used in our institution as the surgical approach for plating proximal radius fractures. The dorsal approach is less favored because of the risk of posterior interosseous nerve damage. In clinical practice there is also the possibility of impingement of plates when both bones are plated. In supination the forearm bones are parallel, whereas in pronation the radius crosses over the ulna, producing a block in pronation. In our study impingement does not appear to be a significant factor. We found no significant difference in forearm rotation on additional ulna plating. Our study only looked at the effect of plating the radius on forearm rotation, and we accept that other factors are also important. Soft-tissue factors such as scarring and adhesions can also affect forearm rotation. Patient factors such as compliance, early mobilization, and postoperative rehabilitation are also important. The findings in this study have important implications for clinicians. Surgeons, when plating fractures in the proximal radius, should consider restoring the normal sagittal bow of the proximal radius, especially if the fracture line lies just distal to the bicipital tuberosity. This is in the vicinity of the apex of the sagittal bow. Contouring the plate will allow more accurate reduction of the fracture and maintenance of normal anatomy, hence improving postoperative outcomes. This study suggests that the normal sagittal bow of the radius is important to maintain when one is using a contoured plate for fracture fixation in this area. This improves forearm rotation. Furthermore, ulna plate impingement is not a source of reduced rotation. We thank the Auckland University Bio Engineering Department and Medical School, Auckland, New Zealand, for use of the Faro arm and cadavers, respectfully. This study was supported by the The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.