This study was conducted in order to determine the effects of soil properties on the excavation performance of an earth pressure balance tunnel boring machine (EPB TBM) used in the Istanbul Ayvali Waste Water Tunnel Project in the development of empirical performance prediction models. The tunnel alignment was divided into three general sections in terms of geological and geotechnical conditions. Soil samples were collected from 14 different locations along these sections of approximately 60 segment rings, and subjected to laboratory tests in order to determine the particle size distribution, natural water content, consistency limits (liquid limit, plastic limit, plasticity index, and consistency index), vane shear strength, fall cone penetration depth, unified soil classification, and clogging potential. The field performance data were obtained from the EPB TBM data logger, which operated in open mode without any face pressure being applied. Data analysis was carried out by statistically linking the net cutterhead torque, TBM thrust force, instantaneous cutting rate, and field-specific energy with the geotechnical properties of the excavated clayey soil by using single and linear multi-variable regression methods. The results indicate that, while the performance parameters are similar for the silty sand and lean (low plasticity) clay, the cutterhead torque and field-specific energy are higher, and the thrust and instantaneous cutting rate are lower, for high plasticity clays. The vane shear strength and consistency index may be used for predicting the cutterhead torque, fall cone penetration depth for the thrust force, plastic limit for the instantaneous cutting rate, and plastic limit and plasticity index, as well as the consistency index, for field-specific energy predictions. Additional studies are required to provide more reliable and generalized prediction models, by increasing the number of laboratory and field tests for different soil types and performance data for different EPB TBMs.The rapid increase in human population in urban areas has resulted in the need for new infrastructure systems such as metro tunnels, water tunnels, and utility lines. The demands on the limited available space, combined with increasing demands for higher-quality structures, forces decision-makers to investigate extended use of subsurface space. This need makes it necessary for engineers to determine new solutions for construction difficulties in urban areas. The effectiveness of management is, too often, criticized for the contractual problems arising during construction. In most instances, the roots of such problems can be traced back to the initial planning. Unrealistic performance predictions result in a limited opportunity for the contractor to manage the construction effectively. Excavation rate prediction is the most critical element in planning a TBM excavation project. The critical path of a tunnel project would normally be linked to excavation activity, and adherence to the cost and schedule would implicitly require the TBM to be excavated as planned. For the project to be successful, the planning process must provide a realistic evaluation of TBM performance expectations, reflecting both the known and unknown factors of the excavation process. For this purpose, models have been developed by researchers to estimate TBM performance by basically using geological and geotechnical data. The parameters affecting a mechanical excavation system may be categorized into three main groups: geological and geotechnical, mechanical (machine-related), and operational and environmental factors ( TBM performance prediction for soils is gaining popularity, and limited studies exist that are focused on EPB TBM performance prediction.  It remains important to describe the scientific relationships between soil parameters and EPB TBM performance, although the studies mentioned above have demonstrated the relationships among different parameters. This study aims to define the effects of soil parameters on the performance of an EPB TBM used in the excavation of the Ayvali Waste Water Tunnel in open mode, without applying any face pressure and with almost no conditioning, as well as to develop empirical performance prediction models. After summarizing the EPB TBM performance during excavation of three different lithological units, the engineering properties of the 14 soil samples obtained from the tunnel alignment were determined. The particle size distribution, natural water content, Atterberg limits, fall cone penetration, and vane shear tests were performed on the soil samples, and the clogging potential, consistency, and plasticity indices were defined according to the test results. The laboratory and field investigation results were used in order to statistically link the soil characteristics to the EPB TBM field performance (cutterhead torque, TBM thrust force, instantaneous cutting rate, and field specific energy), by using single- and multi-variable regression methods to develop empirical prediction models. The Ayvali Tunnel project (Ayvali 2) is a wastewater project excavated in the Zeytinburnu district located on the European side of Istanbul, with the specific goal of transporting wastewater from Zeytinburnu to the Yenikapi Treatment Plant through the Bayrampasa, Bagcilar, and Gungoren alignment. The tunnel alignment is illustrated in The tunnel, which has a length of 1969 The general geology of the tunnel alignment consists mostly of Cekmece Formation, Bakirkoy Division, as shown in The tunnel alignment was divided into three sections, according to the observations during the excavation (color, consistency, and type of material entering from the screw conveyor). The geologic conditions and field performance of the EPB TBM between rings 330 and 536 were observed onsite. The section between rings 330 and 360 consists of mainly high-plasticity sandy and silty clay (CH), with liquid and plastic limit values of 51.0% and 23.5%, respectively; its fine particle content is 62.3%, while the sand content is mostly graded as fine. Because the geological conditions between rings 360 and 504 are quite similar to those between rings 330 and 360, no measurements or laboratory testing were performed in this section. The section between rings 504 and 521 consists of brown-colored silty sand (SM), which is mostly graded as fine. The section between rings 522 and 536 consists of dark gray-colored lean clay (CL), with the sand having liquid and plastic limit values of 36.1% and 13.3%, respectively; its fine particle content is 64.5% and the sand content is mostly graded as fine. Certain geotechnical properties of these soils are summarized in Various index tests were performed on the 14 soil samples obtained from the three different sections/soil types along the tunnel alignment in order to evaluate the effects of soil properties on the EPB TBM performance. The natural water content ( The samples (disturbed) were collected from the excavated material by the EPB TBM and placed in plastic bags that were tightly closed to prevent moisture loss. The natural water content tests were performed for each of the three soil sections by combining 50 The particle size distributions of the 14 soil samples are provided in The plasticity chart ( One of the main problems encountered during excavation of fine-grained soils consisting particularly of clays, silts, and clay-silt containing soft rocks is adhesion. During excavation in combination with water inflow, these types of excavated materials stick to the metal surfaces, causing blockages and clogging. When a sticky soil blocks the openings of a TBM cutterhead, the excavation is halted for cleaning purposes, which consumes a great deal of time and dramatically decreases tunneling performance ( The clogging potentials, as defined by Soft and very soft fine-grained soils (consistency index, I The field performance of the EPB TBM between rings 330 and 536 along the tunnel alignment was obtained from the data logger, and the excavation in these sections was observed closely in the field ( During excavation of the Ayvali tunnel, the net cutterhead torque ranged between 171 and 1067 The amount of energy consumed when excavating a unit volume of the soil is defined as the specific energy (MJ/m The mean instantaneous cutting rate values for the soils CH, SM, and CL are 53.6, 74.6, and 66.7 The thrust force requirement was lower in the soil section (CH), because the instantaneous cutting rate (or penetration) was lower when cutting the high-plasticity soil CH than with the other soils (SM and CL). However, the higher clogging potential of the soil CH than that of the other soils (SM and CL) resulted in a higher cutterhead torque requirement. The EPB TBM field performance for each ring for which the geotechnical properties were determined ( It was observed in the field that soil conditioning was generally performed with a very low foam concentration ratio of approximately 0.5%. Although the representatives of the contractor company aimed to apply 1–1.5% foam concentration, one of the foaming pumps was broken during excavation of the previous rings. Therefore, there was a problem with forming foam bubbles at a 0.5% concentration (visually no bubbles), and it was considered that applying this amount of foam in all soil sections did not have a significant effect on performance. The development of empirical models using soil parameters can provide project engineers with valuable data during the feasibility stage of a tunneling project as well as the preliminary design of an EPB TBM, by means of the mechanical requirements for given soil types. Therefore, statistical analyses were used to derive the relationships between soil characteristics and EPB TBM performance parameters. The laboratory and field investigation results were applied to statistically link the soil characteristics (silt Firstly, a single variable (simple) regression analysis was performed using Microsoft Excel, and then a multivariable linear regression analysis was performed using the Simple regression is the simplest form of regression analysis, involving one independent and one dependent variable, where the relationship between the two is approximated by a best-fitting line. The relationships obtained between the soil characteristics and EPB TBM performance parameters using simple regression analysis are summarized in Eqs. The consistency index was found to be the most appropriate predictor for the net cutterhead torque, as indicated in Eq. The fall cone penetrometer depth values were found to be the most appropriate predictor for the thrust force requirement of the EPB TBM for the given clayey soils, and the relationship that was obtained is represented in Eq. The plastic limit values of the samples were found to be the best predictor for the EPB TBM’s instantaneous cutting rate for the given clayey soils, and the relationship obtained is represented in Eq. Specific energy is a major parameter for defining the efficiency of excavation systems and indicating the consumed power per unit volume of excavation. The liquid limit test values were found to be the most appropriate for predicting the EPB TBM’s specific energy for the given clayey soils, and the relationship obtained is provided in Eq. Multiple regression analysis is more amenable to single parameter analysis, because it allows researchers to control many other factors explicitly that simultaneously affect the dependent variables. Multiple regression models can accommodate various explanatory variables that may be correlated, and researchers may infer causality in cases where simple regression analysis would be misleading ( Multi-variable linear regression analyses were carried out with a 90% confidence interval, using It was observed that the fines (silt The best-fitting models, provided in Eq. During soil excavation, the cutting tools on a cutterhead break the soil, providing shear stress on the tunnel face and causing shear failure of the soil. The relationship between the vane shear strength of the soils and cutterhead torque values (simply for cutting the soil) was not directly investigated in the previous literature; however, certain studies have been conducted on the relationships between the soil’s shear strength and the torque of the screw conveyors (   Appropriate soil conditioning is an important issue in achieving optimum EPB TBM excavation performance, where it has functions such as improving the excavation advance rate by decreasing cutterhead torque and thrust force ( The surfactant concentration (Cf) describes the percentage of surfactant (Qf) by mass in the solution (QL) (water A recent study by The previous studies imply that the effect of soil conditioning on excavation performance should be investigated further in order to increase the reliability of EPB TBM performance estimation models, for both open and closed mode operation. Researchers have suggested that face pressures should be considered when estimating the EPB TBM excavation performance parameters. In this study, the laboratory tests were performed on disturbed soil samples, owing to the difficulties of obtaining undisturbed soil samples during tunnel excavation in an urbanized area. According to the authors’ best knowledge, there is no literature relating loose or in-situ soil properties with EPB TBM performance. However, it would be preferable to correlate the properties of both the in-situ and loosened (excavated) soil characteristics, and thus their effects on EPB TBM performance. In particular, the fall cone test and hand vane shear test results should be correlated with the field static cone penetrometer test and field vane shear test results, respectively, in order to define the effects of the sample disturbance on the soils’ engineering properties. Moreover, the standard penetration test (SPT) may be used for defining the soils’ in-situ characteristics. The development of simple empirical performance prediction models using soil parameters can provide project engineers with valuable data during the feasibility stage of a tunneling project as well as the preliminary design of an EPB TBM, by means of mechanical requirements for given soil types. This study demonstrates the potential use of simple index tests for EPB TBM performance prediction and may provide a potential performance prediction tool for future projects. The proposed models in this study are valid for fine-grained soils excavated by an EPB TBM operating without face pressure and without or having limited foaming applications. In order to increase the reliability and accuracy of the suggested models, additional studies are required that increase the number of laboratory tests (requiring both disturbed and undisturbed samples and possibly including field tests) for various soil types and field performance data for different EPB TBMs. However, considering the lack of research in the literature, this study has served to shed light on further studies in this area. The aim of this study was to investigate the effects of soil properties on the performance of an EPB TBM operating in open mode, without face pressure and without or having limited foaming application, and to statistically link the soil parameters with performance parameters. The obtained results are summarized as follows. The measured mean cutterhead torque value (797 The empirical performance prediction models developed indicated that the cutterhead torque increased with an increasing vane shear strength and consistency index. Furthermore, the thrust force decreased with increasing fall cone penetration depth. The instantaneous cutting rate decreased with an increasing plastic limit, as well as with an increasing consistency index and fall cone penetration depth. The field-specific energy increased with an increasing plastic limit and plasticity index, as well as with an increasing liquid limit. When the soil samples were grouped according to their consistency index values, it was observed that the mean field-specific energy values increased with an increasing consistency index. The mean field-specific energy values were 16.93 Additional studies are required to provide a deeper understanding of the relationships between the soil characteristics and EPB TBM performance, by increasing the number of laboratory tests (including tests requiring both disturbed and undisturbed soil samples) as well as field tests for various soil types and field performance data for different EPB TBMs. This study forms part of the unpublished PhD thesis by Emre Avunduk. The authors are grateful to the