The formation of grain boundary (GB) brittle carbides with a complex three-dimensional (3-D) morphology can be detrimental to both the fatigue properties and corrosion resistance of a biomedical titanium alloy. A detailed microscopic study has been performed on an as-sintered biomedical Ti–15Mo (in wt.%) alloy containing 0.032wt.% C. A noticeable presence of a carbon-enriched phase has been observed along the GB, although the carbon content is well below the maximum carbon limit of 0.1wt.% specified by ASTM Standard F2066. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) identified that the carbon-enriched phase is face-centred cubic Ti2C. 3-D tomography reconstruction revealed that the Ti2C structure has morphology similar to primary α-Ti. Nanoindentation confirmed the high hardness and high Young’s modulus of the GB Ti2C phase. To avoid GB carbide formation in Ti–15Mo, the carbon content should be limited to 0.006wt.% by Thermo-Calc predictions. Similar analyses and characterization of the carbide formation in biomedical unalloyed Ti, Ti–6Al–4V and Ti–16Nb have also been performed.Beta-titanium alloys that can offer a low modulus of elasticity, high strength, good fatigue strength, excellent corrosion resistance and biocompatibility continue to attract significant attention in the medical and surgical device industry. The Ti–15Mo alloy (in wt.% unless stated otherwise) is one such important alloy, where a minimum 10 Various product forms of Ti–15Mo, including bar, rod, sheet and wire made to specifications by Allegheny Technologies Incorporated (ATI), are now commercially available for orthopaedic, trauma, spinal, dental, orthodontic and cardiovascular applications Apart from the mechanical property requirements, corrosion of metallic implants in human bodies is a pertinent clinical issue caused by the electrochemical attack of human body fluids and can lead to potential mechanical failures The formation of brittle titanium carbides in a biomedical titanium alloy, particularly when it forms along the GB with a complex three-dimensional (3-D) morphology, has the risk of decreasing the fatigue properties, ductility and corrosion resistance of the alloy while increasing the modulus of elasticity. This could lead to unexpected consequences and should be avoided metallurgically. This paper presents a detailed microstructural study of an as-sintered biomedical Ti–15Mo alloy with a focus on the impacts of trace carbon, including use of 3-D tomography to determine the 3-D morphology of the identified GB carbon-enriched phase. Based on the experimental findings, the maximum carbon limit for Ti–15Mo has been reassessed. For comparison, similar studies have been performed on as-sintered biomedical unalloyed Ti, Ti–6Al–4V and Ti–16Nb. Titanium hydride (TiH As-sintered Ti and Ti–6Al–4V were prepared and analysed in identical ways, while Ti–16Nb was prepared by injection moulding As-sintered microstructures were characterised using scanning electron microscopy (SEM; JEOL 7001 at 15 The dual-beam FIB was used in two ways: (a) to prepare site-specific TEM samples using ion beam and (b) to perform 3-D electron-beam tomography for the carbon-enriched phase and the adjacent matrix phases. The 3-D tomography was achieved as follows: (i) a platinum layer (∼300 Nanoindentation (HYSITRON TriboIndenter) was used to assess the mechanical behaviour of each microstructural feature identified. A three-sided Berkovich indenter with an included angle of 142.3° and a tip radius of 100 The Young’s modulus of each phase was determined using the following model The equilibrium phases in the as-sintered Ti–15Mo were predicted using Thermo-Calc Software AB (2008) and the Ti–alloys database V3 (TTTI3). Vertical sections of phase diagrams for Ti–15Mo–C, Ti–6Al–4V–C and Ti–16Nb–C and the solubility of carbon in Ti–15Mo, unalloyed Ti, Ti–6Al–4V and Ti–16Nb at different temperatures was calculated from the same database. The as-sintered microstructure of Ti–15Mo is shown in It should be noted that the carbon content did not change much during sintering, i.e. 0.028  Literature The 3-D morphology of a brittle GB phase is important information in assessing its potential influence on the performance of the microstructure, including its fatigue properties and resistance to corrosion. The GB Ti The Ti  The current ASTM standard specification F2066-08 sets the maximum carbon limit of 0.1  Similar to Ti–15Mo, Ti–Nb alloys are promising β-Ti alloys for surgical implant applications In contrast, both α-Ti and α-β Ti alloys seem to be able to tolerate a much higher level of carbon. It is noticed that ASTM standards set a maximum carbon limit of 0.08  GB titanium carbide (Ti Mo reduces the carbon solubility limit in β-Ti. The maximum carbon limit to avoid GB carbide formation in Ti–15Mo is predicted to be ∼0.006 Binary biomedical beta Ti–Nb alloys show a similar trend where GB titanium carbide forms in as-sintered Ti–16Nb that contains 0.06 The authors would like to acknowledge the support of the Queensland Centre for Advanced Materials Processing and Manufacturing. M. Yan further acknowledges the support of a Queensland Smart Future Fellowship (Early Career). The authors wish to specially thank one of the reviewers for his/her constructive comments and suggestions on the TEM-EDX analysis of carbon and the identification of the grain boundary Ti Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at  Certain figures in this article, particularly Figs. 5 and 7, are difficult to interpret in black and white. The full colour images can be found in the on-line version, at