Carboxymethyl cellulose grafted polymethacrylic acid (CMC-g-PMAA) was investigated as a template for rod-like hydroxyapatite mineralization. CMC-g-PMAA/hydroxyapatite hybrid material exhibited high removal capacity toward methylene blue (MB), cationic dye model, from aqueous solutions. The adsorption behavior of MB using CMC-g-PMAA/hydroxyapatite hybrid was investigated in detail using batch adsorption technique. The hybrid material exhibited adsorption capacity up to 671mg/g. Pseudo-second-order and Langmuir isotherm models were found to describe the adsorption mechanism. This new adsorbent material has promising future for waste water purification.Removing synthetic dyes from waste effluents has become a challenge area to prevent their environmental hazard in particular for aquatic bio-systems ( Natural polymers, especially polysaccharides, are actually produced in great quantities with low cost and promising alternatives for biomaterials ( In the current study, CMC-g-PMAA/hydroxyapatite, as a sustainable hybrid material, was successfully achieved by calcium phosphate mineralization in the presence of CMC-g-PMAA graft co-polymer. CMC-g-PMAA/hydroxyapatite material was introduced as a new adsorbent and its effectiveness for removing MB from aqueous solutions was examined. The effect of variation of pH, time and initial concentration of MB solution on the adsorption process was discussed. CMC sodium salt was purchased from Fluka BioChemika. Methacrylic acid, dibasic potassium phosphate, ammonium persulfate were obtained from Sigma Aldrich and used without further purification. The other chemicals were of analytical grade and used as received. Double distilled water was used for adsorption study. Graft copolymerization of methacrylic acid onto CMC was optimized in our previous study ( CMC-g-PMAA/hydroxyapatite hybrid material was investigated as adsorbent for MB removal from waste water. Batch adsorption experiments were conducted in 50 FTIR spectra of CMC-g-PMAA/hydroxyapatite was recorded, in KBr disc, using Brücker IFS FTIR spectrometer. XRD was performed using X-ray diffractometer (PANalytical, Netherlands) with a monochromatic CuKα radiation source ( The current hybrid material was synthesized through hydroxyapatite mineralization in the presence of water-soluble graft copolymer CMC-g-PMAA. The hybrid material was evaluated as new sustainable and cost effective adsorbent for organic dyes removal from waste water. FT-IR spectra of CMC-g-PMAA/hydroxyapatite was presented in Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was performed to explore the internal shape of mineralized calcium phosphate. The pH of the dye solution was reported to control the adsorption capacity ( In order to investigate the mechanism of MB adsorption onto CMC-g-PMAA/hydroxyapatite, the adsorption kinetic was evaluated with the initial concentration 100 The Weber and Morris model was introduced to understand the mechanism of intra-particle diffusion of MB molecules during the adsorption process. The linear form of this equation is described in Eq.  Langmuir and Freundlich models (Eqs. The importance of Langmuir isotherm can be expressed in terms of a dimensionless separation constant factor (R The current study demonstrated new organic/inorganic hybrid material as dye adsorbent for waste water treatment. The maximum adsorption capacity of CMC-g-PMAA/hydroxyapatite hybrid is 671 The authors acknowledge the financial support from