U.S. residents have been moving en masse to places with nice weather. Well known is the migration towards places with warm winters, which is often attributed to the introduction of air conditioning. But people have also been moving to places with cooler, less-humid summers, which is the opposite of what is expected from the introduction of air conditioning. Nor can the movement to nice weather be primarily explained by shifting industrial composition or by migration of the elderly. Instead, a large portion of weather-related movement appears to be driven by an increased valuation of nice weather as a consumption amenity, probably due to broad-based rising per capita income.Over the course of the twentieth century, U.S. residents moved en masse to places with nice weather. Well known is the migration towards places with warm winters, which is often attributed to the introduction of air conditioning ( Valuing weather's contribution to quality of life has received considerable attention in the compensating differential literature. The value of a weather characteristic can be calculated as the sum of the wages a household is willing to forego plus the price premium they are willing to pay to live in a place with that characteristic ( There are several important limitations to the compensating differential methodology of valuing weather. First is that the number of U.S. geographic observations is relatively small, since the necessary micro data is available only for places with a population of at least 100,000. These observations are subject to a sharp selection bias since places where large numbers of people have not chosen to live are excluded. A second limitation of the compensating differential methodology is the difficulty controlling for individual-specific and house-specific characteristics ( In contrast to the “price” approach of the compensating differential literature, the present paper pursues a “quantity” approach. Partial correlations of population growth with local weather reflect changes in the valuation of weather's combined contributions to quality of life and productivity. Continental U.S. counties are used as the geographic unit of observation. The large number of these – more than three thousand – allows for high statistical power. The discrete partition of the continental United States captures an extremely wide variation in weather. And the underlying theory explicitly takes into account that steady-state and actual population are likely to differ. There are three main limitations to the quantity approach. First is that it can generally capture only The paper proceeds as follows: Two sets of theory underpin the paper's empirics. The first concerns how to interpret partial correlations between local population growth and exogenous attributes. The second considers specific ways in which the contribution of weather to quality of life and productivity has changed over the past century. The theoretical framework for inferring the determinants of local population follows In a long-run steady state, population density is an increasing function of local quality of life and local productivity. Individuals are willing to endure greater crowdedness and the associated higher price of housing in order to directly enjoy higher quality of life and to indirectly enjoy higher productivity via the higher wages it affords. Indeed, varying local population density is the primary mechanism by which local wages and house prices adjust to equate utility and profits across localities. The setup might suggest that a “level” regression of population density on exogenous attributes can identify their contributions to quality of life and productivity. But this is unlikely: factor mobility is not perfect, and both productivity and quality of life also depend on endogenous attributes. Imperfect factor mobility implies that current population density may differ substantially from steady-state population density. Even relatively small frictions to labor and capital mobility can cause population to require several decades to transition from one steady state to another ( The partial dependence of quality of life and productivity on endogenous attributes introduces an additional difficulty: such endogenous attributes are likely to be correlated with the exogenous ones. Substantial research suggests that quality of life and productivity themselves depend on population size and density. Size and density may increase quality of life by allowing for increased social interaction and product variety (e.g., Interpreting partial correlations between population growth and exogenous attributes is more straightforward. Regardless of factor mobility, an exogenous attribute that is partially correlated with long-run population growth will be partially correlated with a change in steady-state density. Imperfect factor mobility simply implies that the change may have occurred substantially before the period over which population growth is being measured. One possible cause of a change in steady-state density is a change in the contribution from the exogenous attribute to quality of life and productivity. Another is a change in the contribution to these from an endogenous attribute that is correlated with the exogenous attribute. To rule out the latter possibility, regressions can include controls for predetermined endogenous attributes. That the weather contributes to quality of life and productivity is obvious. Indeed, it is hard to think of any outdoor activity – whether for leisure or for work – that is not affected by weather. But for present purposes, the relevant question is how weather's contribution to quality of life and productivity has changed over the past century. Among many possible ways, four stand out. The first is that the decline of agricultural employment has decreased the importance of weather characteristics that contribute to agricultural productivity. The second is that air conditioning and improved heating technology have decreased the disutility from extreme temperatures. The third is that rising per capita income has increased the relative valuation of temperate weather. The fourth is that it is primarily the growing number of affluent and mobile retirees who have increased their valuation of temperate weather. The explanation based on declining agricultural employment is straightforward. Agricultural productivity clearly depends on numerous weather attributes, such as rainfall and the length of a growing season. While this dependence may have remained largely unchanged over the course of the twentieth century, the importance of agricultural productivity to overall U.S. productivity has become much smaller. Agriculture's share of U.S. employment fell from approximately 40% in 1900 to less than 2% in 2000. The sector's relative decline freed up more than a third of U.S. residents and jobs to relocate based on considerations other than agricultural productivity. A related possibility is that relative employment declines in the minerals extraction and manufacturing industries freed up people to move away from bad-weather places where such industries were concentrated. The roles of air conditioning and improved heating technology require a bit more explanation. As a matter of background, the first known air-conditioning units were installed around 1900. Over the subsequent 40 years, AC was slowly adopted by manufacturers and a few service businesses. However, it was not until after World War II that the mass adoption of residential air conditioning began. As late as 1960, only 13% of U.S. households had any sort of AC and only 2% had central AC. Home heating also improved dramatically over the course of the twentieth century. Starting in the 1920s, vendor-delivered oil came to supplant coal as the primary fuel source. Starting in the 1940s, utility-supplied natural gas and electricity came to supplant oil. During the latter part of the century, there were also considerable improvements in home insulation technologies. To help understand the implications of air conditioning and improved heating, The introduction of air conditioning lessens the disutility from hot summer weather. Individuals become willing to endure more of it in return for warm winter weather. Equivalently, the indifference curves stretch rightward along the top vertical axis. This causes numerous preference reversals. For example, Duluth Minnesota's weather without air conditioning is preferred to that of numerous cities in the South and Southwest. But with AC, Duluth's weather is the least preferred among the depicted cities. Similarly, numerous cities in the bottom left of the figure reverse from having relatively desirable to relatively undesirable weather. Restoring spatial equilibrium requires a new vector of wages and house prices across places. In general, the more the valuation of a place's weather has risen, the larger the required fall in its relative wage and increase in its relative house price. Migration brings about the new spatial equilibrium. People will move both towards places with hot summers and places with warm winters (that is, towards the upper right of the figure). The impulse towards hot summers is intuitive: hot weather has become “less bad”. The impulse towards warm winters arises because AC increases the sensitivity of relative weather valuations to winter temperatures. This is reflected in the flatter indifference curves. Improved heating technologies cause indifference curves to shift in a way that mirrors the shift from air conditioning. Specifically, the curves stretch downward along the left vertical axis. As a result, people move both towards places with cold winters and towards places with cool summers (that is, towards the lower left of the figure). Although air conditioning and improved heating imply migration in the opposite direction, the two technological changes in combination only partially offset each other. With approximately equal magnitude shifts from air conditioning and from improved heating, the AC-induced impulse toward warm winters and the heating-induced impulse towards cool summers are indeed cancelled out. But there continues to be a combined impulse toward cold winters and hot summers. To see this, suppose that the combined technological shocks cause indifference curves to shift downward and rightward such that the new curves exactly parallel the old ones. As a result of such a shift, the required compensating variation for any given deviation from ideal weather falls. Restoring spatial equilibrium thus requires people to move in the same direction as the shift in indifference curves. In sharp contrast to the implied movement from air conditioning and improved heating, the rise in income associated with broad-based technological progress creates an impulse for people to move toward places with nicer weather. Over the course of the twentieth century, rising total factor productivity and the capital accumulation it implied increased U.S. per capita income more than six-fold ( However, broad-based technological progress can also induce substitution effects that offset the income effect just described. Suppose, for example, that technological progress causes an equal-proportional rise in wages across all localities. In absolute terms, the wage penalty to living in a high quality-of-life locality will have increased. Similarly, technological progress may be relatively slower for the production of housing than for other goods. As a result, suppose that house prices rise by an equal proportion across all localities. In absolute terms, the housing price penalty to living in a high quality-of-life locality will have increased. In a general equilibrium model with CES production and utility, the direction of movement from rising wages depends on nontrivial parameter restrictions. As a rule of thumb, movement will be toward nice weather if the elasticity of substitution among the sources of utility is below one ( The final hypothesized way in which the contribution from weather to quality of life and productivity has changed is similar to rising per capita income, except that it applies only to the elderly. Social Security and better retirement planning have increased the wealth of retirees. Medical advances have increased their longevity. And many affluent individuals are deciding to retire early. Because they do not work, retirees' income no longer depends on their locale's productivity. And so upon retiring, quality of life suddenly becomes a much more important determinant of where they live. The empirical section below argues that growth regressions can distinguish, at least in part, among these four possible changes in weather's contribution to quality of life and productivity. Controlling for predetermined agricultural, mineral extraction, and manufacturing characteristics of counties suggests that the movement towards nice weather does not arise primarily from a shift in industrial composition. The faster relative growth of places with cooler, less humid summers establishes that air conditioning cannot alone account for the movement toward nice weather. And the approximately equal draw of nice weather for both working-age and elderly individuals suggests that increased retirement has been a relatively unimportant source of the population shift. Overall, the empirics are most consistent with the explanation that individuals have been steadily increasing their valuation of nice weather's contribution to quality of life. In addition, fitted growth rates suggest that air conditioning has also played a large role in the population movement. A locality's steady-state population density is assumed to depend on its productivity and quality of life. In turn, these are assumed to depend on actual density, on time-invariant attributes, and on time-varying local attributes. More specifically, the natural log of steady-state population density for locality The term Only actual density rather than steady-state density is observed: An expression for population growth follows from first-differencing The growth regressions that follow have reduced functional form, For present purposes, we are most interested in interpretations of the coefficients, b, on time-invariant variables. To motivate such interpretations, it is helpful to temporarily assume that the convergence component of The simplest growth regressions below include only time-invariant attributes, Reintroducing increasing returns to scale broadens interpretations of b. As a first step, suppose that Now allow the degree of increasing returns to vary over time. So, for example, an increase in Similar to the case of initial population density, there may be other time-varying attributes, On the other hand, the inclusion of time-varying attributes in Eq. Attempting to control for A final complication to interpreting coefficients comes from relaxing the assumption that the convergence component in Eq. The most obvious bias comes from the slow adjustment of population density following a contemporary change in structural coefficients. Consider a positive change in the structural coefficient on some particular time-invariant attribute, ( A bias in the opposite direction occurs following a change in structural coefficients that precedes the interval over which growth is measured. Suppose that ( Together, these two biases arising from slow convergence caution against interpreting coefficients in the growth regressions as literally estimating the Regressions using county observations almost surely violate the classical assumption of independence. This is due to possible spatial components both of omitted variables and of stochastic disturbances. Hence a generalization of the Huber–White heteroskedastic-consistent estimator is used to report standard errors that are robust to a spatial structure among regression residuals ( Herein, the weighting on the estimated covariance between residual terms is assumed to fall off quadratically as the distance between county centers increases to 200 km. U.S. counties are used as the geographic unit of analysis. Doing so offers several benefits relative to using alternative U.S. local geographies. First, counties completely partition the continental United States. Excluding geographic areas with low population would introduce a source of considerable bias. Second, counties' borders have been relatively constant over time. Constant borders allow intertemporal comparisons between geographically fixed areas that can be considered exogenous relative to most data-generating processes. The primary dependent variable below is the annual growth rate of population density from 1970 to 2000. Other regressions use the growth rates of population subgroups and house prices. Summary statistics for the growth rates are included in The weather variables are derived from data purchased from The Climate Source, Inc. ( Winter weather is measured by January daily maximum temperature. This is the average maximum temperature for days in January; in other words, it is the average of the warmest temperature attained on each of the 930 January days from 1961 to 1990. The choice to use January daily maximum rather than minimum temperature reflects an a priori belief that winter daytime highs are likely to be a more important contributor to quality of life than winter nighttime lows. Results are extremely robust to using alternative winter temperature measures. Summer weather is measured by July daily maximum heat index and July average daily mean relative humidity. The latter is the mean of average daily maximum and minimum humidity. The former is a discomfort index that combines average daily maximum temperature with average daily mean relative humidity ( All regressions also include controls for precipitation. These are made up of linear and quadratic terms for average annual precipitation and for the average number of days per year on which there was at least 0.01 inch of precipitation. Maps depicting the distribution of each of the five weather elements across U.S. counties are included in the paper's supplemental materials. Some of the regressions include a set of seven geographic controls measuring coastal proximity and topography. Separate dummies indicate whether a county's center is within 80 km of an ocean or Great Lakes coast or within 40 km of a major river. Additional variables measure ocean and Great Lakes shoreline per unit area. And a topography variable, entered linearly and quadratically, measures the standard deviation of altitude across 1.25-arc-minute grid cells within a county divided by total county land area. To control for increasing returns to scale, some of the growth regressions include an additional set of fourteen variables measuring initial population density and surrounding total population. Initial population density is entered as a seven-part spline to allow for a nonlinear relationship between initial and steady-state population density. Surrounding total population is the initial total population in seven concentric rings emanating from a county's center. An innermost circle measures (the natural log of) total population of all counties with centers within 50 km of a county's own center. At a minimum, this innermost circle always includes the county's own population. A second ring measures the total population of all counties with centers 50 to 100 km from a county's own center. Additional rings have outer-circle radii of 150 km, 200 km, 300 km, 400 km, and 500 km. Together, these concentric population variables capture, for instance, the “market potential” available to local firms that produce goods with nontrivial transportation costs ( As discussed in the Throughout much of the 20th century, local population growth in the United States has been positively partially correlated with winter temperature and negatively partially correlated with summer temperature and summer humidity. Supporting results are presented and interpreted for three sets of regressions. The first uses 1970-to-2000 population growth as its dependent variable and incrementally introduces different categories of controls. The second set applies a base specification from the first set to several alternative dependent variable growth rates. The third set applies a base specification to decade growth rates from the 1880s through the 1990s. Together the results suggest that rising incomes are likely to have played a large role in causing the move to nice weather. They also suggest that air conditioning was probably important as well. Results of the 1970-to-2000 growth regressions are reported in The signs and statistical significance of the coefficients on the winter and summer variables are extremely robust to introducing additional controls. Column 2 includes the coastal proximity and topography variables. Coastal proximity, which helps moderate extreme temperatures, is strongly positively correlated with population growth ( Column 3 additionally controls for initial density and for total surrounding population in order to capture any growth arising from increasing returns to scale. On the one hand, increasing returns may cause the partial correlation between population and a weather attribute to remain constant even after that attribute's contribution to quality of life and productivity has changed. On the other hand, changes in the degree of increasing returns may induce positive or negative partial correlations between population growth and an attribute notwithstanding unchanged contributions to quality of life and productivity. Directly controlling for the variables from which increasing returns derive should mitigate these problems. Doing so hardly affects the winter and summer coefficients. One of the explanations for the movement to nice weather is the historical decline of relative U.S. employment in the agricultural, mineral extraction, and heavy manufacturing industries. Column 4 reports results from a regression that includes controls for the initial concentration in each of these. The magnitude of the linear winter coefficient decreases moderately. More substantial decreases in the magnitude of the linear summer coefficients are partly offset by increases in the magnitude of the corresponding quadratic coefficients. The only change in the pattern of statistical significance is that the coefficient on linear heat index differs from zero at the 0.10 rather than the 0.05 level. As discussed in the Overall, some portion of the move to nice weather probably does reflect the changing industrial composition of employment. But most of it probably does not. Notwithstanding all the controls in the Column 4 regression, omitted variables might still account for a portion of the partial correlations with winter and summer weather. In case such variables are correlated across regions, Column 5 includes one–zero dummies for 8 of the 9 Census geographic divisions. Coefficient values remain close to those in Column 4. Nor do values change much when dummies for each U.S. state are included (not shown). Results are similarly robust to a weighted regression that considerably discounts low-population counties. The variance of the error term, The coefficients in the weighted regression (Column 6) are similar to those in the unweighted one (Column 4). The main difference is that the negative coefficient on linear summer heat index no longer statistically differs from zero. But the negative coefficient on July humidity continues to do so at the 0.05 level. The Column 4, unweighted regression will henceforth serve as a baseline. The magnitude implied by the winter weather coefficients is quite large. An increase in January temperature from one standard deviation below its sample mean to one standard deviation above its sample mean (from 29 The implied magnitudes of the negative coefficients on summer weather in the baseline regression are also large, though slightly less so. An increase in July heat index from one standard deviation below its sample mean to one standard deviation above its sample mean (from 87 In addition to the correlations with summer and winter weather, the regressions in The five weather variables in  The faster expected growth of places with cooler and less humid summers establishes that air conditioning cannot alone account for the move to nice weather. This point is nicely illustrated in Nevertheless, the pattern of expected growth suggests that air conditioning was indeed important. The high expected population growth in southern Arizona and southern Florida holds despite average daily summer heat index values exceeding 110 The movement to nice weather has not been primarily driven by any single demographic group. Rather, growth's positive partial correlation with winter temperature and negative partial correlations with summer heat index and summer humidity hold for a number of sub-populations.  The regressions in Columns 3 and 4 partly support the retiree explanation of the move to nice weather. Both the positive correlation with winter temperature and the negative correlation with summer heat index are stronger for elderly population growth (those aged 65 and up) than for working-age population growth (those aged 25 to 54). The differences in the linear coefficients do not statistically differ from zero. But the differences in the quadratic coefficients differ at the 0.10 level for January temperature and at the 0.05 level for July heat index. As above, more important for present purposes is that the coefficients in the working-age regression remain statistically significant and large in magnitude. Elderly migration can account for only part of the overall move to nice weather. Of course, it may be that elderly migration spurred migration of others, for instance by increasing labor demand in destination locales. But the early timing of the move to nice weather, discussed below, casts doubt that this latter possibility was the main driver of the migration. Another possible explanation for the move to nice weather is that it disproportionately reflects location choices by international immigrants rather than native-born U.S. citizens. The regressions reported in Columns 5 and 6 partly support this. The positive partial correlation with winter temperature is much stronger for immigrants than for natives. Similarly, the implied magnitude of the negative correlation with summer heat index is moderately larger for immigrants. Moreover, the weather variables account for a much higher share of the variation of immigrant growth than of native growth. Even so, growth's positive correlation with winter temperature and negative correlations with heat and humidity remain strong for native-born citizens. Columns 7 and 8 compare the movement to nice weather between college graduates (i.e., those with at least a bachelor's degree) and non-graduates. The magnitudes of the positive correlation with January temperature and negative correlation with July humidity are moderately larger for the college non-graduates. The magnitude of the negative correlation with July heat index is moderately larger for the college graduates. Once again, both groups are clearly participating in the move to nice weather. To the extent that the movement to nice weather has been caused by rising incomes, it is intuitive that the same movement would be larger among more highly-educated individuals. After all, such individuals have higher earnings and have seen more rapid increases in earnings. But this intuition misses two important points. First is that the distributional implications of wealth-driven migration are intratemporal rather than intertemporal. An increase in the desirability of nice weather indeed suggests that those at the upper end of the wealth distribution will continue to disproportionately choose to live in nice-weather places. But this static result is perfectly consistent with a disproportionate increase in the affordability of nice weather by lower-income individuals. Second is that the increase in wages over time can increase the opportunity cost of moving to nice weather. It may be that the associated substitution effect comes closer to offsetting the associated income effect for individuals with more education. Consistent with compensating differential theory, the migration to nice weather has been paralleled by house price growth. Column 1 of The empirical results so far have been for growth rates from 1970 to 2000. But the movement to nice weather actually began in the 1920s. Such a dating reinforces the conclusion that it was largely driven by the broad-based rise in incomes.  From the 1880s through the 1910s, people actually moved to places with bad weather. During the first two decades, population growth was negatively correlated with winter temperature. During all four decades, population growth was positively correlated with summer temperature and humidity. Over the same decades, agriculture's employment share was already declining rapidly. Hence, the shift away from agriculture need not imply movement towards nice weather. Beginning with the 1920s regression, statistically significant, positive coefficients result on both linear and quadratic January temperature. And statistically significant negative coefficients result on one or more of the summer heat and humidity terms. A first point is that manufacturing's employment share was approximately increasing through 1940 and then approximately constant through 1970. Since the migration towards nice weather persisted through both of these phases, the subsequent decline in manufacturing's employment share seems an unlikely cause. A second point is that the movement towards nice weather far predates the mass adoption of air conditioning, which began in the late 1940s. AC's spread thus seems too late to account for the population shift. Similarly, increases in the life expectancy and financial security of retirees – also largely post World War II phenomena – occurred after the migration towards nice weather was already underway. Still another explanation for the move to nice weather is that it captures the increasing ease with which people can relocate. Railroads, the automobile, and the airplane have all helped make long-distance moves much less costly. Along with rapidly improving telecommunications technologies, they have also made it much easier to stay in touch with friends and family following long-distance moves. While such falling transportation costs almost certainly helped facilitate the move to nice weather, the timing of the movement suggests that they are unlikely to be the main cause. Railroads were a relatively mature technology many decades before the onset of the move to nice weather. Conversely, it was probably not until the construction of the interstate highway system in the 1950s that the automobile yielded significant time savings on long-distance journeys. Widely affordable air travel arrived even later. Throughout most of the 20th century, U.S. residents migrated to places with nice weather. Possible explanations for this include the introduction of air conditioning, the shift in the industrial composition of U.S. employment, increased elderly migration, and the broad-based rise in incomes. Regressions of 1970-to-2000 population growth on weather suggest that each of these explanations played a role. The positive partial correlations of population growth with summer heat and humidity establish that air conditioning cannot alone account for the migration. But the high expected growth attributable to weather in places with extreme summer heat and humidity almost certainly would not have occurred in the absence of air conditioning. An extensive set of controls for initial industrial structure accounts for a portion of the weather-related moves. But the draw of nice weather nevertheless remains strong. And the move to nice weather has indeed been larger for the elderly, but only moderately so. That the movement to nice weather began in the 1920s reaffirms that it cannot be explained by a combination of air conditioning, shifting industrial structure, and increased elderly migration. The shortfall of the alternative explanations is consistent with an increasing valuation of weather's contribution to quality of life being an important impetus for the migration. Such an increased valuation is documented in the compensating differential literature and is theoretically predicted from the sharp rise in incomes over the course of the twentieth century. With sufficient complementarity among non-housing goods, housing, and nice weather, the increased valuation of the latter requires migration toward it. The present set of results suggest several lines of future research. One is the extent to which migration to nice weather has occurred or can be expected to occur in nations and regions other than the United States. Large increases in income have occurred throughout the industrialized world. In many developing countries, income is now rising rapidly or is hoped to do so in the near future. Of course, the degree of labor mobility within many countries is well below that of the U.S. Some initial research along this line finds migration among Japanese prefectures over the period 1955 to 1990 to be negatively correlated with a measure of extreme temperature ( A second line of research is the extent to which the U.S. migration to nice weather can be expected to continue. The introduction of air conditioning represents a discrete shock. The transition to the implied new steady-state population distribution might take several decades. But it would eventually end. In contrast, the U.S. population is rapidly aging. And broad-based technological progress and the associated increase in per-capita income are likely to endure. Hence the movement to nice weather may endure as well. A third line of research is the extent to which migration to places with high levels of other consumption amenities has occurred. Coasts, mountains, lakes, and national parks offer numerous recreational opportunities, as do urban amenities such as restaurants, museums, live performance venues, and professional sports. Other likely draws include low pollution; low traffic; and high-quality schools, universities, and hospitals. It may be that such quality-of-life amenities rather than targeted tax breaks and low wages are the key to future local economic development. Thank you to Jonathan Willis, Steven Durlauf, and several anonymous referees for advice and suggestions. Thank you to Michael Haines for sharing historical census data. Thank you to Taisuke Nakata and Aarti Singh for excellent research assistance. A number of other individuals also contributed to the construction of the underlying data including Nathaniel Baum Snow, Scott Benolkin, Anne Berry, Krista Jacobs, Jason Martinek, Peter Northup, Chris Yenkey, and Andrea Zanter.