Simulated supracondylar fractures were created proximal to posterior cruciate ligament–retaining total knee arthroplasty components in paired human cadaver femora and stabilized with either a retrograde-inserted locked supracondylar nail or the Less Invasive Stabilization System (LISS; Synthes USA, Paoli, PA). Loads were applied to create bending and torsional moments on the simulated fracture stabilized with either no gap or a 10-mm gap. The LISS exhibited less torsional stability with anterior (P<.001) and posterior loads (P<.01). When varus loads were applied to 10-mm-gap specimens, the specimens stabilized with a retrograde nail had an 83% reduction in fracture displacement (P<.001) and 80% less medial translation of the distal fragment (P<.001). The samples stabilized with the LISS had a 93% reduction in fracture gap displacement when a valgus load was applied with a 10-mm gap (P<.001). Overall, these results suggest that the retrograde-inserted nail may provide greater stability for the management of periprosthetic supracondylar femur fractures in patients with a posterior cruciate ligament–retaining femoral total knee arthroplasty component. Copyright 2002, Elsevier Science (USA). All rights reserved.Periprosthetic supracondylar femur fractures are an uncommon complication of total knee arthroplasty (TKA) that occur in 0.6% to 2.5% of patients Many types of operative fixation techniques have been described for periprosthetic supracondylar femur fractures, including use of a condylar buttress plate Human cadaver femora were selected to obtain 6 matched pairs that could be fitted with the same size femoral TKA component and instrumented with the same size retrograde inserted intramedullary supracondylar nail. The femora were evaluated for bone mineral density with biplanar radiographs and dual-energy x-ray absorption scanning (QDR-2000 Supine Lateral X-ray Bone Densitometer; Hologic, Waltham, MA) to confirm that specimens had mild-to-moderate osteopenia (mean bone mineral density, 0.694 ± 0.057 g/cm All femora were implanted with size 5 Sigma P.F.C dual condylar, posterior cruciate ligament–retaining femoral TKA components (DePuy, Warsaw, IN), using the same instruments and cement technique. The proximal portion of the femur was cut at the inferior border of the lesser trochanter and vertically mounted with acrylic cement contained within a square metal holder. The femora were mounted such that the intercondylar notch was located over the central axis of the femur. A short oblique simulated fracture was created with an oscillating saw extending proximally and posteromedially at a 45° angle from the anterolateral aspect of the TKA component flange. The osteotomized samples were selected randomly to be stabilized with 1 of 2 implants, following the surgical technique provided by the manufacturer. Six femora were instrumented with 13 mm × 150 mm short retrograde-inserted intramedullary supracondylar nails (IMSC Five; Smith & Nephew, Memphis, TN) employing 2 proximal and 2 distal interlocking screws. The other femur of the pair was stabilized with a 9-hole LISS. Each LISS was stabilized with 5 unicortical screws proximally and 5 unicortical screws distal to the simulated fracture according to the manufacturer's protocol. The bone–implant constructs were mounted on a Materials Testing System 410 servohydraulic testing machine (MTS, Minneapolis, MN). Each sample was statically loaded in anterior, posterior, and axial directions at fixed points on the prosthesis. Anterior loads (200N) were directed through the trochlear groove of the femoral component to simulate the compression force of the patella on the femur during a straight-leg raise and level walking (Fig. 1A, B). Paired parallel Kirschner wires were placed in the anterior, lateral, and medial femoral cortices within 5 mm of either side of the simulated fracture gap to measure gap displacement and translation of the distal fragment ( Displacements in response to anterior and posterior loads on gapped and ungapped specimens are shown in Table 1. The displacements with axial loading are shown in Table 2. After cycling, permanent deformation measurements were made at the medial, lateral, and anterior cortices (Table 3). A short oblique fracture extending from the anterior flange of a femoral TKA component is a common pattern. This fracture, combined with a posterior cruciate ligament–retaining TKA femoral component, lends itself to a wide variety of surgical treatment options. Acceptable fixation methods for a short oblique fracture extending proximally from the component flange include a dynamic condylar screw, blade plate, condylar buttress plate, and a short retrograde nail. This study compared the biomechanical stability obtained with a retrograde-inserted locked supracondylar intramedullary nail and the LISS. When no gap was present, the 2 implants showed similar linear displacements of the simulated fracture. There was, however, a significant difference between the mean rotations of the 2 implants when the samples were loaded anteriorly or posteriorly. This torsional elastic deformation of the LISS group was most likely due to the creation of a lever arm when loading a distance from the plate. There is no lever arm for rotation with the intramedullary nail stabilized group because the loads are centered directly over the implant. When a 10-mm fracture gap was created, displacements became more a function of the mechanical properties and configuration of the 2 implants tested. The lateral position of the LISS provided more stability during valgus loads. Loading on the lateral condyle essentially eliminated the lever arm for the LISS and created a more stable construct. In contrast, during a varus load on the medial condyle, a lever arm was created, and the LISS plate bent on itself. To a lesser extent, some of the displacement may have occurred because of bending of the fixation screws. Toggling of the screws does not occur in the LISS because they are locked to the plate. Motion in the intramedullary nail stabilized specimens was most likely due to bending of the locking screws and toggling of the screws within the nail. Several biomechanical studies compared fixation techniques of supracondylar femur fractures proximal to TKAs. Biomechanical comparisons of retrograde-inserted intramedullary nails with plate fixation in these fractures showed retrograde nails to be inferior in initial fixation to dynamic condylar screws and blade plates but superior to condylar buttress plates Our biomechanical study had several limitations. The first limitation was the magnitude of force loaded on the specimens. Axial loads were limited to 500N, and anterior and posterior loads were limited to 200N. These loads were chosen to approximate physiologic loads that may be encountered in a patient with limited weight bearing who may be attempting straight-leg raises In patients with a periprosthetic supracondylar femur fracture proximal to a posterior stabilized TKA component with a closed or narrow box, it may be advantageous to use a LISS instead of a retrograde nail that would require cutting the metal. When significant comminution or medial gapping is present, the biologic advantages of the LISS must be weighed against the disadvantage of possible increased elastic deformation to high loads that the LISS exhibits compared with conventional plating. The short retrograde inserted locked intramedullary nail had greater fixation stability than the LISS, with a varus load of 500N when a fracture gap was present. The LISS group also exhibited a translational component to the displacement that was larger than that of the intramedullary nail specimens. When anterior and posterior loads were applied to the 2 groups, the LISS group exhibited a rotational displacement not seen with the intramedullary nail group. It seems that both implants provide similar fixation in fracture patterns that lack significant comminution; however, the LISS may prove to be inferior in fracture patterns that contain a large medial fracture gap.