The interactions of As(III) ion with C2H5OCS−
                     2 and C2H5SCS−
                     2, known as the most popular collector ions, were studied by density functional theory (DFT) at the B3LYP/6-31G** level in connection with the arsenic-containing minerals realgar, orpiment, and arsenopyrite. The dixanthogen formations of these ions were also investigated at the same level of theory. The central purpose of this paper is to compare the stabilities of the major flotation products, namely As(III) xanthates and dixanthogens. The results show that the magnitudes of the interaction energies for the formations of As(III) xanthates and dixanthogens increase when the oxygen atom is replaced by the sulfur atom in C2H5OCS−
                     2. Therefore, the C2H5OCS−
                     2 ion is preferred in these formations. The results obtained are in agreement with the experimental data reported.Flotation is a widely used method for separating valuable minerals from the associated gangue minerals in the ores. Xanthates (ethyl dithiocarbonates) are used extensively as collectors in the beneficiation of sulfide minerals by flotation. Although a number of different interaction mechanisms depending on physical and chemical parameters such as pH, collectors, depressants, and ore type have been reported so far Realgar (AsS), orpiment (As It is well known that computational methods provide a useful way to obtain information about the interaction between the collector and the mineral surface. A detailed literature survey reveals that there are no reported data about the relative stabilities of the dixanthogens and the arsenic(III) xanthates obtained computationally. The principal aim of the present study is to get valuable information about the important part of the flotation processes for these arsenic minerals by calculating the interaction energies (Δ Density functional theory (DFT) computations at the B3LYP/6-31G** The determination of the relative stabilities of the dixanthogens and metal–xanthate compounds is a key issue in the sulfide flotation when the xanthate ions are used as collectors. Of course, this approach cannot explain a number of the phenomena observed in the flotation process. It is also difficult to assess the general picture of the interactions of sulfides with these collectors. However, valuable information can be obtained about the important part of the collector–metal interaction to predict the flotation process. In this paper, ethyl dithiocarbonate (C In the case of As(C The oxidation of the xanthate ion yielding the neutral dixanthogen molecule through the formation of an Realgar and arsenopyrite contain arsenic in a lower oxidation state, less than +3, and arsenic is oxidizing to form As(III) alkyl xanthates. The amounts of the alkyl dixanthogen formed on the orpiment, realgar, and arsenopyrite mineral surfaces were found to be about the same by Valli et al. In this work, the interactions of C The interaction energies obtained in this work may be higher than those of the collector-mineral surface due to the lack of neighboring atoms and solvent effect in the system considered. On the other hand, flotation process depends on the other parameters, such as interfacial properties of solids, properties of reagents and gases, hydrodynamics, energetics, and kinetics, besides the solvent effect. Therefore, the solvent effect is not sufficient in these systems. However, we hope that these findings help to explain the collector-mineral attachment for the flotation of arsenic-bearing minerals. The authors acknowledge the CUBAP for providing the Gaussian 98W and GaussView 2.1 program packages.  Interaction energies (kcal mol Zero-point vibrational energy included Δ