The effect of mechanical activation on the phase constitution, particle size and distribution, surface area, unit cell parameters, crystallite size and strain of a beach sand ilmenite concentrate from Chatrapur, Orissa, India and their effect on the kinetics of sulfuric acid leaching have been investigated. It was observed that mechanical activation significantly enhances the dissolution of both iron and titanium in sulfuric acid. The kinetic parameters for leaching of the activated samples were determined using a nonlinear least squares minimization procedure. The activation energy for leaching of iron was marginally higher than that of titanium and both decreased monotonically with activation time.India has the second largest ilmenite reserves in the world estimated at 278 million tonnes. The ilmenite occurs in the beach sand deposits of the eastern and southern coasts of India at Orissa, Tamilnadu and Kerala, respectively. A major part of the ilmenite finds application in the manufacture of white titanium dioxide pigment that is used extensively in the paints, plastics and paper industry. The commonly used processes for the manufacture of titanium dioxide pigment are the aqueous sulfate process and the anhydrous chlorination process. In the sulfate route, the ilmenite is digested in concentrated sulfuric acid in the temperature range 150–180 °C to dissolve both titanium and iron, the iron is crystallized and separated and subsequently the titanium from solution is hydrolyzed, filtered and calcined to yield titanium dioxide. However, the kinetics of dissolution of ilmenite in sulfuric acid is very slow. The chlorination route involves anhydrous chlorination of the enriched ilmenite or rutile at elevated temperatures, purification of TiCl Early studies by Mechanical activation, usually carried out by high-energy milling is reported to substantially accelerate the leaching kinetics of several sulfide and oxide minerals ( The dissolution behavior of ilmenite will depend on its phase constitution and textural characteristics determined by the degree of weathering and are likely to vary among the various beach sand deposits ( The ilmenite concentrate used in this study was obtained from Indian Rare Earths (Orissa Sands Complex), Chatrapur, India. The bulk chemical composition of the ilmenite samples used in this study is given in A Fritsch Pulviresette-5 planetary mill having agate bowl and balls (Fritsch, Germany) was employed for the mechanical activation of the ilmenite samples. For each grinding experiment, 15 agate balls of 20-mm diameter were used in each bowl. The samples (about 40 g in each batch) were subjected to dry milling in ambient atmosphere. The ore to ball ratio in the bowl was maintained at a ratio of 1:4 by weight for all the experiments. Milling was carried out at 200 rpm for all the batch experiments. No other additives were used during the milling. The samples were activated in the planetary mill for 30, 90 and 240 min in separate experiments. At the completion of grinding, the contents of the bowl were thoroughly cleaned and dried before the next milling experiment. The unmilled concentrates as well as the activated samples were characterized by thermal analysis, XRD, optical and electron microscopy, particle size analysis and surface area measurement. Thermal analysis experiments were carried out on a simultaneous TG/DTA analyzer (Seiko, Japan, Model No. 320), X-ray diffraction studies on a Siemens D-500 diffractometer using Co-Kα radiation ( Leaching of the unmilled and milled powder was carried out in a three-necked pyrex glass reactor (250 mL) at 1% wt/vol in 50% sulfuric acid. A thermometer was fitted to one of the openings. The reactor was heated in a mantle to the required temperature and controlled at the desired temperature using a powerstat. The temperature during the leaching experiments could be controlled to within ±2 °C. The reactor was filled with H The photomicrographs of the raw (unmilled) ilmenite samples are given in The X-ray diffractograms of the unmilled sample and for various times of activation are delineated in The results of the thermogravimetric experiments of the unmilled and activated ilmenite samples in static air are depicted in The variation of particle size and particle size distribution with time of activation is shown in The extent of dissolution of Ti and Fe as a function of leaching time at 80, 95 and 120 °C are depicted in Initial kinetic analysis of the dissolution behavior of Ti indicated that none of the common kinetic models (power law, diffusion models, phase boundary reaction, Avrami-Erofeev equation, autocatalysis models, etc.; A suitable mechanistic model can be chosen for Since the Ti and Fe in the ilmenite dissolves differentially for the activated samples, and not according to their stoichiometry in the ilmenite phase, the dissolution kinetics of Ti and Fe has to be analyzed independently. The kinetic parameters determined from the least squares minimization technique for the dissolution of Ti and Fe for the unmilled and activated samples are depicted in   The thermogravimetric and XRD results on the ilmenite samples indicate that complete oxidation of ferrous to ferric is achieved by 850 °C for the activated samples, whereas, less than 50% oxidation occurs for the unmilled sample. Enhancement of thermal oxidation reaction of ilmenite by mechanical activation has not been earlier reported in the literature. However, thermally activated oxidation of ilmenite to pseudo-rutile at temperatures below 800 °C and to pseudo-brookite at higher temperatures is well known ( Although mechanical activation enhances the dissolution kinetics for both Fe and Ti, it is observed that for the activated samples, the Ti and Fe in the ilmenite dissolves differentially and not according to their stoichiometry in the ilmenite phase. The maximum dissolution of Ti is restricted to 65% whereas, in excess of 90% Fe could be dissolved from ilmenite samples activated for 240 min and leached at 120 °C for 4 h. It is seen that the dissolution rates for iron shows a higher increase with both activation time and leaching temperature in comparison to Ti. The enhanced rates of dissolution of Fe in comparison to Ti in the activated samples can be attributed to the increased oxidation of ilmenite to pseudo-rutile and its subsequent amorphization. Both oxidation of iron and amorphization are likely to promote the dissolution reaction. Another reason for the differential dissolution behavior of Fe and Ti in sulfuric acid may be related to their solvation mechanism. Although the solvated Fe The overall increase in the dissolution rates with mechanical activation is in addition to an increase in surface area, a result of several factors such as structural disorder ( The calculated values of 1/ Mechanical activation of ilmenite resulted in substantial increase in structural disorder in addition to the enhancement in surface area because of milling to submicroscopic particle sizes. The crystallite size decreased exponentially with milling time, whereas the lattice strain showed a linear increase. Although mechanical activation considerably enhanced the dissolution kinetics for both Fe and Ti, it was observed that the Ti and Fe in the ilmenite dissolves differentially and not according to their stoichiometry in the ilmenite phase. The maximum dissolution of Ti was restricted to 65% whereas, in excess of 90% Fe could be dissolved for ilmenite samples activated for 240 min and leached at 120 °C for 4 h. The activation energy for the dissolution of Ti ranged from 53.9 to 62.0 kJ/mol and that of Fe from 57.8 to 66.1 kJ/mol depending on the time of milling. The activation energies for the dissolution of both Ti and Fe decreased monotonically with activation time. The authors are thankful to Sapan Das, T.C. Alex, Scientists, NML, Jamshedpur for the SEM and thermal analysis measurements, respectively, and Indian Rare Earths, Chatrapur for supplying the ilmenite sample. The first author (CS) is grateful to CSIR, New Delhi for providing a CSIR JRF fellowship for pursuing this work.