A peptide-based hydrogel has been designed that directs the formation of hydroxyapatite. MDG1, a twenty-seven residue peptide, undergoes triggered folding to form an unsymmetrical β-hairpin that self-assembles in response to an increase in solution ionic strength to yield a mechanically rigid, self supporting hydrogel. The C-terminal portion of MDG1 contains a heptapeptide (MLPHHGA) capable of directing the mineralization process. Circular dichroism spectroscopy indicates that the peptide folds and assembles to form a hydrogel network rich in β-sheet secondary structure. Oscillatory rheology indicates that the hydrogel is mechanically rigid (G′ ˜ 2500Pa) before mineralization. In separate experiments, mineralization was induced both biochemically and with cementoblast cells. Mineralization-domain had little effect on the mechanical rigidity of the gel. SEM and EDXS show that MDG1 gels are capable of directing the formation of hydroxapatite. Control hydrogels, prepared by peptides either lacking the mineral-directing portion or reversing its sequence, indicated that the heptapeptide is necessary and its actions are sequence specific.A major ongoing challenge in the field of reconstructive and regenerative medicine is the successful repair or replacement of hard tissue, such as cartilage, bone, and dental tissues, which have been lost due to disease, congenital defects or trauma. Autograft tissue is considered as one of the best sources for the replacement of lost hard tissue. Its use, however, is limited due to difficulties in harvesting substantial amounts of autologous grafts with the appropriate shapes Some of the most commonly investigated materials for possible hard tissue scaffolds include natural materials, such as cornstarch-based polymers For many implantable hard materials, regardless of how similar the mechanical and physiochemical properties of designed scaffold are to the living bone, when clinical application is considered, the many advantages offered by these materials can be lost if the scaffold cannot be implanted correctly at the defect site. Poor tissue integration due to improper apposition at the site of implantation is a major failure mechanism of many tissue engineering materials. Thus, an In this work, we describe the development of an Peptides were synthesized on RINK amide resin via an automated ABI 433A peptide synthesizer employing standard Fmoc-protocol and HCTU activation. The resulting resin-bound peptides were cleaved and side-chain deprotected for 2 Circular dichroism experiments were performed on a Jasco J-810 spectropolarimeter. Stock 300 Oscillatory rheology experiments were performed on a Paar Physica MCR 500 rheometer using a 25 For the 24 Mineralization experiments were performed in a 3.5 An immortalized mouse cementoblast cell line, (OCCM-30), was maintained in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS, 100 U/mL penicillin, and 100 An SYTO 9/Propidium iodide based live dead assay (Invitrogen, USA), where only the dead cells are stained with propidium iodide and gave red fluorescence, was used to test the viability of the cells in the hydrogel. The cells were encapsulated as described below and at the end of 3 days, a 1:1 mixture of SYTO 9/Propidium iodide was added on top of the gels and incubated for 30 At the conclusion of the mineralization studies (24 X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements were performed to identify the final phase of the mineral deposited on the gels. The gel samples were collected by re-dissolving the lyophilized gel-mineral composite in distilled water to solubilize the peptide matrix. The mineral component was isolated by centrifugation. Collected mineral was dried in vacuum at room temperature prior to the measurements. The measurements were performed on a D8 Focus model diffractometer employing CuKα radiation, 40 MDG1 is a twenty-seven residue peptide designed to undergo triggered intra-molecular folding and subsequent self-assembly to form a fibrillar network affording a mechanically rigid gel, In addition to the MDG1 hydrogel, two control hydrogels were prepared and studied. The first control gel is formed by the self-assembling peptide, cMDG1. This peptide is identical to the parent peptide except that the sequence of the seven C-terminal residues is reversed. cMDG1 examines the role that sequence specificity and amino acid composition play in directing mineral deposition. If sequence specific interactions are made between the C-terminal sequence of MDG1 and inorganic species during mineralization, distinct mineral morphology and type should be observed as compared to mineral deposits formed in hydrogels comprised of the control peptide (cMDG1). If there is little difference in the type of mineral deposited, this would suggest that sequence specific interactions are largely not at play and that non-specific interactions, such as gross electrostatics, may be more important. This would suggest that amino acid composition, rather than sequence specificity, is the more relevant design parameter. The second control hydrogel is formed by the peptide MAX8, which lacks the mineral-directing portion. This control gel was used to determine if the fibrillar scaffold alone could direct mineralization. In addition, the MAX8 control was used to assess what effect adding a C-terminal sequence to an otherwise symmetrical β-hairpin had on peptide folding, self-assembly and the rheological properties of the resultant hydrogel. The peptide construct MDG1 was designed to undergo triggered folding and self-assembly resulting in the formation of a mechanically rigid hydrogel in the presence of CaCl  The ability of the MDG1 hydrogel to promote and direct mineralization was probed by rheology, quantitative mineral load assessment, spectroscopy, microscopy and diffraction experiments. In the biomineralization experiments we used an enzyme-mediated mineralization model to mimic vertebrate biomineralization, where AP controls calcium phosphate formation by hydrolyzing organophosphate groups releasing inorganic phosphate. Here, therefore, our model consists of AP entrapped within the hydrogel in the presence of β-GP. Hydrogels used in the mineralization studies were prepared employing a dialysis cassette. Hydrogels were formed by initiating gelation with a solution of CaCl Next, studies were performed to assess whether or not the mineral-directing peptide attachment could control the crystal morphology and the phase of the deposited calcium phosphate mineral. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of lyophilized peptide hydrogels after mineralization are displayed in Identification of the final calcium phosphate phase is often difficult by electron diffraction analysis alone because of the similar crystal structure of octacalcium phosphate (OCP) and hydroxyapatite (HA). One of the key diffraction effect, i.e., the characteristic OCP ring that corresponds to (100) ( The response of cells to the MDG1 matrix was assessed by monitoring mineralization induced by encapsulated cementoblasts. Cells were directly embedded in a 0.5 wt% MDG1 hydrogel by initiating peptide folding and self-assembly in the presence of cells (see Experimental Section). In this experiment, the DMEM media contained calcium and β-GP; viable cells should produce and secrete alkaline phosphatase to drive mineralization if the MDG1 hydrogel is cytocompatible. Upon 3 days of post encapsulation, cell viability assay shows that encapsulated cementoblasts were viable in the MDG1 matrix with 597 In this study, we have designed, synthesized and studied the mineralization potential of a peptide-based hydrogel. The peptide, MDG1, undergoes triggered folding to form an unsymmetrical β-hairpin that self-assembles in response to an increase in solution ionic strength to yield a mechanically rigid, self supporting hydrogel. The C-terminal portion of MDG1 contains a heptapeptide capable of directing the mineralization process of calcium and phosphate to produce hydroxyapatite. The ability to form well defined three-dimensional networks that carry an inherent functionality makes these hybrid peptides attractive candidates for use in tissue engineering applications and ideal models for developing, multifunctional structures for nano-technological applications. This work was supported (MG, HF, CT, MS) mainly by the National Science Foundation through the Genetically Engineered Materials Science & Engineering Center (GEMSEC), an MRSEC at UW and partially by NSF-NIRT. This work was also supported (MB, JPS) by funding from the     The Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the on-line version at Figures with essential color discrimination. Figs. 1, 6, and 7 in this article are difficult to interpret in black and white. The full color images can be found in the on-line version, at