Bisphosphonates (BPs) are a class of synthetic pyrophosphate analogs that can prevent the loss of bone mass, given orally to treat postmenopuasal osteoporosis. It is not clear yet if the benefits of BPs include the possibility of affecting bone apatitic precursors transition for bone consolidation except for encouraging osteoclasts to undergo apoptosis. Furthermore, the complexity of the in vivo system makes it difficult to isolate and study such extracellular topographical cues that trigger bone turnover response. Herein, we proposed a wet-chemical approach employing alendronate sodium (AS) as a guide of hydroxyapatite (HA) precursor growth and conversion which was initiated from the nucleantion of octacalcium phosphate (OCP) in a cell membrane-mimicking surfactant micelle aqueous system. The nanocrystal clusters of dicalcium phosphate dihydrate (DCPD) and OCP nanocryatals were readily precipitated within a relatively narrow AS concentration range (2–8μM). However, such low concentrations of AS seemed to stabilize the more acidic phases, and to delay the transformation into HA, to an extent which increased on increasing AS concentration. In contrast, at a slight higher concentrations (16–32μM), AS promoted HA precipitation after ageing for 1h. It was found that the effect of AS on the phase selectivity of apatitic precursors was concentration-dependent within a prolonged ageing time stage (0.5–168h). The AS-assisted reactions in vitro offer an expedient way to understand the underlying implementarity between bone and BPs for bone consolidation, and to improve our understanding of benefit of BP dosages on bone turnover and trauma healing.Biomineralization provides a variety of complex solid structures for numerous life forms. Vertebrate skeletons are constructed from organic substrates and calcium phosphates (CaPs) minerals known as apatite Morphosynthesis mediated by the dilute ion-dopants or organic additives is rapidly developed in Nanochemistry We have investigated the feasibility of infrequent architecture evolution of OCP clusters by a polypeptide/ cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) dual-mediating nanocrystal self-assembly High-purity Ca(CH In a typical procedure, for instance of experiment No. 2 as mentioned in To understand the phase conversion, more CaPs were synthesized at different AS concentrations and ageing times under the same temperature and initial pH conditions, without stirring during ageing stage. The so-called The powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis was carried out using an X-ray diffraction meter (Rigaku D/max-rA) with Cu In order to investigate the possibility of the AS adsorption on the surface layer, the as-dried samples were analyzed by nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR). The solid-state magic angle spinning (MAS) The precipitates obtained from the CTAB containing solutions in the absence and presence of AS were identified by XRD ( The FTIR spectra ( The SEM images with low magnification of CaP0 and CaP2 samples revealed the characteristic morphology of OCP, consisting of a large quantity of ribbon-like individuals with high aspect ratio ( In order to obtain more details about the microstructure, the CaP precipitates after ageing for 1 Since the OCP and DCPD have been regarded as transient intermediates, we examined the prolongation of ageing time for any CaP transformation in the solutions. We found that the long plate-like OCP nanocrystal cluster (CaP0) grew from a core after half of the calcium salt solution was added at the absence of AS condition (data not shown). In the control experiments, the CaP0 aged alone in the AS-free mother solution, remained in the original stage without any change even for two weeks and their XRD patterns were idential (see Fig. S5, SI). In this study, the CaP2, CaP4, and CaP8 were selected and all phase transition time studies were performed in the mother solutions. The pH values of the aqueous solutions containing the intermediates (DCPD, OCP) were measured during the CaP precipitation and ageing stages. Under these conditions, the pH profiles exhibited a multi-step process of CaP formation, as shown in The XRD data given in To evaluate the changes of the particle morphology, the powders aged for different time in the mother solutions were observed by SEM. Morphological comparisons between the CaP2, CaP4, and CaP8 using a variety of ageing times were summarized in We aim to offer an expedient way to investigate the potential effect of the antiresorptive bisphosphonate on the CaP precipitation and phase transformation in a cell membrane-mimicking micelle aqueous medium. Interestingly, addition of minor amount of AS into the reaction solutions would interfere the initial CaP phases and causes different endurance to the mother solution. It was first thought that the antiresorptive action resulted from a direct inhibition of mineral dissolution Our results show that the presence of extremely low concentration of AS, in addition to the use of CTAB, impacts mineral selectivity. Increase of AS concentration from 2 to 16 To confirm that the presence of AS in CaP precipitates is important for the possible mechanism of phase selectivity. The structure and surface analysis is usually used to determine whether the As molecules are incorporated into the crystal structure and/or adsorbed in the surface layer. In our studies, AS is scarcely detected by the IR analysis because CaP0 and CaP2 show the typical IR spectrum of OCP There are also interesting differences in phase stability that occur in the presence of AS during ageing stage. It is known that the direct hydrolysis of OCP-to-HA in the absence of other components occurred rather slowly In the present study, the experimental evidence suggest that the influence of AS on the time course of the reaction seems to follow two different routes as a function of concentration. At extremely low AS concentration it seems to stabilize the more acidic phases, and to delay the transformation into HA, to an extent which increases on increasing AS concentration (from 2 to 8 SEM investigations provide further insights and correlations between the morphology and phase transformation of CaP nanocrystals. Although there is slight change in the macroscopic morphology of the representative CaP2, CaP4, and CaP8 crystals with different ageing times (see In addition, the issues of functionalities and local pH values undoubtedly play an important role in the CaP OCP is more basic CaP phase in comparison to DCPD, and OCP will be further hydrolyzed to form HA. These two reactions help to explain the phase transformation and the pH decrease. This is why we observe a consistent pH decrease in the mother solutions containing AS, from 5.4 to 4.7 in the 7 In summary, the influence of AS on the apatitic precursor precipitation and transformation from an aqueous solution was evaluated under different conditions, including AS concentration and ageing time. It is experimentally found that the concentration of AS played a key role in controlling the phase selectivity and stability because AS inhibited precursor phase transformation within a relatively narrow concentration range (2–8 This work was supported by the  