It is a great pleasure and honor for us to serve as editors for this special issue of Powder Technology in honor and memory of Professor Genji Jimbo. Professor Jimbo was a professor of the Department of Chemical Engineering of Nagoya University for 27 years. During his distinguished career, he made numerous contributions to the science of powder technology and promoted its importance in society through his efforts in organizing academic societies in a variety of related fields. For many years, he was a regional editor of Powder Technology. In addition, he contributed to the 2nd World Congress on Particle Technology in 1990, held in Kyoto, and the 6th International Symposium on Agglomeration in 1993, held in Nagoya. He also played a significant role in the International Fine Particle Research Institute (IFPRI) as an adviser. Professor Jimbo obtained his doctoral degree on the topics of jet milling and comminution. These subjects became his lifelong passion. He made important contributions to industry through his research, especially the study of grinding limitation phenomena. He pioneered the establishment of powder mechanics in order to analyze complex powder phenomena. His ultimate goal was to define the powder properties like viscosity and density in Newtonian fluid context and develop measurement techniques to relate theory and experiment. He focused his attention on adhesion force between particles and stress as dominant powder properties and found the factors controlling adhesion phenomena by developing original test equipment. He then correlate adhesion phenomena with many powder behaviors such as fluidized bed dynamics. Professor Jimbo's devoted enthusiasm for powder technology was not limited to research but also to enlightenment, as shown by many books and lectures. He recognized the importance of industrial standards from the early stage of ISO activities and played a leading role. Extensive knowledge of history and methodology of science and technology, art, literature and numerous other fields of human knowledge made Professor Jimbo's contributions possible. We are privileged and honored to have been supervised and studied as his coworkers. For the requiem of his soul and the development of the fields where he had been so prolific throughout his life, we have asked for contributions from the most active scientists in the fields of comminution, powder properties, particle characterization and fluidized bed. We thank the authors who responded to our request and generously contributed to this special issue. Professor Jimbo left us on May 27, 1999. However, we are certain that many powder technologists in the world inherited his ambition on that day.