The objective of this review is to remedy the lack of knowledge about the expected relationship between the irrigation techniques (flood irrigation, sprinkler irrigation, surface and subsurface drip irrigation) and the nitrogen transformations (fixation, mineralization, immobilization and nitrification) or fluxes (denitrification, runoff, volatilization and lixiviation) in agricultural contexts. This study investigates thus the various controls on the nitrogen cycle and budget, either site-specific (soilC/N ratio, pH, salinity, texture and temperature) or corresponding to deliberate strategies in water and nitrogen management. The comprehensive view gained from the gathered literature elements identifies the local variations (in space and time) of soil water content profile as both the strongest control and the control most directly related to the irrigation technique and to the practitioner's decisions. In the overall picture, flood irrigation and sprinkler irrigation are the techniques in which most transformations or fluxes may be enhanced or reduced, also with the risks associated with non-optimal practices. By contrast, subsurface drip irrigation seems the technique with the least unwanted impacts. Besides the academic aspects (bringing together scattered literature elements) an outcome of this review is thus to facilitate decision-making regarding the choice and/or use of irrigation-fertilization techniques and strategies (doses and scheduling) for given agro-pedoclimatic contexts, also for combined agricultural production, economic and site preservation objectives.Increased anthropic pressure and growing food demands exerted on cultivated areas have lead to the intensification of agriculture ( To start from well-established knowledge, soil nitrogen availability has been long known to influence crop and root growth thus to have a direct impact on crop yield, attributing increased death rates for young individuals and leaf yellowing to insufficient nitrogen uptake ( In a schematic overview, Quite surprisingly, there is still a need for the literature to investigate how several elements of the nitrogen cycle may be influenced by the chosen irrigation and fertilization technique but also strategy (e.g. dates of application, doses applied, formulation of the fertilizer) with an expected impact on the nitrogen budget, thus on the environmental footprint, as well as on several key performance indicators: crop yield, water and nitrogen use efficiency and operating profitability. To our knowledge, these issues have not been explicitly addressed so far, even when discussing the global agricultural or environmental perspectives associated with the nitrogen cycle, as affected by human activities ( This review leans on 177 literature sources to suggest or establish the existence of a correlation between the irrigation techniques and soil nitrogen transformations or fluxes, focusing on these described in Nitrogen fixation is the process by which the stable dinitrogen atmospheric gas (N Fixation occurs either in non-biological (fixation by lightning or industrial fixation) or biological (symbiotic fixation) or processes ( Geochemical fixation by lightning leads to NO Industrial fixation of gaseous N Symbiotic fixation necessitates the action of the nitrogenase enzymes. Several species of rhizobium bacteria, living in the nodules of plant roots (ex.  Differences between irrigation techniques (in this paper, FI: flood irrigation, SI: sprinkler irrigation, DI: drip irrigation, SDI: subsurface drip irrigation) in water amounts and delivery are likely to have temporary thermal effects thus to influence nitrogen fixation. Fixation occurs only in appropriate, medium aeration and water stress conditions ( From literature, a significant interplay seems to exist between (i) the irrigation technique, (ii) nitrification and mineralization with effects on soil pH and (iii) fixation as influenced by soil pH (thus indirectly by the cited nitrogen transformations). Soil acidification is caused by the nitrification of excess fertilizers, which lowers soil pH ( A consensus exists on the adverse effects of salinity on nitrogen fixation, either from the phenomenological point of view (e.g. As for salinity, the role of temperature on nitrogen fixation (and on most of nitrogen transformations) is well know from thermodynamics (energy of activation) and has been widely documented, for various species (e.g. The gross N-mineralization is the decomposition of large organic nitrogen molecules (proteins, amino sugars and amino acids present in organic matter, plant residuals or organic manure, noted R-NH These two forms allow nitrogen uptake by plants roots. Immobilization (also organization or reorganization) is the adverse process, consisting for example in the oxidation of carbonic substrates. The difference between the nitrogen amount that issues from gross N-mineralization and that organized by soil microorganisms is the net mineralization depending on the activity or inactivation of the heterotrophic bacteria.  Mineralization was found optimum in presence of enough water in soil pores Precisely, the frequent application of relatively small amounts of water is characteristic of DI and aims at maintaining soil water contents compatible with easy root water uptake. This, in turn, ensures humidity conditions favorable for microbial activity and mineralization ( Very low water contents induce very strong matric potentials for which microbial activity is drastically reduced: soil microorganisms accumulate organic and non-organic solutes in their cells to balance the local matric potential conditions. The next moisture increase (irrigation or precipitation) causes the quick release of most of these trapped solutes into the soil solution, leading to this “flash of mineralization” or “mineralization pulse” ( A complementary explanation invokes the perturbation of soil aggregates by the drying-wetting cycles. The mechanical effects of quick and intense moisture increases likely leads to the release of the organic matter trapped in the macro and micro soil aggregates. This increase would also be responsible for the desorption of the organic matter from clayey soil horizons ( The C/N ratio, i.e. carbon mass divided by nitrogen mass, directly acts upon the mineralization, immobilization and nitrification of soil nitrogen. Low C/N ratios (C/N<25) favor mineralization through their high mineral nitrogen content while high C/N ratios (C/N>25) enhance nitrogen immobilization by microorganisms. This negative correlation between C/N ratios and mineralization has been widely observed ( Besides the C/N ratio, the nitrogen dose applied is expected to have an effect on soil pH and salinity also ( Soil temperature also exerts a strong control on microbial activity, thus on mineralization, often said maximal between 25 and 35 Soil texture is also known to influence mineralization processes: sandy soils and silts a priori favor mineralization because their aerated structure is prone to ensure sufficient oxygen availability for soil microorganisms. By contrast, clayey soils tend to prevent air circulation thus to inactivate mineralization processes. Moreover, the sorption of organic matter on clay particles or sheets reduces its availability for mineralization ( Immobilization is the uptake of mineral nitrogen by microorganisms to synthesize their tissue and develop their own populations. The C/N ratio is often said to decide which one of the immobilization or mineralization prevails over the other ( The gross immobilization rate was found between 18 and 119 Nitrification is the biological oxidation of ammonium (NH This makes nitrogen available for plants and microbes, but also prone to lixiviation or denitrification losses ( − Autotrophic nitrification is performed by bacteria that draw their energy from one of the two stages of the oxidation of ammonium into nitrates (Verstraete and Focht, 1997). Bacteria taking part in the first, nitritation stage are categorized as ammonia-oxidizing bacteria, e.g. − Heterotrophic nitrification is due to a wide range of fungi and heterotrophic bacteria unable to develop on inorganic grounds, needing organic compounds to synthesize their tissue. Heterotrophic nitrification is generally less than autotrophic nitrification though non-negligible in acid soils (  The marked wetting and drying cycles in areas of infrequent precipitation or in SI could lead to enhanced nitrification ( A negative correlation has often been stated between the values of the C/N ratio and nitrification rates ( The pH values between 6.5 and 8 have been reported optimal ( In complement, an increase in soil temperature acts in the expected positive way on nitrification rates ( Denitrification designates the reduction of nitrates (NO Most denitrifying bacteria are heterotrophic, e.g.  Denitrification preferentially occurs in the local anaerobic or global weakly-aerobic conditions associated with average saturation indices of at least 60% ( Many early works ( Nitrogen losses are well-documented terms of the nitrogen cycle and budget, being in direct line with the major environmental issue of surface and groundwater contamination. The reduction of nitrogen losses is a recognized agricultural and economic challenge: to ensure the maximum efficiency of nitrogen applications within sustainable site-preserving practices, techniques and strategies (e.g. Soil pH progressively increases a few days after urea application on the soil surface, resulting from the conversion of ammonium to dissolved ammonia, the later available for volatilization. Losses are higher when fertilizers (urea) are placed on the soil surface with no subsequent (or too weak) irrigation or rainfall. The choice of SI immediately after nitrogen application minimizes the losses by volatilization (  Two factors must be taken in consideration to decide the location of the fertilizer. The first factor is the root distribution during the crop growth period ( Recommendations on the timing and duration of fertigation within irrigation events seem to vary between authors, irrigation techniques and site specificities. For example, For most irrigated crops, nitrogen demand and uptake are low at the beginning of the growth stage but drastically increase around the middle of the vegetative growth stage, until at least the first reproductive stage ( Soil properties are generally known before the choice of a type of molecule is made, so that soil properties may dictate the type of molecules used in a number of cases. Lixiviation typically occurs in the coarsest soils because of their high water conductivity and low ability to retain the NO Nitrate, ammonium and urea are the main forms of nitrogen fertilizers taken up by plant roots. These molecules have a different behavior in soil and a different effect on the cations vs. anions balance, thus on soil pH. For example, for nitrate-based fertilizers, plants will absorb the nitrates (anions) thus leave the cations in the rhizopsphere, before exuding OH- ions to reestablish the local balance between H+ and OH- ions, which increases soil pH. Conversely, plant roots exude H+ ions if ammonium-based fertilizers or urea are used and absorbed: soil acidification is then induced, which decreases soil pH and creates unfavorable conditions for mineralization: more fertilizer is thus expectedly available for lixiviation ( An illustration of typical agricultural cases is proposed in  Leaning on the cited literature elements, The implications for agricultural water and nitrogen management are several, though depending on the degrees of freedom at the practitioner's disposal in choosing the irrigation technique and/or the crop and/or the irrigation and fertilization strategy. In the typical case of a known soil type (characterized by its C/N ratio, pH, salinity, temperature, texture, i.e. all secondary-order controls for nitrogen transformations listed in A complementary representation is proposed in This academic, mostly qualitative review tries to bridge the gap between detailed biochemical studies on nitrogen transformations and fluxes in agricultural soils on the one hand and studies on irrigation techniques and strategies on the other hand. To the authors knowledge, no such overview and comprehensive picture was available to assess the influence of the irrigation techniques on the nitrogen cycle and budget, at least at the chosen intermediate level of complexity that addresses first-order and second-order effects while deliberately discarding the finer details. A wide consensus exists in the literature that the temporal evolution of soil water content profile directly dictates most nitrogen transformations (symbiotic fixation, mineralization, immobilization, nitrification) and fluxes (denitrification, runoff, volatilization and lixiviation) while multiple secondary factors may intervene (soil C/N ratio, pH, salinity, temperature and texture for nitrogen transformations, fertilizer location and scheduling of applications, soil texture and type of molecules for nitrogen fluxes). As irrigation techniques (furrow irrigation, sprinkler irrigation, surface and subsurface drip irrigation) and strategies may both be characterized by specific patterns of soil water content in space and time, this endows practitioners with several efficient degrees of freedom in deciding agricultural water and nitrogen management practices. Assuming the best decisions are taken when comparisons are possible, this review summarizes typical agricultural situations in simplified, graphical overviews that indicate which irrigation techniques tend to favor which nitrogen transformations and fluxes (at the need of indirect confirmations in the form of local soil water content measurements and the examination of all known secondary factors). The overview gained on the expected relevant or risky associations between irrigation and fertilization strategies (especially with the benefit of previous in situ experiences) may also be used to decipher more relevant site-specific combined strategies. Fertilization management options especially impact volatilization, runoff and lixiviation fluxes, the latter more complex in their processes but far more plausible for occasionally large irrigation amounts, or the coincidental occurrence of strong rain events soon after fertilization. However, a series of mitigation effects is known from literature and consists in the choice of the right type of molecules (nitrates instead of urea is risky in coarse soils), their application of appropriate doses (meeting plant demands) at relevant locations (where roots will find the fertilizer −depending on the irrigation technique) within a clever scheduling (within-event and/or within-season dose splitting). Finally, furrow irrigation and sprinkler irrigation appear to be the irrigation techniques with the strongest, more numerous and less controlled effects on the nitrogen transformations and fluxes (unless dedicated attention is paid). By contrast, subsurface drip irrigation seems to be the irrigation technique with potentially the least effect on soil's nitrogen cycle, possibly meeting root demands at best, provided roots have grown to a sufficient depth. [After acceptance of the manuscript]