The development of Andersonian faults is predicted, according to theory and experiments, for brittle/frictional deformation occurring in a homogeneous medium. In contrast, in an anisotropic medium it is possible to observe fault nucleation and propagation that is non-Andersonian in geometry and kinematics. Here, we consider post-metamorphic brittle/frictional deformation in the mechanically anisotropic mylonitic mica-schists of the Grandes Rousse Massif (France). The role of the mylonitic foliation (and of any other source of mechanical anisotropy) in brittle/frictional deformation is a function of orientation and friction angle. According to the relative orientation of principal stress axes and foliation, a foliation characterized by a certain coefficient of friction will be utilized or not for the nucleation and propagation of brittle/frictional fractures and faults. If the foliation is not utilized, the rock behaves as if it was isotropic, and Andersonian geometry and kinematics can be observed. If the foliation is utilized, the deviatoric stress magnitude is buffered and Andersonian faults/fractures cannot develop. In a narrow transition regime, both Andersonian and non-Andersonian structures can be observed. We apply stress inversion and slip tendency analysis to determine the critical angle for failure of the metamorphic foliation of the Grandes Rousses schists, defined as the limit angle between the foliation and principal stress axes for which the foliation was brittlely reactivated. This approach allows defining the ratio of the coefficient of internal friction for failure along the mylonitic foliation to the isotropic coefficient of friction. Thus, the study area can be seen as a km-scale triaxial experiment that allows measuring the degree of mechanical anisotropy of the mylonitic mica-schists. In this way, we infer a coefficient of friction 
                        
                           
                              μ
                              
                                 w
                                 e
                                 a
                                 k
                              
                           
                           =
                           0.14
                        
                      for brittle-frictional failure of the foliation, or 
                        
                           20
                           %
                        
                      of the isotropic coefficient of internal friction.Weak faults, characterized by an unfavourable orientation with respect to the regional stress field, are quite common in nature, even if they represent an anomaly according to the Anderson's theory of faulting ( The effect of anisotropy on deformation is qualitatively well known, and brittle-frictional failure of weakness surfaces like metamorphic foliations, bedding, and fracture sets is very often recognized as a fundamental factor influencing deformation modes or “structural styles” at all scales (e.g. In this contribution, we develop a new approach, combining meso- and micro-scale characterization of modes of brittle failure and paleostress analysis, allowing estimation of the in-situ stress field at the time of deformation. We apply this approach to mica-schists of the Grandes Rousses Massif (Helvetic-Dauphinois Domain of the French Alps). Paleostress and structural analysis allow us to reconstruct the loading conditions for failure modes in these anisotropic rocks, like in a true triaxial apparatus, but at the scale of 10 m to 1 km and for natural conditions at about 5 km depth. We will call this approach a “km-scale triaxial experiment”. The Grandes Rousses Massif ( The Grandes Rousses Massif is located between the Belledonne Massif, to the NW, and the Pelvoux Massif, to the SE. The Grandes Rousses and Belledonne represent two fragments of the same basement unit ( The Grandes Rousses Massif records three Alpine fold and thrust events (D2 to D4 in In the Miocene, the front of Alpine deformation migrated more externally ( We examined the NW part of the Grandes Rousses, to the north of the Pic de l'Étendard, in the glacial hanging valley of the three Saint Sorlin Lakes (Lac Bramant, Lac Blanc and Lac Tournant, Alpine deformation does not result in penetrative metamorphic foliations in this area, but in concentrated deformation along ductile shear zones, particularly in the mylonites of the Grandes Rousses Thrust separating the migmatitic gneiss and schists (phase D2-D3 of Biotite/chlorite schists outcropping on the western side of the Saint Sorlin lakes are characterized by a penetrative metamorphic foliation, locally developing in a mylonitic foliation with S/C/C′ fabric. This foliation is constituted by an alternation of phyllosilicate films with quartz and feldspar-rich layers. It shows a rather constant dip azimuth of about 103° (ESE); the dip angle varies from 60° to 90°, with maxima at about 65° to 75° ( Joints and veins are present in the whole area as arrays of subvertical to vertical fractures (average dip/azimuth 89/013, Both conjugate shear fractures crosscutting the metamorphic foliation, and cataclastic layers developed along it, are more abundant where the mylonitic fabric is more developed, particularly along the boundary between migmatitic gneiss and schists. The presence of either conjugate shear fractures crosscutting the metamorphic foliation, or cataclastic-ultracataclastic layers developed along it, is generally exclusive, such that we typically observed outcrops with only conjugate shear fractures ( Conjugate shear fractures crosscutting the metamorphic foliation are present in outcrops characterized by an average dip angle of the metamorphic foliation greater than about 70°, with an average dip/dip azimuth of 75°/104° ( Where cataclastic layers reactivate the metamorphic foliation, the foliation shows dip angles lower than about 70°, with an average dip/dip azimuth of 65°/102° ( The transition between modes of deformation characterized by conjugate fractures vs. cataclastic-ultracataclastic layers has been observed in a few outcrops where these structures coexist ( The coexistence and mutual crosscutting of conjugate shear fractures and cataclasite/ultracataclasite layers in outcrops such as those in Samples collected for microstructural analysis were chosen to represent the two different modes of deformation and the transition regime. Under the optical microscope ( Quartz grains show a bimodal grain-size distribution: smaller grains (1–10 μm) show irregular grain boundaries typical of bulging recrystallization, while larger ribbon-shaped grains (up to 1 mm) show polygonization due to progressive subgrain rotation recrystallization ( Tensional joints/veins develop perpendicular to foliation, and are often filled with quartz, chlorite, oxides, sulphides and less frequently carbonates. Quartz is arranged in fibres perpendicular to vein walls ( Volumes with meso-scale conjugate fractures also contain microscale shear fractures cutting the foliation at a large angle ( Increasing the magnification using SEM/BSE (Scanning Electron Microscopy, Backscattered Electrons Mode), we were able to characterize the deformation in phyllosilicates from early to more mature ultracataclasite stages ( Tiny micro-shear fractures, a few micrometers long, are present along (001) crystallographic planes and host small < 1 micrometer tabular fragments, partly or completely detached from the fracture walls, but not rotated ( In anastomosing arrays, microfractures are more continuous and organized ( Continuous ultracataclasite layers up to a thickness of 10–15 μm show tabular iso-oriented mica fragments ( Cataclasite layers thicker than 10–15 μm, up to some hundreds μm, show randomly-oriented different-sized mica fragments ( We reconstructed the paleostress field associated with the formation of the conjugate faults crosscutting foliation, and cataclastic layers along foliation, with WinTensor ( The minimization operated by WinTensor results in a best-fit paleostress tensor ( We used the results of stress inversion as the reference stress model for the slip tendency analysis ( Given a stress tensor For a given combination of stress axes orientation and shape ratio The observation that the maximum allowed slip tendency In other words, slip tendency defines the proneness to slip (or fail) of a surface with a given orientation subject to a prescribed stress field, which is maximum for Based on the stress inversion results, we calculated As expected from the Mohr-Coulomb failure criterion for isotropic rocks ( Additionally, we calculated the Dilation Tendency, defined as ( This parameter is a measure of the proneness of a tensional joint to open and eventually result in a mineralized vein. Tensional joints and veins (average dip/dip azimuth 89/013) show a high Thanks to a fortunate combination of inherited structural setting and Alpine paleostress conditions, we were able to quantitatively characterize the effect of the mechanical anisotropy of mica-schists in the Grandes Rousses Massif during the development of younger brittle structures. This analysis shows that, where a pre-existing mylonitic foliation was exploited by brittle shear failure, the coefficient of friction for activation of the foliation was Considering the mechanical behaviour of foliated rocks, the very low coefficient of friction that we have found represents an extreme example of the effects of a pre-existing mechanical anisotropy. If we compare the In terms of regional-scale tectonics, the extreme anisotropy of the Grandes Rousses mica-schists and gneiss has important consequences. The scale at which we conducted our study is between 10 m and 1 km, hence it is a scale that approaches that of numerical models developed for regional tectonics studies. If the anisotropic behaviour that we have described could be included in numerical models, the result will be a much weaker upper crust, and a different pattern of faults in foliated regions. However, including this mechanical behaviour in numerical models at the scale of the crust might be a difficult task, not only for numerical reasons, but mainly because linking the weakness to metamorphic foliation or other inherited structures introduces a sort of “memory effect” in the system. As already proposed by In any case, the Grandes Rousses case study is a useful example of regional consequences of mechanical anisotropy. The superimposed brittle deformation developed under a strike-slip regime, with The project presented here was carried out by FB during her PhD thesis with assistance by AB (Tutor). The paper was written by both co-authors. Matteo Massironi and Sergio Vinciguerra are warmly thanked for discussions at different stages of the project. The editor William Dunne, reviewer David Wallis, and an anonymous reviewer are thanked for very useful reviews and suggestions.