Mechanical loading has been shown to modulate longitudinal bone growth and cellular activity of the growth plate. Nevertheless, limited and controversial results exist regarding the effect of exercise on a physiological level on the growth plate. The present study investigated whether dose-dependent voluntary exercise has an influence on morphological, biochemical, and mechanical factors of the distal femoral growth plate of immature rats. Female growing Sprague–Dawley rats were randomly assigned to a unlimited exercise group (UE, n = 10), a limited exercise group (LE, n = 10), and a sedentary control group (CON, n = 10). The exercise groups were trained voluntarily in a running wheel for 8 weeks. The UE group could use the running wheel everytime, whereas the LE group had timely restricted (50%) access. After sacrifice, the right femur was prepared for histomorphometric analysis and immunohistochemical staining of the distal growth plate. Mechanical testing was carried out on the distal growth plate of the left femur in shear direction.
                  At the end of the study, the UE group had a significantly lower body mass than the CON group. There was no significant difference in overall femoral length between the groups. The height of the growth plate and the proliferation zone was significantly greater in the CON group than in both exercise groups. Only the LE group had a significantly lower hypertrophic zone and matrilin-3 staining pattern than the CON group. Osteonectin was located in the matrix of the upper hypertrophic zone in the UE group, whereas the LE and CON group showed more chondrocytes in the hypertrophic and lower proliferation zones stained for osteonectin, suggesting a higher level of mineralization in the growth plate of the UE group. No variations of mechanical properties of the distal femoral growth plate were detected. These results clearly demonstrate adaptations of morphology and biochemical parameters to the dose of running exercise, which do not result in significant differences in mechanical properties or bone length between the UE, LE, and CON groups.It is well established that mechanical loading is essential in skeletal development during growth, as well as it enables modifying geometry and morphology of bones after reaching maturity The effect of increased mechanical loading through centrifuging has been shown to affect cell number and height of the growth plate zones It is still unclear how exercise, typically resulting in a large number of loading cycles of various amplitudes and frequencies, can be integrated in Frost's chondral growth compression force response curve for growth plate cartilage. No information exists, if an adaptation of the growth plate to exercise, that is, alterations of mechanical strength or specific morphological characteristics, is possible without any consequences on longitudinal bone growth. Only very few studies have focused on adaptation of the growth plate in response to exercise, and the published results are inconsistent. Swissa-Sivan et al. To our knowledge, there are no studies investigating the effect of increased physical loading through exercise on the mechanical properties of the growth plate. In addition, the adaptation of the mechanical properties to exercise was not determined in relation to changes in morphological and biochemical parameters. The purpose of this study was to investigate the effect of dose-dependent voluntary exercise on mechanical, morphological, and biochemical properties of the distal femoral growth plate in the immature female rat. Thirty 3-week-old (77 ± 5 g) skeletally immature female Sprague–Dawley rats (Charles River, Sulzfeld, Germany) were randomly assigned to a unlimited exercise (UE, Control animals were kept in pairs in standard plastic cages, whereas the exercising rats lived in individual cages each connected to a running wheel. The animals lived under standard diet (Ssniff V 1534, Soest, Germany) and water ad libitum with a 12:12 h light/dark cycle. All animal experiments followed the principles of laboratory animal care and the German Law on the Protection of Animals. Body mass was determined weekly. The UE group had unlimited access to their running wheels (32-cm diameter) exercising voluntarily. For the LE group, the access to the running wheel was locked in mean every second day resulting in 50% access time. Each running wheel consisted of a magnet passing a magnetic switch at each revolution of the wheel. A custom-built controller circuitry connected to a PC was used to record and store the summed wheel rotations using a commercially available data acquisition software package (DasyLab 5.5, Datalog GmbH and Co.KG, Mönchengladbach, Germany). After 8 weeks, animals were killed by decapitation. The femora of the right and left hindlimbs were prepared by carefully dissection of the surrounding tissues under Tris-buffered saline (TBS). Subsequently, the mass of each femur was determined with an electronic precision balance (Kern and Sohn GmbH, Balingen-Frommern, Germany; sensitive until 0.001 g). The length of the femora was determined from caput femoris to the condylus medialis using an electronic caliper (Scala Messwerkzeuge GmbH, Neuffen, Germany; sensitive until 0.01 mm). Right and left femora were pooled for comparison of length and mass between groups. The right femora were processed for morphological and biochemical studies of the distal growth plate and fixed in Bouin solution for 3 days. The left femora were taken for the mechanical testing of the distal growth plate, and after shock-freezing in liquid nitrogen, they were stored at −80°C. After fixation, the bones were decalcified for 4 weeks in 20% EDTA (ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid) pH 7.5 at 37°C. The EDTA was replaced on a weekly basis until decalcification was complete. Subsequently, the bone samples were dehydrated in graded isopropyl alcohol. Then, the proximal portion and two thirds of the shaft were removed. The distal epiphyses were split into two halves in the sagittal plane, and the specimens were embedded in paraffin. Sections of 10 μm were made in the sagittal plane from the area of the condyles with a microtome (HM355s, Microm International GmbH, Walldorf, Germany) and stained using standard histological methods. One section of each growth plate was stained with Masson-Goldner's Trichrome to determine the height of both the proliferation (PZ) and hypertrophic (HZ) zone. Immunohistochemistry was carried out with antibodies directed against collagen type II (II-4C11, Merck Biosciences GmbH, Bad Soden, Germany), matrilin-3 Collagen type II, matrilin-3, and osteonectin expression was detected by horseradish peroxidase (HRP) staining using 3-amino-9-ethylcarbazole (AEC, Sigma, Germany) as a substrate. The slides were deparaffinized and endogenous peroxidase activity was blocked with 1% H The antibodies directed against collagen type II and matrilin-3 were diluted 1:100 in TBS containing 0.01% BSA. The osteonectin antibody was used in a dilution of 1:200 in the same buffer. The sections were incubated with the primary antibody overnight at 4°C. HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies (antimouse for collagen type II and osteonectin, antirabbit for matrilin-3) by a dilution of 1:100 were added for 1 h. Finally the sections were stained with AEC method according to the manufacturer's instructions. As a control, sections were incubated with primary or secondary antibodies alone but showed no staining (data not shown). From each growth plate, five images from different sites were obtained using a computer-coupled microscope (KS 300, Carl-Zeiss, Jena, Germany) with a 100-fold magnification The height of the total growth plate, the proliferation and hypertrophic zones, and the matrilin-3 staining pattern was measured at five sites in each of the five images from the section On the day of mechanical testing, the femora were thawed for 10 min at room temperature of 22°C. The proximal portion was removed from the shaft, and the femur was embedded in a metal cylinder (diameter: 3.2 cm; height: 4.5 cm) with fixation cement (Technovit 4000, Heraeus Kulzer GmbH, Wehrheim/Ts., Germany) to the end of the facies patellaris. The specimen was placed horizontally so that the distal growth plate was loaded in shear direction from lateral to medial at the epiphysis. Load was applied by the testing machine Z2.5/TN1S (Zwick GmbH and Co., Ulm, Germany; Results are presented as means ± SE. One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used to test for significant differences among the three experimental groups. To detect significant differences between individual experimental groups, significant ANOVAs were followed by post hoc Tukey test for multiple comparisons. Differences were considered significant at Results show that the UE rats run at least three times more than the LE rats No differences in body mass were present between the three groups at the beginning of the study In our study, there was no significant difference in mean cross-sectional area of the distal femoral growth plate between the UE group (39.9 ± 5.2 mm For the further immunohistochemical stainings, no differences were detected in the local distribution of the collagen type II between sections from the UE The physical activity did not result in any damages or cracks of the exercise rats as the histological sections demonstrated. The CON group had significantly higher growth plates as the UE ( The ultimate shear load of the distal femoral growth plate was 53.4 ± 10.5 N for the UE, 62.5 ± 14.3 N for the LE rats, and 62.4 ± 14.5 N for the CON rats This paper represents a first investigation of the adaptation behavior of the rat distal femoral growth plate to dose-dependent voluntary exercise by analyzing intraindividual three sets of parameters: morphological, biochemical, and mechanical properties. The results of this study are based on spontaneous unlimited and limited voluntary running exercise of the animals. The overall running distances monitored are comparable to results of previous studies which have used the voluntary running exercise model Obviously, the exercise did affect body mass development during growth. After 3 weeks, a significant ( The length of the femur was not different between the trained groups and control group, suggesting that exercise did not influence longitudinal bone growth, which is in good agreement with other studies Our microscopic sections demonstrate that the overall structure of the growth plate was not impaired through physical activity in both exercise groups, because no signs of damage or cracks could be identified. This indicates that the applied loads through the running exercise ranged within a physiological window. Although a huge difference in the total dose of exercise existed in the training groups, no negative effects on longitudinal bone growth were observed. Nevertheless, our data reveal that the total height of the growth plate and especially the height of the proliferation zone were lower in both, UE and LE rats, combined with no difference in total bone length. This result indicates no straightforward relationship between growth plate height and longitudinal growth rate and does not support the generalized claim that the height of the growth plate reflects the rate of bone growth The response of the growth plate morphology to physical loading is also dependent on age and gender. In a study by Huang et al. We analyzed the expressions of the proteins collagen type II, matrilin-3, and osteonectin which are related to the mechanical properties of the growth plate. Increased or decreased expression as well as an altered distribution of each of this proteins might influence the mechanical properties of the growth plate. In the LE group, the height of the matrilin-3 staining was significantly reduced, and for the UE group, a trend towards a reduced height ( To our knowledge, there are no studies which have analyzed the effect of exercise on the mechanical properties of the growth plate. In this study, we were unable to detect a statistically significant difference in the analyzed mechanical properties of the distal femoral growth plate, which is likely to be a reflection of the small sample size and reduced power to detect a relevant difference. Only the shear modulus of the UE group was significantly lower compared to the LE group and tendentially lower ( In conclusion, we provide the first data on growth plate adaptation to physical activity in mechanical, morphological, and biochemical terms. The results demonstrate that there was an adaptation in the analyzed parameters which indicate that the voluntary running exercise had an effect on the growth plate structure and function. The longitudinal bone growth rate of the trained rats was faster, and skeletal maturity was achieved earlier compared to the CON group. The authors would like to thank Professor Dr. Dr. H. Michna (Technical University of Munich) for his assistance in animal handling and morphologic studies and Dr. R. Wagener (University of Cologne) for providing the matrilin-3 antibodies.