In this study, the effect of mill speed was investigated on the limestone and the clinker samples of Göltaş Cement Factory (Isparta, Turkey) at batch grinding conditions based on a kinetic model. For this purpose, first, six different monosize fractions were carried out between 0.850 and 0.106 mm formed by a two-sieve series. Then, S
                     i and B
                     i,j equations were determined from the size distributions at different grinding times, and the model parameters (S
                     i, a
                     T,α,γ, and φ
                     j) were compared for five different mill speed (fractional of mill critical speed; 55%, 65%, 75%, 85%, and 95%).
                  The effect of the fraction of mill critical speed (φ
                     c) on the grinding for model parameter a
                     T was found to be different for two different samples: a
                     T=0.0344 exp(0.00301 φ
                     c) for clinker and a
                     T=0.0225 exp(0.06183 φ
                     c) for limestone. Additionally, it was found in this study that optimum grinding occurs at φ
                     c=85%, in contrast to the 70% of critical speed of the ball mill in the cement factory.Comminution is extremely energy-intensive, consuming 3% to 4% of the electricity generated worldwide and comprising up to 70% of all energy required in a typical cement plant During the last decade, there have been considerable improvements in comminution efficiency not only due to the development of machines with the ability to enhance energy utilisation but also due to the optimal design of grinding systems and operating variables that enable more efficient use of existing machines In the design of grinding circuits in a cement plant, the Bond method is widely used to evaluate the performance and determine the power required and the mill size for a material. This method is complex, and it takes a very long time. In addition, it is very sensitive to procedural errors. For this reason, different methods have been proposed as an alternative to the Bond method by many investigators. In the recent years, the matrix model and kinetic model, which are suggested by investigators, have been used in laboratories and industrial areas. The kinetic model, which is an alternative approach, considers comminution as a continuous process in which the rate of the breakage of particle size is proportional to the mass present in that size. The analysis of size reduction in tumbling ball mills using the concepts of specific rate of breakage and primary daughter fragment distribution has received considerable attention in the last years. Austin et al. The use of Portland limestone cements has many benefits, both technical and economical. The European Prestandard prEN 197-1 identifies two types of Portland limestone cement containing 6–20% limestone and 21–35% limestone, respectively. It is expected that the future world production and use of Portland limestone cement will be significantly extended. These materials have different grindabilities, and the individual particle size distribution of each component influences the cement hydration and ultimately its performance Various laboratory studies, pilot plant works, and full-size-plant observations showed that the mill speed, which is an operating variable, can affect grinding efficiency at a given output fineness. The normal specific rates of breakage vary with mill speed in the same way. However, the maximum in power occurs at different fractions of critical speed from one mill to another, depending on the mill diameter, the type of lifters, the ratio of ball-to-mill diameter, and the ball and powder filling conditions. The maximum is usually found within the range of 70–85% of critical speed. Within the range of speed near the maximum, the power drawn are relatively small changes in the normal specific breakage rates with rotational speed. There is no significant variation in The change from cascading to cataracting pattern is the cause of the peak of feed size specific rate of breakage Austin and Brame This paper presents a comparison of the breakage parameters with mill speed under the standard conditions in a small laboratory ball mill of clinker and limestone samples, which are ground at the condition 70% of critical speed of cement ball mill in Göltaş Cement Factory. When breakage is occurring in an efficient manner, the breakage of a given size fraction of material usually follows a first-order law Assuming that On breakage, particles of a given size produce a set of primary daughter fragments, which are mixed into the bulk of the powder and would then in turn have a probability of being refractured. The set of primary daughter fragments from breakage of size Limestone and clinker samples taken from Göltaş Cement Factory were used as the experimental materials. The chemical compositions of the limestone and the clinker samples are presented in Firstly, Standard Bond Work index tests were made for limestone and clinker samples. The Bond Work index values of limestone and clinker samples were determined as 13.52 and 13.69 kWh/t, respectively. The standard set of grinding conditions used is shown in The first-order plots for the various feed sizes of limestone and clinker samples are given in The dry-grinding of size intervals of limestone and clinker samples showed that both samples followed the first-order breakage law with constant normalized primary breakage distributions. The values of the primary daughter fragment distributions and the values of Herbst and Fuerstenau The values of It can be seen from the data in Austin et al. The variation of It can be seen from Although limestone and clinker samples have close work index values 13.53 and 13.69 kWh/t, respectively, they have demonstrated entirely different characteristics in the selection function and the breakage function model parameters. In addition, these samples do not depend on the particle size from cumulative breakage distribution function. In this study, it was found that optimum grinding occurs at 85% of critical speed, compared to the optimum grinding at 70% of critical speed of the ball mill in the cement factory. The variation of This study showed that grinding kinetic parameters could be different for clinker and limestone. Therefore, it has appeared that the grinding kinetics for each material must be evaluated to lower the energy costs in the grinding process.