A pilot-scale flotation apparatus has been developed for the purpose of determining floatability parameters for an ore. It has the capability to vary many of the important flotation variables allowing them to be investigated independently. Adjustable factors include: cell size, froth depth, feed, tailings and air volumetric flow rates and reagent addition rates.
                  The flotation rig was commissioned successfully at BHP Billiton’s Cannington mine in North-West Queensland, Australia. It was found to supply a stable feed stream with air well distributed across the cell. At the test conditions, the relative standard deviation of the calculated galena overall recovery was found to be only 1%.
                  Such an apparatus could prove invaluable in flotation research, allowing live streams from an operating industrial flotation plant to be processed continuously. The versatility of the design and accuracy of performance allow the investigation of most major flotation variables with confidence.There are two main approaches for determining floatability parameters for the Australian Mineral Industry Research Association (AMIRA) P9 flotation model ( A single-stage pilot-scale apparatus has been built for the purpose of investigating the P9 model parameters, specifically P. Requisite features include: simple stable continuous operation, high reproducibility giving confidence in the determined parameters, access to all streams to give redundant data in mass balancing, access to the pulp volume for gas dispersion sampling, adjustable froth height and control of feed, air and reagent addition rates as well as impeller speed. This paper details the performance of the apparatus at a single, industrially relevant condition in terms of the variability of stream flows and cell overall, froth and pulp zone true flotation recoveries on an unsized basis. The apparatus, originally designed and constructed as a high The 40-L cell used in the commissioning work is of square section (35 Outotec style impeller mechanism surrounded by fixed stator. Bottom driven by electric motor with speed control. Adjustable height concentrate launder. Internal false wall allowing tailings to exit the cell. Fixed overflow weir, defining pulp level. Overflowing tailings sampled by gravity, tailings on cell side of weir pumped from base of weir. The rig consists of the following components: Three 230-L capacity sumps. Three Lightnin electric mixers (model EV5P37) with two impellers per mixer. Bredel SPX25 peristaltic pump with variable speed drive for the feed. T-valve on feed line allowing sampling of the feed. T-piece on side of cell allowing in-line addition of reagents. Watson Marlow 101U/R Mk 2 peristaltic pump for frother addition. Verderflex 120 peristaltic pump with 0.37 Wash water nozzle on internal side of overflow weir, pushing settling particles into the tailings pump. Festo digital flow meter (model number SFE1-LF-F200-WQ8-P2I-M12) to read air flow rate (injected below impeller mechanism). The operating procedure for the rig when used in continuous mode to treat a stream from an operating plant (which is its primary intended use) is described below: Switch on power. Start sump mixers. Fill feed sumps from plant (during commissioning they were set up as two feed sumps in series giving a total feed volume of 460-L). Add collector (in this case dissolved in beakers with process water) to feed sumps simultaneously and allow to condition. During conditioning set cell impeller speed and air flow rate to preliminary values for the test (these may change upon introduction of slurry to the cell). If required measure pH, Eh and dissolved oxygen demand in feed sump. After conditioning period start feed and frother pumps simultaneously (cell is initially filled with process water to avoid solids settling during filling). Start tailings pump. Adjust impeller speed and air flow rate until steady at required values. Allow to stabilise for four residence times to reach steady-state. Control feed sump levels such that half of the bottom sump is emptied, then filled with half of the top sump; once the bottom sump again empties to half, the remaining slurry in the top sump is emptied to the bottom. Terminate tests once the top impeller in the bottom sump begins to show. This procedure eliminates particle settling in either of the feed sumps. Sample tailings, concentrate and feed (in that order to minimise disruption to the cell). If required take cell characterisation measurements. Upon completion of test, the sumps, pumps and cell must be washed out thoroughly to remove any remaining solids or reagents. The pumps are stopped, the impeller speed decreased and the top sump cleaned, followed by the bottom one, with some fresh water added. This water is then pumped into the cell to flush the feed lines. The cell is drained, washed out and filled with fresh water. Some of this water is pumped through the tailings pump. The air is left on at all times to prevent blocking the line. The cell is then ready for another test. Measure the flow rate of wash water used in the overflow weir before and after a series of experiments to complete the cell water balance. The rig was commissioned, characterised and tested with the 40-L continuous cell using the flotation plant feed stream at BHP Billiton’s Cannington mine in North-West Queensland, Australia. Cannington is a silver-lead–zinc mine; the major minerals are galena, sphalerite and quartz. The reagents used were sodium ethyl xanthate (SEX) as collector for galena, and methyl isobutyl carbinol (MIBC) as frother. The objectives of the tests were to commission the rig on solids, and to characterise the apparatus in terms of solids mixing in the sumps, gas dispersion in the cell and stability of operation and performance. The operating conditions employed during the test work programme were: air flow rate 110 The ability of the apparatus to provide a stable feed stream was assessed in two ways. Firstly, the solids suspension in the bottom feed sump was checked by profiling the percent solids and particle size distribution (F Gas dispersion characteristics were profiled across the 40-L cell to determine the most representative position for sampling. It was found that there was little variation in the measurements around the cell, indicating that gas was well dispersed. Sauter mean bubble diameter was noticeably smaller in a corner of the cell. Superficial gas velocity and gas hold-up were also somewhat lower in this position. Bubble load Operational stability was assessed by conducting three repeat tests. Considering that the feed stream has been sourced from an industrial grinding circuit the parameters have quite reasonable relative standard deviations, not exceeding 10%. The relative standard deviation of the feed galena assay was found to be comparable to that of a single measurement; seven identical samples were submitted independently for assay, giving an average galena grade of 5.8 Recovery values were calculated for attached material, with the contribution from entrainment removed. This was done using the technique of  These results indicate that, when operating under typical industrial conditions, the flotation rig gives very reproducible results in terms of valuable mineral overall recovery. The high standard deviations of the calculated froth recovery values are caused by the high variability of the bubble load measurement rather than the performance of the rig. A pilot-scale apparatus for the isolation of important flotation variables has been presented. It was found that the apparatus was able to provide a stable feed stream, gas was well distributed across the cell and the measured valuable mineral overall recovery was very reproducible. The apparatus represents a powerful tool for the systematic study of flotation variables and phenomena. The author wishes to thank the following parties. Prof. Marco Vera for designing the rig. Robert Marshall and Michael Kilmartin of the JKMRC workshop for building the rig. Dr. Robert Alford and the metallurgical and technical staff at BHP Billiton’s Cannington mine for allowing and assisting the test work. Carlos Vanegas and Rena Varadi of the JKMRC for helping conduct the flotation tests. This research was supported under