Electromagnetic wave (EMW) pollution impairs the performance of equipment, facilities, information security, and human health. Ordinary, plain cementitious composite has limited EMW-reflecting capacity. To correct this, a macrostructure EMW absorbing element has been developed to reduce EMW pollution. As conventional casting of macrostructures is not cost-effective and lacks quality because of the demand for special formwork, 3D printing technology offers greater design flexibility, higher efficiency, and improved mechanical properties. Moreover, the surface texture of 3D-printed material exhibits natural corrugation to enhance EMW reflection further. In this study, novel wave-shaped EMW absorbing elements were fabricated using 3D cementitious printing technology. The EMW absorbing performance was analyzed by the naval research laboratory (NRL) system in the range of 1 GHz–18 GHz. Significant improvement of reflectivity was observed, especially in the low-frequency range. The optimum configuration was identified through effectiveness evaluation to be a K3 sample with 45 mm of heave height and 2/3 tan(θ), exhibiting a minimum reflectivity −43.7 dB, mean reflectivity −25 dB, and an absorbing bandwidth of 18 GHz. The experimental reflectivity was also simulated by the finite element method, which agrees with the experimental results. The synthetic vector electromagnetic field distribution was also studied to explore space impedance characteristics. Moreover, the finite element method attempted to correct drawbacks in experiments, including multiple direction reflection measurement and wave-number interruption. Based on simulation calibration, the influence of wave-shaped parameters (heave height and tangent value) upon EMW absorbing capacity was induced accurately.The rapid development of the modern electronics industry has led to the diversification of electronic products from radio and radar systems to computer networks and high-voltage transmission lines [ However, even with the addition of these absorbents, ordinary plain EMW absorbing cementitious composite has limited EMW absorption capacity and narrow effective absorption bandwidth. This is because most EMW absorbents’ dielectric constant and magnetic permeability are unevenly distributed in the relevant frequency domain, resulting in an unaccountable reflectivity peak value as well as EMW bandwidth [ Novel macrostructures, such as wave-shaped elements with outstanding EMW absorption capacity, are a popular focus [ Despite the numerous advantages of macrostructure, EMW absorbing cementitious composite, the current casting method faces challenges regarding design flexibility and costs [ This paper proposes a wave-shaped, EMW absorbing element to improve the EMW absorbing capacity by using 3D printing technology. To improve the EMW absorbing capacity and guarantee printability, a mixture combining both copper slag and copper powder as the EMW absorber is carefully designed for the 3D-printed EMW absorbing, cementitious composites. Eleven wave-shaped EMW absorbing elements are fabricated by the 3D-printing methodology, EMW reflection experiments are conducted, and the optimum configuration is identified. Finite element simulation using COMSOL is verified by experimental reflectivity results. The EMW absorbing mechanism of the wave-shaped element is then identified through the electric field and surface current distribution simulation. To revise the drawback in experiments, the double-port methodology and the multiplied expanding methodology are adopted. On success on simulation calibration, the influence of wave-shaped macroscale configuration parameters, including wave element height and slope value, are explored in an accurate way upon EMW-reflecting performance. This study lays the foundation for the potential general application of 3D printing technology to construction engineering based on the understanding of the EMW absorbing behavior of wave-shaped elements. A combination of a novel type of copper slag (CS) and a copper powder (CP) was applied to develop the 3D printable EMW absorbing composites. In addtion, copper powder was also supplementarily applied because its higher metal content (Cu and Zn element) at 99% with excellent EMW absorbing capacity. Also, excessive copper slag resulted in increased extrusion friction and degenerate rheological property. The copper powder owned smooth edges and posed a lubrication effect that reduced the bonding friction among the aggregate-calcium silicate hydrate (C–S–H) interface. In conclusion, the combination of the ingredients ensured shape-retention and load-sustainability, revealing the printability of cementitious composites. According to Ma et al. [ After determing material category, seven copper-slag-to-cement weight ratios (5%, 10%, 15%, 20%, 25%, 30%, 35%) were adopted to investigate the EMW absorbing property of composites. After the printability experiments, the weight ratio of 25% was chosen. Afterwards, five weight percentages (2%, 4%, 6%, 8%, 10%) of copper powders to cement were explored. After the reflectivity loss experiments in plain sheet structure, a mixture design combining copper slag (25%) and copper powder (6%) was determined for the 3D printed EMW absorbing cementitious composites. The design proportions of the 3D-printed composite are demonstrated in The proposed cementitious composite in this study was competitive in material cost because it utilized less filler content with relative lower price. Other studies of EMW absorbing materials applied copper slag contents ranging from 25.8% to 50% of mortar [ The 3D printing system was our self-developed desktop cementitious extrusion printer for investigating material behaviors and fabricating small-sized components as shown in Apart from the hardware, the system had an integrated software system. The system's printing parameters, such as screw rods extruding speed, nozzle running speed, layer thickness, and laminar time interval among adjacent layers could all be automatically set. The print route could also be designed with varying options. Meanwhile, the listed parameters could be calibrated directly in the printing system to accommodate the flowability and stiffness development of mixtures. A circular nozzle opening diameter was designed to reduce interruptions caused by route direction variations with flexible printing velocity controlled by the extrusion machine. Its 12-mm diameter was determined as the optimized parameter to contribute to maximizing mechanical strength. It provided sufficient transverse stiffness and also enabled the fiber-orientation effect in the printing procedure. The rest time influenced versatile rheological ties, including deformation performance, early age toughness, and paste bonding capacity. After repeated calibration and adjustment, the paste rest time The focus of this paper's research was based on the influences of macroscale configuration on the EMW absorbing capacity. To Whom It May Concern: Whom It May Concern: compare the EMW absorbing effectiveness of 3D printing technology and traditional casting technology, a sample (CC) of 180 mm (W) × 180 mm (L) × 14 mm (H) was cast with a smooth surface as a counterpart. Simultaneously, two printed samples in different extrusion configurations were fabricated as counterparts, shown in The samples, including cast and printed, were cured at a relative humidity of 95 ± 5% for 28 days with an ambient temperature of 20 ± 1 °C. When the curing procedure was finished, all wave elements and plate samples were treated with a low-temperature drying procedure at 60 °C. This process was stopped when no weight was further reduced. The naval research laboratory (NRL) system was used to measure the EMW reflectivity in the range of 1 GHz–18 GHz, complying with the standard GJB 2038–94 [ In addition to directly measuring the reflectivity of the wave-shaped element, the electromagnetic parameters (permeability and permittivity) of the proposed composite was also measured by testing the grounded material powder. The permeability and permittivity were used in the numerical simulation to further investigate the EMW absorbing mechanism of the proposed macrostructures. The Agilent E5071C network analyzer measured the S-parameters and, based on the transmission line model, results were recorded in the range of 1 GHz–18 GHz. To begin, after the 28-day curing process, the manufactured samples were subjected to drying treatment and were then ground into a fine powder. The powder was mixed with dissolved paraffin wax at 20 wt% proportion, which glued the powder, allowing it to serve as an electromagnetic medium. After that, the composite was depressed into a toroid-shape mold of 2 mm in height, 7.05 mm in outer diameter, and 3 mm in inner diameter. Every cylindrical sample was finally tested by a coaxial holder along the frequency range of 1 GHz–18 GHz to obtain the real and imaginary parts of the electromagnetic parameters. The time-domain plot was one of the most significant factors for the network characteristics because it indicated the transient response of the electromagnetic sweep pulse. The transmitter released the ideal step function signal and got an instant distortion response by output waveform as a frequency-domain plot. This frequency-domain plot was then transferred into the time-domain plot h(t) by an inverse Fourier transformation. The h(t) function was then calibrated to diminish EMW interference by setting an appropriate gate position and a corresponding threshold value. As structural material, it is critical to guarantee the mechanical strength which is significantly affected by printing quality. After careful adjustion of the chemical additive and printing parameter, the internal structure was compacted to reduce cold joints, which comprehensively improved rheological performance as well as mechanical capacity. The 3D printed mixture created excellent mechanical strength which was superior to casted counterpart shown in The EMW energy exhaustion was divided into two main categories, namely dielectric loss and magnetic loss. The integrated influence of relative permittivity and permeability symbolized the EM wave within the inner field. The parameters were expressed as During the measurement process, interference by the addition of wax of 20 wt% fraction was calculated using the Bruggeman mixture permittivity and permeability formulas [ The permeability and permittivity of the proposed composite were physically tested, as shown in For the real and imaginary parts of permeability, both parameters demonstrated a descending trend due to a similar heterogeneity level for spin rotations. The According to the intrinsic electromagnetic parameter experiments, considerable energy dissipation and EMW absorbing potential were found for the novel composite. These electromagnetic parameters can be used to determine the theoretical reflection loss distributions through the application of the transform line theory, laying the foundation to improve the current model in terms of macroscale configuration and surface roughness. Taking specimen L The influence of 3D-printed surface roughness on EMW absorbing performance was explored to set the foundation for the wave-shaped elements’ reflectivity calculation model. All eleven wave-shaped elements were divided into three batches with respective identical H factors, namely K group (H = 45 mm), A group (H = 90 mm), and L group (H = 180 mm). In each group, a printed plain slab CP was engaged in the comparison chart to derive the macroscale parameters. The EMW reflections of the printed plain slab and different height, wave-shaped element groups are depicted in For the 45-mm high group, as shown in   Put simply, the addition of the wave structure improved the EMW absorbing capacity given both the average and peak RL. When the tan(θ) and height met a specific inverse condition, significant improvement of EMW absorbing capacity in the low frequency was detected. By contrast, the improvement of the wave-shaped element had a saturation limitation, beyond which no further improvement could be availed. An adverse effect may also be yielded. Moreover, the high-frequency range reflection exceeded low-frequency ranges. First, as for absorbent material characteristics, the permittivity and permeability changed continuously when frequency grew, improving theoretical energy exhaustion and structural impedance matching in a transformed line calculation model. Second, because of the size effect mechanism, when the sample's geometric size is similar to the wavelength of the microwave, the structure occluded EMW mechanically. Specifically, when the incident EMW frequency rose, its wavelength shrank to around 16 mm (18 GHz), which resembled the individual structure's heave width (14 mm) to incur better high-frequency absorption. Third, high-frequency microwave obtains more concentrated reflection lobe width and less energy deviation than low-frequency ones. This microwave transmission characteristic denotes that higher energy exhaustion efficiency (reduced traveling waves, scattering, diffraction, etc.) will be created. To test the proposed macrostructure, the NRL system had two main drawbacks that were caused by the limitations of the receiver port and sample width, which affected the accuracy of the measurement. To overcome the drawbacks, finite element simulation was carried out for the K General information about the mesh of the finite element model is given in For the electromagnetic properties, the material was defined according to the measured intrinsic permeability and permittivity. The electromagnetic parameters for air were defined as 1 for permeability ( Based on the electromagnetic parameters, the dielectric field was determined using Maxwell equations in the frequency domain, so that The perfect matching layer (PML) was specified at 250 mm above the element top and 100 mm below the element bottom. The two layers absorbed all the reflected EMW to diminish interruption by the superposition effect of the electromagnetic fields. The model is a Descartes type with a scaling factor of 1. The wave-shaped element manufactured by the 3D printing technique had rough surfaces, which significantly influenced the impedance matching observed in the NRL experiments. The algorism used in the simulation is defined as Based on the impedance simulation, the EMW absorbing capacity for the single-layer composite was expressed as  The simulation for K For the K The basic electromagnetic material characteristics, including the flux density and the electric field intensity, were expressed as [   Based on the electric field and surface current distribution, the degeneration phenomenon of K The wave-shaped element yielded multiple EMW reflections compared to the traditional sheet structure. Experimental equipment, however, can only capture a limited area symmetrical to the transmitter port without capturing residual reflected EMW signals, which incurred inflated EMW reflection capacity. Given that, for the sake of being conservative, it was necessary to measure EMW signals from all directions, especially in real engineering practice. As a result, the double-port methodology was adopted. Specifically, in expecting the current receiver port symmetrical to the transmitter port, an additive receiver port was established below and all along the top as perfect matching layers to grasp residual microwave. All other wave-shaped elements were also revised using the proposed double-receiver ports methodology to elaborate real EMW absorbing capacity. Taking the K When the macroscale parameter (H and slope tangent) varies, the individual wave width, which is geometrically related parameter, also shifts. However, for the vector network analysis system, the transmitter and receiver plot and sample plant are fixed in an area of 180 mm(W) × 180 mm(L). As a result, the samples’ wavenumber has to be terminally changed to adapt the experimental equipment despite it ought to be constant. This drawback cannot explore the superposition effect between individual waves, especially for fewer wavenumber structures, leaving inaccurate EMW absorbing capacity. Given that, the multiplied expanding methodology is proposed in finite element simulation by expanding the alumni sheet, transmitter-receiver ports size simultaneously. The calibration is aiming at exploring how overlapped electromagnetic characteristic distribution belonging to individual wave structures influences the EMW absorbing performance. Terminally, all finite element simulations are improved by using the multiplied expanding methodology to reduce experimental defects by eliminating the wavenumber variable.   However, the slope was too steep and triggered a degenerated EMW absorbing capacity. This may have been incurred through excessive structural EMW parameters that resulted in a decline of cementitious composite-free space impedance performance. Meanwhile, due to the 3D printing manufacture characteristic, the printed heave top demonstrated a round-shape tendency that triggered increased direct surface reflection and reduces the EMW absorbing performance. Moreover, the low-frequency effect was also validated in finite element simulation in K  Among all simulations, the K In this paper, the novel wave-shaped electromagnetic wave absorbing cementitious composite was manufactured using 3D printing technology. The following conclusions were drawn from the study's experiments, numerical simulation, and theoretical study. The influence of macroscale parameters of wave-shaped cementitious elements upon the EMW absorbing capacity was primarily proved by the time-domain plot using the time difference value, laying the foundation for experimental exploration and simulation analysis. The 3D-printed wave structure promoted the EMW absorbing capacity. The printed specimen exhibited an RL peak value that was 4 dB lower than that of the traditional cast sample and had an EMW absorbing bandwidth that was 2.71 GHz broader than the counterpart of the cast specimen. This was because the printed, rough, corrugated surfaces tended to increase the EMW propagation distance, leading to high EMW energy consumption, multiple EMW reflections, and EMW scattering effects. These reflected directions were disorganized due to the heaves that modify surface impedance matching capacity. EMW absorbing performance in the high-frequency range exceeded that of the low-frequency ranges. First, absorbent material characteristics changed when frequency grew and availed better EMW absorbing capacity. Second, given the size effect mechanism, when the sample's geometric size was similar to the microwave wavelength, the structure was able to occlude EMW mechanically. Third, high-frequency microwave obtained a more concentrated reflection lobe width and less energy deviation than low-frequency ones. This microwave transmission characteristic denoted higher energy exhaustion efficiency creation. The low-frequency effect was validated in both experiments and finite element simulations. This phenomenon was attributed to the size effect for the wave structure to occlude EMW energy. In the low-frequency range of 1 GHz–2 GHz (150 mm–300 mm wavelength), when the slope shifts to a steep degree from which cannot supply the occlusion effect to a certain threshold, the structural geometric size for heave decreases to the similar magnitude with microwave length, activating a desirable size occlusion effect. The K The finite element simulation results for reflectivity were in close agreement with the experimental results. The finite element simulations (electric field and surface current distribution) suggested the superposition of vector electromagnetic field results in the improved electromagnetic field parameters and enhanced impedance matching. The crests and the head surface of the wave elements harbored the highest current density, especially in the high-frequency range. This finding may serve as evidence that EMW reflectivity degenerates in this area, complying with the experimental findings. The proposed finite element calibrations, including double-port methodology and multiplied expanding methodology, contributed to the correction of experimental configuration drawbacks. This helped accurately explore the influence of wave-shaped parameters upon EMW absorbing capacity. Regarding the wave-shaped macroscale parameters, the lower tan(θ) was prone to yield better EMW absorbing capacity. Also, the low-frequency absorption effect is created at a lower tan(θ). The above results are attributed to the slope-enhanced, contacting surface, prolonged energy exhaustion, optimized structural impedance matching, and EMW scattering and transmission. However, excessive slope triggers degenerated EMW absorbing capacity, which was caused by a decline in structural impedance and increased direct surface reflection at the printed, round-heave top. As the other parameter, structural height did not significantly improve EMW absorption capacity, especially in the low-frequency and high-frequency ranges. The variation of structural height could not effectively change the electromagnetic parameter, energy reflection-diffraction direction, and vector superposition results in electromagnetic field distribution. Due to the enlarged structural geometric size, the high-frequency absorption peak was found to shift to a low-frequency domain to activate the size effect at a lower height. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This research study is financially supported by the