Knelson Concentrator (KC) has been widely used in industrial gravity separation processes. In the present study, the separation process for a multiphase flow in a laboratory Knelson Concentrator (LKC) is numerically simulated using a 4-way coupled CFD-DEM approach. The simulation of the complex multiphase flow is carried out by using a hybrid Eulerian–Lagrangian model, dense discrete phase model (DDPM), as well as DEM collision model to include the solid inter-particle collisions and to compute individual particles trajectories. The particle–fluid interaction is considered by exchanging momentum through the interaction forces such as drag force, virtual mass force and pressure gradient force between the DEM and the CFD computations. The Realizable Mixture k-ε turbulence model is selected to model the turbulence of fluid phase due to its swirling nature. Since coupled simulations are computationally expensive and challenging, the separation process inside the laboratory KC bowl was simulated for a real process time of 20 s under the specific conditions. Coupled CFD-DEM simulation yields valuable information about both particle and fluid flow patterns such as residence time distribution and velocity magnitude of particles inside the rings which are difficult or even impossible to measure experimentally with sufficient accuracy; meanwhile, the simulation results are expressed in terms of performance indices, i.e., concentrate grade and total recovery. To validate the simulation predictions, the authors carried out an experimental test under the same operating conditions used in the simulation. A complete agreement between simulation predictions and laboratory measurements for concentrate grade and total recovery was observed both qualitatively and quantitatively which validates coupled CFD-DEM simulation.Knelson Concentrator (KC) is a semi-continuous centrifugal fluidized bed concentrator that has been widely used for recovering gold and platinum group metals (PGMs) from grinding circuits. The separation principle of this apparatus is based on the relative settling velocity differential between the particles which vary in size and density. The difference in centrifugal forces exerted upon heavy and light particles and concentrate bed fluidization are the key promoters of the separation process ( The feed slurry in the KC is a complex and multiphase flow which consists of water as fluid phase and different mineral particles as solid phases. The weight percent of solids in the feed slurry is commonly adjusted between 30% and 70%, which demonstrates a relatively high dense flow ( According to the Newton’s second law, the motion of a spherical particle in a fluid under the action of a centrifugal field and the forces acting on settling can be derived from Eq. Multiphase flows exist in many industrial applications such as fluidized bed flows and a detailed knowledge of these flows is crucial for design, scale‐up, optimization, and troubleshooting of such processes ( In CFD–DEM approach, the fluid phase is assumed to be a continuum and its mesoscale motion is described by the volume averaged Navier–Stokes equation, while the microscale motion, behaviour and interaction of the particles are captured by Newton’s and Euler’s second laws, with considering the proper interaction force exchanges between the DEM and the CFD. The coupled CFD–DEM method has been successfully applied to the modelling and simulation of several applications such as fluidization ( In the field of mineral processing, CFD–DEM has been also used for simulation of particle flows in tumbling mills ( In the last decade, there had been a few works reported in the literature about the modelling of KC with different approaches for the purpose of optimization, performance improvement and control. Recently, In the present study, a four-way coupled CFD-DEM simulation approach was applied to include the effect of drag force exerted on particles and inter-particle collisions which allows for a more realistic simulation of separation process inside LKC bowl with three different phases, one fluid phase of water and two solid phases of mineral particles. The coupled simulation was performed in three dimensions to predict the particles flow under specific conditions. For implementation of the simulation, the authors used the geometry of LKC with a feed hopper that will be explained in the next sections. In order to validate the simulation results, the authors carried out an experiment under the same operating conditions used in the simulation and compared the separation performance from experimental measurements and simulation predictions. The motion of solid particles present in the feed slurry of LKC are modelled using the discrete element method where governing equations for the particle flow are the Newton’s second law of motion and the Euler’s second law of motion for the angular momentum change. To reduce computational time, for the current CFD-DEM simulation, all particles are assumed to be spherical. The main governing equations for spherical particles in the system are presented as below ( The first term on the right‐hand side of Eq. The DEM implementation accounts for the forces that result from the collision of particles. In this study, a soft sphere contact model was applied where the forces from the particle collisions are determined by deformation, which is measured as the overlap between pairs of spheres or between a sphere and a boundary particle ( The Young’s modulus has the unit of Pascal and is normally in the range of 1 GPa to a few 100 GPa. The Poisson ratio is a dimensionless constant in the range of −1 to 0.5. For the Young’s modulus, a non-realistic value is used, which is a common practice in DEM simulations in order to save computational time (       The movement of an incompressible fluid with particles can be described using the equations of conservation of mass (or continuity) and the conservation of momentum (or Navier–Stokes). In the standard formulation of the Lagrangian multiphase discrete phase model (DPM), the assumption is that the volume fraction of the particles is sufficiently low and the particle–particle interactions are not taken into consideration. In the LKC separation process which is considered here, these interactions have a noticeable impact, as the density of feed slurry is relatively high, explaining the need for CFD-DEM simulations. It is believed that particle–particle interactions have to be included as soon as volume fraction of the solids becomes more than 0.0004 ( The advantage of CFD-DEM simulations compared with DPM, is that particle–particle interactions and the effects of particles swarm (where particle disturbance of the fluid locally affects the motion of other particles as well) on the flow modifications are directly taken into account. However, in order to overcome this limitation and to speed up the DPM method, a new model has been developed in which the collisions between particles are not simulated directly, as in DEM, but they are considered and described by means of Kinetic Theory of Granular Flows (KTGF) and thus the computational efficiency is considerably enhanced ( This model which is called dense discrete phase model (DDPM), instead of considering the detailed collisions between particles, introduces transport equation of granular temperature and uses granular stress to account for the effect brought by the collision between particles. For calculation of the particles interactions, first the position of the particles is mapped on the Eulerian grid and the interactions are calculated on this grid, then calculated interaction terms are mapped back on the particles positions. Particle tracking in this method has several important fundamental advantages over standard Eulerian multifluid approaches including the much improved grid independence behaviour and easy inclusion of particle size distributions ( DDPM is available under the framework of Eulerian multiphase model at the ANSYS Fluent software and uses a hybrid Eulerian–Lagrangian approach. In this approach, the groups of particles identical both in density and diameter (known as a parcel) are tracked in a Lagrangian frame of reference. DDPM benefits also from the advantages of Eulerian multiphase model which is the only appropriate model to handle flows with high solids concentrations such as fluidized beds where a four-way coupling is necessary; meanwhile, the main advantage of DDPM over the Eulerian model is that there is no need to define classes to handle particle size distributions. This is done in a natural way in the Lagrangian formulation of DPM model. The published research on applications of DDPM to study the behaviour of dense fluid-solid flows were found to be limited in literature ( The first term on the right-hand side is the drag force per unit particle mass, where The particle equation of motion includes a gravitational force, so it is important to define the magnitude and direction of the gravitational acceleration vector. Some additional forces can gain importance under special circumstances. For example, when the density ratio of fluid phase to particle phase is greater than 0.1, the virtual mass force (the force required to accelerate the fluid surrounding the particle) and the pressure gradient force (the force arisen due to the pressure gradient in the fluid) become significant and it is recommended to include these forces in the particle force balance. The term Particle rotation is also another normal part of particle motion and can have a major effect on the trajectory of a particle moving in a fluid. This effect is more pronounced for large and/or heavy particles with high moments of inertia. To account for particle rotation, the following equation is solved for the angular momentum of the particle: The drag force describing the interaction between fluid and all solid particles is computed using the drag model of Gidaspow, which is recommended for dense fluidized beds ( Previous experimental studies have shown that the main flow regime inside the LKC is transitional from laminar to turbulent ( In multiphase flows, the number of terms to be modelled in the momentum equations is large, and this makes the modelling of turbulence extremely complex in such flows in comparison with single phase flows. There are different methods for modelling turbulence in multiphase flows within the context of the k-ε turbulence model ( In multiphase flows, particles can influence the turbulent quantities by damping or producing turbulent eddies. Damping occurs when the particle diameter is less than one tenth of the turbulent length scale whereas larger particles can produce turbulence kinetic energy ( Additionally, the dispersion of particles due to turbulence in the fluid phase was predicted using the stochastic tracking model. The stochastic tracking with discrete random walk (DRW) model includes the effect of instantaneous turbulent velocity fluctuations on the particle trajectories. In this approach, the turbulent dispersion of particles is predicted by integrating the trajectory equations for individual particles, using the instantaneous fluid velocity, along the particle path during the integration. By computing the trajectory in this manner for a sufficient number of representative particles, the random effects of turbulence on the particle dispersion can be included ( In multiphase flows, phase coupling can occur through the exchange of momentum (e.g., interaction forces between phases), energy and mass among phases. Before choosing or developing a model for a multiphase flow, an appropriate coupling strategy must be selected based on the characteristics of the flow such as particles concentrations ( The key to the coupling between the CFD and DEM is a suitable consideration of particle–fluid interaction forces. According to the interactions between phases, there are four different phase coupling categories in a multiphase flow. In the dense particle flow regime inside the LKC, the drag force is the predominant force causing momentum exchange between the phases while there is no exchange of energy and mass. The slurry feed used in the current work has 30 wt% of solid particles which shows a contact dominated flow. Therefore, the implementation of coupling strategy between the phases in the present study is considered to be four-way which means that: the continuous fluid phase affects the particles; the particles have an influence on the fluid flow; the continuous phase disturbances (e.g., eddies and wakes) can affect the motion of particles; collisions of particles with each other and the LKC bowl walls affect their motion. The transfer of momentum from the fluid phase to the particles is computed by examining the change in momentum of a particle as it passes through each control volume in the model. This change in momentum appears as a source of momentum in the continuous phase momentum balance in any subsequent calculations of the continuous phase flow field. It is computed as follows: where During the coupled simulation, the particle iterations are performed at specified intervals during fluid phase calculations. In this study, this interval is set at every twentieth fluid iteration. The coupled calculation continues until the fluid field no longer changes with further calculations that is, all convergence criteria are satisfied. When convergence is reached, the particle trajectories will no longer change. The simulated KC in this investigation was an LKC of Manual Discharge type with a bowl diameter of 3 in. (KC-MD3) at Iran Mineral Processing Research Center (IMPRC), Iran. The Knelson Concentrator inner bowl is made of polyurethane and consists of five collecting rings with different sizes in diameter. This bowl is located concentrically within a cylindrical stainless steel outer bowl. The detailed 3-D LKC bowl geometry and computational mesh used in this study is illustrated in The relatively complex geometry of LKC bowl was meshed using a combination of tetrahedral and mixed cells due to their appropriate filling at curvatures and hole areas. To find out whether the obtained solution is independent of the generated mesh size, a grid independency test (GIT) was carried out using four different mesh sizes having 1,442,890, 2,065,456, 2,688,034 and 3,220,909 cells, respectively. The effect of grid size on the variation of water maximum velocity inside the LKC bowl was studied. Considering the available computational power, the optimal grid with the highest accuracy and the lowest computation cost was selected. In addition to GIT, the mesh quality of the selected grid was also checked based on three different indicators including orthogonal quality, skewness and aspect ratio. It is noted that the worst cells in the grid will have an orthogonal quality closer to 0 and the best cells will have an orthogonal quality closer to 1. The minimum orthogonal quality for all types of cells should be more than 0.01, with an average value that is significantly higher. Skewness is defined as the difference between the shape of the cell and the shape of an equilateral cell of equivalent volume. Highly skewed cells can decrease accuracy and destabilize the solution. A general rule is that the maximum skewness for a tetrahedral mesh in most flows should be kept below 0.95, with an average value that is significantly lower. Aspect ratio, which is a measure of the stretching of a cell, also has a significant impact on the accuracy of the numerical solution. It is computed as the ratio of the maximum value to the minimum value of any of the following distances: the normal distances between the cell centroid and face centroids, and the distances between the cell centroid and nodes. Cell size change and face warp are additional quality measure that could affect stability and accuracy ( The choice of the timestep influences the convergence behaviour. If taken too large, the simulation diverges and if taken too small the computational time increases. In our simulation, four values of 0.1, 0.01, 0.001 and 0.0001 s were selected initially as timestep of fluid phase and the results were compared. Considering the computational cost and acceptable accuracy of the results, the value of 0.001 s was final choice for transient calculations. Different fluid boundary conditions were applied to the grid based on the working procedure of LKC. Two velocity inlet conditions were defined at the fluidization water injection holes and at the entry of hopper, i.e. there is a specified velocity vector normal to these inlets. The top surface of the bowl was designated as a pressure outlet to the atmospheric pressure. The type of particle boundary condition for these three zones was chosen as “escape”. When a particle encounters these boundaries, it is reported to have escaped the bowl and the trajectory calculations are terminated. The other parts of the LKC bowl and hopper were considered as “wall” boundary with no slip shear condition. To apply the specific intensity of relative centrifugal force, the bowl was designated to be a moving wall with a clockwise rotational speed of 1675 rpm while the hopper was selected to be a stationary wall. The particle boundary condition of “reflect” type was considered for these walls where a particle rebounds off the boundary with a change in its momentum. Both normal and tangent coefficients of restitution were set as a polynomial function for wall zones. When performing trajectory calculations, it is necessary to have information about the fate of particle trajectories as they are completed. There are different possible fates for a particle trajectory based on the selected boundary conditions. In this study “escaped” trajectories are those that terminate at a flow boundary for which the “escape” condition is set. The “incomplete” trajectories are also those that are terminated when the maximum allowed number of timesteps is exceeded. An additional fate for parallel simulations may appear as “incomplete parallel” which means that the number of particle exchanges between partitions has been exceeded. Any remaining particles on the computing nodes are stopped and no further source terms from these particles are considered ( The schematic representations of these boundary conditions are shown by surfaces and volumes highlighted by blue colour in The coupled simulations are computationally very expensive and it takes a lot of time to investigate the effects of various operating parameters on the separation performance of LKC. The authors have already investigated the effects of all important parameters using DEM excluding the effect of fluidization water. In this study it is tried to perform a 3-D 4-way coupled CFD-DEM simulation of multiphase flow inside LKC bowl for a real process time of 20 s under specific conditions. The main purposes of this simulation were to consider the effect of fluidization water and fluid drag force on the separation process and also to gain insight into the liquid and particle motion inside a KC. The governing Navier-Stokes equations are solved sequentially until the defined values of convergence were obtained by using pressure-based, unsteady state and segregated solver with double precision and first order implicit body formulation, while particles treatment is done transiently with implicit tracking scheme. They are tracked with their own specific timestep. Among available solution methods, finite volume method (FVM) was used for the discretization of the governing equations. All physical quantities including momentum, volume fraction, turbulent kinetic energy and turbulent dissipation rate were calculated through the first order upwind scheme, while the spatial discretization method adopted for gradient was least squares cell-based. The SIMPLE algorithm was used for calculation of pressure and velocity fields. Application of the DDMP requires many closure models which are implemented by the ANSYS Fluent solver. These closure models are presented in detail in the software documentation ( In this simulation, LKC solid feed is considered as a binary mixture of light quartz particles and heavy magnetite particles. The details of physical and mechanical properties of feed materials, physical parameters of DEM collision model and operating variables of KC employed in the present simulation are listed in Both feed water and bed fluidization water flows are considered incompressible with a uniform density of 998.2 kg·m Convergence is considered to be met when the residual values of predicted velocities, continuity, k and ε become smaller than 10 Particles tracking is possible after calculating their trajectories. As it is expected, during the occupation time, particles form a bed of concentrate inside rings which is fluidized by the fluidizing water flow. It is worthy of remark that there is no separation of particles until the bowl rings are completely filled and consequently no particle is observed leaving the bowl from the outlet zone. After elapsing of fifteen seconds, all rings are almost full of solid particles and the next snapshots from the simulation are quite similar. During the next 5 s, with the insertion of more feed particles; the separation stage starts and the majority of heavy particles displace light particles and as a result the heavy particles are trapped in the ring spaces while most light particles are washed out of the LKC bowl by water. The simulation of separation process is stopped at the end of 20th second and the solver makes it possible to count the number of each particle type collected within the bowl inner space and to calculate the performance indices of LKC, i.e., concentrate grade and total recovery. The trace of particles in terms of residence time, i.e. the time required for a particle to reach its trajectory fate, inside the LKC bowl is shown in  Although the velocity magnitude is always independent of direction and takes positive values, but the velocity components are dependent on the direction of water flow and may take positive or negative values. It can be seen from The contours of static pressure for mixture phase and total pressure of water phase are presented in The total pressure of water includes dynamic pressure which is a function of water velocity and consequently the pattern of total pressure distribution almost conforms to the pattern of velocity. The maximal value of 105,000 Pa happens in the center of the holes and then declines to 31,400 Pa and 13,100 Pa in the outer parts of the fifth and fourth rings, respectively. The minimum value of total pressure equals 13,100 Pa at the three lower rings and central part of the bowl. The contours of volume fraction for water, quartz and magnetite phases are illustrated in In any numerical simulation which uses coupled methods, it is essential to adequately validate simulation results. In the current work, although the coupled CFD-DEM simulation yields valuable information about both particle and fluid flow patterns, as described in the previous sections, which are difficult or even impossible to measure experimentally with sufficient accuracy, the simulation results can be expressed quantitatively in terms of performance indices, i.e., concentrate grade and total recovery. Here, the concentrate grade refers to the ratio of the mass of magnetite particles retained in the bowl rings to the total mass of both magnetite and quartz particles retained in the bowl at the end of the separation process. Moreover, the ratio of mass of magnetite particles collected inside the bowl riffles to their initial mass in the feed can be regarded as the total recovery. In this study, in order to validate simulation predictions, an experimental test was carried out on a synthetic mixture sample of quartz and magnetite powders under the same operating conditions as in simulation by using the 3-inch laboratory Knelson Concentrator. Both quartz and magnetite powder samples were provided by Iranian producers, Silica Sand MFG Co and Sangan iron ore mine (  Furthermore, during the validation test, the simulation prediction about the order of rings filling was also confirmed. It was observed that the LKC did not separate particles until all rings were filled in the sequence from the bottom ring to the top ring with about 75 g of feed in the first 15 s of test time. A four-way coupled CFD–DEM approach has been presented to simulate the multiphase flow in an LKC bowl. In this method, the DEM collision model was applied to simulate the motion and interactions of particles and CFD was used to solve the locally averaged Navier–Stokes equation for fluid flow using a hybrid Eulerian–Lagrangian model, DDPM. The interaction between fluid and particle is considered by exchanging momentum through interaction forces such as drag force, virtual mass force and pressure gradient force between the DEM and the CFD computations. The turbulence of swirling fluid phase was predicted by Realizable Mixture k-ε turbulence model. By running a simulation of LKC separation process for a synthetic mixture of light quartz and heavy magnetite particles under specific conditions at a process cycle time of 20 s, the following conclusions can be made: Feed particles gradually fill the inner space of all bowl rings from the bottom to the top ring, respectively. There is no separation between heavy and light particles until the rings are completely filled after 15 s. During the last 5 s of process cycle time, the separation stage occurs where most of magnetite particles are trapped in the rings, while most of quartz particles are poured out of the bowl. The particle residence time increases from the bottom ring to the top ring and the number of particles with a higher value is more for the upper rings than the lower ones. After 20 s, for most of the particles inside the bowl rings, the predicted values of velocity as well as Reynolds number are 5 m s The pattern of fluid flow including the contours of water velocity magnitude, water tangential velocity, static pressure of mixture phase, water total pressure and contours of volume fraction for all three phases are obtained from simulation. The maximum magnitude of water velocity occurs at the fluidization holes. By moving from holes to the center of the bowl and from the fifth ring to the first ring, the velocity magnitude declines gradually. The results demonstrated even and linear distribution of water velocity inside the inner bowl rings under specified operating conditions. The trend of tangential velocity of water is opposed to that of velocity magnitude. Tangential velocity of water increases from holes to the center of the bowl and from the fifth ring to the first ring. Static pressure of mixture remains almost constant within the bowl space. At the fluidization holes, it is maximal with the value of 83,700 Pa but decreases to 14,500 Pa inside the bowl. The distribution pattern for total pressure of water approximately conforms to that of the water velocity. Due to the particles bed formation inside the rings, water volume fraction declines to 0.92 while the volume fractions of quartz and magnetite reaches to 0.078 and 0.002, respectively. In order to investigate the validity of the simulation results, the authors carried out one experimental test three times on a synthetic feed under exactly the same conditions. Comparing the results of coupled CFD-DEM simulation and those measured experimentally indicates a close agreement both qualitatively and quantitatively. The authors would like to express their sincere thanks to the