Phosphate tailings, which mainly consist of dolomite particles, are solid wastes produced from mining and beneficiating operations of phosphate rock. The use of phosphate tailings in Portland cement as filler is helpful to reduce the carbon emission and relieve other environmental problems caused by its large accumulation. Influences of phosphate tailings on hydration, properties of Portland cement and volume stability due to possible dedolomitization are investigated. Phosphate tailings affect setting time, strength and drying shrinkage mainly through the dilution effect. A small part of phosphorus dissolves from the tailings during the early stage of hydration, and the dissolved phosphorus extends the induction period, reduces the main heat peak by the precipitation mechanism. The dedolomitization of phosphate tailings takes place with the presence of alkalis but causes no significant volume expansion and strength recession.Phosphate tailings are solid wastes produced from mining and beneficiating operations of phosphate rock. About 30–40% of the raw ore is rejected as tailings during a typical phosphate beneficiation operation Nowadays, limestone is commonly used as filler in cement in order to lower consumption of energy and CO Phosphate tailings consist of finely ground particles. The average size of phosphate tailings generated from a typical flotation operation is about 30 The influences of phosphate tailings on the properties of Portland cement need to be understood fully for the potential utilization in cement, especially, those arise from the possible dissolution of phosphorus from the tailings for the relatively high P The cement used was Portland cement (type P·I according to GB 175 The rheological properties of cement paste (with a water to solid ratio of 0.5) blended with phosphate tailings were measured with a RheoPlus QC rheometer, and the evolution of hydration heat was monitored by isothermal calorimetry (10 In order to understand the effect of phosphate tailings dedolomitization on volume stability and strength, mortar specimens of 25 Many properties of Portland cement, such as strength development, setting and hardening, are associated with the hydration process. Thus, the influence of phosphate tailings on hydration kinetics is discussed first in the section. At the early stage, chemical shrinkage is directly proportional to the hydration degree of cement During the early period of hydration, fast dissolution of anhydrous phases result in a rapid evolution of heat for several minutes. This burst of heat is followed by an induction period (or a dormant period) during which the hydration remains almost at a halt, characterized with continuous low evolution of heat. The induction period may last for several hours and then the hydration accelerates for a few hours until a main peak corresponds to the massive precipitation of the main hydration products of alite is reached. According to the heat flow curve ( The measurements of chemical shrinkage and heat evolution rate of blends with phosphate tailings and quartz indicate that the phosphate tailings has a retarding effect on hydration besides the dilution effect. Soluble phosphates have a retarding effect on the setting of cement because they retard the first hydration peak of alite and considerably extend its duration by a precipitation mechanism It is obvious that the above mentioned retarding effect of phosphate tailings arises from the dissolution of phosphorus from phosphate tailings. Dissolved phosphorus retards the hydration of cement through the precipitation mechanism. However, phosphate tailings only have a limited effect on the hydration for there is a small amount of phosphorus dissolved from the tailings, in the case of distilled water, a simple calculation shows that the dissolved P The cumulative heat of hydration ( Basically, the water demand for standard consistency is a function of surface that must be wetted. A decrease in surface area leads to a reduction in the amount of water absorbed by these particles and an increase in the excess water to solid surface area ratio, thereby decreasing the water demand for standard consistency Rheological properties provide information about the workability of cement-based materials. Fresh cement paste is initially a thick suspension of the cement particles in the mixing water. Rheological properties of fresh cement pastes are associated with the water/cement (W/C) ratio, the particle size distribution of the cement, the inter-particle forces and the attraction of the water to solid surfaces (either chemical interactions or physical attraction, or both). The presence of phosphate tailings reduced the shear resistance and apparent viscosity of cement pastes, and cement pastes with phosphate tailings exhibit an evident thixotropy ( The plastic viscosity, Because of the dilution effect, the setting time of cement will prolong along with the increase of the content of additions such as limestone, quartz, etc. With the increase of phosphate tailings content, the initial setting and final setting time of cement are prolonged ( Under the condition of the same amount of cement substituted (30% by mass), compared with cement blended with quartz, both the initial and final setting time for cement blended with phosphate tailings were prolonged for 20 The addition of phosphate tailings in cement has a significant influence on its flexural and compressive strength, and the increasing of phosphate tailings causes the flexural and compressive strength to decrease ( Quartz in cement acts as a filler, and reduces the strength of cement due to a dilution effect. In general, the addition of phosphate tailings increases drying shrinkage ( Phosphate tailings have almost the same influence as quartz on the drying shrinkage ( A reaction called dedolomitization may take place when dolomite comes in contact with alkalis. The generally considered chemical reaction equations is In concrete, dolomitic aggregates may react with alkali in pore solution, in this case, dedolomitization is also known as alkali-carbonate reaction (ACR). Theoretically, Eq. The XRD patterns indicate that phosphate tailings react with alkali to consume dolomite, produce brucite and calcite ( Immersed in alkali solution, samples with phosphate tailings and quartz exhibited a shrinkage, and the values of shrinkage for those two samples were basically the same in the first 100 The change trend of the volume of mortar is similar to that of the cement paste ( After being placed in 38  The influence of phosphate tailings on the strength is similar to that of quartz, due to the dilution effect; its influence on drying shrinkage is the result of the inhibition effect of phosphate tailings as filler and the dilution effect which leads to the increase in the porosity of hardened cement paste. The addition of phosphate tailings leads to yield stress, viscosity and water demand of standard consistency to decrease. Phosphate tailings extend cement setting time mainly due to the dilution effect; a small part of phosphorus dissolves from the tailings during the early stage of hydration, and the dissolved phosphorus extends the inducing period by a precipitation mechanism, to some extent, delays the setting and hardening of cement. Dedolomitization of dolomite contained in phosphate tailings takes place in the presence of alkali; the dedolomitization leads to a slight expansion (approximately 0.0045 The findings indicate the feasibility to utilize phosphate tailings in Portland cement as a filling material, which provides an environmentally friendly option to dispose of this solid waste generated from the phosphate industry.