In this paper, the two-dimensional Legendre wavelets are applied for numerical solution of the fractional Poisson equation with Dirichlet boundary conditions. In this way, a new operational matrix of fractional derivative for the Legendre wavelets is derived and then this operational matrix has been employed to obtain the numerical solution of the above-mentioned problem. The main characteristic behind this approach is that it reduces such problems to those of solving a system of algebraic equations which greatly simplifies the problem. The convergence of the two-dimensional Legendre wavelets expansion is investigated. Also the power of this manageable method is illustrated.It is well-known that the most famous elliptic partial differential equation which arises in many physical models is Poisson equation, i.e., Fractional differential equations are generalized from integer order ones, which are obtained by replacing integer order derivatives by fractional order ones Another usual way to solve functional equations is to assume that the unknown solution of the problem can be expressed by a linear combination of the so-called orthogonal basis functions. In recent years, the most widely used orthogonal families of functions are sine–cosine functions, block pulse functions, Legendre, Chebyshev and Laguerre polynomials and also orthogonal wavelets such as Haar, Legendre, Chebyshev and CAS wavelets. The main advantage of using an orthogonal basis is that the problem under consideration reduces to a system of linear or nonlinear algebraic equations which not only simplifies the problem enormously but also speeds up the computation work during the implementation. This can be performed by truncated series of orthogonal basis functions for the solution of the problem and using the operational matrices. In this method, there are two main approaches for numerical solution of fractional differential equations: One approach is based on using the operational matrix of fractional derivative to reduce the problem under consideration into a system of algebraic equations, and then solving this system to obtain the numerical solution of the problem. Another useful approach is based on converting the underlying fractional differential equations into fractional integral equations, and using the operational matrix of fractional integration, to eliminate the integral operations and reducing the problem into solving a system of algebraic equations. As we know, any smooth function can be approximated by the eigenfunctions of certain singular Sturm–Liouville problems such as the Legendre, Chebyshev and Laguerre orthogonal polynomials. In this way, the truncation error approaches zero faster than any negative power of the number of basic functions used in the approximation Wavelets, which are powerful tools, have been extensively used in signal processing, numerical analysis and many other areas of science and engineering and permit the accurate representation of a variety of functions and operators. However, wavelets are another basis set which offer considerable advantages over alternative basis sets and allow us to attack problems that are not accessible with conventional numerical methods. Their main advantages are the basis set can be improved in a systematic way, different resolutions can be used in different regions of space, the coupling between different resolution levels is easy, there are few topological constraints for increased resolution regions, the Laplace operator is diagonally dominant in an appropriate wavelet basis, the matrix elements of the Laplace operator are very easy to calculate and the numerical effort scales linearly with respect to the system size, see The main purpose of this work is to extend the Legendre wavelets basis for solving the fractional Poisson equation The paper is organized as follows: in The well-known Legendre polynomials For practical use of these polynomials on the interval of interest The analytic form of the shifted Legendre polynomials A function If the infinite series in We investigate the convergence of the Legendre wavelets expansion in the following theorems.   See Appendix. Here, we present a scheme to derive the operational matrix of fractional derivative in Caputo's sense for the Legendre wavelets. By using the shifted Legendre polynomials, any component  For For  It is an immediate consequence of From To illustrate the calculation procedure we choose In this section, we apply the operational matrix of fractional derivative of the Legendre wavelets to obtain the numerical solution of the Poisson equation as a boundary value problem in two-dimension. Here, for simplicity we consider the fractional Poisson equation in two-dimension of the following form: Applying Eqs. In this section, we apply the proposed method in the previous section to obtain numerical solution of some fractional Poisson equations. To show the efficiency of the presented method, we report the maximum error First, consider the fractional Poisson equation Consider the fractional Poisson equation Consider the fractional Poisson equation Consider the fractional Poisson equation In this paper, a numerical method for approximating the solution of the fractional Poisson with Dirichlet boundary condition by combining wavelet function with the operational matrix of fractional derivatives was presented. Error analysis and convergence of the proposed method were investigated. The method was shown very convenient for solving boundary value problems. Also, the implementation of the proposed method is very simple and is very efficient for solution of the Poisson problem. Moreover, the proposed method can be used for numerical solution of other kinds of fractional partial differential equations such as telegraph and diffusion equations. The authors would like to thank professor Wen Chen who has made valuable and careful comments, which improved the paper considerably. In this section we prove Let The Legendre wavelet coefficients of continuous function