Flotation recovery and selectivity problems have been reported in the flotation of fine sulphide minerals in gypsum supersaturated process water. In this study, the effect of gypsum supersaturated solution on the interactions between silica and sphalerite (ZnS) minerals was examined by observing deposition behaviour of silica nanoparticles on sphalerite surface using a quartz crystal microbalance with dissipation (QCM-D). Significant deposition of silica nanoparticles on ZnS coated sensor surface was observed in the gypsum supersaturated solution, indicating consequential slime coating of silica fines on sphalerite mineral surface. Substantial deposition of silica nanoparticles on SiO2 coated surface was also observed suggesting strong homo-aggregation of silica fines in the gypsum supersaturated solution. The interaction behaviour between silica–sphalerite and silica–silica is mainly attributed to the high calcium concentration of the gypsum supersaturated solution. Similar deposition behaviour of silica nanoparticles onto ZnS or SiO2 coated sensor surface was observed in 800ppm calcium solution, which is similar to the calcium concentration of the gypsum supersaturated solution. Colloidal force measurement between a silica particle and a fractured sphalerite surface or a silica wafer surface by an atomic force microscopy (AFM) revealed attractive van der Waals force between the mineral particles in both gypsum supersaturated solution and 800ppm calcium solution. The high calcium concentration of the gypsum supersaturated solution induced the hetero-aggregation between silica and sphalerite, accounting for the observed decrease in flotation selectivity.In flotation system, a variety of uncontrolled species exist in the pulp, arising from the water source, involved minerals and/or deliberate additives. The role of these species on the interactions between minerals in zinc sulphide flotation has received considerable attention. Measurements of zeta potential distribution, settling rate, and particle size distribution, and direct colloidal force measurements in combination with model predictions have been carried out to study the homo- and hetero-aggregation of zinc sulphide and silicate minerals ( Quartz crystal microbalance with dissipation (QCM-D) has been widely used to monitor the adsorption kinetics of polymers ( Sphalerite mineral samples obtained from Ward’s Natural Science were used in this study. XRF analysis showed that the sphalerite sample contained 66.36% Zn, 32.27% S, and trace amounts of Fe (0.25%), Al (0.26%) and Si (0.06%). The sphalerite sample was crushed to −4.75 The 800 The QCM-D measurements were performed with a Q-Sense E4 unit (Q-Sense AB, Sweden), which simultaneously monitors the changes in frequency (Δ The Sauerbrey relation (Eq. In this study, the impact of calcium and gypsum supersaturated solutions on the interactions between silica and sphalerite was investigated using QCM-D. A ZnS coated quartz sensor was used to represent the sphalerite mineral. The ZnS coated on the quartz sensor surface has similar crystalline structure as natural sphalerite mineral. Detail information about the ZnS sensor can be found elsewhere ( A silica wafer was cut into 15 A spherical silica particle (∼8 The interaction forces between a silica sphere and a fractured sphalerite surface were measured using a Nanoscope Multimode AFM (Digital Instrument, Santa Barbara, USA). The working principle and a detailed description for the colloidal force measurement by an AFM is provided elsewhere ( The colloidal forces obtained from the AFM force measurements were fitted with the classic DLVO (Derjaguin–Landau–Verwey–Overbeek) theory ( The electrical double layer forces were calculated by numerically solving the nonlinear Poisson–Boltzmann (BP) equation (Eq. The zeta potential of silica and sphalerite particles in 800 A micro-flotation cell was used to study the impact of gypsum supersaturated solution on flotation selectivity of sphalerite from silica. Detailed information about the cell can be found elsewhere ( QCM-D has been widely used to study the deposition kinetics of engineering nanoparticles (ENP) on functionalized or clean surfaces ( QCM-D response is often presented as a ratio of dissipation to frequency shifts (Df-ratio) or dissipation as a function of frequency to evaluate the adsorption kinetics, the viscosity as well as the conformational changes of an adsorbed layer ( In order to understand the impact of gypsum supersaturated solution on the interactions between silica and sphalerite minerals, the deposition behaviour of silica nanoparticles on ZnS or SiO Interactions between silica nanoparticles and ZnS or SiO The QCM-D response indicates the absence of silica nanoparticle deposition onto ZnS or SiO The gypsum supersaturated solution has a significant impact on the interactions between silica nanoparticles and ZnS or SiO Accompanying with the frequency shifts, phenomenal energy dissipation shifts were observed ( It should be noted that the QCM-D response of the adsorption of gypsum supersaturated solution on both ZnS and SiO The interactions between silica nanoparticles and ZnS or SiO It is obvious that the QCM-D responses of the deposition of silica nanoparticles on ZnS and SiO In order to better understand the QCM-D responses on the deposition of silica nanoparticles on ZnS and SiO  Similarly to the silica–sphalerite interactions, the force profile between a silica particle and a silica wafer surface in 1 The QCM-D response of the silica nanoparticles deposition measurements on ZnS and SiO The motivation of this study is to understand the cause of silicate gangue minerals misplacement in the zinc concentrates observed in the gypsum supersaturated process water. Clearly, hetero-aggregation between silica and sphalerite in the gypsum supersaturated solution and high calcium concentration solutions (800 The hetero-aggregation between silica and sphalerite could cause the reduction of sphalerite flotation recovery and promote silica contamination in the zinc concentrate. QCM-D deposition measurements show that deposition of silica nanoparticles on ZnS and SiO Gypsum supersaturated solution promotes the hetero-aggregation between silica and sphalerite, and homo-aggregation between silica particles. The high calcium concentration in the gypsum supersaturated solution is responsible for the aggregation between those mineral particles. The hetero-aggregation between silica and sphalerite minerals reduces flotation selectivity. Authors would like to thank the financial support from