A visual technique, for measuring bubble size in flotation equipments, has been developed. The technique combines bubble visualization methods with digital image processing procedures to process the information. The method uses a simple device to draw bubbles into a viewing chamber and exposes them to a monochrome CCD progressive scan camera. Visual data is captured and stored at regular intervals of time. The image acquisition and the off-line processing were automated.
                  The new visual system was tested in a 50 l lab scale cell, two-phase system, permitting us to characterize a large number of bubbles. The performance of the new method was studied altering the operating- and chemical conditions in the cell: impeller speed, air flow rate and frother concentration. The outcome of the experiments is compared with the results achieved using a UCT bubble size analyzer. Consequently, this paper discusses the features of the new method and tries to give a explanation to the found discrepancies between the methods.A variety of methods has been proposed for performing measurements of bubble size in two- and three-phase systems, revealing the complexity of the problem. Nonetheless, according to the authors' knowledge, only one method, the UCT bubble size analyzer, which is an optical method developed in the late eighties at the University of Cape Town, has demonstrated that it has the capability to accomplish bubble size determination in flotation cells. However, visualization techniques have recently established, that it is possible to measure bubble size in flotation machines using a rather simple approach ( The UCT method consists of riser tube and a water reservoir, where a capillary tube is placed. The gas bubbles ascend through the riser tube to the reservoir. A fraction of the bubbles that reaches the reservoir are taken into the capillary by suction forces, where their length and velocity are measured with two optical detectors. The total volume of gas captured by the capillary tube is measured, thus it is possible to compute the size distribution of the bubbles from the pulse lengths and velocities. A detailed description of the instrument has been given by The new method for bubble size measurements was designed based on the device suggested by The capture of images and their analysis was automated by the use of a commercial image analysis software, Matrox Inspector, which is interfaced with a self-built Visual Basic application. The approach used, enables us to characterize a large number of bubbles. The images are recorded with a monochrome progressive scan camera JAI CV-M10RS CCIR. The electronic shutter of the camera offers two modalities: normal speed (speed shutter within the range: 1/50–1/10,000 s) and high speed (range: 1/25,000–1/917,000 s). In the current setup the speed shutter used was 1/2000 s. A Nikkor lens, model AF Micro Nikkor 60mmf/2.8D, which provides a high image magnification, was used for the camera. A light source, a 500-W lamp, is placed behind the viewing chamber, as shown in The bubble sampler is filled with water containing the same frother concentration as the liquid in the cell, to reduce coalescence problems within the device. The bubble sampler is filled by pumping liquid in from the bottom of the sampler tube, during the process V1 is closed. V1 is manipulated by means of a three way valve, V3. The air contained in the instrument, is released through the vent. Once the bubbler sampler is completely full, the pump is switched off. In this stage, the camera is focused, the imaging set up is calibrated by inserting a wire, 5 mm in diameter, into the chamber and then an image of the field of view is grabbed. The field of view normally set, was of about 26 mm wide and 35 mm high. The high-magnification ratio used, yields really shallow focal depth of fields. This facilitates the identification of overlapping structures. The sampling process is initiated by closing the vent (V2), and opening the valve V1. After a steady flow regime, of bubbles reaching the viewing chamber, is established, the image capture process is launched. The number of images captured depends on the amount of bubbles crossing the field of view. Each image is processed sequentially applying the same methodology. The 8 bit grayscale images are enhanced employing a high-pass filter (sharpening filter), after that a blob analysis is completed. A high-pass filter is a pre-processing image tool utilized to highlight details in an image ( Air bubbles rising in water, typically adopt two types of shapes in the range size, volume-equivalent diameter, between 0.2 and 15 mm ( A series of experiments was performed in a 50 l lab scale cell, with only tap water and frother. The ambient temperature registered during the experiments was of about 20 °C. Bubble size distributions were measured at only one location in the cell, in the impeller neighborhood as shown in The operating conditions in the cell were modified altering impeller speed, air flow rate and frother concentration. The values chosen for the impeller speed were 336, 531 and 804 rpm. The commercial Dowfroth 250 frother was selected for the experimentation. The measurements of bubble size were completed at two frother concentrations 3 and 6 g/m The HUT was first placed into the cell. Once the sequence of measurements was completed, the HUT was replaced by the UCT, and a new series of experiments was run. The capillary tube used to sample bubbles in the UCT, was of 1 mm in inner diameter, and with a belled inlet of 3 mm in diameter.  In the measurements presented in The results obtained by the UCT and HUT devices are compared graphically in However, at a frother dosage of 3 g/m The number of bubbles characterized by the HUT ranged from approximately 500, at poor gas dispersion, to 2400 when the gas was dispersed efficiently. The bubble size detected by the HUT, over the range of operating-and chemical conditions investigated, varied from 0.2 to 7.8 mm. In order to investigate the origin of the discrepancies showed by the capillary device and the new technique, images of the UCT in operation were acquired. The images show how bubbles enter the capillary tube. The water reservoir of the UCT needed to be replaced by a replica of the HUT viewing chamber, for being able to acquire good quality images. The hybrid device was then set close to the wall of the cell, in the same horizontal plane as in the previous measurements. The capture process was carried out with the following operating conditions: impeller speed 336 rpm, air flow rate 50 l/min and frother concentration 3 g/m The images showed, that bubble breakup took place when bubbles entered the capillary tube. Two mechanisms of bubble breakup were observed, apparently related to bubble size. A similar phenomenon has been observed when air bubbles by means of a co-current flow of liquid are forced to enter a capillary tube (  If bubble breakup and a high probability of segregation are assumed to be a normal event in the operation of the UCT, it can be expected that this method, sampling a dispersed bubble population, drives us into underestimation of the bubble size, as shown in The measurement of bubble size distribution in three-phase systems is still unsolved. Although several techniques have been proposed, a practical and reliable method to determine the bubble size distribution in flotation cells still needs to be developed. It seems that bubble visualization could be the key to solve this pendent task. However, as Chen et al. mentioned, this technique needs to be improved on several areas. The current method used for recognizing bubbles in a digital image (two-phase system), needs to be adapted to new patterns, since new structures, such as cluster of bubbles and particles, will be present in the images. A method based on digital image processing techniques, so that it allows us to differentiate between bubbles and particles that form part of complex aggregates, must be developed. The method can be used to identify and recognize flotation patterns in a flotation machine, as proposed by The bubble sampler should include a cleaning stage, to avoid the release of particles carried by the bubbles, and their accumulation in the viewing chamber. The new apparatus must also incorporate a system for keeping the water level in the viewing chamber stable by removing excess gas. This would allow us to have longer sampling times. A new improved method for measuring bubble size in two-phase systems has been developed. The visualization method is based on well-known photographic techniques. The new method demonstrated that it has the capacity of measuring different bubble size distributions with a high reproducibility. Major discrepancies in the measurements done with the UCT device and the new method were detected, when the air gas was not efficiently dispersed in the cell. It was found that the capillary system produces bubble breakup. Two probable mechanisms of bubble breakup were briefly discussed in this work. Based on the discussion, it can be concluded, that by using fine capillary tubes, the UCT device is capable of capturing only a certain bubble size interval. Therefore, if there is inefficient dispersion of air in the cell, there is a high risk that the bubble size distribution becomes biased in favor of fine bubble sizes.