Introduction
                  The increasing incidence of acetabular fractures in the elderly and the fracture complexity seen in this cohort represents one of the greatest challenges faced by trauma orthopaedic surgeons today. There are no formal guidelines of best practice in the treatment of these patients. Management options vary from non-operative, acute ORIF, and/or total joint replacement. Although surgical intervention allows for earlier mobilization and avoidance of the complications of prolonged bedrest, the patients ability to tolerate what is often major surgery is always of concern. This is in stark contrast to intracapsular hip fractures, (a fracture within the same joint), where acute surgery is recommended in virtually all cases.
               
                  Objectives
                  This study was undertaken to evaluate the peri-operative outcomes for geriatric patients undergoing acetabular ORIF and hemiarthroplasty to assess if there is a significant difference in early outcome parameters.
               
                  Design
                  This is a retrospective case–control study.
               
                  Setting
                  This study was performed in the National Centre for Pelvic and Acetabular surgery.
               
                  Patients
                  42 age- and sex-matched patients with comparable ASA grades were included in each arm of the study. Patient selection in the acetabular ORIF group was consecutive patients managed operatively in the centre during the period 2010–2015. The selection for the hemiarthroplasty group was by random selection of age- and sex-matched patients undergoing hemiarthroplasty during the same period.
               
                  Main outcome measurements
                  The primary outcomes that were proposed prior to the study being performed was perioperative mortality and post-op complications. Secondary outcomes were operating times, blood loss and need for ICU admission.
               
                  Results
                  A significant difference between the two cohorts was observed with operative times, blood loss, need for transfusion, and need for ICU admission, all higher in the acetabular ORIF group. There was no significant difference in mortality or post-op infection.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Our paper supports the concept that acute ORIF of acetabular fractures, with appropriate peri-operative support, can be undertaken safely. There is no difference in the major peri-operative outcomes of mortality or infection when compared with hip fracture patients requiring hemiarthroplasty.The relative incidence of acetabular fractures in the elderly is increasing markedly with the increased longevity of the population combined with the reduction of high velocity trauma in the younger population. Acetabular fractures result in similar restrictions to the elderly patient, in the immediate term, as hip fractures as it compromises the ability to mobilise. Much research has focussed on the management of hip fractures and it is widely accepted that it is not the hip fracture that leads to mortality in these patients but the restrictions and resultant complications that arise to a patient whom is already heavily maligned with co-morbidities. The operative options are: limited open and percutaneous screw fixation, ORIF, or ORIF with concurrent total hip replacement. Our institute is the national centre for pelvic and acetabular surgery with an average operative case load of 100–120 per year. With regard to the management of hip fractures there exists national policies aiming for early surgery to promote early mobilization to decrease morbidity and mortality. We performed a retrospective analysis of acetabular fractures undergoing ORIF (ORIF group) compared to a randomized age- and sex-matched group of patients with intracapsular hip fractures undergoing hemiarthroplasty (hemiarthroplasty group), in patients aged 65 and over, from 2010 to 2015. Statistical analysis between the two groups was carried out using Student's The patients were sex- and age-matched and there was no statistically significant difference in the mean ASA status between the two groups. There were 42 patients in each group, 26 male and 16 female patients with an average age of 73.4 years (range 65–85). The mean length of stay was not significantly different between the two groups: 21.3 days (S.D. 19.3) for the ORIF group 23.9 days (S.D. 22.0) for the hemiarthroplasty group. The results of the study are summarised in Classification of fracture type was performed by the senior authors. The distribution of fracture patterns largely follows international evidence for the “typical” acetabular fractures seen in this cohort, with the obvious bias of cases that were not elected for operative management not in this group. Over 70% of the acetabular fractures had one or more associated radiographic features that have been shown to confer poorer outcome. Of the 8 patients who had an acute THR as part of their operative management all of them had one or more of these features. There were 6 cases of delayed THR all of whom had at least one of these features on their initial radiographs. The results of the radiological evaluation are shown in Delay to surgery was calculated, in days, from the date the patient was admitted to hospital to the date of surgery. As this unit is the national pelvic and acetabular referral centre, and the fact that there exist guidelines for surgical management of a hip fracture within 48 h, there was an expected statistically significant difference in the mean delay to surgery with 9.9 days (range 1–27 days) for the ORIF group and 1.4 days (range 0–8 days) in the hemiarthroplasty group ( Within the ORIF group there were 8 cases requiring acute THR as part of their initial treatment. On subgroup analysis between these 8 patients and the remaining 34 patients there was no statistically significant difference in operating time, intra-operative blood loss, need for transfusion or ICU admission. Of the 34 patients who underwent ORIF alone, six went on to have subsequent THR at a later stage, representing a 17.6% conversion rate, comparable with international data. This retrospective study was performed to evaluate if there existed a significant difference between operatively managed elderly patients with acetabular fractures and patients undergoing hemiarthroplasty for displaced intracapsular hip fractures with respect to in-hospital mortality and other peri-operative outcome measures. This is the first paper to compare these two groups. The rationale for the study was that there are no clear guidelines for operative management of acetabular fractures at this time, whereas, a fractured neck of femur, affecting the same joint, has very definitive guidelines for early operative management due to the high risk of mortality and morbidity associated with non-operative management. Non-operative management of acetabular fractures carries similar restrictions on mobility and has been shown to have a significantly higher 1-year mortality compared to operatively managed fractures. With respect to the primary outcome there was no statistically significant difference in in-hospital mortality. In a systematic review conducted by Daurka et al. (2014) it was shown that in general, elderly patients undergoing ORIF for acetabular fractures have worse outcomes compared to the rest of the population. There is much debate about the management of acetabular fractures in the elderly. Of the secondary outcomes analysed in this study the majority of the significant findings were centred around the procedure with greater operative times, blood loss volumes and subsequent need for transfusion, as well as need for ICU admission. These findings are not all that revelatory given the more extensive surgery required for acetabular fixation and the high prevalence of associated injuries. However, it is the lack of significant difference in post-operative complications such as wound infection, LRTI, UTI, VTE or any other reported acute complication, that is a potentially significant finding with regard to patient selection for acetabular ORIF. Despite the fact that these patients had a significantly greater delay to surgery, which has been shown to have a significant effect on the mortality and morbidity in hip fractures, A recent review by Butterwick et al. (2015) lists “typical” acetabular fractures in the elderly are as follows: associated both column (ABC) fracture 23–25%, associated anterior column fractures are 2nd most common; anterior column posterior hemi-transverse (ACPHT) account for 15–19%, isolated anterior column (AC) fractures 11–19%, and posterior wall (PW) fractures 8–13%. Daurka et al. (2014), looked at the quality of reduction, and found that the likelihood of anatomical reduction is lower 45.3% in the elderly population, versus 74% The evidence based multidisciplinary approach to the management of hip fractures in the elderly has resulted in a clear management algorithm that has improved the mortality and morbidity associated with hip fractures. It is our position that acetabular fractures confer similar morbidity and thus, although less common, will confer similar mortality if left untreated. As with elderly patients with hip fractures, they have less capacity to deal with the surgical insult of fracture fixation and without clear guidelines surgeons may be less willing to undertake surgical intervention due to the perceived increased risk of intra-operative, or early post-operative mortality. There are a number of limitations associated with this study. Firstly, it is a retrospective study and thus carries the inherent bias. Secondly, this study was performed in a tertiary referral centre and long-term follow-up of the acetabular group is limited as patients are discharged back to the referring hospital once medically fit, but are followed up in the outpatient clinic. Our hip fracture patients are not followed up routinely and may be discharged to peripheral step-down units once medically fit. This study focussed on peri-operative outcomes, although chart review did look at subsequent follow-up, the minimum follow-up possible in this study was 1 year and maximum was 5 years, this only applies to the acetabular group who elected to travel back for their follow-up appointments which correlated to 83.3% at 3 months. Other limitations include: the power of the study which if more patients were included may have shown more statistically significant differences in some of the secondary outcomes. As previously stated, the intracapsular hip fracture carries similar restrictions to the geriatric patient as acetabular fractures requiring fixation. There is consensus that almost all hip fractures should be operatively managed. We believe that peri-operative outcomes for acetabular fractures requiring fixation and hip fractures can be compared given the similarities in outcome in non-operative management and the extensive surgery required for both. Without consensus on how aggressive one must be in treating sick elderly patients with acetabular fractures, as with hip fractures, it can be said that there will arise a bias in a study such as this. However, it is the point of this study using sex, age-matched patients, with no significant difference in ASA status, to determine that we can be more aggressive in the treatment of elderly patients with acetabular fractures. This study shows that there is little difference in the peri-operative morbidity and mortality when managed in the appropriate setting. It provides preliminary evidence for the surgeon dealing with these complex patients that with appropriate peri-operative support that we can provide operative management albeit knowing that they pose a similar risk to hemiarthroplasty patients. This is the first study to compare peri-operative morbidity and mortality in patients undergoing surgical intervention for neck of femur fractures and acetabular fractures. The relevance of comparing these groups is outlined above. The primary outcome measure, peri-operative mortality, was not significantly different between the two groups. Our study demonstrated no significant difference in early peri-operative mortality or infection between the acetabular ORIF group and the hemiarthroplasty group in the elderly population. We consider this a very relevant finding particularly for those faced with managing this increasing problem. The current authors submit this manuscript aware of no conflict of interests regarding this study.