Phytochemical extractives can include hundreds of molecules in diverse classes—including soluble components such as flavonoids, proanthocyanidins, and terpenes—and they make-up several percent of the non-carbohydrate dry mass in small diameter Douglas-fir forestry residues. We establish that aqueous extracts from the most extractive rich tissue of Douglas-fir, bark, are inhibitory at biofuel relevant concentrations and demonstrate the inhibition with initial rate saccharification experiments using Trichoderma reesei cellulases. Initial rates of carbohydrate production from crystalline cellulose and amorphous cellulose substrates suggest that exoglucanase, endoglucanase and β-glucosidases are each inhibited between 15 and 25% in the presence of bark extracts. We find that despite the chemical complexity of this feedstock, the bulk of the inhibition comes from tannins while other suspicious extractive components we tested produced no statistically significant inhibition (in conditions of up to 3 grams per liter dry extractives).Forestry residues are an abundant, low environmental impact biomass feedstock ( There are over 200 identified extractives in Douglas-fir ( Bark was collected from an approximately 20-year-old Bark was dried between 60 and 70 °C until the mass decreased <0.1% in 10 min. DI water was added to 75 g/L of the dried bark and was mixed in a shaker table at 200 rpm and 50 °C for 12 h. The solids were filtered out using 0.45-micron PES filters. UV–Vis spectrograms of the extracts had a peak at 280 nm, a wavelength used to estimate phenolic concentrations ( Buffer solutions with or without extractives were preheated in the shaker table at the experimental conditions (50 °C and 200 rpm) and added to substrates preheated in capped Erlenmeyer flasks. Cellulose substrate concentrations were either 250 g/L Avicel PH-101 (crystalline) cellulose or 250 g/L carboxymethyl sodium salt (amorphous cellulose). Solutions combined with substrates were mixed in the shaker table for 1 h before cellulase addition. Owing to the viscosity of the amorphous cellulose solutions, additional mixing was required, including a 30 s vortex mix upon buffer addition to the cellulose, stirring with a spatula upon cellulase addition, then vortexed for another 30 s after stirring. All concentrations used here were chosen to be representative of a bark rich feedstock undergoing biofuel processing (liquids to solids ratio of 4:1, bark to other solids ratio of 23:76) ( Saccharification of model cellulose substrates can give us an indication of if exoglucanases, endoglucanases, and/or β-glucosidases are inhibited. These better defined substrates make it easier to pinpoint the origin of inhibition rather than using the more complex biomass. Experiments with whole bark extracts, a condensed tannin supplement, taxifolin, α-pinene, or abietic acid are compared to control experiments without extractives. The effects of different extractive molecules on the initial rate of glucose production from Exoglucanases are the primary cellulases in our enzyme mix responsible for initiating saccharification of crystalline cellulose. Glucose production from this cellulose substrate is primarily produced by the simplified two-step mechanism in Eq. In our experiments using the Celluclast cocktail, no excess β-glucosidase has been added to allow us to more easily monitor the intermediate product cellobiose in Eq. Parallel inhibition screening experiments can be performed using amorphous cellulose as the substrate, resulting in a more direct probe of inhibition on endoglucanase components in our Celluclast cocktail. The primary mechanism for glucose production from this substrate is shown in Eq.  The inhibition of amorphous cellulose hydrolysis by bark extract closely resembles the inhibition seen from the tannins/phenols in the tannin supplement. Similar to crystalline cellulose hydrolysis, this implies that the bark's own tannins and phenols lead to inhibition. Condensed tannins are known exoglucanase, endoglucanase, and β-glucosidase inhibitors ( Douglas-fir bark extracts were shown to cause inhibition of both crystalline cellulose and amorphous cellulose hydrolysis with each mechanistic step in the corresponding hydrolysis inhibited between 15 and 25%. Considering this, exoglucanases, endoglucanases, and β-glucosidases from E-Supplementary data related to A) Cellobiose saccharification inhibition, B) Lineweaver Burk graphs, C) UV–Vis of bark extract and tannin solutions, D) HPLC diagrams, and E) the composition of bark extractives, can be found in an online version of the paper. None. This work was supported by the Agriculture and Food Research Initiative Competitive Grant (No.  Supplementary data in regards to Supplementary data related to A) Cellobiose saccharification inhibition, B) Lineweaver Burk graphs, C) UV-Vis of bark extract and tannin solutions, D) HPLC diagrams, and E) the composition of bark extractives, can be found online at