The effects of eight alditols and six related hydroxycarboxylates on the nucleation, agglomeration and growth of gibbsite from caustic aluminate solutions (synthetic Bayer liquors) were studied under controlled but variable conditions, with the aim of elucidating the relationships between crystallization inhibition and sodium incorporation. Results obtained for pure solutions were consistent with the current understanding of gibbsite crystallization.
                  The observed inhibitory effects of the selected model compounds differ only in the extent to which they (i) decrease precipitation, (ii) confirm that the number and stereochemistry of hydroxyl groups determines the inhibition strength of the alditols and (iii) show that tridentate binding and/or terminal carboxylate increases that strength. Inhibitors are thought to adsorb at specific sites, mainly on the basal faces, and reduce the number of available sites to which aluminate ions can attach.
                  The effects of intermediate-strength inhibitors on gibbsite morphologies and sodium incorporation form the basis of the proposed inhibition mechanisms, in which both organic molecules and sodium ions become incorporated between gibbsite double layers. Their effect is to disrupt “birth and spread” growth on the basal faces and to weaken the bonding between double layers. “Spiral” growth continues on the prismatic faces leading to the formation of large, thin hexagons.Many organic compounds build up in Bayer liquors as a result of the recycling of liquor through the digestion and precipitation stages. They are the alkaline-degradation products of humic and fulvic materials in the bauxite or of organic additives introduced to improve Bayer productivity. Few of these compounds have been identified and little is known about their specific effects For this fundamental study, a group of low molecular weight compounds was selected which, between them, provided variety in carbon chain length, number and stereochemistry of hydroxyl groups (the alditols) and functional groups (hydroxycarboxylic acids). Alditols are straight-chain aliphatic compounds with a hydroxyl group at every carbon atom. The properties of alditols, such as their ability to complex cations and anions over a wide pH range and the role that stereochemistry plays in that complexation Hydroxycarboxylic acids have similar stereochemistries to their alditol equivalents. They form complexes with aluminium (Al The effects of eight alditols on secondary nucleation, agglomeration and gibbsite crystal growth were quantified and compared with the effects of six related hydroxycarboxylic acids. In addition, their effects on sodium incorporation were compared. The results obtained are discussed in relation to the mechanisms of gibbsite precipitation inhibition. Methods used for the preparation of synthetic Bayer liquors and for precipitation tests have been described fully The organic compounds tested Gibbsite samples were dissolved in a 5% (v/v) sulphuric in nitric acid mixture and sodium in solution was determined using ICP-AES. The sodium content of the freshly precipitated gibbsite was calculated. It has been shown that, for the precipitation of gibbsite from alkaline aluminate solutions (synthetic Bayer liquors), the processes of secondary nucleation, agglomeration and ordered growth can be studied separately The effects of the selected compounds are illustrated for threitol (a relatively weak inhibitor) on nucleation, arabinitol (intermediate strength) on agglomeration and sorbitol (a strong inhibitor) on crystal growth The comparative effects of the model compounds at a solution concentration of 6 mmol L That inhibition is due to rapid adsorption of the organic compounds from solution onto the gibbsite seed surface was demonstrated for xylitol (6 mmol L Results for glycerol, threitol and glyceric and threonic acids illustrate the effects of model compounds on secondary nucleation On the basis of mass precipitated in the presence of 6 mmol L Under the conditions chosen for the comparative tests, an induction period was not observed for the control and agglomeration was essentially complete within the first hour, during which time the aluminium supersaturation dropped significantly. After this time, agglomerates were consolidated further by slower crystal growth Gibbsite agglomeration was sensitive to the presence of alditols in solution. At low concentrations, 2–3 mmol L Again, on the basis of mass precipitated in the presence of 6 mmol L Gibbsite deposition from supersaturated aluminate solutions as a function of time was significantly hindered in the presence of increasing concentrations of the model compounds compared with deposition under control conditions Rate constants were calculated for all the test compounds Gibbsite crystals grown from pure solutions were found to be large and blocky, grouped into agglomerates, with well-formed hexagonal basal faces, prismatic faces and chamfered faces A diminution of the chamfered faces was observed in the presence of low concentrations of sorbitol and mannitol (1 mmol L The effects were magnified as organic concentrations were increased. Blocky crystals without chamfered faces but with sharp interfacial boundaries formed in the presence of sorbitol (1 mmol L Needle-like crystals growing out of the basal faces were observed in some samples (e.g. 8 mmol L The sodium content of newly precipitated gibbsite was calculated (excluding the contribution from the seed particles) for all samples collected during these experiments; results for a selection of the alditols and hydroxycarboxylates are shown in The results are less clear for the hydroxycarboxylates, particularly those, which are strong inhibitors. At high supersaturation (nucleation — The aim of this research is to describe the mechanism(s) of gibbsite crystallization inhibition. Previously, studies tended to be focused on the effects of a single compound [e.g. Two experimental observations relate directly to a description of the relationship between gibbsite crystallization and the incorporation of sodium. First, it has been shown that, for the precipitation of gibbsite from aluminate solutions with no added organic compound, sodium incorporation increases proportionally with increased deposition rate Gibbsite crystal growth involves the adsorption of aluminate ions onto the growing surface and their restructuring to form gibbsite, with the consequent release of sodium and hydroxyl ions. In its simplest form, this reaction may be represented as For ordered growth at relatively low supersaturation, it is envisaged that aluminate ions adsorb at the gibbsite surface and restructure according to the underlying surface template. Sodium and hydroxyl ions released in the reaction diffuse away from the surface, with the result that incorporated sodium levels remain low. However, at higher supersaturations, with greater concentrations of “polyaluminates”, the adsorbed units are likely to be clusters, which restructure rapidly because of the high crystallization driving force. During rapid deposition, the released sodium ions may become trapped and incorporated into the lattice because they are unable to diffuse away from the interfacial layer before it crystallizes In respect of the former, a simple calculation using structural data for gibbsite Related to the above are the results of Friej In summary: sodium incorporation in gibbsite from seeded supersaturated aluminate solutions is dependent upon a combination of deposition rate, temperature and seed surface area; sodium atoms may be located between gibbsite double layers, possibly substituted for protons, and are thought to stabilise the lattice; the “birth and spread” mechanism dominates growth on basal faces at high supersaturation and may involve addition of polyaluminate clusters, which restructure rapidly to form nuclei and hinder the escape of sodium ions; ordered growth at low to moderate relative supersaturations occurs on basal and prismatic faces by a spiral growth mechanism. Modifications to these growth mechanisms and/or their dependences are expected when crystallization inhibitors are present, making it possible to describe possible mechanisms of gibbsite growth inhibition and sodium incorporation. Alditols — CH At low concentrations, the stronger inhibitors delay the formation of secondary nuclei significantly as compared with the control; at higher concentrations they hinder deposition almost entirely. Agglomeration is delayed, but not prevented, in the presence of low alditol concentrations, but the resulting agglomerates are often significantly smaller in diameter than those formed under control conditions. The rates of ordered growth are slowed even further by low concentrations of alditols. Xylitol and sorbitol both delay and slow gibbsite deposition at concentrations above 2 mmol L The results obtained are consistent with, and extend significantly, suggested correlations between the inhibition of gibbsite precipitation by selected alditols and their adsorption on an alumina surface. Specifically, it is clear that three hydroxyls in a preferred configuration adsorb more strongly than two and cause greater crystallization inhibition The effects of the corresponding hydroxycarboxylate compounds are not as well defined. In general, an increased number of hydroxyl functional groups and their different stereochemistries tend to cause increased inhibition of all three crystallization processes, as was found for the alditols. However, superimposed on this is the added effect of the carboxylate group. For equivalent compounds (i.e. glycerol cf. glyceric acid), each hydroxycarboxylate has a greater detrimental effect than its respective alditol. In the case of threitol/threonic acid, the effect of oxidising one terminal hydroxyl to a carboxylate functional group is remarkable. If threonic acid is considered to be glycerol-carboxylate, then the magnitude of its effects, compared with the C3-alditol, is even more noteworthy. Previously, it was proposed that the action of the carboxylate group was to withdraw electrons, making the adjacent (two) hydroxyl groups more acidic, and increasing the ability of a given hydroxycarboxylate to adsorb onto the gibbsite surface under Bayer conditions It is not known whether the carboxylate group participates directly in chemisorption with the gibbsite surface, for example, in the case of glyceric acid, where tridentate binding via three hydroxy groups is not possible. The results of spectroscopic studies on the complexation of aluminate ions by gluconate and tartrate ligands under Bayer conditions The strong relationship between stereochemistry of hydroxyl groups, with and without the terminal hydroxyl group, and inhibition strength support previous suggestions that inhibitors adsorb at specific sites on the seed surface. Alamdari et al. One of the consequences of the above hypothesis is that dendritic growth leading to secondary nucleation cannot occur when growth sites are blocked and in the extreme case, the effect is as if the solution was unseeded. Under such conditions, where aluminium supersaturation in solution remains high but the opportunity to precipitate on a seed surface is removed, aluminate solution clusters may restructure to form gibbsite nuclei as a means of reducing the degree of supersaturation. Such nucleation has been observed after a prolonged induction period for unseeded solutions containing model organic compounds Secondary nuclei were not generated in the presence of the strong inhibitors at high supersaturation in the time frame of the experiments (refer threonic acid, When not all growth sites are blocked, as in the case of intermediate strength inhibitors, it might be predicted that deposition at the remaining available sites would proceed even more rapidly, perhaps resulting in increased secondary nucleation, such as that observed for glycerol and/or glyceric acid Agglomeration is also a rapid process, which depends on fast and significant gibbsite deposition as the means of cementing particles together into strong attrition-resistant agglomerates. Slower deposition would be expected to result in insufficient cementation as a function of time, causing fewer particles to adhere to one another, and rendering those agglomerates which form more prone to breakage and attrition. Observations of lower deposition rates and delayed agglomeration in the presence of model organic compounds resulting in smaller agglomerates are consistent with the above expectation. Again, the root cause may be a reduction in the number of growth sites, preventing cementation of particles from taking place. Compounds, which hinder precipitation, may do so by affecting growth processes on particular crystal faces. In seeded precipitation, the morphology of the gibbsite seed usually determines the morphology of the precipitation product, thus masking any subtle effects of the model compounds. However, mechanistic information about crystallization inhibition can be obtained by precipitating gibbsite from unseeded, supersaturated aluminate solutions under controlled conditions and characterising the crystals formed using scanning electron microscopy Certain of the model compounds appear to block adhesion of the next growth layer on the basal faces, resulting in thinner plate-like hexagons. Deposition on the prismatic faces may continue, in the extreme case forming scale (compare Thus, the observed inhibitory effects of the alditols and hydroxycarboxylates (at different concentrations) on gibbsite growth processes and morphologies: differ only in the extent to which a compound inhibits deposition rate (fewer secondary nuclei and delayed/reduced agglomeration are consequences of lower deposition rates); confirm that the number of hydroxyl groups and their stereochemistry determine the inhibition strength of the alditols; tridentate binding and/or the presence of a carboxylate group confer added inhibition strength; indicate that adsorption plays a key role and that inhibitors target specific growth sites, mainly on the basal faces, effectively reducing the number of available sites to which aluminate ions can attach. In attempting to describe the relationship between inhibition and sodium incorporation, two apparently inconsistent observations must be reconciled. First, it has been noted that increased sodium incorporation during gibbsite crystallization is directly proportional to high deposition rates per unit area. At the same time, it has been shown that the effects of the model compounds differ mainly in the extent to which they lower deposition rates (relative to controls under the same conditions). Combining these two, it would be expected that sodium incorporation should occur to a lesser extent in the presence of these organic compounds, if only because the deposition rates are less. Clearly this is not the case. Sodium concentrations in precipitated gibbsite increase when crystallization is carried out in the presence of crystallization inhibitors, except where they arrest precipitation. Thus, it must be concluded that inhibition and sodium incorporation are directly linked. This relationship has a further component in that sodium incorporation is greater for larger sized organic molecules The interactions between organic compounds and sodium and aluminate ions during gibbsite precipitation are summarised in For pure solutions at low supersaturation, it is envisaged that sodium aluminate ion pairs might approach the gibbsite surface, adsorb at appropriate sites on prismatic and basal faces, and release sodium and hydroxyl to the solution during restructuring to gibbsite. Those sodium ions that become incorporated into the lattice can be accommodated without undue strain between the gibbsite double layers or substituted for a proton and may strengthen the lattice. In the presence of strong inhibitors that arrest precipitation, organic molecules may adsorb at similar sites, blocking the addition of further aluminate ions — this seems to occur mainly on the basal face. Strong crystallization inhibitors specifically target “active growth sites”, implying that the spatial distribution of, for example threo–threo hydroxyl groups, resembles very closely the functional part of an aluminate “growth unit” and is held at the surface with sufficient force not to be readily displaced. The nature of the so-called active sites has yet to be determined. Sodium ions can be associated with the gibbsite surface, the organic molecules, and the aluminate ions, but in the absence of a strong crystallization driving force, it is unlikely that their desorption and diffusion away from the surface is hindered. Thus strong inhibitors have very little effect on gibbsite quality (no deposition, no organic or soda incorporation) but decrease yields significantly For pure solutions at high supersaturation, deposition rates are high and growth is mainly by the birth and spread mechanism on the basal face. Sodium ions are associated with aluminate ions and clusters and adsorbed on the gibbsite surface. Their release to the bulk solution may be hindered by the rapid deposition, so that they may be trapped between the gibbsite double layers by successive growth layers. Higher sodium contents may stabilise the lattice further but become a quality issue when the calcined gibbsite (alumina) is smelted. Weak inhibitors, which cause a small reduction in deposition rates, are readily desorbed from the surface and are unlikely to be incorporated into the growing crystal in large amounts. Sodium incorporation is high because of the high deposition rates, with only a small additional contribution due to organic incorporation. Hydrogen bonded adhesion of successive double layers occurs, as expected. Thus weak inhibitors have little effect on either sodium or organic incorporation in the growing crystal but may cause a slight reduction in yields. High sodium incorporation is the result of high deposition rates Intermediate strength inhibitors at high supersaturation have the most detrimental effects on gibbsite quality while decreasing yields significantly. Their relative degrees of inhibition are determined by the strength of adsorption at growth sites on the gibbsite surface. Whether the molecules are ion-paired with sodium ions in solution, adsorb at the surface with its associated sodium ions, or complex with sodium aluminate clusters in solution prior to adsorption on the surface, the effect will be the same — an active site will be blocked to further addition of aluminate ions or clusters. This may be because the adsorbed organic molecule presents a “non-gibbsite” template to the incoming aluminate ions or makes the surface site hydrophobic. Nevertheless, deposition rates remain relatively high for longer periods than in pure solutions and growth by the birth and spread mechanism may continue to incorporate both organic molecules and sodium ions in the crystal lattice. Increases in organic incorporation between the double layers is thought to disrupt the hydrogen bonding between the layers and larger organic molecules promote or permit additional sodium ion incorporation. The role of sodium (if any) in the organic-gibbsite adsorption process remains unclear. While yields are only slightly lower, adsorption of intermediate strength inhibitors on the basal faces disrupts bonding between successive double layers during gibbsite crystallization and is accompanied by increased sodium incorporation Comparisons between data obtained in this and related studies From results here and reported earlier The incorporation of sodium in the gibbsite structure has already been simulated The inhibitory effects of eight alditols and five related hydroxycarboxylates on gibbsite crystallization processes (nucleation, agglomeration and ordered growth) and morphologies differ only in the extent to which they reduce the deposition rate in comparison with that obtained for a control under equivalent conditions. The appearance of fewer secondary nuclei and the observed delay and reduction in agglomeration are consequences of the lower deposition rates. Comparisons between compounds with increasing number of carbon atoms (hydroxyl groups) and different isomers confirm that the number of hydroxyl groups and their stereochemistry determine the inhibition strengths of the alditols, and that tridentate binding through three vicinal hydroxy groups and the presence of a terminal carboxylate group confer added inhibition strength. Adsorption of the organic compound on the basal face at specific sites is a key step in inhibition. For the selected model compounds, sodium incorporation could be related to both inhibition and adsorption, but the hypothesis that adsorption is the key to sodium incorporation, independent of inhibition, requires further investigation. The effects of intermediate-strength inhibitors on gibbsite morphologies and sodium incorporation form the basis of the proposed inhibition mechanisms, in which both organic molecules and sodium ions become incorporated between gibbsite double layers. Their effect is to disrupt birth and spread growth on the basal faces and to weaken the bonding between double layers. Spiral growth continues on the prismatic faces leading to the formation of large, thin hexagons. H. Gatter, J. Loh, D. Lau and M. Brown are thanked for their assistance with precipitation experiments, sodium analyses and SEM imaging. My particular thanks to C. Vernon and P. Fawell for the many useful discussions about the results and for the critical review of the typescript. The financial support of the Australian Federal Government through its Cooperative Research Centres Program is gratefully acknowledged.