This work studies how drainage of a wet foam is affected by certain characteristics of its container: diameter, wettability and shape of the walls. Drainage is registered by three simultaneous techniques: (a) electrical conductance measurements for the evolution of the local liquid fraction, (b) close-up photos for the evolution of the local bubble size distribution and (c) volumetric measurements for the evolution of the global liquid fraction in the entire container. Electrical measurements are conducted at different heights along the foam with the aid of several pairs of non-intrusive ring electrodes. Three cylindrical Plexiglas containers of different diameter are used, before and after treatment of their walls to allow tests with hydrophobic and hydrophilic walls, respectively. To resemble the shape of common industrial containers, the lower part of the largest container has a gradually reducing diameter towards its bottom. Foam decay is slower in the hydrophobic containers, this being less evident as diameter increases. Moreover, the role of diameter and shape is complex since the highest drainage rate is measured at the largest container whereas the lowest one at the medium container. The possible effect of the container walls in promoting the macroscopic rigidity of the foam structure is discussedFoams are encountered in diverse industrial processes such as food production, cosmetics, fire fighting, fermentation reactors, mineral processing, effluent treatment and enhanced oil recovery. There is a vast literature on fundamental aspects of foam formation and stability and in several cases the role of the dynamic physicochemical and rheological properties of surfactant solutions in interfacial stability is assessed. From a technological standpoint the most frequently examined aspect is the influence of impeller design and operating conditions such as rotational speed and air–liquid ratio in order to rapidly produce large quantities of homogeneous foams ( Liquid film thinning is a characteristic process of foam drainage since liquid films around bubbles control the foam structure. A large number of studies have tried to establish principles and criteria based on isolated foam films in order to understand the complex mechanisms of foam drainage and collapse ( Container effects in free drainage may be separated in three key categories. The first category refers to container size: diameter (since most work is performed in cylindrical containers) and height. The second category refers to container shape. Most lab studies utilized cylindrical containers but in industry it is common to use containers with gradually converging (curved) bottoms. The third category refers to the wettability of the container walls. Clean glass containers traditionally used in lab work are fully wettable leading to hydrophilic drainage but the prolonged and repeated use of metallic or polymeric containers in industry yields a finite and hardly controllable wettability. From the first category the container diameter is the least investigated parameter. Different authors have used containers with different diameters but only recently a systematic study was performed by Containers of different cross-sections were employed in the past. The most popular one has been the circular one but other shapes were also used e.g. square ( We are not aware of any systematic work on the effect of the wettability of the container wall. Most lab studies used glass containers in order to facilitate visual observations. In addition to imaging convenience, experience has shown that hydrophilic drainage over clean glass substrates gives good reproducibility of the experiments. In order to install stably their diagnostic probes some researchers used stainless steel containers but they were then forced to do measurements only at the specific locations of their probes e.g. for rheological or bubble size measurements ( The objective of this work is to examine the effect of some container characteristics on foam free drainage. In particular, experiments are conducted with three Plexiglas containers of different diameter the smallest of which is 40 In the following sections, the foam preparation procedure and a few essential physicochemical properties of the foam solution is presented first followed by an outline of the experimental setup and the employed measuring techniques. A section comes next with experimental results and discussion on the underlying phenomena. Soya protein isolate (SPI, PRO Foams are prepared by whipping air into 300 Three Plexiglas containers are used in the experiments. Their basic geometrical features together with electrodes details are presented in <?MCtwidthcolumnwidth?> The medium and small containers are cylindrical throughout as in most traditional studies on foam stability (although usually those containers had smaller diameters for different reasons). The shape and dimensions of the large container are the same with those of the mixing vessel provided for use with the Sunbeam Mixmaster mixer. This particular shape, curved towards the bottom of the container, is common in industrial foam-making vessels. All containers are furnished with parallel stainless-steel rings (2 The aforementioned foam preparation procedure was found to yield a very homogeneous initial foam with virtually no angular or radial non-uniformities at a cross-section of the container. In such cases it was shown that the separation distance between electrodes can be chosen as small as about two times the electrodes width (4 Instantaneous conductance values of the draining foam from the different probes are obtained by employing the technique of For a uniformly dispersed liquid phase (as in a homogeneous foam), the ratio of the apparent conductances (the inverse of the apparent resistances) is equal to the ratio of conductivities: The empirical formula of A still digital camera (SONY, DSC-F717, 5 Mp) is employed to take photographs of the entire containers height. These images are used to determine the instantaneous heights of the foam and of the drained liquid inside the containers and from these values estimate the quantities High definition close-up photographs are taken every 10 The liquid of the foam has a natural pH 6.9 (MP 220, Mettler Toledo), electrical specific conductivity 0.52 According to Taking the above into account, an effort is made to roughly appraise the mobility of the gas/liquid interface since surface shear viscosity measurements are not available. For this, we employed the dimensional analysis proposed by For a specific surfactant at a specific concentration the above relation was found to be approximately described by a power law expression: For such rigid gas/liquid interfaces the effect of the container wall on drainage is expected to be significant ( The volumetrically determined initial global liquid fraction in the foam is For practical reasons results of drainage are presented only for the first hour after foam formation. It is instructive to start with the results of volumetric measurements. During the entire first hour of draining, the foam remains pretty wet (liquid fraction always above For the small and medium containers with hydrophobic walls the foam shows no sign of drainage for the initial 10–20  It must be recalled here that the side walls of the large container are not cylindrical throughout but below a certain height attain a curved shape (converging walls). This particular shape would be expected to increase foam stability contrary to e.g. diverging walls which were found to promote drainage (  Local electrical measurements differ from global volumetric ones since the latter give information on the entire foam volume including also regions above and below the electrical probes. In the containers with hydrophilic walls volumetric measurements do not show any initial idle period indicating that capillary suction effects at the bottom of the foam are not enough to hinder drainage. Moreover, in the small and medium containers global measurements decline faster than local ones but this reverses in the large hydrophilic container. Bearing in mind that in the large container electrical probes are located at lower (relative to its height) locations than in the other two containers, we believe the different behavior of the large container is a result of its curved lower wall which enhances capillary suction effects and retards drainage. We were unable to find any foam drainage report in similarly curved containers so at present we can only speak about the comparisons with our cylindrical containers. Evidently, more work is required before a definitive statement can be made about the role of the wall shape.  If one further compares electrical signals from probes located at the middle of the foam in the three containers obtained with the same wetting properties of the walls a qualitative agreement is found with the volumetric measurements in Admittedly, it is not easy to obtain information on bulk bubbles without disturbing them e.g. with a measuring probe or by taking samples. To our knowledge, there is no non-intrusive experimental evidence on the evolution of bubble size distribution in the bulk of a foam. The present optical measurements refer to bubbles located at the wall which, however, may be different than bulk bubbles. This difference may be a little less in wet foams (compared to dry foams) since the thick liquid films at the walls reduce the friction between bubbles and allow higher bubble mobility and spatial rearrangement without stretching the gas/liquid interface. Our observations during drainage show that bubbles in contact with the hydrophilic wall are not pinned to the wall but move slowly upward in a non-linear fashion. The same holds for bubbles on our hydrophobic walls although these bubbles move at lower speed. This is not so surprising if one recalls that film formation on the walls is inevitable even on hydrophobic walls. Bubbles in the bulk are also expected to move upwards as the liquid drains out of the foam and accumulates at the bottom of the container. This upward motion is merely a result of mass conservation and volume exclusion (  Apart from similarities, there are also some essential differences in the evolution of bubble size distributions between hydrophobic and hydrophilic walls. In the runs with hydrophilic walls, the smaller bubbles (250– There are also some differences with respect to the container diameter. In the hydrophobic containers, the smaller bubbles (250– The major mechanisms of foam destabilization are: (a) Our electrical measurements indicate a small increase in average bubble size during the initial idle (constant liquid fraction) period. In this period the liquid draining out of a finite measurement volume is replaced by the liquid draining in from higher foam layers. The small bubble size increase demonstrates that even at high liquid fractions coalescence and/or coarsening may occur at some extent. For our stiff bubble surfaces On the basis of the evidence obtained in this and other earlier works, e.g. Volumetric (global) and electrical (local) measurements have shown that the employed protein–polysaccharide stabilized wet foams drain more rapidly when the container walls are hydrophilic than hydrophobic. This becomes however less and less evident as the diameter of the container increases. Electrical measurements demonstrate that a liquid fraction gradient evolves along the foam column during drainage and that the traditional volumetric determination of the instantaneous global liquid fraction of the foam is not a safe indicator of foam behavior. In addition, in all containers a correlation seems to exist between onset of drainage and change in bubble size distribution. Moreover, it seems that there is a relation between the evolution of bubble size (which reflects coalescence and coarsening) and the evolution of liquid fraction (which reflects drainage). For the examined range of container diameters, the performance of the medium and small containers (which are both cylindrical throughout their height) depends on the wettability of their walls: for hydrophilic walls, the small container exhibits a little higher drainage rate but for hydrophobic walls the performance is comparable between the two containers. Interestingly, the fastest drainage of all is observed in the large container regardless the wetting properties of its walls. This is so despite the rounded bottom of the large container which acts to stabilize the foam by promoting capillary suction effects. We believe that the observed fast foam decay in the large container may be ascribed to the relatively large distance between the walls and the central regions of the foam which does not allow adequate mechanical support of these regions and so the foam structure disintegrates under its own weight. We are grateful to Dr. E. Kalogianni for performing the contact angle measurements. Financial support by the European Space Agency through the Project FASES (Fundamental and Applied Studies of Emulsion Stability) (ESA-AO-2004-PCP-109/ELIPS-2) is gratefully acknowledged. This work is conducted under the umbrella of the COST P21 action: Physics of Droplets.