The aim of this study is to demonstrate the potential of coals as a low-cost reactive barrier material for environmental protection applications, with the ability to prevent leaching of toxic Cr(VI) and other transition metals. Depending upon the type of ion and the surface functionalities, the uptake can involve ion sorption, ion exchange, chelation and redox mechanisms with the surface functionalities being considered as partners in electron transfer processes. The capacity for Cr(VI) uptake of low rank coals and oxidized bituminous coals has been found to lie within the range 0.2–0.6mMg−1. Air oxidation of bituminous coals can increase their Cr(VI) removal capacities. The effect of air oxidation of coals on uptake capacity was more pronounced for Cr(VI) than Cr(III), but less than for Hg(II) and the other ions (Ca2+, Ba2+, Zn2+, Cd2) investigated. As previously found for Hg(II), redox mechanisms play an important role in Cr(VI) uptake, with sorption of the resultant Cr(III) being aided by the functionalities arising from oxidation of the coal surface. In acidic media, much of the resultant Cr(III) is exchanged back into solution by hydrogen ions, but some of the sorbed chromium is irreversibly bound to the coal. The reduction of Cr(VI) alone is often considered a satisfactory solution in view of Cr(III) being essentially non-toxic.The minimization of the environmental impact of transition and heavy metals in aquatic system and leachates requires the application of different chemical process: precipitation, ion-exchange, adsorption, electrochemical and membrane filtration. Finding the cost effective methods requires further investigation in the field of natural sorbents, industrial and agricultural wastes or by products. The environmental and biological effects of chromium are dependant upon its oxidation state. Cr(III) is essentially non toxic and Cr(III) complexes (picolinate) are applied to human food supplements, and these are also bio-available for plants This study aims to determine the characteristics of Cr(VI) removal by a wide range of coals. Our goal is also to gain an understanding of how the Cr(VI) coal interaction operates with the view of using coals for the reduction and removal of Cr(VI) from waste streams and leachates. The characteristics of the coals and peat used in this study are summarised in Prior to metal ion loading the coals were treated with 0.1 Surface areas of the as-received and oxidised samples of Gedling and Taff–Merthyr coals determined by CO As discussed earlier, there are two principal means by which coals and ions can interact with each other in aqueous solutions. The first and most common way involves the sorption, ion exchange and chelation of metal ions The interaction of Cr(VI) with one of the bituminous coals (Gedling), one of the lignites (Can) and the activated carbon (Norit C) was investigated at different pHs: pH≈5 in 0.1  At pH≈1 (0.05 In the buffer and the 0.005 The relative extent of the uptake of Cr(VI) as a function of pH (see To summarise thus far, the influence of pH on the redox potential and the ion sorption capacity can explain why less Cr(VI) was reduced in the buffer than in the sulphuric acid medium (compare A comparison of the removal of Cr(VI) at pH≈1 and pH≈5 as a function of coal rank is presented in The oxidation of organic materials by Cr(VI) is practised widely in organic and analytical chemistry, for instance it is used for the determination of the humic acid or organic content of soil and chemical oxygen demand in water. In these cases the final goal is to produce CO Oxidation by Cr(VI) is likely to give rise to new surface carboxyl functionalities on the coals. The increase in the concentration of potentially accessible carboxyl sites formed by the redox mechanisms can clearly be demonstrated by the increase in the barium ion sorption capacities. These were determined in 0.1 A comparison of redox and and non-redox interactions has been considered by first comparing Cr(VI) and Cr(III) removal with respect to coal rank, and secondly, by comparing Cr(VI) removal to that of alkaline earth, transition and heavy metal ions (Ca  As the reduction of Cr(VI) mostly takes place with the carbons bound to –OH functionalities, the pre-treatment of coals to increase the concentrations of electron donor sites can improve the redox capacity of the coal. To this end oxidised samples of bituminous coals were prepared as described earlier. Oxidation under the conditions used here can have two effects; it can modify the type and the number of the functionalities on the surface (see the enhancement of the total oxygen content in Our on-going research will address the multi component system and dynamic character of the Cr(VI)–coal interaction as a function of particle size and flow rate since these experimental variables play important roles in function of reactive permeable barriers.  This investigation has demonstrated that the reduction of chromium(IV) is governed by the concentration and the extent of electron donor functionalities in the coals, which varies with pH. Lower pHs exhibit larger redox potentials for the Cr(III)/Cr(VI) system, and give rise to larger redox capacities of the coals. pH also affects Cr(III) desorption which was found to be partially irreversible or very slow. The variations in Cr(VI) and Cr(III) removal as a function of coal rank were similar, but due to the redox effects accross the rank range the extent of Cr(VI) removal is higher than Cr(III). A comparison of the removal of Cr(VI) with the other ions (Ca The extent of Cr(VI) uptake by coals achieved in this investigation (0.2–0.6 One of the authors (J.L.) is greatly indebted to the Hungarian Science Foundation for providing a grant (OTKA T-031959.). The authors thank the European Coal and Steel Community for financial support (Contract No. PR070).