Alteration halo geochemical study was carried out along one transect at the Buzwagi mine which is found in the Neoarchaean Nzega greenstone belt of northern Tanzania. The Buzwagi mine Au mineralization is hosted in quartz veins that are cross-cutting strongly sheared and hydrothermally altered K-granites. Mineralogical studies within the shear zone reveal that sericite, silica and sulphides are the most important hydrothermal mineral assemblages responsible for Au mineralization at the Buzwagi mine. The geochemical alteration halo is characterized by the addition of Au, Cu, Fe, K, Rb, Sn, W and U to wall rocks and simultaneous removal of Na, Sr, Ba, LREE and MREE from the host rocks. The concentrations of Cu (130–870 ppm) which show strong positive correlation with Au (R2 = 0.99) are so high in the alteration halo indicating that Cu is a strong Au pathfinder at the Buzwagi mine. Owing to their immobility during the post-emplacement processes, the HFSE (Zr, Hf, Th, Ta) remained unchanged during the hydrothermal alteration process.
                  The addition of Fe and Cu is attributed to the presence of Fe- and Cu-sulphides (pyrite, chalcopyrite and chalcocite) whereas the addition of K, Rb, Sn, W and U is a function of both primary concentrations of these elements in the host rocks as well as the subsequent strong hydrothermal alteration evidenced by sericitization and silicification which involved the destruction of feldspars into sericites). The destruction of albite and its replacement by sericite accounts for the depletion of Na, Sr (and Ba). The Buzwagi mine Au mineralization mineral association do not include the more known pathfinders like Ag, As, Sb, Bi, Te and Tl and they seem not to have played a role in the mineralization process. These elements, therefore, should not be considered as pathfinders for Au exploration purposes at a Buzwagi-like deposit.The recognition of primary geochemical haloes is one of the important tools for exploring undiscovered mineral resources as well as understanding the important geochemical features associated with the mineralization (e.g. The Buzwagi gold deposit is located on the north-western tip of the Neoarchaean Nzega greenstone belt in northern Tanzania. It is a quartz vein sheared deposit with the mineralization hosted in the hydrothermally altered and sheared K-rich granites that has been recently studied with age determinations and petrogenesis of the K-rich granites and the associated tonalite-trondhjemite-granodiorite (TTG) by The timing of gold mineralization was loosely temporally constrained by the age of the host rocks. Thus, the age of 2674 Ma reported for the emplacement of the K-granites was considered as the maximum age of gold deposition at the Buzwagi mine and by implication in the Nzega greenstone belt ( The Buzwagi gold deposit is, together with the former Golden Pride mine; found in the Nzega greenstone belt of northern Tanzania. Nzega greenstone belt is one of the six greenstone belts known in the northern part of the Craton ( The greenstone sequence is intruded and flanked by various types of granitoids. So far three types of granitic intrusives have been reported in the greenstone belts of Tanzania: the TTG, K-rich granites and Sanukitoids ( The greenstone belts of northern Tanzania are the major sources of gold production. About 90% of Au production in Tanzania comes from the greenstone belts of Lake Victoria. Styles of Au mineralization in the Lake Victoria greenstone belts include (examples of deposits given in brackets and found in Quartz vein hosted mineralization associated with shear zones (e.g. Bulyankulu, Tulawaka). Mineralization in this category is hosted in metavolcanic and volcano-sedimentary rocks. Banded Iron Formation (BIF) hosted mineralization associated with shear zones (e.g. Geita). Mineralization in this category can also be categorised as strata-bound. Granitic intrusives hosted mineralization associated with shear zones (e.g. Nyabirama - North Mara, Buzwagi – the focus of this study) Clastic sedimentary rocks (sandstones, siltstones) hosted mineralization associated with shear zones (e.g. Golden Pride, Nyanzaga). In all these styles of mineralization, the ore is associated with sulphides (mainly pyrite, although pyrrhotite, arsenopyrite, chalcopyrite and chalcocite are also common) and a particular hydrothermal alteration assemblage (mainly silica, carbonate, chlorite, sericite; The Buzwagi gold deposit is unique in that its mineralization is hosted in quartz veins which are cross-cutting sheared and hydrothermally altered K-rich granites ( Eleven out of twelve samples (i.e. sample BZ 12 being new) used in this study are the same samples that were used in the recent study by The samples collected in the field were crushed in a jig-saw crusher for size reduction and subsequently pulverized in an agate mill to fine powder. 5 g aliquots of each powdered sample were packed and sent to the Activation Laboratories Ltd of Ontario, Canada, for major and trace element determination. Since the same samples used in this study are the same that were used in Representative samples were thin-sectioned and studied under a polarizing microscope. Samples from the mineralized zone consists of minerals that have a preferred orientation due to being sheared and is predominated by plagioclase that has been altered to fine and large crystals of sericite, recrystallized quartz; and are thus foliated ( The un-mineralized K-granites (i.e. sample BZ8 and BZ10) are composed of large phenocrysts of plagioclase and K-feldspars and small crystals of quartz, biotite, feldspar and sphene and are thus porphyritic. In these rocks, sericitization is evident but less pronounced ( Major and selected trace element compositions for the Buzwagi mineralized and un-mineralized K-granitic rocks are shown in Trace elements characteristics in the alteration halo of the Buzwagi mine exhibit different trends with some showing enrichment while others show depletion or no conspicuous trend at all. Trace elements with poorly developed trends, albeit with some scatter (i.e. their compositions do not vary significantly in both the mineralized and un-mineralized zones except for a few spikes) include As, Ag, Sb, Bi, V, Mo, Sc, Se, Be, Ga, Ge, Zn, Zr, Hf, Th and Pb. In particular, As, Sb, Sc, Se, Be, Ga, Ge and Bi concentrations in the alteration halo are similar to those of the background values in the unmineralized zone, which in most cases were beyond the detection limit ( Trace elements Sr, Ba, and La exhibit the opposite trend in that they show depletion in the alteration halo relative to the un-mineralized zone. In particular, Ba concentrations are more than three times in the un-mineralized zone (Ba = 824–1644 ppm) relative to those of the mineralized zone (Ba = 387–708 ppm) whereas Sr concentrations are four times higher in the un-mineralized zone (Sr = 525–1092 ppm) than those of the mineralized zone (Sr = 146–208 ppm) ( Alteration halo geochemical studies by researchers in gold mineralization (e.g. As shown in Section The depletion of Na The fact that elements As, Sb, Sc, Se, Mo, Be, Ga, Ge and Bi showed very low concentrations within and outside the alteration zone implies their insignificance in the Au mineralization at the Buzwagi deposit. Although such elements are reckoned as useful pathfinders in gold mineralization in other parts of the world, they don't seem to have played a role at the Buzwagi deposit. The geochemical study of the alteration halo at the Buzwagi mine was conducted along one transect perpendicular to the strike of the mineralized zone and revealed the following: Sericite, silica and sulphides are the most important hydrothermal mineral assemblages responsible for Au mineralization at the Buzwagi mine. This alteration halo mineralogy is found within the shear zone in the host K-granite rocks. The geochemical alteration halo is characterized by the addition of Au, Cu, Fe, K, Rb, Sn, W and U to wall rock and simultaneous removal of Na, Sr, Ba, LREE and MREE from the host rocks. The concentrations of Cu (130–870 ppm) which have strong positive correlation with Au (R The addition of Fe and Cu is attributed to the presence of Fe- and Cu-sulphides (pyrite, chalcopyrite and chalcocite) whereas the addition of K, Rb, Sn, W, and U is a function of both primary concentrations of these elements in the K-granites as well as the subsequent strong hydrothermal alteration as evidenced by sericitization and silicification which involved the destruction of feldspars into sericites. The addition of K and Rb corresponds with depletion of Na, Sr (and Ba) due to the destruction of albite and its replacement by sericite. The Buzwagi mine Au mineralization mineral association do not include the more known pathfinders like Ag, As, Sb, Bi, Se, Te and Tl and they seem not to have played a role in the mineralization process. These elements, therefore, should not be considered as Au pathfinders for exploration purposes in a Buzwagi-like deposit. The author is grateful to the