Economic optimization of a flotation circuit is necessary to ensure that the circuit is performing at its maximum economical potential. This paper deals with the economic optimization of flotation circuits. A model for estimating the optimum number of cells in a bank, to give a definite target recovery, as well as the volume of each cell is developed. A hypothetical copper project is provided to explain the applicability of this investigation.constant in Eq. annual operating cost constant in Eq. capital cost increase of capital cost due to the marginal increase of the number of cells ratio of the geometric volume to the pulp volume in the cell decrease of the present value of the total operating cost due to the marginal increase of the number of cells feed flow rate constant in Eq. constant in Eq. discount rate first order rate constant [time number of cells number of working days/year hourly operating cost of unit volume of cell per m power consumption per m present value of the total annual operating costs recovery of valuable mineral theoretical ultimate recovery project life in years total annual operating cost total capital cost geometric volume of cell average residence time in a cell unit pulp volume Froth flotation is an important minerals separation process. There are many factors to consider before specifying equipment for a flotation circuit. Among these factors are metallurgical performance (recovery and grade), power consumption and capital and operating cost of the flotation circuit ( Optimizing the design of mineral processing plants cannot be based only on technical considerations. When designing a flotation circuit to treat a certain ore, the mineral recovery, the cell volume and the number of cells in the circuit should be optimized on the basis of both technical and economic considerations. There are many combinations of cell volume and cell numbers that give the same recovery. Accordingly, the selection of the optimum cell volume as well as the optimum number of cells should be based on economic considerations. This study provides a method to estimate the optimum number of flotation cells in a bank and the volume of each cell to achieve a definite metallurgical performance (recovery and concentrate grade). The optimization process is carried out assuming that the optimization process in the present case concerns only with the transaction between the number of cells and the volume of each cell when all other parameters are held constant; the feed rate to the bank, feed grade, and the required concentrate grade are known; the mean residence time is constant down the bank. The recovery, The volume ( Substituting for The capital cost required to purchase and install a flotation cell can be expressed as ( Substituting for the value of The hourly operating cost per m The total annual operating cost of As the number of cells, arranged in series to achieve a definite recovery, increases, the cell volume decreases, the capital cost of the circuit increases, and the present value of the operating costs decreases. To optimize the number of cells, the effect of the marginal cell on both the capital costs and the present value of the operating costs should be analyzed. The summation of these effects of the marginal cell is termed the cost of the marginal cell. If the cost of marginal cell is negative, then increasing the number of cells marginally is economical. If the cost of the marginal cell is positive, then increasing the number of cells marginally will add to the total costs of the circuit and hence it is uneconomical. The optimum number of cells is the one at which the cost of the marginal cell is zero. This means that the increase of the capital costs of the circuit due to increasing the number of cells marginally equals the decrease of the present value of the total operating costs. This optimum number can be calculated as follows. The increase of capital costs due to the increase of the number of cells marginally can be expressed such as The optimum number of cells is the one that satisfies the following condition: To illustrate the applicability of the models developed in this study, consider a hypothetical low-grade copper ore project of a 20 Both the marginal capital and operating costs depend on the number of cells in the circuit. As shown in A model is developed to find the optimum number of cells in a flotation bank, as well as the volume of each cell required to give a target recovery. The model is based on comparing the effects of the marginal cell on both the capital and the present value of operating costs. Based on the data of the hypothetical project, the optimum number of cells required to give a target recovery of 80% has been found to be 16 cells and the volume of each cell is 24.0 m