Present work addresses Co(II) extraction from chloride medium using toluene diluted Cyphos IL 102 as an innovative extractant for the recovery of cobalt. Effect of various parameters has been examined. Co(II) is transferred into the organic phase as [P66614
                     +]2[CoCl4
                     2−] which can be efficiently stripped by 0.05 mol L−1 HCl. Loading capacity and recyclability have been assessed. Temperature effect confirmed that the extraction of Co(II) is endothermic in nature. Studies were further extended to recover cobalt, manganese and lithium from waste Li-ion batteries containing 2.915 g L−1, 0.576 g L−1, 3.370 g L−1, 0.407 g L−1, 0.014 g L−1, 0.033 g L−1, 0.019 g L−1 of cobalt, lithium, manganese, nickel, aluminium, iron and copper, respectively. The influence of the concentration of Cyphos IL 102 to extract cobalt from leach liquor has been investigated. The McCabe-Thiele plot suggested two theoretical stages of counter current extraction at A/O 1/1 with Cyphos IL 102 (0.2 mol L−1) for the quantitative extraction of Co(II) with negligible extraction of nickel and lithium. A stripping efficiency of around 99.9% for Co(II) was obtained using 0.05 mol L−1 HCl in a single stage at O/A 1/1. Cobalt is recovered as cobalt oxide from the loaded organic phase. Manganese and lithium were also recovered from leach liquor as MnO2 and Li2CO3 using the precipitation method. All the recovered products were identified using XRD, EDX as well as FE-SEM techniques.With the revolution of information technology, the production of electric and electronic equipments (EEEs) has rapidly increased the world over. Technological innovations and market expansion of EEEs has led to a significant generation of waste EEEs (WEEE) presenting a new environmental challenge ( Li-ion batteries (LIBs), one of the components of WEEEs are extensively employed as power sources in various electrical appliances owing to their unique properties such as higher cell voltage, high energy density and extended energy storage. The waste LIBs contain large quantities of organic chemicals and heavy metals, which at high concentration cause a serious hazard to human health and ecological system ( Various metallurgical operations have been employed to recover a variety of metals from secondary sources. One such choice is pyrometallurgy, which is a conventional method to recover various metals from e-waste. However, high energy consumption and generation of toxic substances are the limitations correlated with pyrometallurgy. In comparison with pyrometallurgy, hydrometallurgical processes use low temperature and are more predictable and controllable ( In view of the limited resources of cobalt and its increasing use in various applications, the present studies were focused on the extraction, separation and recovery of pure cobalt. Extraction studies on cobalt from chloride and sulphate media using a single extractant such as Alamine 336 ( Nowadays studies are being focused on the recycling of waste LIBs. Many such studies report recovery of metals by precipitation. The present study focuses on the recovery of cobalt, manganese and lithium from waste LIBs. Manganese and lithium have been recovered by precipitation and cobalt by solvent extraction. All three metals have been recovered as high purity useful products, which can find many industrial applications. The detailed partition behavior of Co(II) using Cyphos IL 102 diluted in toluene has been investigated. The influence of different parameters such as nature of diluents, shaking time, temperature and concentration of Cyphos IL 102, nature and concentration of acid on the partition of Co(II) has been evaluated. Loading capacity and recyclability of Cyphos IL 102 have been examined. The metal to extractant ratio for the extracting species has been determined. The partition behavior of correlated metal ions namely Cu(II), Ni(II), Mn(II), Li(I), Fe(II)/(III) and Al(III) with Cyphos IL 102 has been examined. Conditions were optimized for the successful recovery of Co, Mn and Li from waste LIBs. Manganese was selectively precipitated and recovered as MnO All the chemicals were analytical grade materials from Sigma-Aldrich (USA)/E.Merck (Germany)/Thomas Baker (India). Ultra-pure water obtained from arium pro, Sartorius (Germany) was used throughout the studies. Stock solutions of the metal ions were prepared by dissolving their salts in ultrapure water containing a minimum concentration of the corresponding mineral acid. Trihexyl (tetradecyl)phosphonium bromide with the commercial name, Cyphos IL 102 was procured as a gift sample from Cytec Industry Inc., Netherlands, and was used without further purification. The structure and physicochemical properties of this extractant are given in supplementary information ( ICP-OES (Agilent technologies 700 series) was used for the chemical analysis of the aqueous phase. A mechanical shaker was used for shaking the mixed phases. The temperature studies were performed in a shaking water bath (Julabo FT-200, Germany). FTIR measurements were performed on a Nicolet 6700 FTIR spectrometer. Bruker AXS D8 XRD with Cu Kα radiation was used to identify the solid material. FESEM-Carl Zeiss ULTRA plus55 was used to determine surface morphology and particle size. EDX was used for evaluating the elemental constituents of synthesized materials. UV analysis were carried out using Shimadzu-2450 UV–Visible spectrophotometer. Batch extractions were carried out at room temperature (25 ± 3 °C) by mechanically contacting equal volumes of aqueous and organic solutions for 10 min and allowed to stand for 5 min for complete phase separation. The aqueous phase was then analysed by ICP-OES. The efficiency of extraction was evaluated by calculating percentage extraction (%E) and distribution ratio (D) using following equations- Waste LIBs of mobile phones collected from the local market were mechanically dismantled and separated into different parts such as cathode, anode and separator. The cathode active material was then collected from the cathode and thermally treated at 80 °C for 24 h. Finally, the residue was crushed into a fine powder and sieved through a 75 μm sieve. For digestion, 1 g of cathodic powder was stirred with 20 mL aqua regia (solid/liquid ratio = 1:20, w/v) for 2 h at 80 °C ( For leaching 1 g cathodic powder was heated with 50 mL of 4 mol L Distribution behavior of Co(II) in different acids (HCl, H Shaking time was varied from 30 s to 30 min. The results obtained are presented in Distribution of Co(II) was studied with Cyphos IL 102 concentration varying from 0.001 to 0.3 mol L To examine the influence of Cl To examine the temperature effect on Co(II) extraction, the temperature was varied in the range 283–333 K. The distribution of Co(II) increases with rising temperature, which indicates the process to be endothermic. The value of ΔH for Co(II) is calculated using Von't Hoff equation- Where D is distribution ratio, R is universal gas constant (8.314 J mol The changes in entropy (ΔS) and Gibb's free energy (ΔG) for Co(II) were found to be 250 ± 3.39 J mol Different diluents such as n-hexane, n-butyl alcohol, xylene, toluene, benzene, cyclohexane, kerosene and cyclohexanone were used as diluting agents. The results are mentioned in Cobalt has a tendency to form a series of cobalt chloride complexes in acid chloride medium with a distinct distribution of the species CoCl Similar species for Co(II) have been proposed by Rybka et al. ( The extraction equilibrium constant K UV/Vis and FTIR analysis were used to characterize the extracted cobalt species. FTIR spectra of fresh and loaded Cyphos IL 102 are shown in Co(II) was back extracted from the loaded Cyphos IL 102 using various stripping solutions. Results of stripping studies are presented in Saturation capacity of Cyphos IL 102 was estimated by contacting the organic phase (5 × 10 To evaluate the recyclability of the extractant, extraction-stripping cycles were performed ten times in a consecutive manner and after each cycle, stripped Cyphos IL 102 was washed with water until the washings were neutral and the washed Cyphos IL 102 was used for next extraction cycle. The extraction-stripping studies were performed using both 0.05 mol L probably the exchanged Br exchanged Br In an earlier study ( Distribution behavior of correlated metal ions was examined from 1 × 10 The leach liquor BL obtained after leaching process was adjusted to pH 3.5 by adding concentrated NaOH solution and heated at 95 °C for 2 h to precipitate iron as hydroxide. The solution obtained after filtering off iron hydroxide precipitate was used for the recovery of manganese by adding 10% ammonium persulphate solution at pH 4. A black precipitate of MnO Extraction data obtained for cobalt using Cyphos IL 102 was employed to recover cobalt from waste LIBs leach liquor. The acidity of leach liquor BL1 was adjusted to 5 mol L Leach liquor BL2 was equilibrated with 0.2 mol L To validate this, a two stage counter current extraction was carried out at A/O ratio 1/1 up to five cycles using 0.2 mol L Stripping isotherm for Co(II) was obtained using 0.05 mol L Loaded organic phase obtained after two stage counter current extraction was equilibrated with an equal volume of 0.05 mol L A portion of loaded organic phase was used to recover cobalt as cobalt oxide particles. To a portion of the organic phase obtained after counter current extraction, an oxalic acid solution (0.04 mol L The raffinate obtained after counter current extraction of cobalt (BL3) was processed for the recovery of lithium. Before lithium recovery nickel was removed from BL3 by raising its pH to 9.0 by adding NH The complete process for the recovery of metals from waste LIBs leach liquor is presented as a flowsheet in The prepared Co The average size of the particles were estimated using Debye - Scherrer formula The morphology of prepared cobalt oxide, manganese oxide and lithium carbonate was investigated with FE-SEM images ( Present studies are focused to recover different metal values from waste LIBs. Cobalt the most valuable metal has been recovered in high purity via solvent extraction route and manganese and lithium by precipitation. A phosphonium ionic liquid Cyphos IL 102 has been explored as a novel extractant for selective extraction of cobalt from waste LIBs. Cobalt forms tetrahedral anionic chloro complex at high chloride concentration which is extracted as [P The authors are thankful to Cytec Industries Inc., Netherlands, for providing Cyphos IL 102. Soniya Dhiman thanks The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at