Soilcrete mass is the result of jet grouting operation, which has special characteristics such as high strength, low deformability and very low permeability. Specifications of soilcrete columns that are achieved from the jet grouting procedures from the diameter and strength aspect depend on jet grouting parameters such as grout pressure, lifting speed, number and diameter of nozzles and Jet grouting is a very attractive method for various applications and has been effective in many instances. One of the most important advantages of jet grouting is that different types of soils can be used in such a method. Also, the strength and permeability can be improved by means of this technique. This method is a suitable substitution for common injection methods, chemical injection, trenching (plastic concrete and grab), piling system, foundation and/or using compressed air with the freezing method in tunnel building. In this method, the mixture of grouting penetrates in pore spaces, joints, cracks and voids of rock and soil structures and optimizes the physical and mechanical characteristics of these structures, thus the penetrateability and deformability of layers will become low and on the other hand the strength of these layers will be increased Generally, the most important parameters that affect jet grouting designing are soil type, mixture influx between soil and grout, exiting jet energy from nozzle, grout flow rate, rotating speed and lifting speed In discussion of the effects of soil material properties on the jet grouting process, many researchers have described the soil's behavior, using the various parameters. Nikbakhtan and Osanloo All of the columns were carried out in Shahriar dam site in Iran. Shahriar dam aids Sefidrood dam to provide water for agriculture and industry in Gilan province. Additionally, to control Qhezelozan flood water and to raise the efficiency of removing the sediments in Sefidrood dam, the tank may provide artificial water floods. Decreasing the sediments entering Sefidrood dam and providing 27 In this study, three columns with various jet grouting parameters and constant local soil specifications are designed. These three boreholes, with 5 Specifications of soilcrete columns that are achieved from the jet grouting procedures from diameter and strength point depend on jet grouting parameters such as grout pressure, lifting speed, rotating speed, number and diameter of nozzles, cement/water ratio and specifications of local soil. Because of the extensive range of effective parameter and dependency of conclusion to local soil, it was decided to set some trial tests in constant local soil to achieve the optimized jet grout parameters and cement/water ratio. For this purpose, air pressure, air flow, water pressure, water flow, number and diameter of nozzles and local soil specification were held constant and then the value of the grout pressure, cement/water ratio, lifting speed and rotating speed, respectively, were changed and UCS and diameter of columns were recorded. The jet grouting parameters are shown in After 32 days of grouting, sides of the boreholes which had been grouted to a depth of 5 These values can be compared with values found in the literature, which were obtained with triple fluid system grouting under similar conditions By drawing graphs, the influence of the lifting and rotating speed, cement/water ratio and grout pressure on soilcrete uniaxial compression strength and its diameter are shown in According to the figures, relations between uniaxial compressive strength (MPa) with grout pressure The relations between diameter By considering the mentioned jet grouting results, and also taking into account to artesian problems in Shahriar site, the below suggestions could be used in other sites to reduce artesian problems: Decreasing the lifting speed to at least 5 Repeating jet grouting in height of 1 Adding granular sand during grouting to prevent over-exit of grouting mixture from the section of borehole that has artesian water. Stopping the grouting rods in junction of clay to upper, lower and in the middle of clay layers for 0.5–1 The values from With increasing the depth of jet grouting, the confining pressure is substantially increased which may affect the column diameter and also possibly the strength of the soilcrete. Hence, the values obtained from this grouting may need to be adjusted to the increased depth. According to the numerical results obtained from experiments, the following conclusions can be drawn. With increasing the grouting pressure, UCS of soil and the diameter of soilcrete increase logarithmically. With increasing cement/water ratio, UCS of soil and diameter of soilcrete increases logarithmically. By increasing the lifting and rotating speed, UCS of soil and diameter of soilcrete decreases logarithmically. Also according to