In boron mining and processing operations, large amounts of clay containing tailings have to be discarded. Being rich in boron, the tailings do not only cause economical loss but also pose serious environmental problems. Large areas have to be allocated for waste disposal. In order to alleviate this problem, the possibility of using clayey tailings from a borax concentrator in red brick manufacturing was investigated. Up to 30% by weight tailings addition was found to improve the brick quality.Turkey has the largest known reserves of boron minerals in the world ( It is well known that borax is a good fluxing agent. It combines with silica and alkalis to form a glassy structure and lower the melting temperature, leading to a stronger body upon solidification ( The tailings clay sample was taken from the tailings pond of Kirka Borax Enterprises. The brick clay sample was obtained from a local brick maker in Eskisehir, Turkey. The main constituents of the two samples are given in Bricks were molded in cylindrical molds of 26 mm inner diameter and 38.8 mm length using a press, under a load of 350 kg/cm The quality of bricks is usually determined on the basis of compressive strength, color, appearance, drying and firing shrinkage, water adsorption, frost resistance, and harmful magnesia and lime presence. In this study, the main aim was to compare the bricks made of all brick clay and with those made with tailings clay addition. A two step procedure was followed: First all the bricks with different compositions were fired at 700, 800, and 900ʡC. These bricks were subjected to compressive strength tests and to visual observation for color and appearance. Then, the bricks with comparable compressive strength, color and appearance to that of reference bricks were subjected to other tests. In commercial brick manufacturing the firing temperature is usually 900ʡC. Therefore, the bricks with 0% tailings clay addition (100% brick clay) fired at 900ʡC were considered as the reference brick. The results of the compressive strength, color and appearance tests are given in In order to determine the possibility of lowering the firing temperature to save energy and cut costs in brick manufacturing, bricks with the same compositions as for 900ʡC were fired at 700 and 800ʡC. At 700ʡC firing temperature, compressive strengths of the bricks were substantially lower than those of the bricks fired at 900ʡC. However, addition of tailings clays up to 30% improved the compressive strength. Similar trends were observed for the bricks fired at 800ʡC. Appearances and colors of the bricks were acceptable. Higher than 30% tailings clays addition caused a decrease in the compressive strength of the bricks fired at all temperatures. Bricks made of 100% tailings clays had rough surfaces, whitish color and cracked upon firing at 700 and 800ʡC. These tests indicted that bricks with 30% tailings clays addition could be produced with a favorable effect on the compressive strength and with no adverse affect on color and appearance. Therefore, bricks with 30% tailings clay addition fired at 700, 800, and 900ʡC were subjected to water adsorption, frost resistance, harmful magnesia and lime tests. The results of these tests are tabulated in Tailings clay of Kirka Borax Plant, rich in boron compounds, was tested to determine if this material can be used as an additive in red brick manufacturing. It was found that addition of this material up to 30% improved the brick quality with regard to compressive strength, water adsorption and density without compromising on other qualities. It was also found that firing temperatures lower than of 900ʡC (generally practiced firing temperature in red brick production) could yield bricks with acceptable qualities if tailings clay is used as an additive in brick manufacturing. An industrial scale investigation as well as a more detailed study of the mechanism underlying the findings of this study are needed to establish the tailings as a viable additive in red brick production.