 Separation of chemical species by physical separation has to be often preceded by material preparation to ensure desired separation by the technique used. In the physical techniques of processing the chemical composition of the components is unchanged; no chemical treatment occurs. The separation is based entirely on using the differences in physical properties between the chemical components. They include, as will be explained in the Chapter, specific gravity, magnetic properties, thermal and electrical conductivity and properties related to surface chemistry of the compounds. (Surface chemical treatment does not alter the bulk chemical composition of the compound thus treated). A principal requirement for the success of any physical separation process is that the individual components to be separated should be satisfactorily liberated from each other; that is, the two should not be bound together in a chunk. For example, in a waste rock, several minerals are clumped together and before proceeding to separate the desired components, the rock has to be crushed and ground to the extent, the individual components are freed or liberated from each other. This is done by crushing in appropriate crushers and grinding in ball mills. Rod mills are used for fine grinding, but that is not usually required in waste processing. Both crushing and grinding lead to size reduction of the material. Comminution is the general term for size reduction in mineral industry. Most waste materials originating from metallurgical and mineral processing plants, like slag, dust and tailings, would have already gone through the process leading to Crushers and ball mill of various designs have been described in textbooks of mineral processing (see for example, Wills, 2000). Basically the same equipment is used in waste processing. In addition, a novel process, which is not used in mineral processing, which has been developed in recent years and is applied in some scrap recycling process will be described in the following section. Sometimes it can be advantageous to operate the comminution process at a low temperature as many materials then become more brittle, which facilitates crushing. This is called cryogenic comminution. It is used in some metal recycling plants for treating the scrap. The low temperature is usually achieved by liquid nitrogen (LIN). Carbon dioxide has also been used in some places ( Cryogenic comminution plants have four basic sections: LIN storage chamber, cooling zone(s) (conveyor, screw or tank), impact type size reduction mill and crushed component separator. In an industrial process (called Inch Scrap process) operated in Belgium, complete motor cars are first compressed into cubes, chilled to 266 K by spray of LIN, then further to 133 Κ by immersion in LIN before feeding to a 375 kW hammer mill operating at this temperature. Washing machines and refrigerators are also similarly processed. Dust and fabric from the product are removed by a fan. Screening, density and magnetic separation techniques are used to separate plastics, rubber, glass and non-ferrous metal. Cast iron and alloy steels are separated from mild steel. The advantage of cryogenic comminution is that it reduces power consumption relative to that consumed in equivalent ambient temperature process. It also avoids or minimizes heat build-up in materials that might otherwise degrade or fuse. However, it requires expensive equipment and constant use of liquid nitrogen compared with conventional comminution techniques. The technique is used only where economics of the process and products justifies the cost. For example, in scrap metal processing, cryogenic comminution is used for treating relatively high value metal scraps, which as electric motors, transformers and car generators, which contain typically 20% copper and 80% steel (Daborn and Derry, 198S), even appreciable quantities of precious metals. A potentially useful application of cryogenic fragmentation in the shredding of automobiles has been described by Gravity separation is an old technique, widely used in mineral processing for the separation of minerals from ores. As the name implies, gravity separation is based on differences in specific gravities of two or more components in a recycle system. The separation is carried out in water, but air is used in places where water is scarce, or when some significant special benefits are found from its use. Water is, however, preferred, as the separation is influenced by a density difference term ( A number of gravity separation devices are used in mineral processing. Some of them have been adopted in metallurgical waste processing and recycling where the density differences are significant and the solids are relatively coarse. The ones, which are frequently used will be described with a discussion of the principles on which they operate. For more detailed descriptions text books in mineral processing should be consulted [Wills (2000); This is a relatively old device, but has evolved in different forms. A typical table is illustrated in The earliest model using the differential shaking action which was widely used in ore dressing operations is called Wilfley table. Several new developments have been described sine the early model. One of the most significant is a three-deck table, also called Deister table;  Also known as air tables, these devices function by a throwing motion to move the feed along a flat riffled deck, and blow air continuously up through a porous bed. The stratification results in the separation of particles based on size and density differences. The larger size and higher density particles concentrate on the top, the size and density decreasing from the top of the concentrate towards tailings. The coarse particles in the middlings band have the lowest density. The mechanism of separation is very complicated and has not been well understood; however, some basic separation principles can be understood from  A crucial step in material separation on an air table is stratification. Materials to be separated are introduced by a feeding hopper into the stratification zone; see  By mathematical analysis As materials move across the deck, the side tilt makes them flow across an inclined deck surface. As the air particles are suspended on air cushion and fail to touch the deck surface, they slide downwards to the lowest side of the deck due to the gravitational force. However, the heavy particles staying in contact with the table are subjected to an asymmetric acceleration, thus moving uphill towards the higher end of the deck. Optimum operation of an air table is shown in Air tables are employed where the heavy fraction is minor in the two-part separation into light and heavy fractions, and with a density difference between the two of at least 1.5:1 (Wills, 2001). A laboratory study to separate copper and plastic from electronic scrap has been described by Jigging is another technique, which has been used for almost 200 years in ore dressing to separate minerals with significant differences in specific gravity. The light and heavy particles are separated by using their abilities to penetrate an oscillating fluid bed supported on a screen. A pulsating current of water by a plunger dilates the material A novel jigging concept developed by Yang has led to the development of jigs with multi-cell design. It is schematically shown in The machine consists of a single column fitted with specially designed packing plates. The packing acts as a partition dividing the unit into a great number of jigging cells and also functions as a riffling system similar to thin film separators (as described under Shaking Tables; The Yang jig has been installed in a South African ferrochrome plant for metal recovery from slag. It treats the finest cut of the slag feed of a 2 mm top size. In classification mixtures of solids are separated into two or more products making use of differences in velocities with which the particles fall through a fluid medium, usually air or water. In a typical classifier fluid is rising at a uniform rate in a column. Particles whose terminal velocities are greater than the upward velocity of the fluid sink and are recovered in the underflow and those, whose velocities are less rise and are carried in the overflow. The process is called elutriation. Air classifiers are used on a wide variety of feeds and are simple and efficient. Several designs have been described. In vertical air classifier, shown in A second design is zigzag air classifier ( In another design, rotary air classifier ( Other designs, less frequently used are described in the books by Porteus (1977), In wet classification water is used in place of air as elutriating fluid. Light particles are carried in a rising current of water while dense particles sink. In one design described by Veasey This is another variation of gravity separation, using density differences and centrifugal force;  In heavy media separators, the feed and medium are introduced at the surface of a large pool of the medium. The float material overflows or is scraped from the surface of When the feed contains material of fine particle size, a greater acceleration has to be applied to produce sufficient force to achieve separation. This is done in centrifugal separators. Separation of magnetic substances, in particular, iron, has been used for over 200 years in the concentration of iron ores. In the last 100 years, the technique has been applied for a wide range of ores and mineral wastes using a wide variety of devices. The removal of small quantities of iron and iron-bearing components and the separation of ferrous and nonferrous components are important applications. The property of a material, which determines its response to a magnetic field is the magnetic susceptibility. Materials are classified in two groups based on magnetic susceptibility. Paramagnetic materials are those attracted by a magnetic field, and diamagnetic materials, which are repelled by a magnetic field. The materials which are very strongly paramagnetic e.g., iron and magnetite, Fe Two categories of equipment are low intensity and high intensity magnetic separators. Low intensity separator is used primarily for ferromagnetic materials and for paramagnetic materials of high magnetic susceptibility. High intensity separators are used for paramagnetic materials of lower magnetic susceptibility. Both low and high intensity separations may be carried out either wet or dry. Some very large wet high intensity magnetic separators have been applied in the separation of paramagnetic components. Low intensity separators employ either electromagnets or permanent magnets. Electromagnets provide relatively high magnetic strengths. Separators are also made in the form of drums, magnetic drums. They have five poles symmetrical about the centerline of the magnetic yoke, with the poles alternating , which helps to improve the agitation at the drum surface, thus reducing entrapment of nonmagnetic components. Some of the drum type low intensity magnetic separators are shown in Wet high intensity magnetic separators (sometimes referred to by acronym WHIMS) are made in carousel type ( A schematic representation of dry magnetic separator is shown in The general relationship for magnetic force F where μ A schematic drawing of a high gradient magnetic separator is shown in The HGMS has been applied for recycling ferrous microparticles from aqueous rolling mill effluents ( These separators combine the gravitational force with magnetic force from high magnetic fields to which a fluid is subjected. Magnetic fluid is usually a suspension of ferrosilicon and magnetite in water. When subjected to a magnetic field, the levitation force of the magnetic fluid can create densities up to 10 g/cm This technique is based on differences in electrical conductivities of the materials. The separators are commonly called high tension separators. Electrostatic separation is frequently applied as a step in metal recycling operations, for metal recovery from electronic scrap and in the recovery of precious metals from used catalysts. Some examples will be described in  where b = magnetic flux density, V = voltage and A = cross section of enclosed area normal to the lines of magnetic flux, m In an electrical conductor, the induced voltage produces a current called eddy current is produced. If the magnetic flux density is increasing, the current direction will be such as to create a magnetic field that opposes the applied magnetic field. If the flux density is decreasing the current direction will be such as to create a magnetic field that reinforces the applied field. The direction of the current loop is determined by a principle called Lenz's law. If Β is decreasing, the direction of the current will be such as to create a magnetic filed that opposes the applied magnetic field; if Β is decreasing, the direction of the current will such as to create a magnetic filed that reinforces the applied field. The force that orients a current loop or magnet in a stationary field and that moves a current loop or a magnet in a moving magnetic field is called the Lorentz force. The net Lorentz force is zero when the field is uniform over a conducting material, for example an aluminum can. If the field is stronger on one side than on the other the can would be propelled in the direction in which the magnetic flux density is increasing. When the magnetic field is moved the eddy currents produced in a conductor will cause a net force in the direction of field motion. Eddy currents in metals can be generated by one of the four methods ( Eddy current separation technique is used for separating metals from nonmetal component; for example, aluminum from glass, which cannot be done by gravity methods as the difference in the densities of aluminum and glass is very small. Other applications will be described in Since eddy current separation depends on the levitation of the conducting component by the magnetic field (by magnetic repulsion), the ratio of conductivity to density indicates a measure of selectivity of separation. The values shown in An effective separation method using permanent magnets, developed by  Eddy current rotors have been applied for nonferrous metal recovery from auto-shredder residue. After steel is extracted from shredded automobile scrap, the The aluminum concentrate generated by a heavy media separator frequently contains contaminations of glass and rocks, materials with a specific gravity close to that of aluminum. Such contaminants can be effectively removed by eddy current separators. ( Theories of eddy current separation are discussed in the paper by Automobile processing and metal recycling from domestic appliances (washing machines, refrigerators, etc.) require the material to be shredded and fragmentized to liberate ferrous metals. These applications require special shredding systems. Two basic shredding systems, wet/damp and dry have been described by These techniques are based on differences in surface activity. Solid in particulate or colloidal form is selectively recovered by a gas (usually air) bubble by a process of attachment. The bubbles rise to the surface of water and the captured particles are recovered. A substance which is not naturally surface active can often be made so by the use of reagents called There are a number of adsorptive bubble separation (sometimes referred to as Froth flotation technique was invented in early 20 There are several theories to explain the mechanism of interaction of the collector at a solid surface. The mechanism is determined by the surface chemistry of the specific solid and the chemical structure of the collector. Two principal mechanism are widely recognized and explain collector action in most of the flotation systems. The following is a brief explanation of these mechanisms. In the first, the interaction takes place by a process of electrostatic adsorption. This happens when the sign of ionic charge of the collector species is opposite to that of solid surface. This is the mechanism of the action of oleate on ferric oxide. In the pH range <8 ferric oxide has positive surface charge and electrostatically adsorbs negative oleate ions. The mechanism is known as electrostatic adsorption. It is observed in most oxide minerals. When the surface charge is negative, as in the case of silica at pH >2, a cationic surfactant like long chain amine acetate or chloride is used as collector to float silica. The charge on the mineral surface arises by the ions traveling across the mineral solution interface, caused by the preference of one of the lattice ions for sites at the solid surface as compared to the aqueous phase. This gives rise to an electrical potential across the interface. It is called zeta potential. When the surface is preferentially attracting cations, the zeta potential is positive and when anions are preferentially adsorbed at the surface, it is negative. The ionic species, which pass between the two phases are known as potential determining ions. In most nonsulfide minerals hydrogen and hydroxyl ions are potential determining. When the zeta potential at a mineral surface is negative, it is possible to bring the surface charge to neutral, then raise it to become positive by increasing the hydrogen ion concentration of the aqueous phase. The pH at which the zeta potential is zero is referred to as The second mechanism is essentially of chemical nature. In this case, the collector ion or molecule interacts at the surface by a chemical process. The collector species forms a chemical compound at the surface by reaction between the polar group of the collector and the ionic species present at the solid surface. This is specially observed with sulfide minerals. The surface of the sulfide minerals contains sulfoxyl ionic species (like sulfite, thiosulfate) produced by the superficial oxidation of the mineral by atmospheric oxygen and moisture. These anionic species are exchanged for the anionic polar group of the collector. One of the most common collectors for sulfide minerals is a group of surfactants called xanthates which have the chemical formula, Xanthate reacts with the sulfoxyl ionic species by an exchange mechanism, where the sulfoxyl species are released into solution and a metal xanthate is formed at the surface. It should be noted that the xanthate at the surface, while it may resemble a metal xanthate formed by the precipitation in solution, is often not exactly identical with it as has been observed by comparing the infrared spectra of the bulk metal xanthate and the surface xanthate produced by adsorption. The essential consequence of surface reaction is that a hydrophobic surface film is produced which makes the sulfide mineral flotable.  The above is a simple explanation of the mechanisms governing flotation. Further details of the collector mechanisms and various other aspects of froth flotation will be found in the book by Froth flotation is influenced by several operating factors. The most important of these is pH. Interaction with collector and formation of hydrophobic film at a mineral occurs within certain pH range. In the case of sulfide minerals, at pH above a certain value, called critical pH, the collector uptake does not occur and the mineral ceases to float. This critical pH varies for different minerals and is taken advantage of for selective separation of minerals from slurry containing more than one mineral. Another influence of pH is in influencing the state of ionization of the collector. Amines are cationic in acidic pH range. In alkaline pH, the long chain amines occur in neutral molecular state and not suitable as cationic reagente. In between the two ranges, within a narrow pH range they occur as ionomolecular complexes comprising ionic and neutral molecule species and they are highly surface active in this form. This also applies to weak acid collectors like sodium oleate, which is anionic in the alkaline pH range, but occurs in neutral molecular state at pH below 4. For further discussion see Many designs of flotation machines are currently in use. They all have the primary function of making the particles that have been rendered hydrophobic contact and adhere to air bubbles, then allowing those particles to rise to the surface in the froth, which is removed. To fulfill this function, a flotation machine must maintain all particles in suspension. For this, upward pulp velocities must exceed the settling velocity of all particles present. All particles entering the machine must have the opportunity to be floated. Fine air bubbles must be dispersed throughout the pulp by aeration at the desired rate. The extent of aeration required depends upon the particular system and mass fraction to be floated. Vigorous agitation promotes particle-bubble collision, which facilitates the rise of hydrophobic particles in the froth. A commonly used design of a flotation machine currently in use is represented in Other designs are described in the book by  Froth flotation and dissolved air flotation are applied to recover suspended solids from waste streams. They could contain material of economic value. It has also been used to separate pyrite from waste rocks. Details will be described in This is a relatively new technique, first described by The mechanism is illustrated by the following example of the collection of germanium present as germanie acid by ion flotation. It is first mixed with a ligand activator which is a surfactant. It converts germanium to the anionic state, which is then combined with a cationic reagent like dodecylamine to produce the sublate. where H The collector-colligend product is called sublate (a term coined by Sebba). Initially it comprises groups of ions held to the surface of the bubble by the surface activity of the collector as a solid, but when it reaches the surface of the solution it floats as a solid. Usually, the concentration of the collector and colligend are low, in the range 10-4 -10-5 M and flotation occurs from a true solution. If, however, higher concentrations are to be processed, precipitation of the sublate may occur before gas is passed into the solution. In such cases, the process becomes precipitate flotation, explained in the following Section. The collector to colligend ratio, denoted by ø must at least be a stoichiometric one. In most systems, however, this ration is found to be higher than that required for stoichiometric combination. The excess of collector is required as the collector and colligend ion meet on a bubble surface and the residence time of the bubble must be sufficient to allow this to proceed to completion. On the other hand, if the colligend is precipitated before flotation (precipitate flotation) the amount of collector needed will be close to the stoichiometric requirement. Ion flotation is most efficient when the concentration of colligend is in the range 10-5 to 10 Two main kinds of interaction govern the process of ion flotation according to the ion exchange model. The first interaction is essentially of an electrostatic nature and depends upon the size and charge of ions.( Walkowiak (1992) has obtained the following sequence of growing affinity of metal cations to anionic surfactants. These are found to parallel the sequence of ionic potential values (inV): The situation is different in the case of anionic flotation. Here, monovalent large ions have the highest affinity to a cationic surfactant. It suggests that ion-water interactions govern the selectivity of the ion flotation process. In precipitate flotation an ionic species is concentrated from an aqueous solution by forming a precipitate which is then removed by flotation. It includes three variations. In In precipitate flotation of the first kind, one or other of the ions which constitute the precipitate is adsorbed from the solution onto the particles. The surface becomes charged and is rendered hydrophobic by a surfactant of charge opposite to that of the surface. Coulombic attraction between surfactant ions and the particle causes the surface to become covered with the surfactant, thus the precipitate is carried by a fine stream of bubbles. An important feature of precipitate flotation is the low value of collector to colligend ratio ø (explained before in Section 3.5.3) as each macroscopic particle contains a large number of colligend ions but only requires a monolayer of collector on the surface for good flotation. Usually values between 0.005 and 0.1 are necessary to form a foam to support the precipitate on the surface of the solution and prevent its redispersion in the bulk. This is a great advantage over ion flotation as it implies much less consumption of the surfactant. The lower limit of the colligend concentrations for which flotation remains efficient is determined by several factors including the solubility of the precipitate and pH. The colligend concentration must be sufficiently high to ensure virtually complete precipitation. Excess of the precipitant should be avoided as it increases ionic strength which is believed to affect the process adversely in most cases, The reasons for the effect of ionic strength have not been clearly understood. Three possible causes suggested are the following (  Flotation of the collector is more rapid as repulsion between bubbles is reduced enabling them to leave the solution more easily ( There is an increase in drainage of the foam. The stability of the foam is in part due to repulsion of the positive surfactant ions adsorbed on the inside and outside surfaces of the bubble film. The increased concentration of anions in the film reduces this repulsion and causes to become thinner. That makes the bubbles more susceptible to rupture. As a result, redispersion occurs more freely thus reducing recovery of the precipitate by the bubbles. The pH of the solution must be within a range of values suitable for complete precipitation of the ion to be removed. The charge on the surfaces of the particles may vary with the pH and determine the nature of the collector to be used. For example, at a pH of 6.5 cupric hydroxide particles are positively charged by the adsorption of Cu Precipitate flotation is used to recover metals and complex anionic species from effluents. Examples will be described in There are only a few examples of this variation of precipitate flotation. No surfactant is required, but the precipitate formed when colligend and collector ions react must have a hydrophobic surface. This can occur when the precipitant ion has both polar and nonpolar parts. When present in solution, the influence of the polar part is predominant and the ion is hydrophilic and surface inactive. On precipitation with colligend, however, the charges are neutralized, and the nonpolar group plays the dominant role producing hydrophobic surface on the newly formed precipitate. The elements that have been floated by this technique are, Cu by benzoinoxime, U by benzoyl acetone, Ni by  Reference should be made to one of the oldest methods of physical separation, picking. It was quite common in the fields of farming. In mineral industry, it was used in the beneficiation of coal, that is, to sort out better quality coal from lower quality ones by visual recognition. As the materials to be separated became increasingly complex, such physical separation by visually distinguishing the components was totally inadequate and before long became obsolete. In recent years, however, the progress in the computer and sensor engineering has led to the development of automatic picking devices of far greater efficiency than could ever be envisaged in handpicking. Such automatic picking devices have been designed for the separation of metals. Typical tasks carried out are the selective sorting of stainless steel, copper and brass. The principle of the working is illustrated with a modem unit called "CombiSense 1200" (Mutz A vibrator feed (1), in combination with conveyor belt (2) running at 3 m/s is designed to isolate the particles. The metal sensor (3) located under the conveyor belt delivers the initial characteristics of each single particle to the computer (5). In addition, the color camera (4) also processes particle data. This mass of information is then transferred to a special software (6), which then transmits the impulses, instructing the nozzles (7) to blow out the single particle or allow it to pass. Both the accepted (8) and the rejected (9) products are then transported by single belts to further treatment or storage. The connection (10) is optional; through modem or Local Area Network (LAN) it facilitates the management of the whole process from a remote location. Automatic picking systems combine special characteristics of multi-sensor systems. They incorporate a high-speed camera with 1 billion colors with a special conductivity Various technologies have been applied in the development of picking devices to recognize the particles to be processed. They include X-ray, laser, infrared conductivity and combination of different electronic systems. Separation devices applying these technologies are in the developmental stage. In the long run, they can potentially lower the cost of separation as they do not require the use of chemicals like the ones used for heavy media separation and froth flotation.