Frothers are widely used in flotation to help generate small bubbles, with coalescence prevention generally considered the predominant mechanism. However, recent studies have demonstrated that the presence of frothers also reduces the size of bubbles at the initial formation stage. One possible explanation is that frothers introduce a surface tension gradient-driven stress, which increases instabilities along the air/water interface: increasing the number of instabilities along the surface of a finite-volume air mass means that more small bubbles will break away. The magnitude of surface tension gradient, and thus number of instabilities, is related to frother concentration. This paper investigates the effect of increasing frother concentration on the size of bubble formed. The hypothesis tested is that while low concentration may sustain gradients, at high concentration mass transfer may be sufficient to damp them. The finding is that with an increase in frother concentration the bubble size initially decreased to a minimum then increased supporting the hypothesis.Frothers in flotation help reduce bubble size. The concentrations required are remarkably small, just are a few ppm, that is, a few grams per tonne of water ( Generation of bubbles in a flotation machine is the result of two complementary mechanisms, namely, break-up and coalescence. Most literature on the role of frother is based on coalescence inhibition ( Experiments, such as bringing two bubbles together, have confirmed the role of frother in coalescence prevention ( Coalescence and break-up generally take place simultaneously. To eliminate the impact of the former, The development of surface tension gradients may depend on two important processes. The purpose of this paper is to test the effect of increasing frother concentration on the bubble size formed at break-up. The hypothesis is that there may exist a critical bulk concentration above which surface tension gradients are lost such that the effect of frother on bubble size at break-up diminishes. The experimental setup adopted is that of  The volume of each tested solution was kept constant as 750 A typical bubble formation sequence in RO water is shown in   Bubble formation generally followed the described three-stage sequence. However, there are occasions where a bubble forms in a different manner. The effect of increasing frother concentration on the average bubble diameter is shown in Four frothers were investigated to determine the effect of increasing concentration on bubble size through break-up. The common trend is first a decrease in size compared to water alone followed by an increase. A critical break-up concentration is introduced referring to the concentration giving the minimum size. The results support the hypothesis that it is through surface tension gradients that frother induces small bubbles through break-up. The process is stochastic. The surface tension gradient must increase towards the tip of the bulge for break-away forces to be enhanced. This in turn means the frother molecules must be more concentrated at the neck of the bulge than at the tip ( The effect of frother concentration can be understood here in the context of a finite-volume air bubble: with low frother bulk concentration, the mass transfer rate ( The argument needs to consider the effect of frother type as this affects mass transfer rate. The shorter the hydrocarbon chain generally the higher the mass transfer rate ( The concept of CBC is another potential characterization of frothers along with CCC. This different trend is also indicated in the classic two-bubble coalescence study of This work demonstrated the effect of increasing frother concentration on bubble size produced by break-up. It shows that the bubble size initially deceases with increase in frother concentration, then increases. A critical break-up concentration for the four frothers tested was identified. The findings support the hypothesis that high frother concentration can dampen the surface tension gradients believed to promote break-up. This work was sponsored by Vale Base Metals, Teck Resources Ltd., Barrick Gold Corporation, XPS Consulting & Technical Services, Shell Canada Ltd., SGS Canada Inc., COREM and CheMIQA through the