Diffusion dialysis was employed to recover sulfuric acid from a stone coal acid leaching solution. The dialysis coefficients of H+, V, Al, Fe, Mg, K, F, P, and S ions in a stone coal acid leaching solution for an anion exchange membrane were determined. The effects of the flow rate, flow rate ratio, and water osmosis rate as well as ion rejection on sulfuric acid recovery were investigated. The results demonstrated that the DF120-III anion exchange membrane showed a good separation performance for separating sulfuric acid from the stone coal acid leaching solution. In the diffusion dialysis process, the water osmosis rate, sulfuric acid recovery, ion rejection, water equilibrium and processing ability were taken into consideration. Controlling water osmosis was more important than obtaining a higher acid recovery. Under the optimum operating conditions of a feed flow rate of 12mL/min and flow rate ratio of water to feed of 1–1.1, sulfuric acid recovery reached 71.12%, the water osmosis rate was controlled at approximately 14.95%, and vanadium rejection was approximately 95.50%. The rejection of impurity ions, such as Al, Fe, Mg, K, F, P, and S was approximately 99.04%, 97.37%, 98.01%, 85.12%, 98.33%, 91.16%, and 69.96%, respectively. The high rejections of F in the form of complexes and P in the form of incompletely dissociated acid were disadvantageous to the recovery of sulfuric acid. The recovered acid was able to be reused in the acid leaching process by the addition of fresh acid.In China, in addition to vanadium‑titanium magnetite, stone coal is an important vanadium-bearing resource due to its vast reserves and wide distribution ( Obviously, a new method is needed to both improve the economics of the process as well as avoid the vanadium loss and environmental pollution caused by the neutralization process. Diffusion dialysis with an anion exchange membrane seems to be a desirable method due to its low energy consumption, low installation and operating costs and lack of pollution ( Studies have been performed on the recovery of sulfuric acid from a stone coal acid leaching solution by diffusion dialysis. Therefore, in this study, the dialysis coefficients of H The solution used for cycling type dynamic diffusion dialysis and one-pass type dynamic diffusion dialysis was the actual acid leaching solution generated from the stone coal direct acid leaching process. Before the experiments, the acid leaching solution was filtered through a 0.45 The cycling type dynamic diffusion experiment was carried out using a custom-built mini diffusion dialyzer. The diffusion dialyzer was separated by 20 sheets of an anion exchange membrane (DF120-III, Shandong, China) into dialysate cells and diffusate cells through which the feed and de-ionized water, respectively, passed in a countercurrent fashion. The effective area of each membrane for mass transfer was 0.0112 One-pass type dynamic diffusion dialysis experiments were conducted using a HKY-001 diffusion dialyzer supplied by Shandong Tianwei Membrane Technology Co., Ltd. (Shandong, China). The diffusion dialyzer was separated by 19 sheets of an anion exchange membrane (DF120-III, Shandong, China) into dialysate cells and diffusate cells through which the feed and running water, respectively, passed in a countercurrent fashion. The effective area of each membrane for mass transfer was 0.08 The concentration of sulfuric acid was determined by titration using 0.1 Without accounting for the volume changes, according to Fick's law, the dialysis coefficient of substance i can be calculated by the following equation ( Then, Eq. According to Eq. The total acid recovery ratio R was calculated by the following equation: The ion rejection ratio was calculated as follows: The water osmosis rate was used to quantify the extent of water osmosis and label the extent of the volumetric expansion of the dialysate and was calculated as follows: The residence time was defined as the ratio of the volume of the dialysate chamber to the flow rate of the feed. In the diffusion dialysis process, the anion exchange membrane is the key component. The anion exchange membrane has to have high proton permeability but strongly reject salts ( As To investigate the effect of the flow rate on the diffusion dialysis process, several tests were conducted. During the tests, the flow rate ratio of water to feed was maintained at 1.0.  The volume of the dialysate expanded and the volume of the diffusate reduced during the diffusion dialysis process. There was competition between water osmosis from the diffusate to the dialysate due to the osmosis pressure and water transport from the dialysate to the diffusate due to the diffusion of hydrated ions (acid or salt) ( Ion rejection, especially V rejection, is another important concern and is related to the subsequent extraction of vanadium and whether the recovered acid can be reused in the acid leaching process. If the concentration of impurity ions in the recovered acid is high, a decrease in the extraction performance will occur due to the accumulation of impurity ions in the acid leaching solution. The effect of the flow rate on ion rejection is shown in To investigate the effect of the flow rate ratio on the diffusion dialysis process, several tests were conducted. During the tests, the flow rate of the feed was maintained at 12   Therefore, taking the above factors into consideration, the optimum flow rate ratio should be controlled in the range of 1 to 1.1. The effect of the flow rate ratio on ion rejection is shown in Diffusion dialysis was performed at the optimum conditions. In this study, diffusion dialysis was employed to recover sulfuric acid from a stone coal acid leaching solution. Based on the results obtained from the current work, the following conclusions were drawn: The DF120-III anion exchange membrane showed good performance in separating sulfuric acid from a stone coal acid leaching solution. Comprehensively considering the water osmosis rate, sulfuric acid recovery, ion rejection, water equilibrium and processing ability, the optimum operating conditions for this process included a flow rate of 12 In the diffusion dialysis process, controlling water osmosis was more important than obtaining a higher acid recovery; water osmosis could be reduced by increasing the flow rate. The high rejections of F in the form of complexes and P in the form of incompletely dissociated acid were disadvantageous to the recovery of sulfuric acid. This study was financially supported by a Project of the