The convergence confinement methods are solutions employed to estimate convergence in circular tunnels. They are mostly based on constitutive equations governed by the Mohr-Coulomb and Hoek-Brown yield criteria. However, the solutions based on these criteria neglect the intermediate principal stress confining effect on the ground reaction estimation. Therefore, in this paper, a Drucker-Prager yield criterion governed solution integrated with the Lode angle parameter is employed. It considers the intermediate principal stress influence and the critical effect of the parameter on failure characterization. Subsequently, it is verified with results attained from numerical simulations which consider an elastic-perfectly plastic constitutive law with a non-associative flow rule within FLAC3D. It was drawn from the results that the ground reaction and plastic evolution are influenced by the confining stress. Furthermore, considering a suitable yield criterion leads to realistic convergence and plastic evolution estimation. The circumscribed DP criterion governed solution with Lode angle parameter value (0.8) is considered appropriate for the realistic ground reaction estimation in the three-dimensional (3D) stress state rock mass. It estimates approximately 3.4% of tunnel convergence as compared to the classic solutions (5%) and plastic radius estimated to be approximately 2.45 m compared to 2.84 m.The elastic-perfectly plastic (EPP) ground reaction (response) of tunnels is of great interest to geotechnical engineers in that it is the major determinant of stability and closure predictions in tunnelling. Hence, a realistic prediction of this response is important for the modelling and installation of suitable tunnel support structures. The convergence confinement method (CCM) is a method applicable in predicting and analysing this ground reaction. The method is based and developed on a three-step analysis incorporated to calculate the equilibrium state between the support installed and the ground response in tunnels. The method includes: (1) the ground reaction curve (GRC), depicts a curve which represents the decreasing inner boundary pressure and increasing tunnel boundary closure; (2) the support characteristic curve (SCC), relates tunnel convergence to the installed support deformation; and (3) the longitudinal displacement profile (LDP), relates tunnel convergence to the location of the tunnel face. It has a significant influence on the determination of the position and stiffness of installed supports Furthermore, Yu & He proposed the USC yield criterion which considers all the three principal stresses The not simple application for GRC estimation by USC criterion governed solutions can be attributed to the criterion’s requirement of its true triaxial test ascertained parameters Moreover, the In this study, the focus is on the facet of the GRC based on the solution by Kirsch which originally considered the elastic response The MC yield criterion is widely employed in modelling geomechanics material and has a limitation in its wider application. The first being, it occupies an asymmetrical hexagonal shape on a deviatoric plane which restricts the convergence in flow theory due to its sharp edges ( When an isotropic EP material or rock mass is subjected to stress it develops a state of stress which leads to its elastic behavior, plastic behavior and even failure. The elastic behaviour of the material or rock mass is characterized by Hooke’s law in which the stress-strain increment is solely dependent on the Poisson’s ratio and the elastic stiffness matrix. Whereas the plastic behavior of the material or rock mass is represented by plastic models governed by constitutive equations. Additionally, failure of the material or rock mass is described by these constitutive equations which incorporate damage coupled with the plastic behaviour. Recent studies on theory and experiments have confirmed that this stress state is linked with the triaxiality parameter. A key parameter that controls the plastic flow of materials and it is described by the ratio of the hydrostatic stress to the von Mises equivalent stress The three stress invariants can be defined by On the other hand, the Lode angle ( Since When considering plane stress state it was proved by Wierzbicki et al. that for this condition ( A particular state of stress can be characterised by different formulations which correspond to geometrical interpretation with the suitable coordinate system. These are: (1) the principal stress space represented by the cartesian coordinate system ( The GRC is based on the analytical solutions for a circular tunnel in an EP rock mass under a hydrostatic stress field. Provided the tunnel radius, in-situ stress conditions and the rock parameters, the ground reaction is estimated. The convergence associated with this EP behavior of the surrounding rock mass does not sorely depend on its properties and the in-situ stress state but other aspects which will be explained below. In this study, a deep circular tunnel excavated in a continuous, homogenous, isotropic rock mass subjected to a hydrostatic stress field is considered. It employs common assumptions that classic analytical solutions pertain to the CCM employ. The classic EP solutions governed by the MC and HB yield criteria are used in estimating the ground response of a circular tunnel in this rock mass. The GRC determination is based on the principle of stress relaxation in which the pressure acting on the internal tunnel boundary reduces gradually. With a condition that if it falls below the initial in-situ stress value an inward tunnel convergence occurs As mentioned earlier when The Duncan Fama is the MC yield criterion governed solution for EPP material considered in this study Contrasting the linear condition assumed by the MC yield criterion governed solutions, most rock masses experience non-linear behaviour. Hence, the non-linear HB yield criterion governed solutions are widely employed in tunnel stability analysis. They are based on the yield criterion originally proposed by Hoek & Brown for hard intact rock but later generalized to accommodate weak rock masses The DP yield criterion is reformulated in the spherical coordinate system by incorporating the Lode angle parameter (Eq. Substituting and reformulating of Eqs. Assuming the plane strain and axisymmetric loading around the circular tunnel, stress evaluation in the elastic and plastic zones requires the classic stress equilibrium differential equation expressed as Whereas for the estimation of the radial displacement the strain equilibrium equation is employed and expressed by where the notation of Employing the Hooke’s law for isotropic rock mass to define the stress-strain relation, the elastic strain components are derived and expressed as In the elastic zone, the stress state of the tunnel intrados can be estimated by equations attained from the substitution of Eqs. In the plastic zone, the stresses ( The plastic radius ( As well as the satisfaction of the DP yield criterion incorporated with the Lode parameter represented by Eq. Thereafter, equating Eqs. Therefore, obeying the condition ( Investigation of the tunnel’s GRC employs the solution presented in In this section, the DP yield criteria governed solutions with  As mentioned earlier, the current practice of tunnel convergence estimation employs solutions that ignore the influence of confining stress. Therefore, in this section, the numerical simulation is performed to verify the proposed DP The simulation is performed based on a tunnel excavated in the NUG rock mass subjected to in-situ stresses at the depth of 700 m. The in-situ stresses are assumed to be The simulation employs an EPP constitutive model which entails that after the initial yielding, the residual strength of the rock mass is equal to the peak strength. In classical plasticity, there are two basic surfaces defined in a stress path which are the yield criteria and plastic potential. The two relations are employed in derivation of geomaterials’ constitutive equations. The plasticity theory postulates that plastic strains occur whenever the stress state satisfies the yield criterion. The numerical analysis is demonstrated using a 1.0 m radius circular tunnel excavated in an isotropic EPP material subjected to in-situ stresses presented in The DP After verification of the solution with the numerical simulation results, it is further compared with classic yield criteria governed solutions proposed by Carranza-Torres & Fairhurst and Fama The DP In this section, a parametric analysis is conducted to determine the effect of dilatancy on the GRC derived from the classic and DP The GRC of a circular tunnel excavated in a continuous, homogenous, isotropic rock mass subjected to a hydrostatic stress field and exhibiting EPP behavior using a DP yield criterion under axisymmetric loading is estimated. The analysis results attained herein confirm that the confining stress has an influence on the tunnel stability pertaining to overall convergence and plastic extension. This GRC is estimated using a solution that considers the confining stress as the intermediate principal stress and assumes plane strain conditions. It is established that employing different DP yield criteria governed solutions has the potential of altering the above-mentioned facets. In that, the DP yield criteria governed solutions overrate the strength of the rock mass compared to the classic solutions. Hence, this results in low plastic radius and overall tunnel convergence during estimation. However, not all DP yield criteria are applicable to realistically estimate this plastic zone extent as well as tunnel convergence. This is observed from the comparative analysis between the different DP yield criteria governed solutions in which DP Parametric analysis is performed to evaluate the influence of the Lode angle parameter as well as the dilation angle on the GRC. It is shown that the parameter has a significant effect on the extent of tunnel convergence with its increment. Whereas as the dilation angle has less effect on the convergence this is because the overall strains (elastic and plastic strains) in the direction of the confining stress are assumed to be zero. Hence, the stress change and distribution are autonomous of the dilation angle. Through verification of this DP It is a clear indication that the confining stress influences both the tunnel convergence and plastic flow. The dependence on the Lode angle parameter should be considered in solutions for the realistic convergence and plastic flow estimation. The author gratefully acknowledges the financial support and affiliation from the University of Adelaide.