As catalytic active sites of nitrogen (N)-doped carbon nanomaterials (CNMs) for oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) are always under debate, synthesis of high purity pyridinic-N dominated CNMs is an effective approach to study the relation between pyridinic-N and active sites, as well as catalytic mechanism for ORR. Herein, the carbon nanofibers (CNFs) etched by hydrofluoric (HF) acid can be used to synthesize pure pyridinic-N, suggesting that the exposed edge-patterned surface facilitates to synthesize pure pyridinic-N. Moreover, it reveals that the carbon atoms adjacent to pyridinic-N could be the catalytic active sites for ORR.Fuel cells have been considered as an ideal and clean energy-converting device In order to fabricate high-performance ORR catalysts, N-doped CNMs should be synthesized with higher concentration of active sites. Studies show that the doping N atoms generally exhibit four bonding configurations, pyridinic-N, pyrrolic-N, graphitic-N and oxidized-N. And pyridinic-N facilitating to create catalytic active-sites is confirmed by many reports As the pyridinic-N prefers to locate at the edge sites of CNMs In our previous work, we have synthesized pyridinic-N doped plCNFs and investigated the nitrogen doping mechanism Firstly, the fCNFs, plCNFs and pCNFs were in-situ synthesized on carbon paper (CP) surface via chemical vapor deposition (CVD). Secondly, the pyridinic-N doped CNFs were prepared via post-treatment the edge-patterned CNFs, which were obtained by HF etching CNFs, under NH The as-prepared samples are characterized by SEM, TEM (HRTEM), XPS, Raman spectroscope. The electro-chemical tests were performed in 0.1 M O  The specific surface areas of N-fCNFs (77.23 m  The obvious reduction peaks indicate their outstanding electro-chemical activity for ORR ( To sum it up, CNFs should be excellent carbon substrate for high purity pyridinic-N doping, provided that the chaotic edge planes of CNFs are tailored by HF. High purity pyridinic-N doping mechanisms in CNFs are also elaborated. As a result, pyridinic-N concentration in N-plCNFs is up to 12.61 at.%. Moreover, it is proved that N-plCNFs exhibit the most pronounced electro-catalytic activity and good stability. What’s more, this paper confirmed that the carbon atoms adjacent to pyridinic-N atoms are proved to be the active sites for ORR, rather than pyridinic-N atoms themselves. The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 