This paper investigates the time-dependence of the median particle size during comminution processes in horizontal and vertical stirred media mills. The shape of the time-dependent function describing the particle size is proposed, and it is shown that this function precisely traces the temporal variation of the particle size in comminution processes. The grinding rate constant is defined as the coefficient of time in the function. The effect of stirrer tip speed and mill size on the grinding rate constant is examined, and it is found that the grinding rate constant can be correlated proportionally with the quantity which is related to specific energy. This correlation provides the basis for scale-up of stirred media mills.parameter in Eqs. parameter in Eq. solid concentration of suspension (–) diameter of grinding media stirrer diameter specific energy function in Eq. grinding rate constant constant defined in Eq. constant defined in Eq. number of stirrer revolutions quantity defined in Eq. flow rate coefficient of determination (–) stress energy stress number (–) time stirrer tip speed function describing the temporal variation of particle size initial particle size final particle size bulk porosity of grinding media (–) density of grinding media filling ratio of grinding media (–) quantity of larger mill Stirred media milling is widely used in diverse industries to accomplish fine comminution of various materials. Recently, stirred media milling has also been recognized as a powerful procedure to produce nanoparticles Since the comminution processes in stirred media mills take place mainly when grinding media collide with each other at different velocities There are a large number of operating conditions which can affect the comminution in stirred media mills. This paper focuses on stirrer tip speed and mill size among others, and investigates how the grinding rate, that is, the temporal variation of the particle size changes according to these conditions. Various studies, including Refs. The purpose of this paper is to investigate the time-dependence of the median particle size during comminution processes in stirred media mills, and to present a scale-up procedure for stirred media mills. The shape of the time-dependent function describing the median particle size is assumed, and it is seen that this function precisely traces the temporal variation of the particle size in comminution by tuning one or two parameters. The grinding rate constant is defined as the coefficient of time in the function. The effect of stirrer tip speed and mill size on the grinding rate constant is examined, and it is found that the grinding constant can be associated with the specific energy. Consequently, the comminution results can be estimated from mill operating conditions. Furthermore, using this function, the prediction of the temporal variation of the median particle size is discussed. Two types of stirred media mills (manufactured by Aimex Co., Ltd.) were used. Yttria-stabilized zirconia beads with a diameter of The test material was calcium carbonate, which was suspended in deionized water with a solid concentration of 50 In the horizontal mills, multiple passage operation was employed with several flow rates according to the chamber net volume; The stirrer tip speeds of The function describing the temporal variation of the median particle size during comminution was assumed to be an exponential decay type: The functions  A few comments are in order: The experiment shown in Although the physical meaning of the parameter The regression lines in The value of The experimental data plotted in The parameter The comminution data of the horizontal continuous mills: RMH-03, NVM-2 and NVM-20, was used to examine the influence of stirrer tip speed and mill size on the grinding rate constant. The data of RMB-08 was omitted since the stirrer tip speed dependence of the grinding rate constant of RMB-08 has a different aspect: a vortex arises at the top of the mill due to its open chamber and this prevents the increase of the grinding rate with increasing stirrer tip speed. In addition, Eq.   The occurrence of the two exponents Therefore, it would be useful to define the quantity The quantity In Refs. The domain of the function Two parameter sets describing the temporal variation of the particle size are discussed to predict the 660-min milling results of RMB-08 shown in The second one is  As mentioned in Section Next, the particle size functions obtained from 10-min milling data are compared with the experimental data in 660 This paper defines the scale-up of stirred media mills as the prediction of the time-dependent function The procedure to construct the particle size function The parameters To estimate the parameter The parameter The constant The constant In what follows, four concrete examples of the scale-up results are presented by using both the functions For the first example, the scale-up in the title above is considered. In this conditions, the grinding rate constants of NVM-2 and NVM-20 have close values; see  In these conditions, the grinding rate constant of NVM-20 is larger than that of NVM-2, and the flow rates do not make the average residence time per pass equal between these mills. The third example is somewhat peculiar since the stirrer tip speed of the larger mill is half as large as that of the smaller one, and consequently the difference of the grinding rate constant is large between the two mills. Nevertheless, Finally, an extreme example for the scale-up of stirred media mills is given, namely, the prediction of the comminution result in the This paper discussed the time-dependence of the median particle size during comminution processes in stirred media mills, and examined the influence of stirrer tip speed and mill size on the function describing the temporal variation of the median particle size. The results are summarized as follows: The proposed time-dependent function precisely describes the temporal variation of the median particle size in milling, and can be used to predict the comminution results obtained in the future. The grinding rate constant was defined as the coefficient by which time Combining this correlation with the time-dependent function describing the particle size, a scale-up procedure for stirred media mills was presented with some concrete examples, which confirm the usefulness of the procedure. The author would like to thank A. Furuta, A. Igarashi, Y. Kuwabara, Y. Matsumoto, and T. Shiobara for their support in the experiments. He would also like to thank Y. Higashiura and A. Igarashi for valuable discussions and useful comments.