A method has been developed to reduce the iron content in phosphoric acid produced by the dihydrate wet process from open cast phosphate rock of Abu-Tartur mine in Egypt. In this method, oxalic acid was used to precipitate iron as ferrous oxalate dihydrate (FeC2O4.2H2O). The achieved removal efficiency of iron was about 91% due to the low solubility of the precipitated salt in dilute phosphoric acid medium. The maximum P2O5 losses were less than 1.0%. The optimum conditions of oxalate precipitation method were obtained using synthetic dilute phosphoric acid (28% P2O5, 390 g/L H3PO4) with iron content amounting 2.8% (w/w) Fe2O3 (26.3 g/L Fe). It was found that, the clarification time, reaction temperature, P2O5 concentration and oxalic acid dose were 2 h, 60 °C, 28% P2O5 and 7.5 g oxalic acid/100 g 28% P2O5 acid, respectively. These conditions were applied using wet-process phosphoric acid (26% P2O5). Firstly, ferric ions in the acid were reduced to ferrous ions using iron scrap, followed by oxalic acid addition. Mostly all iron ions in the solution are in the divalent state at Electro Motive Force (EMF) values less than 275 mV. The solubility of ferrous oxalate dihydrate was measured at different temperatures and phosphoric acid concentrations. A recovery study for oxalic acid from the precipitated FeC2O4.2H2O has performed.Pure phosphoric acid is widely used as a feedstock for the production of fertilizers, food products, detergents and pharmaceutical products ( The filter acid (28% P The iron content in most commercial phosphate rocks varies according to its location. Iron content ranges from low 0.1% - 0.4% mass content as Fe Many methods have been developed to decrease the iron content in wet-process phosphoric acid with low percentages of P Precipitation method is one of several methods were developed for purification of phosphoric acid. Several reagents were tested for precipitation of cations in phosphoric acid. The main advantages of precipitation techniques applied for phosphoric acid purification are low cost, simple process and high reduction for minor element ratios (MER). The main disadvantage of precipitation methods is the high P Oxalic acid is used to remove iron from clay used to produce ceramic and silica for fiber optics because FeC In Egypt, Abu-Tartur phosphate deposit has iron content of 3–4% as Fe Surface mine samples of Abu-Tartur phosphate rocks were collected. A representative sample was ground to 100% less than 100 mesh for the leaching process. Particle size distribution analysis was carried out using BT-2001 (Dry) laser particle size analyzer. Moreover, the sample is characterized using x-ray fluorescence (XRF), spectrophotometer and analytical techniques. The leaching process was carried out using small reactor. The produced filter acid was collected for studying iron removal process using oxalate precipitation method. Pure chemicals of phosphoric acid H A synthetic phosphoric acid solution of 28% P Phosphate rock sample of 500 Kg was collected and ground to – 5.0 mm. A sample of 10 Kg weight was ground to 100% less than 100 mesh. The ground phosphate rock of −100 mesh was used to prepare filter phosphoric acid by the dihydrate process. The dihydrate process is the conventional method for production of wet-process phosphoric acid. In this work, DH process was applied to produce filter phosphoric acid with 26% P A Certain amount of iron scrap was added to 100 g of crude phosphoric acid while heating the solution to 60 °C under stirring (300 rpm) for 10 min to reduce Fe The results of particle size distribution analysis are given in XRF was carried out for phosphate sample and the obtained results are given in The solubility of iron oxalate (FeC Effect of clarification time The effect of clarification time on Fe Effect of reaction temperature The effect of temperature on iron removal from simulated phosphoric acid was studied and the results are shown in (3.5% oxalic acid addition, 2 h, 300 rpm, initial concentration of Fe Effect of acid concentration The effect of phosphoric acid concentration on iron removal from simulated phosphoric acid was studied. The results are given in Effect of oxalic acid dose The effect of oxalic acid addition on iron removal was studied. The results are given in The solubility of FeC The optimum conditions of iron removal from synthetic phosphoric acid solution were applied to the filter acid. Iron removal efficiency was 91% at 7.0% (by weight) oxalic acid addition, 60 °C and 300 rpm. Oxalic acid addition was raised to 7.5% due to the presence of impurities such as Mg It was found that, when the reduction potential of the solution decreased to 275 mV, 95% of Fe The bright yellow precipitate (ferrous sulfate dehydrate) was dried at 60 °C for 24 h, and then it was analyzed with XRF and the results are shown in The precipitated iron oxalate FeC A recovery process of oxalic acid has developed as shown in The reaction conditions of stoichiometric ratio of CaCl Development of new precipitation technique using oxalic acid crystals was achieved. In this method, oxalic acid was used to precipitate iron in crude phosphoric acid produced using dihydrate wet-process of Egyptian phosphate ores of Abu-Tartur surface mine. High removal efficiency of iron up to 91% was achieved due to the low solubility of ferrous oxalate dehydrate in dilute phosphoric acid medium. In addition, the maximum losses in P The authors are grateful to the