Indium tin oxide (ITO) nanoparticle films for applications in printable electronics were prepared by dip-coating. The dispersion conditions (bead size, stabilizer concentration) strongly affect the particle size of the ITO suspensions and consequently determine the surface morphology of the ITO films. Deposition from ethanolic ITO suspensions with an extremely small particle size of 17nm to 21nm led to the formation of extremely smooth and spike-free ITO films with a typical root mean square surface roughness of 4.5nm±0.2nm and a high optical transparency above 95%. The effect of annealing with forming gas and CO2 laser treatment on the electrical properties of the ITO films was investigated. Annealing with forming gas and CO2 laser treatment led to a temporary increase in the electrical conductivity of the ITO films by up to a factor of 10 and 6, respectively. Specific conductivities of up to 196Scm−1 were obtained for our ITO nanoparticle films under optimized conditions.Due to its high electrical conductivity and high transparency tin doped indium oxide (ITO) offers a wide application potential as electrode material in optoelectronic devices Despite the efforts as mentioned above the preparation of smooth and spike-free ITO nanoparticle films with high conductivity and high transparency remains challenging. Within the present study we use a combination of two steps to achieve the desired film properties. In the first step dispersions with an extremely small particle size were prepared in order to obtain smooth and spike-free films with high transparency. The effect of the dispersion conditions (bead size, stabilizer concentration) on the particle size of the dispersions and the effect of the particle size on the surface morphology of the films are discussed. In the second step annealing under different atmospheres (air, forming gas) or CO ITO nanopowder (VP ITO TC8) was received from Evonik Degussa GmbH. This powder consisted of agglomerates of ITO particles. The agglomerate size of the feed ITO nanopowder was in the micron range. The primary size of the ITO particles was between 15 The ITO films were deposited by dip-coating on soda lime glass plates (11 Treatment of the ITO films M1 with forming gas (95% N Laser treatment was performed for ITO films prepared from the suspension M4. For the laser treatment in air a Synrad Series 48 CO In order to obtain smooth and spike-free ITO films for applications in organic electronic devices we firstly prepared ITO suspensions with an extremely small particle (agglomerate) size using high amount of the stabilizer TODS and small milling beads. The preparation conditions and the final particle size of the ITO suspensions are given in AFM images of the ITO films deposited from the ITO suspensions M1–M3 are shown in The conductivities of our ITO films are given in UV–vis transmission spectra of ITO films deposited from the dispersions M1–M3 are given in As can be observed from  The increase in conductivity related to the laser treatment was a temporary effect as also observed after forming-gas post-deposition treatment (see The ITO film conductivity is also determined by the composition of the atmosphere during the laser treatment, as demonstrated recently In ITO nanoparticle films were deposited by dip-coating from ethanolic ITO suspensions. For this stable ITO suspensions with an extremely small particle size of 17 Support of the