We describe a simple and effective method using the Stone Cone to prevent migration of stone fragments into the ureter during percutaneous nephrolithotomy. This maneuver may reduce the need for antegrade ureteroscopy to remove residual fragments, thereby saving time and obviating the need for placement of an occlusion balloon.Percutaneous nephrolithotomy (PNL) is currently the treatment of choice for large renal or staghorn stones. However, stone fragment migration into the ureter remains a concern during intracorporeal lithotripsy. Stone migration often requires time-consuming additional procedures for removal. Retrograde insertion of a ureteral occlusion balloon at the ureteropelvic junction has been described to avert stone migration from the renal collecting system into the ureter. However, its cost and the difficulty of inserting a safety guidewire down the ureter after inflation limit its application during PNL. We therefore evaluated the use of the Stone Cone (Boston Scientific, Natick, Mass) to minimize the risk of stone fragment migration during PNL. From 2002 to 2003, 10 patients were referred to our stone centers for percutaneous stone removal. The indications for PNL at our institutions included large renal (greater than 200 mm After cystoscopic placement of an open-ended ureteral catheter, the patient was placed in the prone position. Retrograde pyelography was performed to delineate the renal collecting system. Percutaneous access into the appropriate calix was achieved under fluoroscopic guidance, followed by placement of a 0.038-in. floppy-tipped safety guidewire down the ureter. After placement of a second, safety guidewire and before the placement of the nephroscopy sheath, a two-wire introducer was used to position the Stone Cone into the proximal ureter, just below the ureteropelvic junction. The Stone Cone was deployed and confirmed to be in the correct position radiographically. The introducer system was removed, and a dilating balloon catheter was advanced, inflated, and followed by placement of a 30F nephroscopy sheath. Rigid nephroscopy was used to inspect the collecting system and identify the stone burden. Stone fragmentation was achieved using several modalities of lithotrites: holmium laser, pneumatic, ultrasound, or a combination pneumatic-ultrasound device. During stone fragmentation, the Stone Cone served as a backstop, preventing distal migration of stone fragments down the ureter. At the completion of the procedure, the Stone Cone was used to engage any residual fragments ( The Stone Cone was successfully placed in all patients, with an average time to deployment of less than 1 minute. The device was able to prevent antegrade migration of the fragments created during intracorporeal lithotripsy, thereby obviating the need for adjunctive ureteroscopy in all cases. PNL is the treatment of choice for most staghorn and complex renal calculi larger than 2 cm. However, migration of stone fragments into the ureter during PNL remains a common problem. Stone migration can be a result of fluid irrigation during the procedure and may also be affected by the type of lithotrite used during intracorporeal lithotripsy. Although endourologists have used ureteral catheters and ureteral occlusion balloons to prevent potential stone migration, these have remained suboptimal. The small diameter of a ureteral catheter will continue to allow migration of stone fragments, especially if the ureter is dilated. If unrecognized intraoperatively, impacted residual fragments may occlude the ureter, necessitating additional intervention during the postoperative period. A ureteral occlusion balloon has been used to prevent fragment migration during PNL. We have described a simple and novel use of the Stone Cone during PNL to prevent antegrade stone fragment migration. The Stone Cone was originally introduced to prevent retrograde stone migration during ureteroscopy. The Stone Cone can be used safely with various lithotripsy instruments, including pneumatic and ultrasound probes. A protective coating is also present on the device to limit damage from stray holmium laser energy. However, this coating will not prevent significant damage if the laser is fired repeatedly on the Stone Cone. When deployed in a coiled fashion, the device effectively entraps large stone fragments. The distance between each coil is less than 2 mm, thereby permitting only insignificant small fragments to escape down the ureter. If a stone fragment is too large to be extracted or becomes impacted in the proximal ureter, the device will uncoil, preventing entrapment of the Stone Cone with possible ureteral injury. Another potential advantage of the device is its ability to allow for free flow of irrigation fluid down the ureter during percutaneous stone removal, further decreasing the risk of raised intrarenal pressure. This factor might be especially important in the presence of an infected stone. Placement of a Stone Cone during PNL, before intracorporeal stone fragmentation, is a simple and effective means to prevent antegrade migration of large stone fragments into the ureter. This maneuver reduces the need for antegrade ureteroscopy to remove residual stone fragments, thereby saving time and obviating the need for placement of an occlusion balloon.