From a mixture of a methanol solution of ibuprofen (IB) and an aqueous solution of hydroxypropyl methylcellulose (HPMC), clear, uniform sol was obtained at the methanol/water proportion 7/3. When sol was brought to dryness, nanocomposite gel was obtained with amorphous IB particles of 20–50 nm dispersed in HPMC matrix. Simultaneous and quick nano-hybridization and amorphization are based on: (i) re-precipitation of IB in the restricted space of HPMC network, and (ii) recombination of hydrogen bonds from those within IB crystal to those between IB and HPMC. Associated change in the properties including dissolution into aqueous medium was discussed briefly in view of application feasibility to pharmaceutical processing.Increase in the release rate and apparent solubility of sparingly soluble drugs is one of the major challenges of pharmaceutics and pharmacology. In the case of solid state, comminution of the drugs is conventionally performed in an attempt to particle size reduction, phase transformation or amorphization Drugs sparingly soluble in water are quite often highly soluble in organic solvents. Indeed, Rasenack et al. succeeded by mixing alcoholic solution of drugs with polymeric materials to control association and micronize the drugs down to a fraction of micrometer A number of efforts were paid to obtain drug–polymer nanocomposites to expect increased rate of drug release We therefore try in the present study to obtain amorphous drug nanoparticles below 100 nm by using a sol–gel process. The objective of this study is to examine the existence of those nanoparticles in xerogel, obtained as a final hybridized product. We also try to check whether and to what extent recombination of the hydrogen bonds is involved, i.e., those within drug crystals among drug molecules and those between drug and matrix. We chose hydroxypropyl methylcellulose (HPMC, Shin-etsu Chemicals, Metolose 60SH-15) as a polymeric matrix due to its high hydrophilicity, chemical stability and popularity as an excipient. Ibuprofen (IB, TCI, Analytical grade, used as purchased), a popular anti-inflammatory drug, was used as a model drug. Molecular structures of IB and HPMC are shown in We systematically varied the proportion between the drug and the matrix, and between methanol and water to find out appropriate condition to obtain homogeneous, clear sol, being a key point of the present method. Before preparing IB–HPMC composites, we tested dissolution property of IB without HPMC in water–methanol mixtures. We put 0.1–1.0 g of IB into 10 ml of a series of mixed solvents, i.e., water:methanol We obtained a xerogel from the composite sol obtained above in the form of film of ca 100 μm thickness by casting with a stainless steel coater of an aperture 1.5 mm and dried at room temperature for more than 12 h. We also prepared xerogel granules of ca 700 μm after extrusion of half-dried gel through a PTFE punching board with 800 μm openings and dried at room temperature for 3 days. We also tried dry co-grinding for 6 h using planetary mill (Fritsch, Pulversitte 5) at rotation and revolution speeds 245 rpm and 196 rpm in an agate vessel, just for comparison. Change in the crystallinity was monitored by conventional X-ray diffractometry (Rigaku, RINT 2000). Physical states of sol were observed by optical microscope (OM) and transmission electron microscopy (FE-TEM, TECNAI F20, TECNAI, with 120 kV acceleration voltage). We exposed the film sample to the vapor above a 1 w/v% aqueous solution of OsO Chemical states of IB and HPMC, including their interaction were examined by FT-IR spectroscopy (FT-IR, FTS60A, Varian). Spectrometry was done by conventional KBr method, except for that of film, where we prepared extra thin film for direct transmission spectra. Dissolution test was performed on the samples using the JP 14 Type 2 (Paddle) method (Miyamoto Riken, PJ-12N). A composite sample containing 100 mg of IB was weighed out and placed into 1000 ml of deionized water. The concentration was deliberately chosen in excess of the solubility of IB, i.e. ca 20.6–26.4 mg/l in aqueous media at 35.0–40.0 °C XRD profiles are shown in Microscopic observation of the xerogel is displayed in We examined the dissolution properties of IB and HPMC mixture and composites with 20% IB in HPMC matrix. Since the gel film was not appropriate for the purpose, just because of its floating behavior, we granulated the sol by extrusion through the opening of 800 μm and subsequently comminuted and classified. We used only a sieved fraction below 149 μm. As shown in Osmium is known to preferentially staining CH=CH double bonds To make the drug hydrophilic is of well-known primary importance by compounding with hydrophilic polymers. A unique feature of the present xerogel film is spontaneous disintegration of the film upon attachment with water. The state shown in In FT-IR spectra shown in Stabilization by the interaction between IB and HPMC after hybridization is strong enough to prevent recrystallization of IB in conventional storage time of, at least, for several weeks, since in a dry state, the amorphized drug molecules at the boundary of nanoparticles and matrix are entirely immobilized in the 3D network of HPMC. We previously reported similar stabilization of the amorphous drug, e.g. indomethacin after making a molecular dispersion via a mechanochemical route It is important to notice, that the structure of the composite gel is ensitive to the drying process. The gel film with completely amorphous IM was obtained as a gel from a sol layer of 1.5 mm thick. In order to granulate by extrusion, however, we needed to knead the sample while taking time, where evaporation occurred inhomogeneously. Under these circumstances, we several times failed to completely amorphize and observed crystalline parts due to the coexistence of larger particles shown in By choosing an appropriate mixing ratio between two solutions, i.e. those of ibuprofen (IB) in methanol and HPMC in water, we obtained a clear sol of IB–HPMC mixture. After drying a clear sol of the mixture at room temperature, we obtained composite xerogel comprising 20–50 nm amorphous IB particles dispersed in the HPMC matrix at the ratio, IB:HPMC 2:8. Simultaneous and quick nano-hybridization and amorphization are based on: (i) re-precipitation of IB in the restricted space of HPMC network, and (ii) recombination of hydrogen bonds from those within IB crystal to those between IB and HPMC. The rate of dissolution was enhanced by a factor 2.7 to 3.2 The apparent solubility increased simultaneously by a factor 2.2. The present method is very simple and versatile so that we may anticipate potential practical applications in a wide range of pharmaceutical sectors. This work was partly supported by Grant-in-Aid for 21 Century COE program “KEIO Life Conjugate Chemistry” from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science, and Technology, Japan. The authors thank Shin-etsu chemical for donating hydroxypropyl methylcellulose.