The characterisation the vertical profiles and cross-sections of roads is important for the verification of proper construction and road safety assessment. The goal of this paper is the extraction of geometric parameters through the automatic processing of mobile LiDAR system (MLS) point clouds. Massive and complex datasets provided by the MLS are processed using a hierarchical strategy that includes segmentation, principal component analysis (PCA)-based orthogonal regression, filtering and parameter extraction procedures. Best-fit geometric parameters act as a vertical road model for both linear parameters (slope and vertical curves) and cross-sections (superelevations). The proposed automatic processing approach gives satisfactory results for the analysed scenario.The availability of a detailed digital cartography for road geometry is of great importance when working with topographic applications centred on road characterisation for engineering purposes such as route modifications (i.e., lane additions). In the same way, the analysis of digital road maps can enhance road-safety verification, the identification of potentially dangerous points or black-spot localisation and the influence of road conditions on accident forensics ( The literature contains numerous examples of the use of road planning for road-safety-based modification. Applying mobile LiDAR systems (MLS) to road surveying is straightforward and allows for a wide range of possible applications. The automatic extraction of road layouts from MLS makes possible the availability of detailed digital road maps that contain precise information on widely used geometric parameters, both horizontal (straight lines, circular curves and clothoids) and vertical (slope, vertical curves and superelevations). A number of authors recently employed mobile mapping systems (MMS) to derive precise information on horizontal and vertical road parameters. One of the main disadvantages of these studies is that results analysis and comparison are usually non-quantitative due to the lack of a comparative ground-truth. Among the studies that provide a vertical road analysis, their analysis is usually limited to the vehicle lane, extracting cross-section slopes with no linear slope extraction. In addition, those approaches based only on GNSS measurements require a two-way journey, whereas the studies performed with a MLS do not provide a complete vertical alignment analysis. Within this context, this paper presents a workflow for the automatic extraction of geometric vertical road parameters through MLS data processing, distinguishing linear (i.e., slopes and vertical curves) and cross-sectional (i.e., superelevations) parameters. Finally, the parameters are created according to Spanish road regulations and their absolute and relative errors are estimated to evaluate the method’s accuracy. In Section The capture system used in this work is a LYNX Mobile Mapper manufactured by Optech ( The proposed methodology is carried out in four steps (see The input point cloud provided by the MLS is segmented in a two-step approach. The first segmentation phase is achieved by setting angular thresholds in a road function with user interaction and the second phase based on the generation of the road’s cross-sections. The goal of the first segmentation phase is to set the angular thresholds and produce a rough calculation of the road platform. Noting that the laser heads consist of a laser distance meter that is deflected by a mirror to create 2D sections, we can define a polar local coordinate system centred in each laser (see Once the platform segmentation is completed, the next step consists of generating 1 After the angular and cross-section segmentation is applied, selected points belonging to rectangular regions between the anchor points are processed for plane adjustment using PCA. The plane adjustment, based on a covariance matrix, allows for computation of the slope and superelevation ( By using PCA, a linear transformation to a new coordinate system is achieved to reduce the dimensionality of the original dataset ( The next step involves the calculation of the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of this matrix. The eigenvalues can be derived from Eq. Given that Three eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the matrix are obtained using PCA. These values contain geometric information that is suitable for geometric characterisation of the road’s vertical profile. Specifically, the eigenvector, Once the slope and superelevation are computed, a graphical parameterisation is implemented to improve the readability of the data. Graphical diagrams are commonly used as an accurate and detailed topographical representation of a road’s vertical parameters. Regarding the slope of the road, these vertical parameters are characterised in two ways, through vertical curves and slopes. In the first case, the slopes are drawn as straight lines that possess the same slope as the road, and the vertical agreement is modelled as a parabola. In the second case, the slope diagram consists of horizontal slope lines with straight vertical agreements. These two approaches are depicted in A relationship exists between a road’s superelevation and its horizontal profile. At this point, it should be noted that the results will yield noisy values due primarily to accidental errors by the MLS and the noise added by the parameterisation process itself. A smoothing filter is applied to the diagrams to reduce these errors, and consists of locally weighted scatterplot smoothing (LOWESS). The anti-aliasing filtering used is a locally weighted regression curve ( After applying the anti-aliasing filter to both the slope and superelevation values, the data are suitable for a classification in terms of the road’s vertical geometric parameters. Given that the road is segmented into equally spaced sections, the classification sections are distinguishable through histogram inspection. In fact, the histogram maxima correspond to a constant slope (slope diagram) as normal crown zones and full superelevation (superelevation diagram). Once the constant sections are classified, the joining sections must be modelled in both the slope and superelevation diagrams. These sections act as a connection of the constant zones in the diagrams and are modelled using least-square linear regression ( When the diagrams are classified through histogram processing and linear adjustment, point fixes are extracted from the intersection of these lines and the horizontal lines in the diagram. Point fixes are the points where constant horizontal lines and transition straight lines meet ( The sections and parameters obtained from this process are suitable for storage in a database that complies with the Spanish Official Road Rules regarding a road’s route and geometric characteristics. To test the developed methodology, a dataset is captured from the Spanish highway A-52 between marker posts 278/500 and 282/250. The point cloud obtained by the system is captured with a scanning frequency of 500,000 points per second and generated 97.2 million data points ( Given the massive amount of input data, a segmentation is performed using angular thresholds and PCA-based adjustment, as described in the previous section ( As a result, two angle thresholds between 196° and 336° are set. These values permit the road platform to be segmented, for a total of 33 million points. This segmentation is performed for the entire dataset because the case study consists of a highway where the superelevation is equal in all of the lanes. Finally, the second segmentation provides 1 As a summary of the segmentation process, After segmentation is finished, a PCA-based adjustment is performed, supported by points belonging to the cross-sections. A sequence of planes along the trajectory is obtained as a result, which are processed to estimate the road slope and superelevation. As explained in Section Once the calculations of both the slope and superelevation are completed, we differentiate the geometric elements, as explained in Section The different geometric elements are classified based on these graphical diagrams. The geometric parameters of interest are constant slopes and vertical curves (slope diagram) and normal crown zones and superelevation transitions and full superelevation (superelevation diagram). The constant values (slope, normal crown and full superelevation) are obtained from the histogram of alignment, in which the maximum values correspond to these elements. Once the values are classified based on the histograms, we can determine inflection points by the intersection of constant values with linear fit slopes and superelevations belonging to the vertical curves and superelevation transitions, respectively ( The results of the obtained slope’s geometric elements are shown in Analysing the data in Analysing the data in Overall, in both conducted analyses, the results extracted for slopes and are very similar, where the absolute length differences for linear elements become greater as the sections increase. On the contrary, the differences in superelevation become smaller as the methodology operates in a smaller range. The percentage relative errors are higher for angular measurements than for linear measurements in terms of both slope and superelevation. Noting the absolute differences in slope and superelevation, we can see that the results are below 0.1%, which is the maximum error considered in the inventory of Spanish roads. This paper presented a contribution to data processing tasks for MLS. The developed methodology for road characterisation is based on segmentation processes, orthogonal regression through PCA and filtering. These procedures permit the determination of geometric parameters that best define vertical road alignments, such as slope, vertical curves, normal crown, full superelevation and superelevation transitions. The extracted geometric parameters comply with the Spanish normative. In short, this paper’s novel contribution is to propose an alternative for the automated development of “as-built” road plans. Based on the results, users can perform various analyses of interest about road conditions to determine constructive errors and prevent accidents. The experimental results validate the use of the proposed method, guaranteeing relative accuracies under 3.5%. However, it should be noted that the proposed approach is a first approximation tested only for simple regional roads. It is not within the scope of this paper to provide a universal or commercial solution for any type of road. Accounting for the results and comparing them with existing research ( Despite the large volume of information generated by this type of system, the developed methodology obtains detailed information easily and smoothly due to the simple algorithms implemented. The automatic extraction of road elevations and cross-sections in an accurate manner will be important to further studies on road visibility. In the future, the georeferenced information captured by the MLS, horizontal alignment and vertical alignment could be used for visibility studies and serve as a complete tool for road maintenance and quality control. The authors would like to thank the