Froth plays an important role in flotation processes preventing the pulp transport to the concentrate (short-circuit). Thus, it contributes to increasing the concentrate grade by gravity drainage of entrained particles, back into the pulp. Key parameters affecting the froth performance are the mean residence times of solids, liquid and gas in the froth. The froth mean residence time depends on the froth depth, gas flowrate, gas hold-up, and flow regime.
                  In this work, the froth mean residence times were evaluated from direct measurements of liquid and solid time responses in the froth of self-aerated copper flotation cells of 130m3. For this purpose the radioactive tracer technique was applied, using 82Br as liquid tracer, and non-floatable mineral particles in three size classes (+150; −150+45;−45μm) as solid tracers. All tracers were injected at the cell feed entrance, which allowed the tracer to circulate first through the rotor, and become well distributed over the whole cross-sectional area before entering the froth. Each tracer time response was measured on-line below the pulp/froth interface (input signal) and at the concentrate overflow discharge (output signal). The froth mean residence time was then obtained by difference between the average times of the froth input and output tracer signals, previously modelled.
                  For the copper rougher flotation, the froth mean residence time (9–12s) of non-floatable solids, derived from experimental measurement, was comparable with that obtained by measuring the gas flowrate and estimating the effective gas volume in the froth. While, the froth mean residence times of liquid and floatable solid were significantly larger, 21 and 24s, respectively.Froth residence time is an important factor determining froth mineral recovery ( The froth residence time of an attached particle depends on the point at which the air bubble carrying the particle enters the froth phase. In Large industrial mechanical flotation cells are provided with a froth crowder, a concentric inverted cone located near the top, which accelerates the froth discharge to the concentrate overflow. Also, large flotation cells are provided with internal launders which decrease the distance of horizontal transport in the froth, as shown in Froth characterization was developed by introducing an impulse of tracer (liquid and solid) at the cell entrance and measuring the transient tracer response, of liquid and solid, at the froth feed input The froth mean residence time was determined by comparing the average times of the output transient composition The objective of this work was to characterize the froth input and output signals in order to estimate the froth mean residence time. The study was carried-out on the first cell of the rougher flotation bank of a new copper concentrator at El Teniente Division, Codelco-Chile. The rougher circuit consists of four parallel lines, each one of seven cells in series, in a 1 In order to study the froth zone retention times for liquid and solid, in large industrial flotation cells, the radioactive tracer technique ( The radioactive tracer was injected at the feed inlet of the cell, The input and output time signals of the radioactive tracer were measured on-line using two sensors, sensor S1 located at the concentrate overflow, in front of one internal launder discharge, and sensor S2 located 10   With the assumption of homogeneous composition at the base of the froth, and the assumption of angular symmetry for the froth overflow, the system is completely described by the input signal (data from sensor S2) and the output signal (data from sensor S1). It is important to notice that mixing is present in froth transport and can be attributed to the different transport distances that particles need to travel before overflowing into the concentrate, as shown in The data from each test was filtered, using a digital moving-average filter, to reduce the signal noise, producing a time series of 1000 data points with a 3  The input signals have a low noise level (signal noise). While, the output signals show a low frequency oscillating behavior, of around 1–2 In order to smooth the input and output signals, both time series were modeled using the large and small tank-in series (LTST) model, Eq.  The error in  The mean residence time of non-floatable solid was also similar to the mean transport time of gas in the froth (10–12 The mean residence time of liquid in the froth ( The mean residence time of floatable solid in the froth ( The minimum lag between the input and output signals can be observed at the beginning of the tracer responses, both for liquid and solids. The minimum lag time shown in A powerful tool to evaluate the froth residence time was developed by the radioactive tracer technique. The procedure consists of direct measurement of the mean residence time in the froth zone by measuring and modelling the input/output signals. This approach was used to identify the mean residence time of liquid, floatable and non-floatable solids along the froth of large industrial flotation cells. A minimum lag time of around 10 Models to describe the froth behaviour allowed the estimation of a mean residence time of 9–12 The liquid mean residence time in the froth (21.4 The authors are grateful to El Teniente Division Codelco-Chile for providing access to their plant and for valuable assistance in the experimental work. Valuable discussions with F. Contreras and L. Vinnett are also acknowledged. Funding for process modelling and control research is provided by CONICYT, Project Fondecyt 1070106, and Santa María University, Project 270522. The analytical solution for the LTST model in the time domain, Eq. Here, Taking the inverse Laplace transform from Eq.