Performance of froth flotation recovery plants for platinum group minerals (PGMs) is usually monitored by means of routine chemical assays of samples taken at various locations in the plant. Whilst these assays can alert the plant metallurgist to variations in recovery, the reasons for changes in recovery are not adequately revealed by the assay results. Assay-by-size analyses can help to diagnose whether PGM and/or base metal sulphide (BMS) liberation issues exist, but do not provide any information on mineralogical changes in the plant feed material.
                  The flotation performance of an ore is determined by its mineralogy. Mintek’s Mineralogy Division is currently developing PGM flotation prediction software that uses data from automated mineralogy systems to provide valuable information to the plant metallurgist. Each PGM-bearing particle detected by the automated mineralogy system is individually evaluated. Particle floatability, based on the mode of occurrence of the PGM, the proportion of floatable component/s and the composition of constituent minerals in each PGM-bearing particle is calculated. These data provide a direct output that highlights the metallurgical properties and recoverability of the PGM-bearing particles in samples gathered from strategic locations in the recovery plant.Automated mineralogy systems generally use a combination of scanning electron microscope (SEM), backscattered-electron (BSE) images, image analysis, and energy dispersive spectrometry (EDS), to provide very useful data that cannot be obtained from other analytical techniques, particularly in complex ores. Common results outputs include relative abundance of minerals (modal analysis), liberation characteristics of valuable minerals, mineral grain and particle size, and mineral association data. These results can help to pinpoint mineralogical changes in an ore that can often affect mineral recoveries. If these mineralogical changes can be quantified with a reasonable degree of confidence, then the effect of these changes can be compensated for in the recovery plant. The terms “mineral grain” and “mineral particle” are used frequently in this paper. It is important to distinguish between the two. A mineral grain is a homogenous unit of pure mineral. A mineral particle is made up of one or more mineral grains. In the case of a pure, liberated mineral, the terms “grain” and “particle” are equivalent. In ores that contain platinum group minerals (PGMs), the plant feed material generally contains less than 10 Results from automated mineralogy systems are typically presented as tables or charts that summarise particular sample characteristics, and represent the total population or a specific sub-set of analysed mineral particles in the sample. To reliably determine floatability from mineralogical data, however, each analysed mineral particle needs to be individually evaluated. The reason for this is that more than one particle characteristic often needs to be considered to determine floatability. For example, a liberated PGM grain would be expected to float, but might not if its grain size is either very small or very large. In the case of composite particles, floatability depends on the minerals present, the grain size, association and mode of occurrence of each of these minerals, and the total particle size ( Similar approaches to predicting floatability and recovery of ores using mineral particle properties determined by automated SEM systems have been documented ( The “grains table” produced by the automated SEM system is extracted from the sample results database, and is used to determine individual PGM grain and PGM-bearing particle characteristics. The first step is to determine the mode of occurrence of the PGM in each PGM-bearing particle. This is achieved by means of a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet, using a visual basic for applications (VBA) macro. The macro automatically classifies each PGM-bearing particle into one of six pre-defined mode of occurrence classes, described in Mineral ID and grain measurement data are also captured from the grains table. Grain areas are used to calculate a liberation index for each PGM-bearing particle. This measure of PGM grain liberation is calculated by dividing the area of potentially floatable component ( The PGM flotation predictor predicts PGM recovery by producing an output based on the physical properties of all PGM-bearing particles detected in the sample. These properties include mode of occurrence of the PGM (as per descriptions in The flotation predictor user interface, illustrated in The flotation predictor produces a direct output from mineralogical data, highlighting the metallurgical properties of PGM-bearing particles in the sample in tabular and graphical format. The results file includes quantitative information on the potential recovery, the reasons for recovery or losses, particle size distribution, grouping of valuable species, and estimation of flotation kinetics. The output varies according to the sample type. For example, feed sample output focuses more on potential recovery and estimation of flotation kinetics, whilst tailing sample output focuses more on reasons for losses. Typical flotation predictor graphical outputs are illustrated in Potential PGM recovery, expressed as both volume and number percentage of the total PGM population assessed ( A predicted PGM flotation rate curve, based on the particle characteristics of the recoverable PGM particles detected ( Reasons for PGM losses ( PGM locked in gangue (i.e. no exposed floatable component). PGM-bearing particles with low liberation indices (i.e. a particle with a very low proportion of floatable component). Particles too large to float. Particles too small to float. PGM-bearing particle size distribution ( Grouping of similar PGM species ( The metallurgical significance of mineralogical results from automated mineralogy systems can often be difficult to interpret. The link between ore mineralogy and plant performance is not always clearly revealed by traditional liberation, particle size and mineral association results from these systems. The aim of the flotation predictor is to interpret the mineralogical results in a repeatable manner to produce meaningful metallurgical data in an easy to understand format. Although this has only been applied to flotation of South African PGM ores at this stage, the same principles should be equally applicable to other orebodies and commodities. Laboratory scale rougher flotation rate tests on several PGM ores were used to establish the initial “default” flotation predictor parameters which appear in the user interface when the flotation predictor software is run. This was achieved by performing mineralogical investigations on concentrates collected at 1, 3, 7, 20 and 40 Comparisons of flotation rate tests and flotation predictor rate estimation results on three different ores are presented in Three sets of initial default parameters (for unaltered, partially altered and highly altered ores) are planned for inclusion in the next version of the flotation predictor software, but these only provide a guideline towards the optimal values of the various parameters. Ideally, a specific set of flotation predictor parameters should be established for a particular ore by first performing a thorough PGM mineralogical analysis of feed, concentrate and tailing samples from the recovery plant. Flotation predictor parameters can then be derived from the PGM-bearing particle characteristics observed in the various recovery plant streams. The output produced by the optimised parameters defines a baseline mineralogical profile of the ore, against which future routine mineralogical analyses can be compared. This allows the flotation predictor output to be used as a diagnostic tool, providing a way to monitor the plant, and to establish whether any change in plant performance is due to changes in feed mineralogy. As long as plant reagent addition remains reasonably constant, the effect of reagents should not affect results negatively, as the baseline data will have been established with reagents present. The current version of the flotation predictor (v 2.0, June 2011) operates as a VBA module within Microsoft Excel. Although this works adequately, VBA format is not considered a viable long-term development platform. The software will be upgraded to a stand-alone executable format in future. Capabilities will also be expanded to allow flotation prediction of commodities other than PGM. The flotation predictor produces results that show good correlation with results obtained from laboratory scale flotation rate tests. The predictor is not intended to replace rate tests, as these can be performed quicker and cheaper than automated SEM mineralogical analyses. The predictor can, however, produce flotation rate estimates directly from a full-scale operating flotation plant, and also links flotation performance to ore mineralogy, which is not achieved by traditional rate tests. This provides a means to monitor and troubleshoot plant performance based on ore mineralogy. Although the pre-set default flotation parameters produce useable results, prediction can be improved by establishing parameters through a detailed mineralogical study of the ore and plant products generated from it. Once these baseline data have been established, the flotation prediction parameters essentially define a mineralogical profile for the plant. Future PGM mineralogy studies can be compared against this mineralogical profile to establish whether changes in feed mineralogy are responsible for variations in recovery. Where feed mineralogy remains constant, but concentrates and tailings differ from the baseline data, plant issues other than mineralogical changes are indicated. Maximum value can be obtained from mineralogical data by using the flotation predictor output in conjunction with other mineralogical information, such as relative mineral proportions (modal analysis) and mineral associations. The author would like to thank Mr. Nigel Ramlall of Mintek’s Minerals Processing Division for performing the laboratory scale rate tests and for providing insight on various aspects of PGM flotation, as well as colleagues in Mintek’s Mineralogy Division for their support and encouragement during the developmental stage of the flotation predictor.