First, we solve a semi-classical electronic Boltzmann transport equation and acquire the thermoelectric coefficients for a pure unit cell using the rigid-band approximation. Then, combined with the existing experimental results, we not only reproduce the Seebeck coefficients and electrical conductivity but also yield the carrier concentrations and relaxation time, which cannot be obtained by either experiments or theories alone. Our results are in good agreement with the experiment for all doping samples. Furthermore, we show that Wiedemann-Franz law fails to connect the electronic thermal conductivity with the electrical conductivity. We also show that the Hall effect fails to measure carrier concentration in this study. We attribute these failures to the breakdown of the parabolic band. We think that our approach can be extended to other alloy or compound thermoelectric materials that utilize electronic transport property because they all have problems identifying relaxation time and carrier concentrations.Thermoelectric materials can convert wasted heat into electricity, which would provide one of the cleanest and most environmental-friendly energy. There have been extensive studies to find commercial thermoelectric materials with a high dimensionless figure of merit ZT, which characterizes the conversion efficiency. The ZT can be expressed as the following We study the thermoelectric coefficients by the combination of the calculation and experiment. First, we calculate the band structure of the CoSb Using this new approach, we study a high tellurium doped N-type CoSb Our approach offers a unique combination of experiments and theoretical calculations. This approach can both reproduce the experimental results and yield other transport properties that cannot be obtained by either alone. We can extend it to study the transport properties of other alloy or compounds. We choose a unit cell of 32 atoms, instead of a pristine cell of 16 atoms in other studies. CoSb We study the unit cell of the CoSb The calculated thermoelectric coefficients are based on this CoSb With the obtained σ/τ(T) and κ We show the temperature dependence of carrier concentration N(T) in One can get the type and size of carrier concentration from a Hall measurement, which is based on a single parabolic band model. Because the skutterudite CoSb We attribute the Hall effect failure to the simple one parabolic band, which is corrected in a BoltzTraP2 calculation. Such calculation would integrate all bands near the Fermi energy, ignoring whether they are conduction bands or valence bands, as long as they contribute to the transport properties. We thus have an aggravate behavior. In this sense, our result should be more accurate. When solving a BTE, the introduction of relaxation time to reflect the electronic scattering mechanism makes the final expression more intuitive. Generally, there are five scattering mechanisms: the acoustic phonon scattering, the vacancy scattering, the polar optical phonon scattering, the impurity ion scattering and the nonpolar optical phonon scattering. At low temperatures, the vacancy scattering and nonpolar optical phonon scattering dominate, while at high temperatures, the acoustic phonon scattering, the polar optical phonon scattering and ion scattering dominate. In many thermoelectric studies, only the acoustic scattering is considered, as it has the largest contribution. A relaxation time from the acoustic phonon scattering should have an inverse temperature dependence. The temperature dependence of the relaxation time in The temperature and doping level dependence of the Seebeck coefficient is shown in As a BotlzTraP2 calculation only yields the electronic contribution к In many experimental studies, the Wiedemann-Franz law is used to infer the к Bhandari and Rowe pointed out the failure of the constant Lorentz number [ We have not studied any tellurium doped electronic structure because we use the rigid-band approximation, in which the band structure of un-doped unit cell is maintained. Only the Fermi energy or carrier concentration changes as a function of temperature and doping. This approach is not very strict, as the bandgap and/or band shape would change with the doping and heating. Nevertheless, BoltzTRaP2 is recognized to reproduce thermoelectrics very well. If the doping is not too high, we can consider the doping as a perturbation, meeting the RGB conditions. Besides change the carrier concentrations, the calculation also explains electronic scattering mechanism and yields the subsequent electronic thermal conductivity, which are tellurium doping specific. As we have shown, the Hall effect cannot be applied directly to measure carrier concentrations because of the non-parabolic band of tellurium doped CoSb There is no experimental or theoretical method to acquire relaxation time, which reflects the complicated electronic scattering mechanism. Our approach provides a solution. Though one can measure the electrical conductivity, using Wiedemann-Franz law to infer the electronic thermal conductivity would introduce huge errors, due to the non-parabolic band. Our approach provides a much better alternative. With the combination of theory and experimental tellurium doped CoSb Dr. Wan wrote the main article and directed the study; Mr. Guo performed the calculation; Mr. Jiang analyzed the data; Dr. Chen performed partial data analyses; Prof. Zhang edited and wrote partial of the article; Prof. Tian provided the software and guided computation; Dr. Lei contributed partial writing and funding. All authors read and contributed to the manuscript. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work is supported by the