Our unabated reliance on carbonaceous fuel sources and the rising concentration of atmospheric CO2 motivate the design of integrated thermodynamically downhill CO2 capture and conversion pathways. Carbon mineralization which involves converting CO2 to inorganic carbonates is a representative example. In this study, we investigate the integrated CO2 capture and conversion to produce calcium carbonate with CaO and CaSiO3 as the precursors. To overcome the rate limiting step of CO2 hydration, sodium glycinate is used for CO2 capture. Bicarbonate ions resulting from CO2 capture accelerate carbon mineralization. Carbon mineralization behavior in coupled capture and conversion processes is sensitive to the concentration of Na-glycinate, temperature, and reaction time. In this single step CO2 capture and mineralization pathway, highest conversions of CaO and CaSiO3 were achieved in 1.0 M Na-glycinate at 75 °C and with a reaction time of 3 h in a system comprising 15 wt% solid and at a stirring rate of 300 rpm. Extents of carbon mineralization with CaO and CaSiO3 are 94.2% and 31.0%, respectively. These data suggest that Na-glycinate undergoes multiple CO2 capture and regeneration cycles in the aqueous phase facilitating greater availability of aqueous carbon species for carbonate precipitation. Calcite is the dominant crystalline phase with CaO as the precursor, while aragonite, calcite and vaterite are present in materials with CaSiO3 as the precursor. These results demonstrate the effectiveness of Na-glycinate as a CO2 capture agent for integrated capture and mineralization with inherent regeneration in the aqueous phase.Rising concentrations of CO One of the earliest approaches investigated involved direct gas–solid reactions in which CO During integrated capture and mineralization of CO Prior work on the aqueous alkaline amine looping approach showed that complete conversion of CaO to calcium carbonate and 70% conversion of MgO to hydrated magnesium carbonate was achieved at 50 °C with 30 wt% MEA and 15 wt% solid on reacting for 3 h Given this criteria, amino acid salts such as sodium or potassium glycinate were identified as appropriate solvents for CO The alkaline precursors used in this study calcium oxide (CaO) and calcium silicate (CaSiO The experiments were performed in the Parr Reactor (Series 4590 Micro Stirred Reactor). The solid to liquid ratio is maintained at 3:17 by weight for all the experiments. Experiments were performed in water and Na-glycinate concentrations of 0.5 M and 1.0 M. The reactor was purged with pure CO The effectiveness of Na-glycinate in enabling the mineralization of CO The changes in the functional groups were identified based on the infrared absorption spectra determined using Attenuated Total Reflection – Fourier Transform Infrared spectroscopy analyses (ATR-FTIR, Thermo Fisher Nicolet iS50) in the range of 300–4000 cm The experiments in this study are designed to evaluate the hypothesis that Na-glycinate is an effective CO To determine the dynamic changes in the functional groups as CO  In these carbon mineralization experiments, we explore the hypothesis that there is a non-monotonic temperature dependence on the carbon mineralization behavior of CaO and CaSiO The extents of carbon mineralization of CaO at 25 °C, 50 °C, 75 °C, and 90 °C are 77.0%, 95.1%, 94.2%, and 97%, respectively. The extents of carbon mineralization of CaSiO The effect of competing reactions is more clearly delineated in the case of CaSiO The rate constants for the reaction between CO To evaluate if carbon mineralization is limited by the concentration of the CO To understand if the carbon mineralization reactions with Na-glycinate occur rapidly in the first hour of the reaction or gradually increases with time, carbon mineralization experiments were performed with Na-glycinate. The experiments were performed at 1, 3, and 5 h time periods with 1 M Na-glycinate at 75 °C with a stirring rate of 300 rpm. The extents of carbon mineralization with CaO are 82.5, 94.2, and 95.9% at 1, 3, and 5 h, respectively. The extents of carbon mineralization with CaSiO During the carbon mineralization of CaO and CaSiO CO Unlike CaO, lower extents of carbon mineralization are noted in CaSiO In this paper, we investigate the single-step capture and mineralization of CaO and CaSiO  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors gratefully acknowledge the experimental support provided by Dr. Jan Ilavsky and Dr. Ivan Kuzmenko for performing the combined USAXS/SAXS/WAXS measurements at the Advanced Photon Source at Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: