Accumulation of total CO2 (C
                     T) was investigated in the sub-halocline deep water of the Gotland Sea (Baltic Sea) during a period of stagnation from 1995 to 1999. Depth profiles for C
                     T, nitrate, phosphate, and oxygen were measured during seven cruises in a grid consisting of 26 stations. The mean C
                     T increased by more than 60 μmol/kg from October 1995 to July 1999 corresponding to a mean accumulation rate of 1.1 mol/m2 year. Taking into account vertical mixing, the vertical distribution of the C
                     T accumulation was used to determine mineralization rates at different depths. High rates immediately below the halocline indicated the existence of a fraction of organic matter, which is rapidly mineralized during sinking through the water column. A second fraction is more refractive and accumulates at the sediment surface in the deep center of the basin where it is slowly mineralized and partly buried. Phosphate release rates in anoxic waters and especially at the redoxcline were substantially higher than those estimated on the basis of the carbon mineralization and the Redfield C/P ratio. This is attributed to non-Redfield mineralization ratios and the dissolution of iron oxide/phosphate associates. The formation of nitrate by mineralization under oxic conditions was almost completely compensated by denitrification. Using the carbon mineralization rates and a C/N ratio of 8.4, a denitrification rate of 280 mmol/m2 year was obtained, which approximately balances the input of nitrate/ammonia into the surface water. Relating the apparent oxygen utilization (AOU) to the C
                     T fraction that was generated by mineralization yielded a carbon mineralization/O2 consumption ratio of 0.83.The eastern Gotland Sea is the largest and deepest basin in the Baltic Sea with a maximum depth of 250 m. The deep water tends to stagnate and is separated from the surface water by the permanent halocline at a depth of about 70 m. The renewal of the deep water by the inflow of relatively young water originating from the North Sea occurs irregularly at time intervals of about 1–4 years However, no measurements on the accumulation of total CO The investigations of CO Seven measurement campaigns were performed with R/V A.v.Humboldt during 1995–1999: October 1995, February 1996, February 1997, May 1997, November 1997, July 1998, and July 1999. During each cruise, the vertical profiles of The determination of To determine the concentrations of particulate organic carbon and nitrogen (POC, PON), 1–2 l seawater were filtered through heat-treated (450 °C, 8 h) Whatman GF-F filters and stored deep-frozen. Before the analysis, the filter samples were dried at 60 °C and transferred to tin cups, which were introduced into the elemental analyzer (Type: VARIO EL). The measurement principle of the analyzer is based on the oxidation of organic matter, reduction of NO For the determination of NO The vertical Mean below-halocline To identify the On the basis of the in situ As the consequence of stagnation, A detailed analysis of the mineralization process was performed for the periods of May 1997–November 1997 and July 1998–July 1999. During these time spans, the highest mean To derive carbon mineralization rates from the To determine the depth distribution of the mineralization rates, a simple model was developed which included the For a first run of the model, it was assumed that mineralization occurs at a uniform rate at the sediment surface. Hence, the mean mineralization rate Hence, a nonuniform distribution of the carbon mineralization must be assumed to simulate the observed  Below 140 m, slightly elevated mineralization rates were observed and followed by a substantial increase in the bottom water (box 7) ( Mean mineralization rates were calculated for the water-column mineralization regime (halocline–140 m) for the July 1998–July 1999 and the May 1997–November 1997 periods The mean mineralization rates below 140 m for the May 1997–November 1997 and the July 1998–July 1999 periods The measurement data for the July 1998–July 1999 period and the results from the diffusion model were summarized to construct an annual carbon balance, which is based on the assumption that no lateral water exchange existed below the halocline. Two deepwater sub-boxes are considered: the upper deep water (UDW) between the halocline and about 140 m where mineralization occurs mainly within the water column during sinking of POC, and the lower deep water (LDW) below 140 m where the sediment surface is the main substratum for mineralization. About 2.9 mol/m The total POC export from the surface water includes the fraction (15%) that passes the UDW without being decomposed and that was determined by the deployment of a sediment trap at a depth of 140 m The mineralization rate in the LDW was 1.8 mol/m The time interval of July 1998–July 1999 was used to estimate PO However, a strong excess of PO Our interpretation of the PO  Unfortunately, NH However, water-column denitrification must be questioned because O Oxygen concentrations in box 3 were well below the denitrification threshold value. But the hypothetical NO The total below-halocline denitrification in the eastern Gotland Sea amounted to 280 mmol/m The apparent oxygen utilization (AOU: O Our study has shown that the investigation of total CO The determination of mineralization rates at different depth intervals and the construction of a two-box deepwater carbon budget provided evidence that about 85% of surface-produced POC was rapidly mineralized at depths above approximately 140 m, whereas only 15% reached the sediment surface. This indicates the existence of at least two fractions of organic matter with different mineralization dynamics and thus, different residence times. Our budget estimate showed that only about 10% of the POC collected at the sediment surface was derived from the overlying water column. The remaining 90% must have entered the deeper part of the basin by near-bottom particle transport. These findings indicate the importance of particles with regards to both chemical properties and physical mobility and underline the need for an adequate parameterization of the corresponding processes in biogeochemical models. The transformation between PO The estimated denitrification rate for the eastern Gotland Sea (280 mmol/m The study was performed within the IOW project group “Balance of Matter.” We would like to acknowledge the helpful and constructive discussions with many colleagues from the different Sections of the IOW. Last but not the least, we thank the captain of R/V A.v.Humboldt, G. Herzig and his crew, for the excellent cooperation and perfect technical support. 