The most commonly used collectors for sulfide minerals in the mining industry are the thiol collectors for the recovery of these minerals from their associated gangues by froth flotation. For this reason, a great deal of attention has been paid to understand the attachment mechanism of thiol collectors to metal sulfide surfaces. The density functional theory (DFT) calculations at the B3LYP/3-21G* and B3LYP/6-31++G** levels were employed to propose the flotation responses of these thiol collectors, namely, diethyl dithiocarbamate, ethyl dithiocarbamate, ethyl dithiocarbonate, ethyl trithiocarbonate and ethyl dithiophosphate ions, and to study the interaction energies of these collectors with Ag (+1) ion in connection to acanthite (Ag2S) mineral. The calculated interaction energies, ΔE, were interpreted in terms of the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) energies of the isolated collector ions. The results show that the HOMOs are strongly localized to the sulfur atoms and the HOMO energies can be used as a reactivity descriptor for the flotation ability of the thiol collectors. Using the HOMO and ΔE energies, the reactivity order of the collectors is found to be (C2H5)2NCS2
                     − > C2H5NHCS2
                     − > C2H5OCS2
                     − > C2H5SCS2
                     − > (C2H5O)(OH)PS2
                     −. The theoretically obtained results are in good agreement with the experimental data reported.electronic energy of the collector–Ag electronic energy of Ag electronic energy of collector (hartree) interaction energies (hartree and kcal the highest occupied molecular orbital energy (eV) the lowest occupied molecular energy (eV) bond length (A°) bond angle (°) dihedral angle (°) Flotation reagents used in the flotation of minerals are classified into three types, which are collectors, frothers and regulators. Collectors are the reagents that render the valuable mineral hydrophobic for better floatability. They are usually surface-active compounds and many of them (short-chain thiol compounds) are not surface active at the water–air interface. They contain a polar group in hydrophilic character and non-polar group in hydrophobic character that attach to the air bubbles in the flotation cells. Therefore, collectors are the most important element of the flotation process that are used for the separation of minerals from their ores, and they also can be divided into several classes depending on anionic, cationic or other molecular characteristics. Thiol collectors such as alkyl dithiocarbonate (xanthate), dithiophosphate and dithiocarbamate ions are widely used in the flotation of the valuable sulfide minerals Computational methods are valuable tools for understanding the chemical systems and prediction of their physicochemical properties. The use of the density functional theory (DFT) methods has grown considerably in the last years in many fields. It is well known that DFT methods require less computational effort than the ab initio calculations, and it has become an alternative to the second-order Møller–Plesset perturbation theory (MP2) which is an approach to the computation of electron correlation energy. In this paper, we present the DFT results from the investigation of the structural properties, the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energies of some thiol collectors and their interactions with Ag (+1) ion. We intend to get valuable and predictive information about the most important part of the flotation process of sulfide minerals with an example of acanthite (Ag In the search of the lowest energy conformation, the potential energy surfaces of the thiols under consideration were scanned using the B3LYP/3-21G* method Electrostatic charge properties of the collector compounds were also theoretically determined. Atomic partial charges calculated according to the scheme of Mulliken Diethyl dithiocarbamate [(C This kind of interaction cannot be totally true, but qualitative information can be obtained about the interaction energies of the collectors and acanthite. Some results about these type collector–metal interactions can be summarized as following: Winter Thiol collectors usually act as bidentate ligand and have a negative charge on sulfur atom. Three resonance structures can be written as given in Selected optimized geometrical parameters for the collectors and their complexes with Ag (+1) ion are listed in The optimized geometries of the complexes studied are seen in Atomic charges are known as an important factor in intermolecular interactions. In general, the atomic charges at the binding site of the collectors are expected to be described the reactivity of molecules toward formation of the complexes with metal ions. However, in this study, neither Mulliken nor CHelpG atomic charges (see In this study, the interactions of the thiol collectors with Ag (+1) were modeled. The outcome of these calculations showed that dithiocarbamate ions could be used as the most effective collectors in the flotation of the sulfide minerals. The partial atomic charges evaluated from Mulliken population analysis and CHelpG methods do not provide satisfactory description of the chemical activity of the thiol collectors. A relationship was found between the HOMO energies of the collector ions and the interaction energies with the Ag (+1) ion. The results showed that HOMO energies could be used as a reactivity descriptor for the selected collectors. The interaction energies may be overestimated due to the difficulties in the modeling of the system. However, the theoretical calculations permit us to understand the role of these collector molecules in the initial adsorption step of the flotation processes for acanthite and other sulfide minerals. The authors acknowledge the CUBAP (The Scientific Research Projects Council of Cumhuriyet University) for the providing the Gaussian 98W and GaussView 2.1 program packages.