In this paper the effect of small defects on fatigue threshold of different series of nitrided and nitride-shot peened low alloy steel specimens is investigated by means of experimental rotating bending tests on sandglass specimens. Micro-holes acting as pre-cracks are introduced by means of different methods (electro-erosion and indentation) in order to evaluate the effect of defect size as well as the influence of the process to generate them on the fatigue threshold. The results, interpreted in terms of ΔK
                     th, show good agreement with estimated ones, calculated by a formula that considers the experimentally measured residual stresses, FWHM parameter, micro-hardness values and SEM observation of broken and run-out specimens. A critical discussion of the obtained results highlights the influence of the defect size and of the method used to generate the micro-holes on the fatigue threshold.fatigue threshold value of the stress intensity factor range shot peening nitrided electro-erosion nitrided-shot peened electro-erosion nitrided-shot peened, indentation full width of the diffraction peak at half the maximum intensity fatigue strength for 5+E06 cycles projected shape of the initial defect parameter for Murakami’s equation stress ratio in terms of the stress intensity factor range Vickers hardness full width of the diffraction peak at half the maximum intensity for the nitrided samples full width of the diffraction peak at half the maximum intensity for the nitrided and shot peened samples Great advances in technology require better materials with better mechanical properties, able to resist high stresses, fatigue, wear, etc. Surface treatments are actually used to improve these properties, thus permitting to enhance the performance of components and to reduce their weight and volume. In terms of fatigue, nitriding and shot peening are known as two of the most effective methods to increase components’ strength. In particular, shot peening is one of the most widely used surface treatments for improving fatigue strength of metal components Referring to steels, it is attested in the literature that shot peening is more effective if applied to high strength steels, in which surface and subsurface defects play an important role in the reduction of the fatigue limit The case of nitriding plus shot peening is less investigated and applied; this is usually attributed to the fact that nitriding is able by itself to give adequate hardness and fatigue strength. Gas-nitriding consists in putting a steel part in a nitrogenous gas atmosphere, generally ammonia, at temperature of 500–550 If smooth specimens are considered for crack propagation assessment, the cracks would start from an internal inclusion The presence of small surface defects like scores, notches and scratches can sensibly decrease the strength of nitrided and also nitride-shot peened components; however in these cases, fatigue improvement due to shot peening is more pronounced, for the severe gradient of the applied stresses Nevertheless, not only the size and shape of defect influence the fatigue resistance, but also the way the defects are generated can have strong influence on the results; especially in case of shot peened specimens, since the residual stresses field introduced by this treatment can in turn modify the results. Takahashi et al. In this work the effect of the notch size and how it was produced on fatigue threshold is studied on nitrided and nitride-shot peened steel specimens. Five series of hourglass specimens of 42CrMo4 UNI EN 10083 steel were machined and nitrided, and then four of these series were shot peened after nitriding. In the minimum section of all samples a micro-hole was made after treatment. These micro-holes act as a pre-existent defect, being a preferential site for fatigue crack initiation. Two different methods were used to obtain micro-holes: controlled electro-erosion and indentation. Electro-erosion method is much less invasive than mechanical working, since it only slightly modifies the pre-existent residual stress field and the local mechanical properties of the material. Micro-holes by electro-erosion were made in three series, one nitrided (N The effect on fatigue behavior of defect dimension and the manner it is produced is assessed in terms of fatigue threshold value, Δ A critical discussion of the results in terms of residual stress, micro-hardness trend and fatigue strength is done, bearing out the influence of the defects dimension and also the way to produce them, on the fatigue threshold of nitrided and nitrided and shot peened low alloy steels. The results allow assessing the important role played by shot peening to improve the fatigue behavior of the material, and also evidence the importance of the way how the defect is generated, proving that mechanical work affects residual stresses distribution, influencing on fatigue behavior of components. The material studied in this work is the steel 42CrMo4 UNI EN 10083 (UTS Five different series of 15 sandglass specimens were considered and fatigue tested under rotating bending conditions. All the series were gas nitrided (temperature These artificial defects were created to have a preferential site for fatigue crack initiation. In this way it was possible to observe the evolution of a crack starting from this point also in the case of run-out specimens, due to some non-propagating cracks initiated from the micro-hole. The white layer was not removed, thus making the case analyzed more similar to practical situations, even if the application of shot peening accidentally and partially removed it. The sub-surface layer of material was characterized also by residual stress measurements by means of an AST X-Stress 3000 X-ray diffractometer (radiation Cr Kα, {2 The X-ray diffraction measurements allow obtaining additional important information about the surface state of material in terms of the width of the diffraction peak at half the maximum intensity (FWHM). This quantity is related to the grain distortion, to the dislocation density and to the so called type II micro residual stresses Micro-hardness tests were also performed with a weight of 1 To assess the fatigue behavior of a 42CrMo4 UNI EN 10083 steel nitrided and nitrided and shot peened with superficial defects of different size obtained by the two different methods referred to before, rotating bending fatigue tests were performed. The specimens that did not break after 5E+06 cycles were considered run-out. On the basis of the results, the fatigue strength for A further limited difference can be noted if 5 In order to understand and justify the obtained results, X-ray diffraction measurements of the residual stresses, the FWHM as well as micro-hardness measurements were performed. Broken specimens were observed by means of electronic microscopy and the root square of defect area was calculated for all series; the results are shown in   After the fatigue tests, broken samples were observed by means of scanning electron microscope. The images were taken from different micro-holes, which made possible to calculate the effective root square of the defect area that is the dimension that, according to The results of rotating bending fatigue tests of the five series of specimens with different defect dimensions obtained by indentation and electro-erosion were analyzed in terms of Δ On the basis of the hardness and the X-ray measurements (residual stresses and FWHM), an estimation of the expected results was also calculated using Eq. These equations take into account the peculiar behavior of the “short crack” due to the dimension of the considered defects. The results obtained from the experimental Eq. On the other hand, if the results of Results taken from Eqs. Another comment in The effect of surface defect size and the method to generate it on the bending fatigue behavior of a low-alloy nitrided and shot peened steel was studied in terms of Δ The results indicate that shot peening is able to improve the fatigue strength of nitrided specimens with pre-existent defects, regardless of the defect size and defect generation method. This is attributed to the surface work hardening and compressive residual stresses induced by shot peening. Another experimental evidence is that the method used for obtaining micro-holes influences the fatigue behavior. Fatigue strength of the specimens with larger surface defects obtained by electro-erosion is bigger than the one of specimens with smaller defects obtained by indentation. Since the fatigue strength is expected to decrease with the dimension of the defect itself, if all the other influencing factors are maintained constant, this result could be justified as a detrimental effect of the indentation method to produce the defect. A larger amount of experimental data is needed to confirm this conclusion. In terms of Δ A proposal to assess the short crack threshold of nitrided and shot peened steels derived from Murakami’s equation, previously proposed by the authors Residual stresses and FWHM trends make evident the increment of these parameters induced by shot peening treatment on NSP series with respect to just nitrided ones, and justify the higher fatigue limit of the nitrided and shot peenined series with respect to that of only nitrided series, for the same defect dimension. This observation permits to affirm that shot peening is a suitable treatment to improve fatigue strength of nitrided low-alloy steels. Finally some conclusions can be drawn also in view of a practical application of the results. In fact since the defect generation through indentation is able to represent the accidental damages due to probable scratches made on the component surface in operating condition, it is possible to affirm that in the case of assessing the strength of accidentally damaged nitrided/shot peened components, it would be opportune to consider the indentation as a method to obtain the defect, whereas the defect obtained by electro-erosion seems more suitable for analysis aimed at characterizing the mechanical properties of the material such as fatigue strength determination in the presence of small defects.