Several techniques of arthroscopic treatment of tibial spine avulsion fractures have been described in the literature. These techniques include the use of various fixation devices such as screws, K-wires, wiring, sutures, and suture anchors. In this study, we evaluate a new wiring technique for the treatment of these injuries. This technique involves fixation by stainless steel tension wires passed over the fractured spine and tied over a bone bridge. The advantages of this technique are that it aids in reduction, allows for compression of the tibial spine fragment anatomically in its fracture bed, provides stable fixation in difficult comminuted fractures, and allows for early mobilization and weight bearing because of the solid fixation.Anterior tibial spine fractures are relatively rare with an incidence of approximately 3/100,000/year. The severity of displacement of these fractures was first classified by Meyers and McKeever in 1959 With the advent of arthroscopy and magnetic resonance imaging, it is now known that associated soft tissue injury is common with tibial spine avulsion fractures. Appropriate treatment should provide anatomic reduction of the fragment; in general, operative techniques range from arthrotomy with screws, wires, staples, pins, or suture fixation to arthroscopically assisted internal fixation with cannulated or cortical screws, percutaneous pins, and suture fixation with and without hardware. Instruments used for arthroscopic fixation by a cerclage wire are thin 0.8-mm cerclage wire, 2.4-mm guide pin, and ACL guide ( After appropriate spinal or epidural anesthesia is obtained, the patient is placed in a supine position. When done under general anesthesia, the femoral block is helpful for postoperative pain control. The procedure can be performed either with a leg holder or with the leg free. Tourniquets are applied and inflated. Visualization is established through a standard anterolateral portal with the intra-articular hematoma initially evacuated through the standard anteromedial portal. Once the hematoma is evacuated and visualization established, diagnostic arthroscopy is carried out to assess additional injuries, for example, meniscal, chondral injuries. The tibial spine fragment is probed to determine the amount of displacement, comminution, and soft tissue involvement. The ACL should be examined for ecchymosis and attenuation. With the arthroscope in the anterolateral portal, a 4.5-mm motorized shaver and abrader (Smith & Nephew Endoscopy, Dyonics, Andover, MA) are used to debride the hematoma, loose fragments, and any interposed soft tissue from the fracture crater ( A 2-cm skin incision is made over the proximal anteromedial tibia, the extra-articular portion of the guide is secured over the tibial cortex, and then a 2.0-mm drill-tip guide wire is advanced through the ACL tibial guide to exit just medial to the fracture site ( The ACL guide is placed back in the knee through the anteromedial portal, and directed just lateral to the fracture site. Once the appropriate intra-articular position of the guide is established, it is secured through the previous skin incision on the anteromedial tibia approximately 1 to 1.5 cm from the first drill hole, a 2.0-mm drill-tip guide wire is drilled into the joint just lateral to the fracture site ( By using the grasper or Kocher forceps one of the cerclage wire loops is passed through the eyelet of the other loop ( The wire is twisted (at least 2 twists are necessary to maintain the stability of the cerclage) on the anterior tibial cortex by using pliers ( The knee is placed in a hinged brace locked in extension. This technique can be used in adults and in children with open physis. In children, the cerclage wire is removed 12 weeks postoperatively. Pearls and pitfalls are shown in All patients were immobilized postoperatively with a long-hinged knee brace locked at 0° for 3 weeks. Weight bearing started as tolerated with crutches, whereas full weight bearing was allowed from the fourth week postoperatively. The passive ROM began at the third week postoperatively and was limited at 0° to 90° for the next 2 weeks, allowing active flexion/extension; full ROM was allowed from the sixth week postoperatively. Tibial spine fractures represent a disruption of the ACL complex. Both sutures and screw fixation techniques have been studied in cadavers. Bong et al. The suture characteristics important for a stable construct include strength and knot security. The fixation described in our technique uses a horizontal mattress 0.8-mm cerclage wire. Pedowitz et al. Regarding the fixation method used in this technique, the stainless steel cerclage wires are attractive fixation devices to be used as a reduction and fixation tool for dislocated fragments. The application of a cerclage wire or cable is a standardized procedure. The cerclage wire is looped around the bone and is finally tightened to establish compression. Several methods of arthroscopic suture fixation have been described; however to our knowledge, this technique is the first to describe the use of the stainless steel cerclage wire device to perform a loop around the avulsed fragment to allow its compression. This technique provides the surgeon with a significant advantage in the treatment of displaced type III and IV fractures of the tibial eminence that have significant comminution ( 