Chicken eggshell is the protective barrier of the egg. It is a biomineral composed of 95% calcium carbonate on calcitic form and 3.5% organic matrix proteins. Mineralization process occurs in uterus into the uterine fluid. This acellular fluid contains ions and organic matrix proteins precursors which are interacting with the mineral phase and control crystal growth, eggshell structure and mechanical properties. We performed a proteomic approach and identified 308 uterine fluid proteins. Gene Ontology terms enrichments were determined to investigate their potential functions. Mass spectrometry analyses were also combined to label free quantitative analysis to determine the relative abundance of 96 proteins at initiation, rapid growth phase and termination of shell calcification. Sixty four showed differential abundance according to the mineralization stage. Their potential functions have been annotated. The complete proteomic, bioinformatic and functional analyses are reported in Marie et al., J. Proteomics (2015) [1].  Proteomic analysis of 308 chicken uterine fluid proteins. Gene ontology terms enrichments to investigate potential functions of uterine fluid proteins Quantitative data on protein abundances according to mineralization stage. Functional annotation on quantified uterine fluid proteins. Uterine fluid were collected as described previously For global protein inventory, equal amounts of protein from uterine fluids collected at each stage of shell calcification were pooled. A total of 135 All experiments were performed on a linear ion trap Fourier Transform Mass Spectrometer (FT-MS) LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled to an Ultimate For proteomic inventory, a total of 256, 298 and 98 proteins were identified using nr NCBI database, IPI chicken database, and UniProtKb/Swiss-Prot database, respectively. For quantitative analysis, a total of 85 proteins were identified using the nr NCBI database, 92 proteins using the IPI chicken database, and 50 proteins with the UniProtKb/Swiss-Prot database. Data originating from both proteomic inventory and quantitative analyses were treated as follows. Trypsin and keratin from mammals were eliminated from the lists as they appeared to be contaminants or resulting from the digestion process. Protein sequences from the three databases (NCBI nr, UniprotKb SwissProt and IPI chicken) were aligned to eliminate all redundancies. Protein groups were determined using Clustal Omega multi-alignment algorithm A total of 308 non-redundant uterine fluid protein sequences were identified. The resulting file (Supplementary In order to determine the potential functions of the 308 uterine fluid proteins, we have determined in this list, Gene Ontology terms (GO) which are widely used for the overall interpretation of the functions of proteins in proteomic or transcriptomic studies ( In a second approach, GeLC–MS/MS analyses combined to label free quantitative analysis based on spectral counting quantitative method were used to compare the respective abundance of distinct proteins at the initiation (I), rapid growth (G) and termination (T) phases of shell mineralization. A total of 96 non redundant proteins were identified. Supplementary Moreover, one way ANOVA was performed for protein abundance in each database, in order to reveal proteins which were significantly different between the three stages of shell mineralization. Statistically significant differences were considered for Authors claim no conflict of interest. This research was funded by the French The authors are grateful to the experimental units (UE-PEAT) for care of birds, and to the genotoul bioinformatics platform Toulouse Midi-Pyrenees for providing help and/or computing and/or storage resources. The authors thank and acknowledge Dr. Maxwell Hincke, University of Ottawa for a critical reading of the manuscript. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at 