A micro-gas sensor array with the four porous tin oxide thin films with noble metal catalysts on a micro-hotplate, dangling in air by Pt bonding wires and controlling the thickness by chemical mechanical process (CMP) has been fabricated. The sensing properties of sensors to some combustible gases, i.e. propane, butane, LPG, and carbon monoxide (CO), were evaluated. And we employed a principal component analysis (PCA) and a multi-layer neural network for classification of the gas species. The simulation and experimental results showed that the multi-layer neural network employing back-propagation learning algorithm with the micro-sensor array is very effective in identifying the kinds and some concentration levels of the combustible gases within the range of threshold limit values (TLVs).Many metal oxide gas sensor arrays have been developed for selectively detecting the various gas species by many researchers during last decade Many researchers have reported many kinds of micro-hotplates to enhance mechanical strength and reduce power consumption at the elevated temperature, using a variety of silicon micromachining techniques Therefore, we proposed a micro-gas sensor array with the highly sensitive porous tin oxide thin films with noble metal catalysts on a micro-hotplate. And then, we have applied the signals of the sensor array for the classification of the combustible gases (propane, butane, LPG, and carbon monoxide (CO)), by employing of a principal component analysis and a multi-layer neural network with back-propagation learning algorithm. To obtain the SnO A micro-hotplate ( The four porous SnO Furthermore the micro-gas sensors shows fast response to CO, rapid desorption when the gas is vented, and good reproducibility as shown in For classifying the kinds and quantity of specific combustible gases it was expected to be achieved by using a principal component analysis (PCA) and an error-back-propagation neural network algorithm. The experimented gas and amounts are shown in Furthermore, the relative importance of the sensors in the array (labeled 1–4) can be reviewed using coefficients of the principal vectors with the first largest two eigen-values, However, it is difficult in classifying obviously of some groups (e.g. the 3000 A gas pattern recognizer using a multi-layer neural network with an error-back-propagation learning algorithm was then implemented, utilizing the sensitivity signals from the sensor array as multi-dimensional input patterns. The neural network consisted of an input layer with four nodes which received the data from the sensors in an array, a hidden layer from 3 to 10 neurons, and an output layer with 16 nodes as shown in The same recognition system with that to the tested gases using a PC are also implemented. As examples, the specific recognition results for the tested gases recognition system with 250 An explosive gas recognition system with a micro-sensor array and a neural network pattern recognizer was implemented. To recognize the kinds and quantities of explosive gases under a low explosion limit, a micro-gas sensor array with the four porous tin oxide thin films with noble metal catalysts on a micro-hotplate, dangling in air by Pt bonding wires and controlling the thickness by chemical mechanical process, has been implemented. The thermally oxidized SnO And we confirmed good loading effect even in use of only four gas sensors and employed a multi-layer neural network for classification of the typical and simple comubstible gases. The simulation and experimental results showed that the micro-sensor array, with multi-layer neural network employing back-propagation learning algorithm is very effective in identifying the kinds and some concentration levels of the explosive gases within the range of threshold limit values (TLVs). As results, proposed gas recognition system demonstrated an almost 98% recognition rate. To verify this recognition rate, new data was generated with a 5% error in the original data and the resulting recognition rate was examined. We could confirm a high recognition rate of about 97%.