Molten salt is used as a reaction medium in a number of thermochemical and electrochemical processes including a new method named “hydrogen assisted magnesiothermic reduction (HAMR)” for the production of Ti metal powder from TiO2. A key enabling element of the HAMR process is based on the thermodynamic effect of hydrogen on the relative stability of MgO versus that of Ti-O solid solutions. Another key of the process is the catalytic effect of molten salt, which is used as the reaction medium. Although the general positive effect of the molten salt in the HAMR has been recognized, the role and mechanisms of molten salt during the reaction are still not well understood. The focus of this work is thus placed on the effects of the molten salt on the kinetics of the redox of TiO2 by Mg, and the possible mechanisms by which the molten salt facilitates the reaction. Experiments were specifically designed to elucidate the role of molten salt when TiO2 is separated from the reducing agent Mg when Mg is in vapor, liquid, or solid states. The results show that the kinetic rate of the reduction can be significantly enhanced by increasing the amount of salt. Although the reduction can take place directly between vapor, liquid, or even solid Mg and TiO2, the ionization of Mg metal and the transport of Mg2
                     2+ through the molten salt play a major role in the reduction of TiO2 by Mg. The molten salt must be a Mg2+-bearing salt. A molten salt depleted of Mg2+ is not effective. The possible pathways by which the reaction species form and react with TiO2 are also discussed.In a recent published work, a new thermochemical process based on the reduction of titanium dioxide (TiO Molten salts or molten salt mixtures are excellent solvents for many oxides, carbides, nitrides and metals. A number of their properties, including high thermal and chemical stability, high thermal and ionic conductivities, and low viscosity Most notably, molten CaCl Regardless what process is used for the production of metals, the mechanisms of and the role of molten salt on those thermochemical or electrochemical reactions share some of the same underpinning principles. Ukshe and Bukun Another consideration of adding MgCl In this work, a comprehensive experimental investigation was carried out to study the effects of the molten salt, MgCl Raw materials for this work include TiO TiO To study the effect of the salt on the transport of reducing agent, reductions were carried out by separating TiO To avoid any contact and permeation during reduction, binary mixtures of MgCl The mass ratio of [TiO In the HAMR process as described earlier, TiO As mentioned above, in order to investigate the effect of molten salt on the reduction of TiO It may be understood that the direct contact between Mg and TiO The above results showed a significant difference between reduction with and without salt. In order to understand the mechanisms of the effects of the salt, it would be valuable to determine the distribution of different reaction species in the complex mixtures containing TiO In this work, the distribution of MgO was determined by analyzing the cross sections of the reduced powders using SEM-EDX mapping techniques. The reduced powders labeled as A (without salt), B, C, and D (with different amounts of salt) respectively in Based on these results, even though more MgO was observed in the interior of the reduced powder when salt was used, it appears that the distribution of MgO after reduction is similar in situations with or without salt. One reason for this is that the solubility of MgO in MgCl First of all, in cases when there is no salt, the wettability of TiO Second, in cases when molten salt is used, the wettability of TiO According to the relationship of Mg vapor pressure versus temperature, it is known that Mg vapor pressure increases rapidly with temperature above its melting point After conducting the reduction at 750 The results and analysis above indicate that Mg vapor can be a significant contributor to the reduction of TiO The positive effects of molten salt on the reduction of TiO The phase compositions after reduction by Mg vapor and liquid are summarized in In addition, the chemical compositions of the powders from different steps in different cases were summed up in When Mg is in solid state without adding salt, the O/Ti molar ratio decreased from 2 to 1.89 ( In all three cases involving Mg in either vapor, liquid, or solid state, the results showed that the reaction took place to various degrees. In the case of liquid Mg, the reduction was near completion; while in the case of vapor, limited reduction occurred and intermediate compounds formed. In the case of using solid Mg, the differences in the level of completion of the reduction were very large between using and not using molten salt. The results suggest that some kind of reaction species with reducing capability were able to transmit through the molten salt. However, it is not clear what the reaction species are exactly. Theoretically the formation and transportation of the reaction species must involve the dissolution of Mg (liquid, vapor or solid) by the salt. The indirect evidence of dissolution can be found in During the study of calciothermic reduction of TiO In order to verify the above hypothesis, two experiments similar to those in sections 3.3 were carried out, except for that the conductive molybdenum crucible was replaced with a nonconductive MgO ceramic crucible. Since the MgO from the crucible may contaminate the reduced powder by reacting with TiO The chemical compositions of the reduced powders are shown in However, this does not rule out the effects of other forms of reactive species and the effects of MgCl The results presented above have been primarily based on the use of Mg The reduction of the TiO Using the same experimental set up as in section The chemical compositions of the powders after the reduction are shown in However, when the conductive crucible was used, considerable amounts of both Ca and Mg were found in the powder after the salt was already removed by washing with water. The O/Ti molar ratios were reduced from 2 to (1.2–1.4), indicating the reduction took place. The differences among the results between using conductive and nonconductive crucibles are consistent with the results shown in section 3.4. However, the extent of reduction is significantly smaller than when Mg The phase composition was also analyzed in order to understand the reduction mechanisms. Since there was no reduction when MgO crucible was used, it is understandable that the main phase in the product powder was still TiO In short, the use of non-Mg The above results present strong evidence of the critical role of molten Mg It is generally known that the solubility of Mg in MgCl Another important issue in the Mg-MgCl Bukun and Ukshe The results have shown that during the reduction of TiO Although it is recognized that Mg Path 1: Electrons, generated via reaction “Mg Path 2: Mg Path 3: Mg Path 4: After Mg Path 5: During the transport of Mg Path 6: TiO Finally, although this work did not study these pathways directly, the experimental observations of the effects of molten MgCl A comprehensive experimental study on the role and mechanisms of molten salt-catalyzed reduction of TiO Molten salt plays an effective catalytic role during the thermal reduction of TiO Although the reaction can take place directly between TiO The molten salt must be a Mg The reduction of TiO This work was financially supported by the US Department of Energy (