Background.
                  The aim of this study was to determine if the preoperative administration of 500 ml of a gelatin colloid solution intravenously before hip fracture surgery improves outcome, compared with a conventional i.v. fluid regime with a crystalloid solution.
               
                  Methods.
                  Randomized, double blind, controlled trial of i.v. saline vs colloid for 396 patients having hip fracture surgery admitted to a district general hospital. Patients were followed up for 1 yr.
               
                  Results.
                  There was no statistically significant difference between groups for mortality (30-day mortality 9/198 for saline group vs 19/198 for colloid group, 95% confidence intervals 0.21–1.02), length of hospital stay (22.5 days vs 17.3 days, 95% CI –10.78 to 0.38), or occurrence of postoperative complications.
               
                  Conclusions.
                  The inclusion of 500 ml of colloid solution to the i.v. fluid regime before hip fracture surgery does not improve outcome.Hip fractures generally occur in those aged approximately 80 yr in association with a fall. Blood loss from the fracture varies depending on the exact site and degree of displacement and comminution of the fracture, from a few millilitres to over 1 litre. Recent randomized studies on small numbers of patients using invasive cardiac monitoring have suggested that many of these patients are hypovolaemic at the time of surgery. Between April 1999 and January 2002, 398 patients presenting with a hip fracture, which was to be treated operatively at Peterborough District Hospital, were randomized to receive before surgery either 500 ml of normal saline or 500 ml of gelatin (Gelofusine, Braun Medical Ltd) preoperatively. Each of these solutions were provided in identical containers enclosed in opaque plastic and then numbered sequentially by the hospital pharmacy department. Randomization was achieved when the next numbered study fluid was administered. Neither the patients nor the attending physicians were aware which solution was administered. No patient required un-blinding of the study fluid. All patients also received a standard i.v. fluid regime of saline started at the time of admission in the emergency department at a rate of 1 litre every 8–12 h. The exclusion criteria were those patients whose hip fracture was being treated conservatively, those with clinical signs of congestive cardiac failure, and those in which it was not possible to obtain informed consent from the patient or the assent of the next of kin. Care programmes for all patients were identical and once entered in the study all patients received one of the study fluids. Approval for the study was obtained from Peterborough and Fenland Local Research Ethics Committee. Patients details recorded included age, sex, living in their own home (as opposed to institutional care), American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) grade, Mental test score, All patients were treated surgically with standard operative monitoring (intermittent arterial pressure, continuous ECG, pulse oximetry, capnography, and inhalation agent monitoring for general anaesthetic cases), but no invasive monitoring (arterial line, central venous pressure, or oesophageal Doppler ultrasonography). All surviving patients were followed until 1 yr from injury with no patient being lost to follow-up. The primary outcome measure was mortality with secondary outcome measures of hospital stay, intraoperative decrease in arterial pressure, and medical complications. A decrease in arterial pressure was defined as a decrease of greater than 40 mm systolic from the preoperative value recorded on the theatre checklist chart. The criteria for the medical complications were: myocardial infarction–chest pain, raised enzymes and ECG changes; congestive cardiac failure–clinical signs requiring diuretic therapy; cerebrovascular accident–CT confirmation of clinical signs of hemiplegia; deep vein thrombosis—confirmed by ultrasound venography; and pulmonary embolism—confirmed by post-mortem, isotope scanning or CT. The study was limited to 396 patients when the two trial solutions used for the study ceased to be made by the manufacturer in identical packaging. Statistical analysis between groups was with the Fisher exact test for binary variables and the un-paired  There have been three recent randomized studies on fluid resuscitation for hip fracture patients, all using small numbers of patients and invasive cardiac monitoring. In contrast to these findings, a systematic review of the use of crystalloid Our study was not able to demonstrate that the inclusion of a fixed volume of 500 ml of colloid solution to the preoperative fluid regime had any demonstrable effect on either mortality or hospital stay, although there was a tendency to shorter total hospital stay ( We wish to thank Sharon Patrick for preparing the trial solutions and Braun Medical for providing all the trial solutions.