Inhibition of tissue non-specific alkaline phosphatase (TNALP) decreases intracellular lipid accumulation in human preadipocytes and the murine preadipocyte cell line, 3T3-L1. Therefore, the current study was performed to determine if TNALP is required for intracellular lipid deposition in the human hepatocyte cell line, HepG2. Intracellular lipid accumulation, TNALP activity and peroxisome proliferator activated receptor (PPAR) γ gene expression were measured in HepG2 and 3T3-L1 cells in the presence and absence of the TNALP inhibitors levamisole and histidine. Sub-cellular TNALP activity was localized using cytochemical analysis. Both PPARγ gene expression and TNALP activity increased during intracellular lipid accumulation in HepG2 and 3T3-L1 cells. Inhibition of TNALP blocked intracellular lipid accumulation but did not alter expression of the PPARγ gene. In HepG2 cells, TNALP co-localized with adipophilin on the lipid droplet membrane. These data suggest a role for TNALP in lipid droplet formation, possibly downstream from PPARγ, within HepG2 and 3T3-L1 cells.Alkaline phosphatases (ALPs) are a group of membrane-bound glycoproteins that hydrolyze a broad range of monophosphate esters at alkaline pH optima ( Alkaline phosphatase activity is found in human blood and is a commonly measured analyte in clinical chemistry laboratories. Obstruction of the bile duct is one of the main causes of elevated ALP levels in human serum. Also, increased levels of ALP may be observed in serum during active bone formation ( Studies have shown that TNALP is expressed in human preadipocytes ( A role for TNALP in intracellular lipid accumulation in 3T3-L1 cells and human preadipocytes has been proven using inhibitors of TNALP ( The presence of TNALP in preadipocytes and hepatocytes, the ability of both cell types to accumulate lipid within membrane-bound lipid droplets, and the evidence that TNALP is involved in intracellular lipid storage within preadipocytes forms the basis of our hypothesis that TNALP plays a role in lipid accumulation within hepatocytes. This hypothesis was tested by inducing lipid accumulation in the human hepatoma cell line, HepG2 and 3T3-L1 cells in the presence and absence of the TNALP inhibitors, levamisole and histidine. The expression of the adipogenic regulator, PPARγ was also assessed and the sub-cellular localization of TNALP was analysed via cytochemical analysis. All tissue culture reagents were obtained from BioWhittaker (Walkersville, MD, USA) and GibCo Invitrogen (Paisley, Scotland) unless otherwise stated. HepG2 and 3T3-L1 cells were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC). HepG2 cells were grown in Earle's minimum essential medium (EMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 100 The 3T3-L1 cells were maintained in Dulbeco's modified eagle's medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 100 In HepG2 cells levamisole was used at a final concentration of 3.0 Intracellular lipid accumulation was measured at baseline (day 0) and at 4, 7 and 11 Total RNA was isolated from cell cultures on day 0, 4 and 7 post-induction of lipid droplet formation using an RNeasy Mini kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). Synthesis of cDNA from the total RNA was then carried out using an oligo dT primer (Inqaba Biotech, Pretoria, South Africa), and Moloney murine leukemia virus reverse transcriptase (Promega, Madison WI, USA). Quantitative real-time PCR was then performed with the TATA-box binding protein ( Real-time quantitative PCR of the PPARγ and TBP cDNA was carried out using a Rotorgene 6000 (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) thermocycler and a SensiMix SYBR kit (Quantance Ltd., London, UK). The amplification conditions for the The HepG2 and 3T3-L1 cells were cultured on cover slips coated in gelatin (BDH, Poole, UK), and induced to accumulate lipid using the methods described in All experiments were repeated 3 times unless otherwise stated. Mean and standard error of the mean (SEM) were calculated for each of the variables under study. The Students paired In the HepG2 cells, in the absence of TNALP inhibitors, the activity of the enzyme significantly rose from day 0 to day 4 ( The data in The data in Similar trends to those in the HepG2 cells were observed for intracellular lipid levels in the 3T3-L1 cells (  The photomicrographs in The current study is the first to demonstrate that TNALP activity increases within a hepatocyte cell line during intracellular lipid accretion. It is also the first study to show that inhibition of TNALP activity blocks cytoplasmic lipid accumulation in these cells. Previous studies have shown that TNALP inhibition blocks intracellular lipid accumulation in human preadipocytes ( The TNALP inhibitors used in this study do have non-TNALP mediated sub-cellular effects ( The TNALP activity levels peak in the 3T3-L1 cells after 7 In both cell lines intracellular lipid accumulation was still increasing on day 11 of culture despite falling levels of TNALP activity (see Our data suggests that TNALP may play a role in intracellular lipid accumulation in human hepatocytes. Unfortunately, no immunohistochemical studies have analysed whether TNALP is present within lipid-laden hepatocytes in tissue sections taken from the livers of individuals with NASH. Such investigations must be undertaken to confirm our hypothesis. However, it is interesting to note that studies have demonstrated elevated serum levels of alkaline phosphatase in subjects with histologically-proven NASH ( The HepG2 cell line contains a mutation in the gene encoding β-catenin that leads to increased expression of the protein within the nucleus and higher activity of the Wnt/β-catenin signalling pathway ( The ability of inhibitors of TNALP to block lipid accumulation within a human hepatocyte cell line suggests that this may represent a therapeutic modality for steatohepatitis. However, TNALP is expressed in many different tissues and it has functional activity within the liver and therefore inhibition of its activity, even if confined to hepatic tissue, may have deleterious side effects. This may be averted by undertaking further studies on the precise role of TNALP in intracellular lipid accumulation. This would allow identification of the molecular events downstream of TNALP that are specific to cellular lipid storage and which may represent valid targets for future therapies for steatohepatitis. The aim of the current study was not to determine the function of TNALP in intracellular lipid accumulation. However, it is possible to hypothesise what the role of TNALP may be within this sub-cellular process. It is known that TNALP plays an important role in bone mineralization where it works to convert inorganic pyrophosphate, a potent inhibitor of the mineralization process, to phosphate, a known activator of mineralization. Within osteoblasts, pyrophosphate is generated by the enzyme ectonucleotide pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterase (ENPP) 1. Thus, the level of bone mineralization is determined by the balance between TNALP and ENPP1 activity ( In summary, the present study has shown that intracellular lipid accumulation and TNALP activity are closely linked in both HepG2 and 3T3-L1 cells, suggesting that TNALP expression maybe a common requirement for cells that accumulate cytoplasmic lipid droplets. The localization of TNALP to the surface of the lipid droplet membrane in both cell lines, as well as in the epithelial cells of lactating rat mammary glands ( None of the authors has any conflict of interest related to this manuscript. The authors thank members of the routine laboratory service of the department of Chemical pathology, NHLS, Charlotte Maxeke Hospital (Johannesburg) for performing the TNALP activity assay. Funding: The study was supported by financial assistance from the