Phosphate as fertilizer is so essential for agriculture plants growth. Most of the phosphate resources cannot be directly treated due to the low grade of P2O5 and high content of impurities. Therefore, upgrading of this type of ore is so essential to achieving a grade of concentrate suitable for the production of fertilizer and phosphoric acid. Flotation is one of the most efficient techniques applied to phosphate upgrading. This paper aimed to investigate the effect of operating parameters, including collector dosage, depressant dosage, particle size, and pulp pH, on the rougher stage flotation of apatite ore. The results indicated that at the optimum conditions of flotation, a concentrate of 30% P2O5 with a recovery of a proximately 75% was obtained from a feed of particle size less than 250 microns and 10.8% P2O5.Phosphate rock is the primary source of phosphorous, which is essential to all life forms. Approximately 95% of the phosphate produced in the world is used in fertilizer manufacturing to supply plant nutrients The statistical techniques were commonly used to study the flotation of different minerals This research was carried out on low-grade apatite ore Khibiny deposits (Kola Peninsula, Russia). As well known the most common flow-sheet for beneficiation of this type of ore is consist of ore preparation, a rougher stage, followed by some cleaning and scavenger stages for obtaining a concentrate with high grade of P For this study, apatite samples were collected from Khibiny deposits, Kola Peninsula, Russia. A mixture of different surfactants was used as collector and dispersing agent ( The samples were subjected to primary and secondary crushing to produce a product of size less than 2 Complete chemical analysis of the sample was conducted by Energy Dispersive X-ray Fluorescence Spectrometer (EDX-7000). Identification of the mineral composition of the considered sample was conducted by X-ray diffraction (XRD). The Mineralogical study was performed by using the Liberation Analyzer (MLA). MLA is a scanning electron microscope (SEM) equipped with energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectrometers, and computer software that automates microscope operation and data acquisition for automated mineralogy. MLA measurements are based on image analysis of the backscattered electron (BSE) for determining grain boundaries. Different quantitative information sets are collected on polished surfaces of rocks, sediments or other particulate specimens, including modal mineralogy, grain size and shape, mineral associations and digital textural maps The flotation tests were performed in a conventional flotation machine 237 FL-A with 0.35-liter capacity cell and the impeller rotational speed 40 The experimental design was performed using a software package, Design-Expert 6.0.5, Stat-Ease, Inc., Minneapolis, USA, for regression analysis of experimental data and to plot the response surface. The Box–Behnken factorial design was chosen to find out the relationship between the response function (percentage weight of the concentrate, % grade of P   The experimental data were analyzed statistically. The effect of the factors and also the interactions between factors were quantified and interpreted. The studied parameters are representing in  From the experimental parameters in The correlation between the observed and predicted results using the above-mentioned models was shown in The effects of operating parameters on the % recovery of P At a higher collector dosage 140 The maximum recovery 73.20% with a grade of 26.80% was obtained at centered values of collector, depressant and pH degree when both recovery and grade are considered at the same time The quadratic model found to adequately predict the response variables for the recovery of P The correlation between the observed and predicted results was shown in Further experiments were also conducted on a feed with wider particle size distributions (−250 The presences of slimes are, in general, harmful to the flotation of apatite ores, affecting the selectivity and the quality of the concentrates, besides causing an increase in reagents consumption by which a value mineral is covered by slimes and prevented from direct contact with collectors and/or air bubbles Box–Behnken design was used to investigate the influence of the operational factors affecting the floatability of apatite ore in the rougher stage including collector dosage, depressant dosage, and pulp pH. The study extended to investigate the effect of grinding time and particle size in the efficiency of the flotation. The conclusions obtained from the study are as follows: The percentage grade and recovery of P A medium dosage of a depressant (300 The minimum recovery and grade of P The maximum recovery and grade of P Increasing the percentage of fines and slimes in the feed as results of grinding at a long time (over 10 Based on the mineralogical, chemical, material composition, as well as techno-logical research on the possibility of processing phosphate ores, it was concluded that the optimal scheme for the extraction of apatite is a flotation circuit. The maximum overall recovery (74.3%) with a grade of 30% P The authors declare no conflicts of interest. The work was funded by