In the North Range of the ca. 1.85Ga Sudbury impact structure, massive bodies of Sudbury breccia cut across the Archean Levack gneiss complex and Early Proterozoic Matachewan diabase dykes. The complex underlies the Sudbury Igneous Complex (SIC), which represents an impact melt sheet that lined the floor of the impact crater. The breccia occurs as 1–100m wide irregular bodies that contain rounded clasts of diabase and tonalitic and dioritic Levack gneiss within a fine-grained to aphanitic, black to dark grey matrix. Mineral chemical analyses and Rietveld analyses based on X-ray diffraction patterns show that the breccia matrix contains microclasts of magnesiohornblende, oligoclase, and quartz, surrounded by metamorphic andesine laths, actinolite, Kfeldspar, albite, and chlorite, which crystallized during cooling of the SIC. On binary oxide-SiO2 diagrams, breccia values plot on a compositional mixing line between those of the more felsic tonalitic gneiss and the more mafic dioritic gneiss and diabase. The breccia has concentrations in rare earth elements (REEs) intermediate between those of the dioritic and tonalitic gneisses and a REE pattern with a negative slope that is less pronounced than those of the gneisses. This is due to the addition of a minor diabase component that has a slightly negative REE slope, suggesting that the breccia is a mix of comminuted tonalitic gneiss, dioritic gneiss, and minor diabase. Comminution and cataclasis of these source rocks occurred along pre-existing anisotropies and fractures that formed and were reactivated during the growth and collapse of the transient crater. The comminuted materials mixed together as large bodies of breccia that were injected in dilational sites that opened during the upward expansion and collapse of the crater.The formation of large impact craters occurs in three stages: contact-compression, excavation, and modification of the impact crater ( The ca. 1.85 The Sudbury impact structure is geographically divided into the North Range, the South Range, and the East Range ( The study area extends from the Levack embayment, a semi-circular trough in the footwall contact of the SIC, to the town of Levack 7–8 The Archean Levack gneiss complex is an assemblage of banded and migmatitic tonalitic, granodioritic, and dioritic gneisses with interspersed small metapyroxenite and gabbroic bodies and minor paragneisses ( A continuous penetrative gneissic foliation is observed across the Levack gneiss complex. It is defined by plagioclase The Levack gneiss complex has primary ages ranging between 2711 Shock metamorphic features due to the ca.1.85 Twenty-eight samples of massive breccia (13), Levack gneiss (12), and diabase (3) were collected from 10 outcrops across the map area. The Levack gneiss and diabase samples are from the same outcrops where the massive breccia samples were collected. 10 of the 12 Levack gneiss samples are tonalitic gneisses that host the breccia; the other two are from clasts of dioritic gneiss in the breccia. Two additional samples of breccia (07-NR-03 and -04) and host tonalitic gneiss (07-NR-01) were collected from Site #1 of Mineral chemical analyses were carried out using an Oxford S-Sight energy dispersive detector mounted on the JEOL 6400 scanning electron microscope at Laurentian University, using a 15 Determination of the modal mineralogy of samples 07-NR-01 and 07-NR-03 was done by means of the Rietveld method using X-ray diffraction patterns. Hand-size samples were first crushed and then pulverized in a disk mill. The material was loaded in a conventional 26 There are two main types of Sudbury breccia hosted in the Levack gneiss complex: massive breccia and ductile-margined breccia. Massive breccia, which is the most common type of breccia in Sudbury, has been described extensively in the literature ( In thin section, the matrix of the massive breccia consists of fine-grained plagioclase with tabular or granular shapes, quartz, amphibole, biotite, chlorite, opaque minerals, and epidote. The matrix surrounds large clasts of plagioclase Ductile-margined breccias ( The textures and microstructures of the ductile-margined breccias differ from those of the massive breccias by more extensive microfracturing of the wall rocks of the breccias. The density of microfractures in plagioclase decreases over a few centimeters from the walls of the breccia, where plagioclase is locally completely replaced by small irregular grains, to a distance of a few centimeters within the wall rocks, where plagioclase is cut by discrete microfractures. Microfractures outlined by irregular small grains are ubiquitous in almost all wallrock fragments within the breccia. The breccias commonly have a wall-parallel foliation which is defined by opaque minerals and elongate polycrystalline quartz clasts and is accentuated by the secondary growth of biotite around opaque minerals. Overprinting relationships are observed between the two types of breccia. Ductile-margined breccia transects clasts within massive breccia and terminates at contacts between the clasts and matrix of the massive breccia ( Massive breccia (07-NR-03 and -04) collected at Site #1 of Backscattered imaging and X-ray mapping provide information on the texture and mineralogy of the breccia matrix, which cannot otherwise be resolved due to its very fine grain size (8 The modal mineralogy of the matrix of breccia sample 07-NR-04 was determined by image analysis of combined element X-ray maps ( The major oxide geochemistry of the breccia and host rocks are shown on Harker-type binary diagrams using SiO Trace rare earth elements (REEs) patterns of all collected breccias and tonalitic gneisses are shown in In large impact structures, pseudotachylitic breccias are believed to form either by cataclasis and frictional melting during high-speed slip along fractures and faults or by shock melting due to the transfer of shock energy as heat during shock compression and release ( The abundance of microfractures and irregular comminuted fragments in clasts within both massive and ductile-margined breccias, together with evidence for slip along ductile-margined breccias, suggest that the breccias formed by frictional sliding and cataclasis. Breccia that is generated in situ from a host rock should have the same bulk composition (matrix plus clasts) as the host rock although its matrix could be more mafic in composition due to preferential comminution of ferromagnesian minerals over more fracture resistant plagioclase and quartz ( The removal of quartz and plagioclase clasts from a breccia that formed by in situ comminution of a source rock could produce a bulk breccia composition that is more mafic than its source host rock. Using the whole rock geochemistry of host tonalitic gneiss 07-NR-01 (symbol ‘ The SIC is interpreted as an impact melt sheet that lined the floor of the transient crater ( During expansion of the excavation flow, new faults and shear fractures can form ( Sudbury breccia dykes and veins are steeply dipping with a greater concentration striking parallel to the SIC contact ( As observed at the Vredefort impact structure in South Africa, rocks immediately beneath the floor of the transient crater kept their pre-impact Archean tectonic fabric although they underwent considerable strain and damage during the growth and then collapse of the crater ( The mineral chemistry and bulk chemistry of the Sudbury breccia in the North Range suggest that the breccia formed by cataclasis and comminution of tonalitic gneiss, dioritic gneiss, and lesser diabase. Cataclasis occurred along pre-existing anisotropies, shear fractures and faults that formed in the displaced zone of the transient crater during the expansion of the shock waves and growth of the crater. Cataclasis and brecciation continued during the reverse collapse flow and upward expansion of the transient crater. The brecciated material mixed together as it was injected as large bodies of massive breccia in dilational sites and fractures. How much slip is needed for the generation of large volumes of breccia in the displaced zone of the transient crater is not known. Endogenic tectonic faults have a brecciated core zone surrounded by wider fractured damaged zones. Under the enormous pressures generated during an impact, the damaged zones around syn-impact fractures and reactivated anisotropies may be much wider and only a few centimeters of slip may be required to transform the damaged zones into wide breccia zones. Further detailed field mapping and petrography of other occurrences of Sudbury breccias around the SIC, coupled with SEM and Rietveld analyses, may resolve this question. We wish to acknowledge INCO Ltd. (now CVRD) and Falconbridge Ltd. (now Xstrata Nickel) for access to their mineral properties. We are grateful to Dr. Andy McDonald (Laurentian University) for the Rietveld analyses, to Pat Hunt (Geological Survey of Canada) and Kirk Ross (Laurentian University) for SEM X-ray element mapping and mineral analyses, and to Dr. Natasha Wodicka (Geological Survey of Canada) for comments on the manuscripts. Ulrich Riller and James Mungall are thanked for their reviews and Peter Cawood for his editorial comments. Financial support was provided by a Natural Resources Canada Class Grants and Contribution Program during Targeted Geoscience Initiative-I and a Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) Discovery grant to BL. This is GSC contribution 2008.