One of the major problems of thiosulfate leaching was the high consumption of thiosulfate. In this work, additive was used to reduce thiosulfate consumption and simultaneously increase gold leaching. Thiosulfate leaching without additive was not effective to treat a refractory gold concentrate calcine with high iron, sulfur and arsenic due to its low gold extraction (72.7%) and high thiosulfate consumption (42.4%). Thus, several additives including sodium chloride, sodium sulfite, CMC (sodium carboxymethyl cellulose), CMS (sodium carboxymethyl starch) and HA (sodium humic acid) were used to improve the leaching. HA as a new kind of additive had the best performance, and it could improve gold extraction to 81.4%, which was obviously higher than the extraction by cyanidation (78.2%), and reduce thiosulfate consumption to 13.2%. As the XPS and SEM/EDS results indicated, there were less passivation species including copper sulfides, sulfur, iron hydroxide, etc. on the surface of calcine leached with the addition of HA. The role of the HA in the thiosulfate leaching was also preliminarily analyzed in this paper, and was proposed as follows: HA weakened the interaction between cupric ions and thiosulfate, and also eliminated the catalytic effects of iron minerals on thiosulfate decomposition; on the other hand, HA prevented passivation species from coating the surfaces of gold and gold-bearing minerals, and allowed the extraction of some encapsulated gold.The gold concentrate calcine used in this study was the product of oxidative roasting of a high-sulfur and high-arsenic gold concentrate produced in Hunan Province of China. Oxidative roasting technology is used extensively for the desulfidation and dearsenization of gold concentrate in China because this technology has certain advantages such as modest investment, high efficiency, and technical maturity. ( Among non-cyanide methods, chloride leaching, thiourea leaching and thiosulfate leaching have been the most widely studied in the past few decades. Gold can usually be efficiently extracted by chloride leaching. However, this method requires the use of hazardous chlorine and suitable corrosion resistant equipment. Furthermore, its reaction selectivity to impurities is poor ( At present, the industrial application of thiosulfate leaching is still rare. The primary reason for that is the high consumption of thiosulfate during the leaching, particularly for the copper-ammonia oxidant system ( A lot of works in the field of additive have been dedicated to the stabilization of thiosulfate. As has been reported ( Base on the above, the thiosulfate leaching of a refractory gold concentrate calcine with several additives including sodium chloride, sodium sulfite, CMC, CMS (sodium carboxymethyl starch) and HA (sodium humic acid) has been studied in this paper to investigate a possible increase in gold extraction and/or decrease in thiosulfate consumption. The molecular structure of CMS is similar with that of CMC ( The gold concentrate calcine used in this study had particle sizes of 72% less than 44 The reagents, such as sodium thiosulfate, sodium cyanide, cupric sulfate, ammonia solution, sodium hydroxide, sulfuric acid, sodium chloride, sodium sulfite, CMC, CMS, and HA, which were used in this study were all analytically pure. Redistilled water was used throughout all experiments. The HA derived from lignite was provided by Guangzhou Luyuan Chemical and Glass instrument Co, Ltd., China. Its chemical composition is 55.6% C, 2.5% H, 21.7% O, 1.0% N, 0.53% S, 18.1% Na, 0.28% Al, 0.18% Fe and 0.12% Ti. Au, Cu and Fe were all determined using an atomic absorption spectrometer (AA-6800, SHIMADZU). Cupric concentration was monitored at 618 Chemical phase analysis was widely utilized in China to determine the distribution ratio of gold for its every phase in gold-bearing material, and the analysis procedure was as follows: at first, the phases where Au occurred were ascertained by optical microscope identification and electron microprobe analysis; and then selective dissolution was performed to determine Au content in each phase with certain chemical reagents. All calcine samples were adequately rinsed with distilled water and then dried under vacuum overnight before XPS and SEM/EDS analyses. XPS was employed to detect the surface species of calcine samples by an X-ray photoelectron spectrometer (ESCALAB 250Xi, Thermo Fisher). Calcine samples were subjected to SEM/EDS analysis in order to study their surface topographies and compositions, which was implemented using a scanning electron microscope (MIA3, TESCAN) coupled with an energy dispersive X-ray analyzer (Oxford). All leaching tests were performed in 1 When leaching was completed, the pulp was filtrated and the obtained filtrate was immediately subjected to iodine titration. The leaching percentage of Au was calculated based on the analysis of the leach residue, which was washed adequately. Duplicate leaching tests were implemented with only average results reported because the standard deviations of all the tests were within 2%. The mass balance for leaching was checked by analyzing leachate including washing water, and satisfactory mass balance was obtained in this study. Cyanide leaching was implemented to determine the leachable portion of gold, i.e. the gold that is readily accessible to leachate. Four times leaching under different conditions were performed, and the results are shown in The test results of effects of reaction conditions on thiosulfate leaching are shown in As As indicated in  As seen in From the above, optimal reaction conditions were established as follows: sodium thiosulfate 0.3 In order to reduce thiosulfate consumption and eliminate the detrimental effect of its decomposition products on gold extraction, several kinds of additives including NaCl, Na As shown in  As indicated in  From the above, all of these additives could depress thiosulfate consumption markedly when added in suitable dosages, and the decreased amplitude of consumption followed the descending order: Na Based on its molecular structure, humic acid could easily adsorb on the surfaces of iron minerals in the calcine, such as hematite, magnetite, and arsenopyrite, and thus modified their semi-conductive surfaces and eliminated their catalytic effects. Hence, the oxidative decomposition of thiosulfate was depressed effectively and there were less decomposition products in leachate. Humic acid could also render the surfaces of decomposition products and calcine particles both negatively charged because of its non-selective adsorption, and thus preventing the formation of passivation layer on the surfaces of gold and gold-bearing minerals by electrostatic repulsion. The calcine surface covered with humic acid was supposed to still be hydrophilic and easily accessible for leachate. HA improved the dissolutions of gold-bearing minerals in the calcine because of the absence of passivation layers on their surface, and thus allowed the extraction of some encapsulated gold which was not accessible by cyanidation. For the abovementioned reasons, HA could improve the gold extraction by thiosulfate leaching to be obviously higher than that by cyanidation. Cyclic thiosulfate leaching was conducted under the optimal conditions established in The Au extraction without additive deceased remarkably from 72.6% to 54.1% during the leaching, whilst thiosulfate consumption decreased evidently from 42.7% to 31.2%, as shown in As Calcine samples were subjected to XPS analysis for the purpose of identifying their surface species, where calcine fed was ground in the same way as leaching tests. The result of XPS analysis is shown in As shown in As indicated in As seen in From the above, when additive wasn't used during thiosulfate leaching, the sulfur, copper and iron species could form a compact coating layer on calcine surface, which acted as a physical barrier to prevent leachate from contacting with the calcine and hence passivated thiosulfate leaching of gold. This well explained why the gold extraction percentage of thiosulfate leaching without additive was evidently lower than that of cyanidation. When HA was added during the leaching, there were very few passivation species including copper sulfides, sulfur, iron hydroxide, etc. on calcine surface because HA could effectively inhibit the decomposition of thiosulfate and the precipitations of passivation species simultaneously, and thus the compact passivation layer couldn't be formed. So, the gold extraction percentage of thiosulfate leaching with the addition of HA was remarkably higher than that of the leaching without additive. Calcine samples were subjected to SEM/EDS analysis in order to study their surface morphology and chemical composition, and the result is shown in As indicated in As seen in The result of SEM/EDS analysis was basically coherent with that of XPS analysis. When HA was added during the thiosulfate leaching, there were less precipitation species on the surfaces of calcine particles, and thus the passivation of gold was less likely to occur. 78.2% of gold in the gold concentrate calcine used in this study could be readily extracted by cyanidation, which was roughly in accordance with that 78.8% of gold was exposed. Only 72.7% of gold in the calcine was extracted by no-additive thiosulfate leaching under optimal conditions, whilst as much as 42.4% of thiosulfate was consumed during the leaching. The high thiosulfate consumption might result from the catalytic effects of iron minerals in the calcine on thiosulfate decomposition, and the decomposition products further passivated gold surface. All additives including HA, CMC, CMS, NaCl and Na As the XPS and SEM/EDS results indicated, there were less passivation species including copper sulfides, sulfur, iron hydroxide, etc. on the surface of calcine leached with the addition of HA. The reason for this might be as follows: HA effectively depressed thiosulfate decomposition by weakening the interaction between cupric ions and thiosulfate and also by eliminating the catalytic effects of iron minerals on the decomposition; on the other hand, HA well inhibited the precipitations of passivation species on calcine surface because of its plentiful negatively charged functional groups and non-selective adsorption. Financial supports from the