Introduction
                  Complex acetabular fractures are not uncommon injuries in Egypt. The aim of surgical treatment is to preserve hip mobility and to avoid post-traumatic arthritis.
               
                  Aim
                  The aim of this study was to evaluate the clinical results of patients presented by displaced complex acetabular fractures and treated by open reduction and internal fixation. Factors affecting these results were to be determined.
               
                  Methods
                  Displaced acetabular fractures involving the both columns were included. Initial assessment and treatment were directed towards the patient's general condition. Posterior hip dislocation was reduced as fast as possible. Standard X-ray views and CT cuts were done for every patient. The definite surgery was done through an ilio-inguinal, a Kocher–Langenbeck or combined approaches. Postoperatively, the residual displacement was recorded together with the head roof relationship. Using Matta radiological and modified clinical grading, a correlation between radiological and clinical results was made. Factors affecting the outcome were defined.
               
                  Results
                  The study involved 55 patients between May 2007 and December 2010. The mean follow-up period was 29.62±7.19months with a minimum of 12months and a maximum of 43months. Excellent to good results were achieved in 38 cases, 69.1%, while fair to poor results were obtained in 17 cases, 30.9%. Anatomical reduction and/or restoration of perfect head/roof congruency were strongly associated with better outcome. Beside this there was significant relation between good clinical outcome and the utilisation of the anterior approach. On the other hand bad outcome was associated with these factors: (1) associated pelvic ring injury, (2) fracture of the posterior wall, (3) articular surface comminution and (4) the presence of intra-articular fragments.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Fracture personality and not the fracture type is the main determinant of its complexity. Surgical experience is required to achieve the best reduction while avoiding complications.The term complex acetabular fracture is not clearly defined in the literature. Some authors restricted its use only to the associated fracture patterns according to Letournel classification. The study was done in Elhadarah University Hospital. A protocol was set to include 50 or more patients and to follow them prospectively. The minimum follow-up period was set to be 12 Following Letournel's classification, fractures that involve both columns of the acetabulum were only included. The following fracture patterns were excluded: (1) minimally displaced fractures with the hip joint stable and congruent, (2) both column fractures with secondary congruence, (3) fractures involving single wall or column, (4) fractures that present after three weeks of injury, (5) pathological fractures, (6) fractures on top of a previous hip disease and (7) patient with severe osteoporosis or severe systemic illness rendering operative intervention high risk. After admission, every patient underwent full assessment including history taking, clinical examination for the patient and the injured hip. Any neurological deficit was reported. Appropriate trauma series of X-rays was requested according to patient's presentation. Initial management was directed to patient's general condition and to the associated injuries if present. Closed reduction of the posterior hip dislocation was performed as fast as possible. Dislocation reduction interval, hip stability and the condition of the sciatic nerve before and after reduction were documented. All patients were encouraged to maintain active exercises for toes and ankle. A dose of 40 After stabilization of the patient, the full radiological workup was completed. This included the three X-ray views (A/P, obturator view and oblique view) and the CT scan with 3D reconstruction. The plain radiographs and CT scans were examined for the presence of certain modifiers that were thought to have a possible influence on the prognosis of the acetabular fracture. These modifiers included the presence of articular comminution, marginal impaction of the articular surface, incarceration of intra-articular fragments or a femoral head lesion. General anaesthesia or spinal The operation was performed on a standard table. The image intensifier was positioned accurately before draping of the patient. Check preliminary images was taken in the A/P and oblique projection. The surgical approach was chosen based on the direction of displacement. All surgeries utilized either an anterior ilio-inguinal approach, or a posterior Kocher–Langenbeck approach. When the ilio-inguinal approach was used the patient was positioned in the supine decubitus and the three windows were created. Traction was done manually by an assistant. Reduction was then started following the proximal to distal rule of Letournel. When the Kocher–Langenbeck was used the patient was positioned either in the lateral or prone decubitus. Careful detachment of the external rotators and the piriformis was done while preserving the deep medial femoral circumflex artery. The sciatic nerve was protected by its special retractor. Inspection of the interior of the joint was done through the capsular rent or the posterior wall fracture and was helped by longitudinal traction on the limb combined with trochanteric traction by a T-handled hook. No re-dislocation was attempted. Reduction was done by traction and/or pelvic reduction clamps. Marginal impaction of the articular cartilage was treated by elevation and grafting. Fixation was done by small fragment reconstruction plates and lag screws. Before closure a check by image intensifier was done to assess the reduction and to rule out an intra-articular hardware. Wound closure over suction drains was performed. Any intra-operative complication was recorded. The patient was mobilized from bed as early as possible. Partial weight bearing was allowed after 6 Within the first week, post-operative X-rays were done for the operated hip including three views (A/P view, obturator view and iliac view). The accuracy of the reduction was assessed using the modified radiological grading of Matta (anatomical: 0–1 Patients were seen at 2 The study adopted the modified clinical grading proposed by Matta. Data were collected in a prepared sheet. Statistical analysis was done using SPSS version 11.0.1 for Windows (SPSS Inc., Chicago, Illinois). Spearman's correlation was used to detect linear relations between quantitative variables while Mann–Whitney and Kruskal–Wallis tests were used to rank and compare qualitative variables against the median final clinical score. A This study included 55 patients between May 2007 and December 2010. Their age ranged between 17 and 65 No case of haemodynamic instability was encountered. Skeletal injuries accompanied the acetabular fracture in more than one half of the patients (30 patients Preoperative neurological examination revealed that the common peroneal division of the sciatic nerve was paralysed in six patients (10.9%). During surgery, none of these nerves were found transected or grossly lacerated. Therefore, the diagnosis of traction injury was made in all of these cases. Local examination of the soft tissue around the hip revealed extensive contusions in 10 cases (18.2%). Hip dislocation was encountered in 21 hips (38.2%). There were 12 posterior dislocations (21.8%) and nine medial dislocations (16.4%). Closed reduction was successful in 7/12 (58.3%) posterior dislocations. For the other five (41.7%) posterior dislocations; there were three irreducible hips and two unstable hips. The most common fracture type was the associated both columns type (18 cases Posterior approach was utilized in 54.5% of cases while anterior approach was utilized in 27.3% of cases. The rest of cases 18.2% were operated via combined approaches. The median post-operative displacement was 3 The mean follow-up period was 29.62 According to the fracture type, anterior column The clinical results were significantly better among cases operated through a single anterior approach. On the other hand, the clinical results were significantly worse among patients suffered an associated pelvic ring injury ( The measured maximum post-operative displacement in mm had an inverse statistically significant relationship with the final score. The more the displacement, the less the score ( Congruent reduction of the femoral head under the acetabular dome was associated with the best final scores (see All cases of iatrogenic partial sciatic nerve palsy were recovered by the end of follow-up (five cases There was only one case with intra-operative excessive bleeding during a second session where ilio-inguinal approach was done one week after posterior fixation. Bleeding came out from the area of the greater sciatic notch after mobilisation of a displaced quadrilateral plate. Initial packing was done until the vascular surgeon came to field. He decided that bleeding is coming out from the presacral plexus of veins. Ligation of the internal iliac artery together with pelvic packing was done. Packs were removed after 72 Secondary loss of reduction was encountered in two cases. One case was a T-type fracture operated posteriorly lifting the anterior column without fixation. The other case was an associated both columns fracture operated anteriorly and the posterior column was fixed only by two unicortical screws for fear of joint penetration. Unfortunately the non-fixed columns moved again in the early follow-up. These cases demonstrated the cost of the learning curve. The relation between early joint related complications and the final outcome was observed. Patients who suffered from post-operative joint infection or early loss of reduction had lower median score compared to remaining patients. This difference was highly significant. ( Hardware related complications were in the form of inadvertent intrarticular screw which necessitated the removal in one case. The drill bit was broken in one case. In another two cases the screws holding the posterior column plates were broken after healing of the fracture . We had only two cases with immature heterotopic ossification. Early osteoarthritis supervened in 14 cases (24.45%). The median post-operative displacement in the non-arthritic group was lower than in the arthritic group (2, 5 The design of this study had included only the most technically difficult acetabular fractures. The most important output of this work is the correlation between the accuracy of reduction and the clinical results. It was possible, even in these difficult patterns to end by a satisfactory outcome when every effort was done to achieve the best possible reduction. Therefore, at the time of reconstruction, the surgeon who is dealing with these injuries should think only about preservation of hip function as possible as the injury allowed him. This comes though striving for anatomical reduction. In other words, acetabular fixation is not just a preparation for hip replacement. However, the relatively low rate of anatomical reductions in this work clarified how long could be the learning curve especially in these most challenging acetabular injuries. It was not an easy job to bring down every displaced often multi-fragmentary acetabular fracture to the perfect reduction (i.e. <1 The second important output is the redefinition of the term complex acetabular fracture. Letournel Experts in this field agree that there is no simple acetabular fracture. This study has some limitations. First of all, the number included in this study is relatively small given that this sample was fragmented many times to study the effect of a given factor on the clinical result. The paucity of patients per subgroup in this study did not allow multivariate statistical analysis and hence there was no control for the confounding factors. Difficulties related to the statistical analysis of outcome after acetabular fracture had been highlighted by Matta. The second important limitation was the relatively short follow-up period. The mean follow-up period in this study was about 2.5 We identified two main determinants for the clinical outcome after internal fixation of such fractures: (1) the personality of the fracture determined by the modifiers that reflect the degree of the primary cartilage damage and not by the fracture type and (2) the surgical expertise in achieving a perfect reduction and avoiding complications. Moreover we found that the presence of a posterior wall fracture or an associated pelvic ring injury was bad prognostic factors. Finally, based on our lowered rates of anatomical we could conclude that the learning curve to master these difficult injuries is very steep. None were declared for all authors. Thanks to all our patients. Without their compliance and patience this work would not be completed at all. We would like to acknowledge Abu-sheasha G.A., MBBCh, MPH, for her assistance in doing the statistics of this paper.