Recombination reactions at the photoanode/electrolyte interface reduce the photovoltaic conversion efficiency of dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). Unlike modification of titania photoanode by coating with MgO which act as a barrier layer toward recombination, addition of MgO nanopowder to electrolyte prevents recombination through adsorption of anions (triiodide/iodide) from electrolyte. In the present study, the surface charge of MgO has been utilized to adsorb anions from electrolyte. This anionic adsorption onto the MgO nanopowders in electrolyte has been confirmed by zeta potential measurements. MgO retards the recombination reaction as efficiently as 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP) which is the most widely used additive in the electrolyte. Higher photocurrent and conversion efficiency is achieved by using MgO loaded electrolyte as compared to TBP added electrolyte. Dark current measurements show that recombination reactions are effectively retarded by use of MgO loaded electrolytes. Open circuit voltage decay measurements also confirm higher electron lifetime at the titania/electrolyte interface in MgO loaded electrolyte based cell as compared to additive free electrolyte based cell.Dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) have generated immense interest due to their low cost and easy fabrication technique as compared to the conventional silicon based solar cells. The achievement of 12.3% efficiency in such cells in lab scale shows their promising future Preventing reaction of triiodide ions with the conduction band electrons seems to be crucial in DSSCs. Binding of the triiodide ions can assist in preventing the loss due to recombination. In case of quasi solid electrolytes based on nanopowders cations adsorb on the surface of nanopowders like silica, titania, etc. 1-Methyl-3-propylimidazolium iodide (PMII) (≥98% Aldrich), iodine (LR, Thomas Baker), 4- Titania slurry was prepared by roller milling titania nanopowder, PEG 600 and ethanol using zirconia grinding media ( Zeta potential of MgO powders dispersed in MPN and electrolytes was measured to study the ion adsorption behavior on the surface of MgO in both absence and presence of TBP in electrolyte. Measurements of zeta potentials were carried out using low concentration flow cell of instrument (Delsa Nano C, Beckman Coulter). The solid loading of MgO in the suspensions was 0.1 Adsorption of ions on surface of the MgO nanoparticles was expected to change their zeta potential. Zeta potential of MgO nanopowder in MPN (solvent) was found to be 34.2 Further confirmation of ionic adsorption and study on the effect of MgO nanopowder addition to liquid electrolyte on redox potential of electrolyte was carried out using 3 electrode set up by cyclic voltammetry. Deviation from the initial ionic concentration of redox couple in the liquid electrolyte by adsorption of ions (iodide/triiodide) on addition of MgO nanopowders to liquid electrolyte would lead to change in the redox potential of the electrolyte. The electrolyte potential can be obtained from the mean of anodic and cathodic peak potentials. Redox potential of 10% solution of L-N and M-N were found to be 178 The photocurrent density–voltage characteristics of DSSCs fabricated with different electrolytes are shown in The photoelectrochemical characteristics of DSSCs fabricated in this study are shown in Retarded recombination reactions increase the electron lifetime which can be measured by open circuit potential ( In conclusion, addition of magnesia nanopowders to the electrolyte can inhibit the recombination reaction occurring at the titania/electrolyte interface as effectively as TBP adsorbed on titania particle surface. The We acknowledge the financial support of