The aim of this work was to study the effect of three different purification methods, using chemical solution of (Na(PO3))6 (method-I), NaCl (method-II) and Na2CO3 (method-III), followed by stokes law of sedimentation, on the textural properties of a Pakistani bentonite, containing >70% Ca2+-montmorillonite. The raw and the purified samples were examined through X-ray Diffraction (XRD), N2 adsorption-desorption, and laser diffraction method (LDM). The quartz contents were found absent in all the purified samples. It was confirmed that the sample obtained by the method-I and other two methods resulted in to be,typically, Ca2+-bentonite and Na+-bentonite, respectively. In comparison with the raw sample, higher percentage volume of fine particles was detected in purified samples. The fine particles, however, exhibited significant enhancement in the samples purified by method-II and method-III. Higher pore volume and specific surface area were noticed for samples purified by the trio methods in comparison with the raw sample. Specific surface area of the sample obtained by the method-III was much higher than that of the other purified samples. Mesopores volume was increased significantly by purification, especially by the method-I and III. Considerably higher value of micropores volume/area and mesopores volume/area were detected for sample purified by method-III than for the samples purified by the other methods. A highly porous sample with the excellent surface area and small particle size was obtained by purification method-III which can be used as a good adsorbent, catalyst and catalyst support.Bentonite is the most important industrially applied clay because of its main montmorillonite (Mt) component which gives it a very high sorbent property and swelling capacity ( Indeed, the porosity especially microporosity originated from the turbostratic piling of elementary layers in particles is expected to be strongly influenced by the nature of the clay such as size of the particles, size of elementary layer, the layer charge, nature of cations, and preparation condition ( Bentonite can be used both as found naturally and after some physicochemical treatment such as ion exchange, acid leaching and heat treatment according to the application area ( The objectives of this study are: First, to investigate the effect of three different preparation methods on particle size distribution, pore size distribution, specific surface area and average pore size of a purified bentonite. Second, to probe the effect of preparation methods on dispersion process, during particle size analysis by laser diffraction-based particle size analyzer, level of purity, and micro-porosity of two different purified Na The bentonite in raw form was collected from Peshawar mine of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province, Pakistan. The sample was dispersed in distilled water and passed through a sieve of mesh No-325 (ASTM). The sieved clay suspension was then dried, ground and designated as “PWR-O”. The selected bentonite PWR-O mainly consists of Ca 5 g of bentonite was added to 1 L deionized water containing 0.25 g (Na (PO In this method, the sample was first treated with NaCl and then washed to get the chloride free slurry. The Stokes law of sedimentation was applied to obtain purified Na To obtain pure sodium Mt, the soda activation procedure, that has recently been described, was applied ( X-ray diffraction (XRD) technique was used to study the effect of modification and purification on raw sample. The oriented samples for raw (PWR-O) and purified bentonites were prepared. X-ray diffraction patterns of entire samples were obtained by D500 diffractometer equipped with monochromator of graphite using CuKα radiation. All the samples were scanned from 2° to 40° 2θ range using 40 mA and 40 kV. The 0.02° scanning step with scanning time of 1 s per step was used. For pore size analysis and specific surface area, N The particle size analyses were determined by “Master-sizer 2000 (Malvern Instruments Ltd., UK)”. Each sample was injected in portion to the aqueous dispersing part equipped with the instrument and sonicated for few minutes to highly disperse the clay sample. Each sample suspension was then added into the analyzer and the size analysis was recorded for five times. The final result was estimated from the average of these five recorded values. It is well known that Mt with Na The X-ray diffraction patterns of raw and the samples purified by three different methods are displayed in The particle size distribution (PSD) plot of PWR-O sample showed two maxima: one with relatively higher volume percentage centered at 12 μm and the other at 4.5 μm ( It was also noted that the sample PWR-I has a low volume percentage of a particle smaller than 1 μm in comparison with the samples PWR-II and PWR-III. These results further confirmed that the PWR-II and PWR-III were sodium bentonite in nature and thus swelled during hydration to higher degree, leading to the formation of smaller particle size. The presence of fine particle in PWR-III was attributed to its relatively high saturation with Na + ion in comparison with PWR-II. The N As seen in The adsorption-desorption isotherm of the purified samples, remained steeply sloped in the relative pressure range of 0.98–1.00, suggesting the presence of macropores. However, the steepness of the slope for sample PWR-II and PWR-III was slightly decreased, suggesting the reduction of macropores in comparison with raw and PWR-I sample. The f-plot isotherm is a technique to compare the shape of the isotherms of a given material to a reference material (in this case, PWR-O) and to obtain information regarding the changes in porosity and absorption capacity for the purified samples. From The samples PWR-I and PWR-II exhibit same porous behavior at 0.3 < P/P From Specific surface areas of all the samples were determined by the standard “Brunauer, Emmett and Teller (BET)” method using the N The following equation was applied to determine the specific surface areas, S (m As seen in The purification method-I (PWR-I) and method-III (PWR-III) showed the following effect on the distribution of mesoporosity and macroporosity: significant increase in incremental pore volume was detected for mesopores size ranging from 2 to 50 nm in the both samples. This increase was, however, more noticeable for pores smaller than 25 nm in PWR-III. A slight decrease in amount of pores was detected for pores larger than 50 nm in the case of PWR-I, and more decrease in amount of pores were observed for macropores sized pores in PWR-III ( The purification method-II (PWR-II) affects the distribution of mesopores and macropores as: amount of pores increased for pore size ranging from 2 to 10 nm but increases less than in case of the others purified samples. No significant change was observed in pore volume for pore size ranging from 10 to 25 nm. A significant decrease in amount of pores was observed for pores larger than 25 nm. The more decrease in the number of macropores by purification method-II was observed than by the purification method-I and III ( The variation in total mesopores volume (V In Contrary to the incremental pore volume versus pore size diameter curve for raw and purified samples, the incremental pore area versus pore diameter curve showed the same four maxima but opposite in behavior, the higher peak (i.e. maximum pore area) was observed at smaller pore radii and vice versa ( The external pore area, microspores volume (V The micropores-mesopores area and volume were estimated from the pore area and pore volume combination, calculated by BJH and t-plot method for mesopores and micropores, respectively. The variations in the micropores-mesopores surface area (S An experimental study was carried out to evaluate the effect of three different purification methods on the textural properties of chemically treated purified bentonites. Typically purified Ca