This paper studies the mechanical behaviors and microstructures of the ball grid array (BGA) solder joints against OSP-coated Cu pads on FR4 substrates after multiple reflow process. A new Pb-free solder, Sn–3Ag–0.5Cu–8In (SACI), has been compared with the popular Pb-free solder Sn–3Ag–0.5Cu (SAC), and the traditional Sn–37Pb (SP) solder. It is found that SACI solder joints provide higher shearing strength over SAC and SP solder joints during multiple reflow. The shearing force of the three types of solder joints does not have significant change with the increase of the number of reflow cycles. The fracture of all SAC and SP solder joints mainly occurs in the bulk solder, whereas the SACI solder joints show a diverse manner, with various combinations of bulk solder facture, solder/IMC interface dissociation, and pad/resin interface failure. The differences in mechanical behaviors are interpreted in terms of diffusion and interaction, as well as chemical and thermal induced degradation. The microstructure evolutions of the solder joints during multiple reflow soldering are also examined. A continuous change of chemical compositions in the IMC layer/particles has been noticed. Large-shaped Ag–In–Sn phase near the IMC layer has been found within the SACI solder joints on the Cu pads.Due to worldwide environmental concerns, public sentiments and market strategies, as well as governmental regulations on the use of toxic Pb in the electronic products, the conventional Sn–Pb solders are under strict scrutiny. Therefore, many Sn-rich alloy systems have been developed as alternative candidate Pb-free solders, which have attracted much researches and trial applications in recent years Although great effort has been made for more than 10 years to get the Pb out of electronic industry, until now, there are still some tough barriers needed to override for a widespread and uniform industrial acceptance of favorable solder alloys and matched materials plus processes Recently, Hwang et al. has invented a novel solder alloy with the addition of In element and claimed that Sn–Ag–Cu–In system possesses low melting temperature range, which can achieve Pb drop-off without changing the conventional reflow temperature and related materials and equipments The BGA technology becomes more and more popular by the virtue of enhancing miniaturization, performance and functionality. As the high-density packaging develops towards finer pitch and smaller size, the importance of mechanical integrity of the solder joints is essentially emphasized to the reliability concerns. So far quite a lot of work on mechanical strengths of the BGA solder joints has been done based on different solders, pad and substrate design, shearing/pulling parameters, reflow ambience and aging conditions, while only a few works were focused on the effect of multiple reflow process This paper aims to evaluate the Sn–Ag–Cu–In BGA solder joints on shearing strength and microstructure characterization after multiple reflow process and to compare with the popular Pb-free solder Sn–3Ag–0.5Cu, and the traditional Sn–37Pb solder. Three commercially available BGA solder balls of Sn–37Pb, Sn–3Ag–0.5Cu and Sn–3Ag–0.5Cu–8In (hereafter SP, SAC and SACI, respectively) were used in this study. The diameter of BGA solder balls was 760 At first, WS600 type paste flux from Alpha Metals was screen printed on the bond pad of the FR4 substrate. Afterward, the solder balls were attached onto the desired pad positions on the substrate. After that, they were put into a BTU VIP-70N model 5-zone forced convection reflow oven to carry out soldering at nitrogen atmosphere. For the sake of comparison, the temperature profile was set to be the same for all the solders and substrates. The temperature profile was measured on the surface of the substrates with a Super MOLE E31-900-45/10 wireless profiler. The peak temperature is 251 The solder joint shearing test was performed using a Dage 4000 series bond tester. The shearing speed was 500 Another set of samples was metallographically cross-sectioned, mounted in a cold setting epoxy, and polished to towards the middle of the solder joints. To reveal the thicknesses and morphologies of intermetallic compounds (IMC), the polished surfaces were slightly etched in a 3 At last, the fracture surfaces after shearing test and the cross-section of solder joints were viewed by a Philips XL40 FEG type scanning electron microscope (SEM) equipped with an energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) analysis system. The variations of average shearing force, as a function of multiple reflows of the SACI, SAC and SP solder joints are plotted in The SACI solder joints show the highest strength, whereas the SP solder joints exhibit the lowest results regardless of the reflow times. This agrees well with the empirical results that most of the Pb-free solders are stronger than the SP solders. Moreover, it is also reported that ternary solder SAC is stronger that binary Sn–Ag solder because of the addition of the Cu   The SAC solder joints have analogous shearing behaviors to that of the SP solder joints, as can be observed in The SACI solder joints show diverse fracture manners with different number of reflow. For the SACI solder joints, after one and two times reflow, the shearing normally generates a mixed mode of fracture surface with a fraction of bulk solder crack and solder/IMC interface separation, as shown in This kind of phenomena is registered neither for the SP nor for SAC solder joints. It can be deduced that the pad/resin interface degrades to a certain level during multiple reflow process, but it still stronger than the intrinsic shearing strength of the bulk solder of the SP and SAC as well as their interfaces with the IMC layer and the interfaces of IMC layer to Cu bond pad.  In the SP solder joints, the IMC layer with one time reflow is not compact, as shown in In order to clarify the compositional evolution of the IMC between 1 and 16 times reflow, the IMC phases are denoted with numbers in the figures for the SAC and SACI solder joints. The IMC layer at the interface is given by No. 1, and the Cu–Sn IMC particles in bulk solder are registered as No. 2. The small Ag-rich IMC particles and large Ag–In-rich phase in the bulk solder are captioned as No. 3 and No. 4, respectively. It is found from EDX results that with the increasing of the number of reflow cycles, the layered IMC (No. 1) at the solder/pad interface tend to dissolve and entrap more base metal atoms (i.e., Cu). At the same time, the Cu content of the Cu–Sn IMC (No. 2) particles dispersed in bulk solder also increases a lot. The Ag content in No. 3 and No. 4 IMC only increase slightly (less than 2.0 In general for all the cases, the IMC layer (No. 1) grows thicker; and the IMC particles (No. 2, 3 and 4) tend to coarsen and to appear in larger quantities with increased reflow times. This suggests that there is a priority of some atoms (Cu or Ag) to nucleate and precipitate on the IMC surfaces. A total of five readings of the IMC layer thickness are counted for each case. The mean thickness of the IMC layer is plotted with respect to the reflow times, as shown in This work investigates the effect of multiple reflow processes on the shearing behavior and interfacial microstructures of the BGA solder joints of SP, SAC and SACI solders. The conclusions are summarized as follows. For all solders, the variation of shearing forces with multiple reflow times is not as remarkable as expected. The SACI solder joints show the highest strength, whereas the SP solder joints exhibit the lowest results regardless of the reflow times. For both the SP and SAC solder joints, irrespective of the number of reflow cycles, the fractures mainly happen in the bulk solders just near above the IMC layer. After one and two times reflow of SACI solder joints, a solder tearing together with solder/IMC separation has been noticed. Meanwhile, when the number of reflow cycles is larger than 4, the SACI solder joints always fail at the pad/resin interface, which reveals that shear strength of SACI is much higher (both for bulk solders of SACI and solder joints of SACI) compared to the case of intrinsic properties of FR4 substrates. The compositional evolution of the IMC phases within the solder joints is examined. The reflow cycle facilitates diffusion of the Ag, Cu and In atoms to IMC particles thus coarsening of those IMC grains. Ag–In–Sn phase in large shapes has been found near the IMC layer within the SACI solder joints. However, there is not any detrimental effect of such large shaped IMC as has been noticed in this study. This project has been supported by CityU CERG project (9040887, CityU 1106/04E). The discussion with Mr. Chen and Mr. Xu at NUS of Singapore are gratefully acknowledged.