It has been proposed that patients with talocalcaneal and talonavicular coalitions have decreased ankle joint range of motion. It has also been reported that rotational forces regularly absorbed by the talocalcaneal joint are transferred to the ankle joint in patients with coalitions, increasing the stress on the ankle joint after trauma. To the best of our knowledge, only 1 reported study has detailed the increased stress placed on the ankle joint secondary to a coalition. We present a case study of a 53-year-old female who experienced a traumatic fall and subsequent right ankle fracture. Advanced imaging studies revealed a comminuted tibial pilon fracture and talocalcaneal and talonavicular joint coalitions. She underwent open reduction and internal fixation for treatment of the fracture, and the coalitions were not treated because they were asymptomatic. She was kept non-weightbearing for 6 weeks postoperatively and was returned to a regular sneaker at 10 weeks postoperatively. The postoperative films revealed stable intact fixation and pain-free gait with no increased restriction in her ankle joint range of motion. The hardware was removed at 13 months postoperatively. She had not experienced increased pain or arthritic changes at 15 months postoperatively.A tarsal coalition is a union between 2 tarsal bones that limits the range of motion of the involved joint. The etiology of tarsal coalitions is uncertain; however, evidence has shown that they can be either congenital or acquired. Congenital tarsal coalitions are more common, occur in the adolescent population, and result from failure of mesenchymal segmentation of ≥2 tarsal bones. Acquired tarsal coalitions are rare, occur mostly in the adult population, and can result from trauma, surgery, arthritis, or neoplasms The 2 most common types of tarsal coalitions are calcaneonavicular and talocalcaneal (TC) coalitions We present a case report of a 53-year-old female. The patient was walking on her porch when her right leg slipped through a loose plank and she suffered a right ankle fracture. She was brought to the emergency department where the physical examination revealed significant edema and tenderness to the right ankle with noted deformity but no open fractures and an intact neurovascular status. Plain radiography revealed an isolated intraarticular tibial plafond fracture, with intact medial and lateral malleoli and no widening of the syndesmosis ( The patient was placed on the operating table in the supine position, and general anesthesia was administered. A well-padded thigh tourniquet was applied, the limb was prepared sterilely, the limb was exsanguinated using a esmarch, and the tourniquet was inflated to 350 mm Hg. A longitudinal incision was made at the anterior aspect of the ankle, and dissection was carried down to the fracture site. Manual reduction of the fracture fragments was performed and temporarily stabilized with Kirschner wires. Open reduction and internal fixation using a 123-mm distal tibial plate and a smaller 6-hole hand plate was performed. After the hardware had been secured, the syndesmosis was stressed, and no widening was appreciated. The postoperative films showed excellent reduction of the fracture with no ankle joint incongruity ( The patient was placed in a well-padded posterior splint and was kept non-weightbearing for 6 weeks postoperatively. She began partial weightbearing in a controlled ankle motion boot at 8 weeks postoperatively and was in a regular sneaker by 10 weeks. The patient was able to walk without discomfort when she transitioned to sneakers. At 3 months postoperatively, she had returned to running and performing activities of daily living pain free. At 1 year after surgery, the hardware was removed to prevent stress shielding, and the patient healed uneventfully 1 year post-hardware removal. The patient never experienced symptoms associated with either of her tarsal coalitions. Contralateral foot radiographs taken at her last postoperative visit revealed identical coalitions to her left lower extremity. She did have significant restriction of range of motion of the subtalar joint; however, this did not cause her pain, and her ankle joint range of motion was pain free. She was asymptomatic at her 16-month follow-up examination. Zuckerkandl Many investigators have reported the mechanical characteristics of the ankle complex In addition, Leardini et al In our review of the published data, we found only 1 study that appreciated an abnormal fracture pattern to the talocrural joint in a patient with a subtalar joint coalition. Imade et al Although our patient's fracture mechanism was severe, minimal comminution was appreciated intraoperatively. Computed tomography did reveal a posterior malleolar fracture, and reduction of the posterior malleolar fracture was attempted intraoperatively. However, secondary to the decreased range of motion at the subtalar joint and fused talonavicular joint, surgical reduction and restoration of the anatomic alignment was difficult. After several attempts, it was decided to forego reduction of the posterior malleolus. We did explain to her that her subsequent risk of arthritis would be increased secondary to her fracture mechanism; however, at 2 years postoperatively, she had no complaints of arthritis or increased pain to her ankle joint. The rationale behind the type of internal fixation used was that our patient was a young, healthy female with no other comorbidities. We believed it was not necessary to use larger plates secondary to this. Another reason the specific construct was chosen was secondary to its low profile and ability to use 2 separate plates on the distal tibia. The hardware was removed approximately 1 year postoperatively to prevent future stress shielding ( In conclusion, we believe that patients with tarsal coalitions should undergo a more thorough perioperative decision-making process in the presence of any traumatic fracture secondary to their altered biomechanics. It is also important to explain to patients with TN or TC coalitions that they might be at increased risk of sustaining a more significant injury to the ankle in a trauma, secondary to the amount of force that is dampened by the subtalar and talonavicular joints. Treatment of asymptomatic talocalcaneal coalition is not necessarily needed; however, it is important to provide patients with information regarding their increased level of risk.