Within the Eastern Desert of Egypt, there are more than a hundred vein-type gold deposits and occurrences. Gold was mined in the Dynastic and Roman periods of the Egyptian history and most of the attention was focused entirely on the near-surface high grade parts of these veins. Currently, besides the more problematic sulfide-rich quartz veins, which generally occur in the lower levels of the worked out auriferous quartz veins, some targets including wall-rock alteration, listwaenite, dumps and tailings of ancient mines, by-product gold hosted in volcanogenic massive sulfide deposits and gold-bearing Algoma-type BIF, as well as alluvial gold constitute the new targets for gold in the Eastern Desert of Egypt. In most of these targets, gold displays a bimodal distribution; occurring both as free-milling gold and in the form of sub-microscopic or “invisible” gold in refractory sulfides and sulfoarsenides such as pyrite, chalcopyrite, arsenopyrite, gersdorffite and pentlandite minerals.
                  Characterizing gold in an ore is important in extraction metallurgy. Free-milling gold can be efficiently recovered by crushing, grinding and cyanidation without additional processing. In refractory ores, on the other hand, conventional milling can liberate the sulfides from the gangue allowing a low content of concentrate to be produced by a process such as flotation. However, direct leaching of the concentrate results in poor gold extractions as the cyanide lixiviant is unable to contact the gold locked within the refractory host. Oxidative pretreatment is required for such ores and the methods available for oxidation are roasting (calcination), pressure oxidation, and bacterial oxidation; all oxidize the refractory minerals in the ore to render the gold amenable to cyanidation. While such oxidative methods are capable of achieving reasonable recoveries, they increase the capital and operating costs. An alternative, applicable to the liberation of gold from the refractory host, is to continue the grinding process to reduce the particle size of the host mineral thereby exposing a part of the gold surface for contact with the cyanide solution. A benefit of this technique is that the environmental aspects of the oxidation reaction products are avoided, however the ultra fine grinding also adds more operating costs.
                  Metallurgical studies carried out on some gold deposits, dumps and tailings of ancient gold mines in Egypt, proved that these ores are amenable to percolation leaching (concentration of KCN varies between 0.5 and 1g/L) for the (−10mm) grain size, and consequently heap leaching is a successful technique as the results of these laboratory scale column tests show. In most of these studies, a marked improvement in the percent of gold recovery was gained when the crushed ore is agglomerated by the addition of water, lime and/or cement particularly in ores containing significant quantities of clay minerals and clay-forming minerals (e.g. sericite and muscovite), and by addition of kerosene which passivates the adsorption surfaces on the graphite.
                  Placer gold is recovered by gravity methods utilizing the large difference in specific gravity between gold and commonly associated minerals such as quartz and feldspar. The equipments range from a simple pan to more complex devices used in gold recovery plants and dredges.
                  Modern studies in Egypt point to the presence of different targets of gold; diverse in their gold content, mode of occurrence of gold and the metallurgical treatments required for extracting gold. With the advance of modern techniques such as Electron Microprobe Analyses (EMPA), laser Ablation Microprobe Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectroscopy (LAM-ICP-MS), gold ores in Egypt should be re-characterized precisely to know the specifications of these ores and consequently predict the metallurgical regime required, and with the high world gold price, it has become necessary to take into consideration the presence of refractory gold ores as one of these targets in Egypt. Generally speaking, laboratory experiments conducted on gold processing in Egypt are encouraging to some extent; however the gold extraction rates of the free milling ores with conventional cyanidation and refractory ores with direct and pretreatment techniques can be improved by modifying the conditions of extraction to be consistent with the results obtained from the re-characterization stage. Otherwise any target for gold and whatsoever the mode of occurrence of gold in this target (i.e. free-milling and/or refractory) could be recovered directly by heap leaching technique and we should accept less than ideal gold recovery for any target when weighed against the capital expenditure required for processes such as roasting, and the continuous grinding processes which might improve recoveries by only a small percentage.The Eastern Desert of Egypt is well known as a gold-mining area since ancient times. There are more than 100 vein-type gold deposits and occurrences spread over the whole area covered by basement rocks of Precambrian age ( Nebu is the Egyptian symbol for gold ( Historical mining was focused entirely on the near-surface high grade quartz veins and associated alluvial gold. Evidence of the historical mining activity is clearly seen in the stopped out quartz veins at shallow depths by means of shafts and adits. Waste dumps and tailings are present at a number of these deposits indicating that they were sites of significant mining activity. Although it was mined since Dynastic times, no data are available as to the total tonnage of ore mined out or the gold that was extracted from it. According to The present paper discusses the potentiality of gold in Egypt. The geological setting of the available auriferous targets is reviewed, mineralogical siting of gold in these targets and results of the metallurgical studies carried out on the Egyptian gold ores, dumps and tailings of the ancient gold mines are discussed aiming to clarify the future of gold potentiality in Egypt; does it get worse or better?. The basement rocks of Egypt comprise about 10% of the total area of the country. They are exposed mainly in the Eastern Desert along the Red Sea, and some are located sporadically in the Western Desert at Gabal Oweinat. A considerable part also covers the southern portion of Sinai ( The Egyptian Eastern Desert is divided into three distinct lithotectonic terranes ( Generally speaking, there is a much higher concentration of granitic rocks to the north and south than in the central Eastern Desert. Serpentinites are extremely rare in the north and gneisses are much more common in the south than elsewhere. The central Eastern Desert exposures display strong ensimatic affinities and consist mainly of an island arc complex overthrust by dismembered ophiolitic sequences and intruded by syn-tectonic gray granitoids. In some places, particularly in the northern terranes, these rocks are overlain by calc-alkaline silicic to basic volcanic rocks, namely (Dokhan Volcanics) and low-grade metamorphosed molasse type sediments (Hammamat Group), and intruded by post-orogenic younger granites. Egypt possesses a wide spectrum of gold-rich (i.e. gold as primary commodity) and gold-enriched (i.e. accessory gold) targets including mesothermal auriferous quartz veins, wall-rock alteration occurring either surrounding these auriferous quartz veins and/or structurally controlled by specific structural features, listwaenite, Algoma-type Banded Iron Formation (BIF), volcanogenic massive sulfide deposits and their keel zones, placer gold and finally dumps and tailings of old gold mining operations ( Quartz veins constituted the main target for gold since ancient times. Most of the attention was devoted to the upper parts of these veins. Generally speaking, the quartz veins may arrange as a series of en echelon veins with pinches and swells. Parallel veinlets and stringers that form ore zones of considerable thickness as compared to the main veins that always accompany the main veins. The mineralized veins consist dominantly of quartz and carbonates, with subordinate amounts of sulfide minerals. Pyrite is the dominant sulfide mineral, commonly accompanied by minor chalcopyrite and arsenopyrite and one or more of sphalerite, tetrahedrite, galena and pyrrhotite. The sulfide minerals occur as disseminations and fracture fillings in the quartz. Native gold occurs in most cases as minute specks and discrete scattered flakes within the quartz vein or as small inclusions in sulfides particularly pyrite and arsenopyrite. According to the geological setting, quartz veins could be classified into: These veins are confined to the metamorphosed island arc volcanic and volcaniclastic rocks and/or the syn-tectonic granitic rocks surrounding them. The veins have been formed during the Pan-African orogeny synchronous with the regional metamorphism (greenschist to amphibolite-facies) and attendant upon calc-alkaline I-type granites ( This style of the auriferous veins is encountered in Um Eleiga, Umm Tenedba, Atalla, Semna and Atud mines ( The mechanism adopted for the genesis of quartz veins located at the contacts between younger gabbro and granite relies on the assumption that the granite intrusion acts as heat engine and as a metal donor. The heat of the granite drives the convective cells to circulate through the fractured zone at the gabbro-granite contact ( This setting (i.e. gabbro–granite contact) is found in a great number of ancient gold mines. The amount of leached gold from the gabbros depends on the sulfide parentage and the volume of granite intrusion. Therefore, some of the mines are large and others are of smaller scale ( Extensive rock alteration is a clearly visible characteristic feature of most Egyptian gold deposits and occurrences. The alteration occurs either surrounding the auriferous quartz veins and/or structurally controlled by specific structural features, such as fractures and shear surfaces. The most common types of wall-rock alteration in the Egyptian gold mines and occurrences are sericitization, beresitization, alunitization, silicification, ferrugination, carbonatization, listwaenitization, chloritization, propylitization and kaolinitization ( Inspite of the diversity of the alteration zones and the variety of the host rocks that are affected, An important factor that influences the variation of gold values in alteration zones, even in the same locality, is the constituent minerals of the alteration zones. It is well known that, one of the most common mechanisms in which gold may be precipitated, is the reaction between gold-bearing fluids and host rocks with the consequent alteration of these rocks. The reactions cause a shift in pH of the auriferous fluid. Acidic auriferous fluids containing gold–chloride complex coming into contact with country rocks cannot precipitate their gold till a group of minerals like carbonates for example (i.e. reducing medium) are formed in the resultant alteration zone. Accordingly, the presence of carbonate minerals among the constituent minerals of the alteration zone in this example is of prime importance for precipitating gold from the acidic auriferous fluids. Similarly, auriferous alkaline fluids containing gold-bisulfide complex will precipitate their gold when such fluids come into contact with wall rocks and reactions such as sericitization and albitization are formed. In this case, the alkaline mineralizing solution will lose alkalis such as K, Na, etc., hence the pH of that solution is shifted toward the acid range, consequently the bi-sulfide complex will decompose and gold is precipitated. Here in this example also the presence of sericite and secondary albite is of importance being good precipitants for gold in alkaline fluids. This is indicated in the Um Rus gold mine where the appearance of sericite in silica–carbonate–chlorite assemblage is concomitant with an increase in gold values from 1.5 Briefly, the most efficient precipitants in any alteration zone are sulfides, carbonates, clay minerals, sericite, iron oxides, chlorite and graphite. The presence of such minerals within alteration zones is necessary to increase the potentiality of alteration zones. Recent studies pointed to the presence of auriferous sulfides (refractory gold) in the alteration zones (e.g. Linear zones of ophiolitic serpentinites show extreme alteration along thrusts with the development of a range of talc, talc-carbonate and reddish brown quartz–carbonate rock (listwaenite). The listwaenite is chiefly composed of ankerite, ferroan-dolomite, quartz and talc with disseminated sulfides (pyrite, gersdorffite and pentlandite). Examples for this style of mineralization in the Eastern Desert are encountered in Barramiya, El Sid, Hutite, El Hisinat, Jabal Sirsir, Jabal Um El Tuyur El Fuqani, Jabal Al Adraq, Jabal Shiab area, Wadi Suruk area, Wadi Abu Fass, Jabal Shilman, ….etc. The most characteristic feature of the listwaenite is its relative resistance against weathering, if compared with the surrounding rocks; accordingly, it stands out forming prominent topographic ridges. In Wadi Allaqi district, where most South Eastern Desert ophiolites are found along the Allaqi–Heiani–Gerf suture, listwaenites are distinguished into two main types: i) silica-rich, and ii) carbonate-rich. The presence of fuchsite (Cr-muscovite) in the former indicates that it is typical listwaenite, while the absence of fuchsite in the latter indicates listwaenite-like rock ( Barramiya gold mine is another example for gold mineralization hosted in sheared ophiolitic ultramafic rocks ( The mineralized zone is represented by intensively mylonitized graphite schist, yellowish brown cavernous talc-carbonate rocks containing bodies of listwaenite (quartz-carbonate rock) and quartz veins and veinlets. The Au-bearing quartz vein (main lode) is flanked by talc-carbonate on one side and listwaenite on the other side ( In the weathering zone along the contact between the quartz vein of the Barramiya main lode and the listwaenite body, a zone few centimeters in thickness and composed of hydrated iron oxides is developed. The gold content reaches up to 32 BIF bands in the Eastern Desert occur as sharply defined stratigraphic units within the Pan-African layered volcanic and volcaniclastic rocks of the island arc stage ( The majority of BIF bands in the Eastern Desert belong to the oxide facies where the iron minerals are represented by hematite and magnetite ( In Egypt, six localities of Algoma-type BIF bands were checked for their gold mineralization. These localities are Abu Marawat, Wadi Karim, Wadi El Dabbah, Um Ghamis, Gabal El Hadid and Um Nar locality. The studies demonstrated that Abu Marawat deposit represents syngenetic gold mineralization ( At Abu Marawat prospect, gold occurs up to 2.15 Gold-bearing quartz carbonate veinlets and quartz strings traversing Algoma-type BIF are common in Um Nar, Wadi Karim, Gabal El Hadid, Um Ghamis and Wadi El Dabbah. In these localities, BIF bands display two generations of folding; an early major overturned anticlinal folding and later minor open folds ( The highest values of gold are restricted to the quartz carbonate veinlets, quartz stringers and limonitic quartz–carbonate bodies occurring in the hinge zones of the folded BIF ( Volcanic hosted massive sulfide (VHMS) deposits in the Eastern Desert include Umm Samiuki, Helgit, Maakal, Darhib, Abu Gurdi, Egat and El Atshan. Some of these deposits (e.g. Darhib and El Atshan) have been identified as talc mines ( The upper contacts of the massive sulfide body are sharp and well defined, while on the footwall side, an extensive pipe or keel of alteration is present. Previous studies showed that alteration was most intensive below (VHMS) deposit at Umm Samiuki area as a result of the ceiling effect of the ore body ( Gold in the (VHMS) deposit of Umm Samiuki area tends to be increased in the lower parts ( Gold occurs as anomalous concentrations in the keel zones if compared with the average of the element (almost less than 0.3 Two distinct spatial and mineralogical associations of gold mineralization could be identified in the volcanogenic massive sulfide deposits and their foot wall alteration (the keel zone) in the Eastern Desert of Egypt ( Gold–silver–zinc association: Here gold grades are very low (generally in the range 0.3–0.4 Gold-copper association: This association typically occurs in the footwall rock alteration (the keel zone) and the lowest parts of the massive sulfide body. Gold grades reach up to 5.54 It is interesting to mention that though gold is associated with zinc and copper, yet no gold was detected in both sphalerite and chalcopyrite of Umm Samiuki and Darhib and only 200 The twofold gold association observed in the volcanogenic massive sulfides and their footwall alteration, in the Eastern Desert of Egypt are also displayed in other volcanogenic massive sulfide provinces such as Kuroko, Canadian and Australian deposits ( Most placer gold deposits accessible to ancient Egyptians were close to the auriferous quartz veins. The arid and hot climate that characterizes the Egyptian deserts results in dominantly physical weathering. This is the most important factor responsible for the disintegration of potential source rocks by a combination of thermal and mechanical weathering, working together over long periods of time. Two main categories of placer gold have formed in Egypt. These are modern placers and lithified placers. Modern placers are subdivided into stream or alluvial, and beach placers. Conglomerate represents lithified placers. The predominant accumulation of ore materials in a mechanically dispersed form in the wadis (dry water courses) of the Eastern Desert favors collection of panned samples from the alluvial placers even where the alluvium contains considerable amounts of wind-blown sand ( Some lithochemical and panning surveys were carried out on alluvial placers in the Eastern Desert of Egypt. Usually stream sediment samples are collected from the main drainage at a depth of about 15–25 The weights of head panning samples vary from 6 Gold shows an uneven distribution in the different grain size classes of the alluvium. For example, the grain-size fraction (− It is clear that there are different fractions favorable for analyses than the bulk samples to reveal gold mineralization in placer gold in the Eastern Desert of Egypt. Mineralogical investigation of the non-magnetic fraction of the concentrate usually includes one or more of the following minerals: goethite, amphiboles, epidote, pyroxene, chlorite, zircon, sphene, apatite, garnet, tourmaline, rutile, monazite, xenotime, corundum, cassiterite, barite, scheelite, cinnabar, wulfenite, fluorite, malachite, chalcopyrite, pyrite, arsenopyrite, sphalerite, azurite and gold. The latter occurs as fine grains ranging from 0.1 to 1.0 A review for the content of gold in the alluvium of the Egyptian gold deposits and occurrences reveals that gold is under detection limit in the heavy concentrate of some occurrences (e.g. Samut mine area, In some instances, results of analyses reveal the presence of gold in the heavy concentrate, however the mineralogical examination of the concentrate reveals the absence of gold grains in the concentrate. This may be attributed to the presence of refractory gold that cannot be detected by the normal stereoscopic binocular microscope. In some prospects, the heavy concentrate separated by panning reveals a variation in the gold content in samples collected from the top of the pit if compared with that collected from the bottom of the same pit. For example gold ranges from 1 to 20 grains in the top of the pits dug in Tallet Gadalla gold occurrence, while the samples taken from the bottom of the same pits have gold content ranging from 1 to 39 grains ( Minor amounts of gold recorded in some Egyptian black beach sands ( Conglomerate represents lithified placers. They occur at the base of the Upper Proterozoic molasse sediments of the Hammamat unit and/or the base of Upper Cretaceous Nubian Formation that overlies the more or less peneplained surface of the Precambrian basement rocks ( Some low-grade gold ore dump and ore processing tailing of old gold mining operations occur in most of the Egyptian gold mines. These dumps and tailings previously regarded as uneconomic can be profitably developed using cheap methods of concentration and metal extraction. Old mining dumps are products of old mining operations produced during opening up of mines, and may contain gold in quantities not considered economic during the past operations, but may be considered economic now. Gold, if present, is found as untarnished flakes or grains. Being products of blasting, these dumps are characterized by a wide grain size distribution. The only economic route of treatment of this target is by heap leaching ( Ore processing tailings are, as the name implies, tailings of previous cyanidation operations. Being products of grinding, they are characterized usually by a more or less uniform sandy grain sizes. Gold, if present, is usually very fine, and is usually enclosed in pyrite, or its products of oxidation i.e. goethite. The only economic route of working of this target is by concentration of the mineral or minerals enclosing the gold, to be followed, if necessary, by the appropriate agitation leaching technique ( Exploitation of tailings and dumps has many advantages; they are easily pitted and sampled, so reserves, metallurgical amenability, and financial projection can assessed with greater accuracy than for grass-roots projects ( Ore tailings in 13 sites and ore dumps in 20 sites were accurately evaluated in such a way that tonnage and grade of the ore tailing and dump, and the economical methods of extraction of gold were identified ( In the Egyptian gold mines and occurrences, gold occurs in the different targets in different modes. In the quartz veins, gold occurs as coarse flakes in the smoky quartz (e.g. Um Rus deposit, In some instances native gold (20 Gold also occurs as blebs and globules associated with galena in Betam deposit ( A considerable amount of gold also occurs as inclusions, microscopic and submicroscopic specks scattered within the sulfide minerals as pyrite, chalcopyrite and arsenopyrite in the quartz veins and adjacent wall rocks (e.g. Semna deposit, Invisible gold is also hosted in tetrahedrite, sphalerite and tennantite (e.g. Hangalia deposit, In wall-rock alteration (alteration zone), gold occurs as stringers or necklaces in the highly sericitized and ferruginated parts (e.g. Um Rus prospect, To sum up, gold in the different auriferous targets in Egypt displays a bimodal distribution: being present both as free-milling gold in the form of microscopic specks and blebs and as “invisible” gold in refractory sulfides and sulfoarsenides such as pyrite, arsenopyrite, gersdorffite and pentlandite minerals. Based on the gold recovery and mineral processing techniques required, gold ores are commonly classified into these two major categories: free-milling and refractory ores. Typically, free-milling ores are defined as those where over 90% of gold can be recovered by conventional cyanide leaching or some combination of flotation and cyanidation ( Sulfide minerals such as chalcopyrite, sphalerite, galena, and pyrrhotite, have historically been found with micron size gold particles included in them. The most common cause of metallurgical problems is the encapsulation of gold by these sulfide minerals. “Invisible” gold is undetectable by the normal microscopy technique, but only revealed by advanced instrumental techniques. Unfortunately, only recent studies in Egypt used these advanced instrumental techniques for the characterization of gold ores. These techniques included Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) for major number of gold deposits; Electron Microprobe Analyses (EMPA) for Abu Marawat gold deposit ( Gold values as 0.36 Gold ranging between 0.03 and 0.06 It is known from the geological practice that in many gold ore deposits, arsenic is associated with gold not only spatially, but also genetically. Arsenic exhibits a nearly universal enrichment in most types of hypogene gold deposits, and there is a marked coherence between gold and arsenic during both hypogene and supergene processes ( The most common arsenic minerals in hypogene gold deposits are arsenopyrite and tennantite–tetrahedrite. Other arsenic-bearing sulfosalts are common in certain deposits. When arsenic minerals are absent in gold deposits, the element is largely camouflaged in pyrite or marcasite. Antimony exhibits a nearly universal enrichment in most types of hypogene gold deposits, and there is a marked coherence between gold and antimony during both hypogene and supergene processes ( In the Egyptian gold mines, arsenopyrite is recorded in the auriferous quartz veins and wall-rock alteration of most gold deposits and occurrences and microprobe analyses revealed the presence of gold in arsenopyrite of some deposits. For example, arsenopyrite in the quartz veins of Dungash gold deposit retains some gold in the range (0.06–0.31 Free gold intergrown with aurostibite in fractures or at grain boundaries is recorded in Betam gold deposit ( Traces of antimony (0.31%–0.4 In addition to the presence of antimony camouflaged in the previously mentioned minerals, stibnite as fine grains disseminated in the fractures of the quartz was identified in Um Bakra gold occurrence ( Chalcostibite was also recorded in Dara copper-gold occurrence associating the secondary copper minerals covellite, chalcocite, deginite, stannite, cuprite and scarcely native copper ( Neubauer (1958) in Sb is recorded as 1 Sb in the range (0.41–1.13 An antimonite-bearing mineralized zone occurs just to the north and north east of Um Selim gold occurrence ( Gold occurs as intergrowths with Bi-bearing tellurides in Semna gold deposit ( Iron is a constant companion in all types of gold deposits. The principal hypogene iron minerals accompanying gold in its deposits in their order of abundance are pyrite, arsenopyrite, pyrrhotite, ankerite, siderite, chalcopyrite, bornite, magnetite and ilmenite ( In the Egyptian gold mines, pyrite, arsenopyrite and pyrrhotite are commonly observed in the auriferous quartz veins and these sulfides are usually auriferous and occur in more than one generation. For example, gold in the range (0.02–0.07 Gold ranging from 12 Magnetite is the dominant oxide in Um Mongul gold prospect, where it is traced in all alteration zones but at variable proportions. Minor specks of gold are dispersed in magnetite particularly when granite porphyry is the host rock ( It is clear that some quartz veins and alteration zones in the Egyptian gold mines retain some invisible gold in pyrite and iron oxides. Pentlandite is the common mineral in the original (undeformed) talc–carbonate rocks of Barramiya gold mine and gersdorffite and millerite are prevalent in their deformed counterparts ( It is obvious the presence of invisible gold in nickel minerals hosted in listwaenite which is considered as one of the most important targets for gold in Egypt. Carbon accompanies gold in all of its deposits being present as amorphous carbon, graphite, carbonaceous matter, various solid and semisolid hydrocarbons and in a great variety of carbonates ( In the Eastern Desert of Egypt, graphite is mentioned among the mineral constituents of the alteration zones in Sharm El Bahari gold occurrence ( Scarce amounts of graphite were recorded in the mineralized quartz veins of Atud deposit ( In Haimur gold deposit, graphite accompanies the veins both in the walls and within the veins themselves ( Traces of graphite are seen in thin sections of the ferruginous sericite schist in Seiga-1 gold prospect ( The recovery of gold from its ores comprise their dissolution by cyanidation, the recovery of gold from the cyanide solution (i.e. the pregnant solution) either by zinc precipitation or by adsorption on activated carbon, the elution of the adsorbed values from the carbon by a stripping solution from which the precious metal is electo-winned and then refined. The extractive metallurgy of gold is largely driven by mineralogical factors such as: gold particle size, association with other minerals, coatings and rimmings, presence of cyanicides, oxygen consumers and preg-robbers, presence of refractory gold minerals and locking of submicroscopic gold in sulfide mineral structure, etc. ( Laboratory scale column tests were carried out for examining the amenability of some Egyptian gold ores to percolating leaching and to reveal the optimistic conditions for recovering gold from the different targets ( Three channel samples from El Barramiya gold mine, one representing a gold-bearing quartz vein, the other two representing the altered wall rocks, were studied ( Two samples were collected from Atud mine. The first one representing the quartz vein, the other representing the wall rock. The quartz vein sample was found to assay 6.32 Petrographic study of samples from the wall-rocks at Atud showed it to be mainly gabbroic rock, strongly altered and silicified at parts adjacent to the quartz veins. The opaque minerals are present in minor amounts and are represented by arsenopyrite, pyrite, marcasite and goethite. One grain of gold was detected ( The leachability of the quartz vein sample and the wall-rock sample was determined by carrying out standard bottle tests in which the pulverized ore (0.1 Column tests on crushed ore (− This occurrence is located in Wadi Um Ashira, which is the largest right tributary of Wadi Allaqi. The occurrence is located at the intersection of latitude 22° 54΄ 00˝ N and longitude 33° 15΄ 00˝ E. Several small stone-built huts were found at the location of the Um Ashira workings ( Ten dump samples (weight of each sample is more than 50 From the ten dump samples, ten representative samples (each one is about 5 A sample weighting 100 An old mining dump of Fatira gold prospect produced during the opening up of the mine was studied ( A sample weighting 100 An old mining dump of Abu Marawat gold deposit produced during ancient mining operations was studied ( An old mining dump of El Sid gold mine produced during ancient mining operations was studied ( In addition to the previously mentioned studies, direct heap leaching (concentration of CN is varying between 0.5 and 1 Gold mining in Egypt dates back 5000 In the underground levels of most Egyptian gold mines, sulfides predominate in the quartz veins if compared with the upper levels of these veins. For example, in um Rus gold deposit, the abundance of arsenopyrite increases erratically with increasing depth and is commonly associated with ankerite and chlorite ( Currently, beside the more problematic sulfide-rich lower levels of the quartz veins, structurally-controlled wall rock alteration and alteration zones bordering the auriferous veins, dumps and tailings of ancient mines, by-product gold hosted in Algoma-type BIF and volcanogenic massive sulfide deposits as well as alluvial gold constitute the possible targets for gold in the Eastern Desert of Egypt. The characteristics of ore deposit and its mineral assemblages determine the recovery methods and extraction process requirements. The gold mineralogy in each ore deposit is unique, due to the variations in the following: mineralogical mode of occurrence of gold, gold grain size distribution, host and gangue mineral type, mineral associations and mineral alterations ( Two types of gold ores can be distinguished: non refractory ores and refractory ores. Non refractory gold ores permit a straightforward recovery by a relatively simple conventional technology. In these ores, gold can be efficiently recovered by crushing, grinding and cyanidation without additional processing. “Refractory” gold ore is an ore that is naturally resistant to recovery by standard cyanidation processes. Refractoriness is recorded in ores containing gold locked in solid solution or as fine inclusions in iron/arsenic sulfide minerals such as arsenopyrite, arsenian pyrite, and pyrite; in copper sulfides such as chalcopyrite, tetrahedrite and none sulfide gangue minerals such as silica minerals and iron oxides ( Refractoriness results also in ores with insoluble or slow leaching gold minerals such as gold-bearing tellurides (e.g. sylvanite Au Ag Te It is to be noted that pyrite for example, is the sulfide mineral most commonly associated with gold. The presence of gold as colloidal particles or in solid solution in pyrite (i.e. invisible) is considered as refractory gold and in this case, pyrite requires more extreme grinding and/or strongly oxidizing conditions to liberate the gold. However, gold can occur in some textural associations with pyrite in such way that it can be readily liberated (e.g. the presence of gold along the pyrite crystal grain boundaries, or the random distribution in the pyrite host). Also, the nature of occurrence of gold in pyrite is critical, since occurrence of gold in pyrite as metallic colloidal particles needs ultra fine grinding to liberate gold, whereas gold hosted in pyrite as solid solution needs oxidative pretreatment to render the gold amenable to cyanidation. Experimentally, besides gold, most metal sulfides decompose quite readily in aerated alkaline cyanide solution to form metal ions, metal oxides, or metal cyanide complexes and various sulfur-containing species, including thiocyanate, sulfide, and thiosulfate ions ( Iron sulfides are much more reactive than the oxides and silicates, and most decompose in alkaline cyanide solutions to form iron cyanide complexes and various sulfur species ( Also, copper minerals dissolve to varying degrees in alkaline cyanide solutions. Copper dissolution is generally undesirable during leaching because it can consume cyanide and dissolved oxygen, retard gold dissolution rates, interfere with subsequent recovery processes, and contaminate the final product ( Chalcopyrite is the least soluble among the copper minerals, whereas chalcocite, bornite, enargite, covellite and copper oxides and carbonates are highly soluble, and dissolution of these minerals can severely affect leaching. In general, the copper minerals dissolve to form a variety of Cu (I) cyanide complexes (e.g. Cu (CN) Also, under the conditions applied for gold leaching, arsenic and antimony sulfides decompose to arsenite (AsO The detrimental effect of stibnite (and probably also other antimony and arsenic sulfide minerals) can largely be alleviated by performing leaching at low pH (10) and by addition of a suitable lead salt (e.g. lead nitrates) in sufficient quantity ( In general, under pH conditions normally applied for gold leaching, the detrimental effect of some of the more common arsenic and antimony minerals on gold extraction generally decreases in the order: stibnite>> Graphite present in gold ore usually adsorbs some of the contained gold from solution during cyanide leaching. However, this adsorption effect can be reduced by using CIL for simultaneous gold recovery during leaching, or by addition of a suitable hydrocarbon (e.g. kerosene) which passivates the adsorption surfaces on the graphite. Although gold is almost always associated with silver, however, when the silver grade is high (> The effect of the presence of high silver in the ore was also discussed by Targets that host refractory gold in the Eastern Desert include the lower levels of the auriferous quartz veins in most ancient gold mines, listwaenites and alteration zones. Conventional milling can liberate the sulfides from the gangue allowing a low mass of concentrate to be produced by a process such as flotation. However, direct leaching of the concentrate results in poor gold extractions as the cyanide lixivant is unable to contact the gold locked or included within the refractory host ( The present author believes that it is common for the upper 50 to 100 The experimental studies carried out by the Egyptian Mineral Resources Authority and the Academy of Scientific Research and Technology ( Most placer gold deposits accessible to ancient Egyptians were close to the auriferous quartz veins. The arid and hot climate that characterizes the Egyptian deserts results in dominantly physical weathering. This is the most important factor responsible for the disintegration of potential source rocks by a combination of thermal and mechanical weathering, working together over long periods of time. Gold shows uneven distribution in the different grain size classes of the alluvium, and there are different fractions favorable for analyses than the bulk samples to reveal gold mineralization in placer gold in the Eastern Desert of Egypt. Placer gold could be recovered by gravity methods utilizing the large difference in specific gravity between gold and commonly associated minerals such as quartz and feldspar. The equipments range from a simple pan to more complex devices used in gold recovery plants. It is evident that the future of gold potentiality in Egypt entails different targets of gold; diverse in their gold content, mode of occurrence of gold and the metallurgical treatments required for extracting gold. With the advance of modern techniques, gold ores in Egypt should be re-characterized precisely to know the specifications of the available auriferous targets and consequently predict their metallurgical response. With the high world gold price, it has become necessary to take into consideration the presence of refractory gold in these targets. Laboratory experiments conducted on gold processing in Egypt are encouraging to some extent; however the gold extraction rates of the free milling ores with conventional cyanidation and refractory ores with direct and pretreatment techniques can be improved by modifying the conditions of extraction to be consistent with the results obtained from the re-characterization stage. Gold mine operators throughout the world are seeking ways to reduce costs for treating gold ores. So, it may be possible in the Egyptian gold mines to recover gold from any target for gold and whatsoever the mode of occurrence of gold in this target (i.e. free-milling and/ or refractory) by direct heap leaching technique and we should accept less than ideal gold recovery for any target when weighed against the capital expenditure required for processes such as roasting, and the continuous grinding processes to reduce the particle size of the host mineral which might improve recoveries by only a small percentage.  The Eastern Desert of Egypt is well known as a gold-mining area since ancient times. There are more than 100 vein-type gold deposits and occurrences spread over the whole area covered by basement rocks of Precambrian age. Waste dumps and tailings are present at a number of these deposits indicating that they were sites of significant mining activity. Egypt possesses a wide spectrum of gold-rich (i.e. gold as primary commodity) and gold-enriched (i.e. accessory gold) targets including mesothermal auriferous quartz veins, wall-rock alteration occurring either surrounding these auriferous quartz veins and/or structurally controlled by specific structural features, listwaenite, Algoma-type Banded Iron Formation (BIF), volcanogenic massive sulfide deposits and their keel zones, placer gold and finally dumps and tailings of old gold mining operations. Gold ores can be categorized into two types: free milling and refractory. Free milling ores are those that can be processed by simple gravity techniques or direct cyanidation and over than 90% of gold can be recovered from these ores. Refractory ores, on the other hand, are defined as those that give low gold recoveries or give acceptable recoveries only with the use of significantly more reagents or more complex pre-treatment processes. The characteristics of ore deposit and its mineral assemblages determine the recovery methods and extraction process requirements. With the advance of the modern techniques, gold ores in Egypt should be characterized precisely to know the specifications of the available auriferous targets and consequently predict their metallurgical response. Characterization of the Egyptian gold ores, particularly refractory ores from both mineralogical and metallurgical points of view, is important since it helps in solving various problems encountered during gold ore processing. Targets that host refractory gold in the Eastern Desert include the lower levels of the auriferous quartz veins in most ancient gold mines, listwaenites and alteration zones. With the high world gold price, it has become necessary to take into consideration the presence of refractory gold in these targets. The gold extraction rates of the free milling ores with conventional cyanidation and refractory ores with direct and pretreatment techniques can be improved by modifying the conditions of extraction to be consistent with the specifications of the concerned ores. The upper 50 to 100 Placer gold is free-milling and gold in alluvium can be recovered by gravity and/or direct cyanide leaching. The future of gold potentiality in Egypt entails different targets of gold, diverse in their gold content, mode of occurrence of gold and the metallurgical treatments required for extracting gold. Critical reviews and constructive comments of the Editor, Professor Franco Pirajno, and an anonymous reviewer have improved the quality of the earlier version of the manuscript and are gratefully acknowledged.