Steam refining of non-debarked spruce forest residues was investigated as pretreatment for enzymatic hydrolysis as well as for biogas production. Pretreatment conditions were varied in the range of 190–220°C, 5–10min and 0–3.7% SO2 according to a statistical design. For both applications highest product yields were predicted at 220°C and 2.4% SO2, whereas the reaction time had only a minor influence. The conformity of the model results allows the conclusion that enzymatic hydrolysis is a suitable test method to evaluate the degradability of lignocellulosic biomass in the biogas process. In control experiments under optimal conditions the results of the model were verified. The yield of total monomeric carbohydrates after enzymatic hydrolysis was equivalent to 55% of all theoretically available polysaccharides. The corresponding biogas yield from the pretreated wood amounted to 304mL/gODM. Furthermore, furans produced under optimal process conditions showed no inhibitory effect on biogas production.
                  It can be concluded that steam refining opens the structure of wood, thus improving the enzymatic hydrolysis of the polysaccharides to fermentable monomeric sugars and subsequently enabling a higher and faster production of biogas. Anaerobic fermentation of pretreated wood is a serious alternative to alcoholic fermentation especially when low quality wood grades and residues are used. Anaerobic digestion should be further investigated in order to diversify the biorefinery options for lignocellulosic materials.Today, there is no dispute that the use of renewable energy has to increase in order to reduce the CO Conversion processes based on fermentation require the hydrolysis of cellulose and hemicelluloses into their corresponding monomeric carbohydrates in order to make them accessible for microorganisms. However, in case of lignocellulosic biomass the matrix of lignin and hemicelluloses around the cellulose fibrils, the low pore volume of the cell walls, and the high crystallinity of the cellulose fibrils limits the rate and extent of the enzymatic hydrolysis ( In the present study steam refining was tested as pretreatment for the conversion of spruce forest residues into biogas. The steam refining conditions time, temperature and SO Spruce forest residues originate from Reinbek Forest near Hamburg (Germany). The trunks and branches with diameters between 2 and 15 The extractives of the wood and bark fractions were analyzed by accelerated solvent extraction (ASE 200, Fa. Dionex). Therefore, about 1 Carbohydrate and lignin contents were analyzed by a two-stage acid hydrolysis. 200 Steam refining was performed in a 10 Treatments were performed at 190–220 The reactor contained inside a blade system, which was rotated at 1455 The effectiveness of the steam refining pretreatment was evaluated by the total monomeric carbohydrate yield after hydrolysis of the fiber and extract fraction. Additionally, the produced biogas volume after anaerobic fermentation of the combined fiber and extract fractions was measured. The above mentioned total monomeric carbohydrate yields after hydrolysis of the pretreated samples were calculated by the sum of carbohydrates yields after enzymatic hydrolysis of the fiber fraction and after acid hydrolysis of the extract fraction. Preliminary experiments with extracts showed that the monomeric carbohydrate yields of enzymatic hydrolysis are very close to those of acid hydrolysis. Furthermore, HPLC–MS measurements revealed that the hemicellulose degradation products exist as monomers or oligomers in the extract after steam refining. Therefore, it can be assumed that all carbohydrates in the extract are easy to degrade by enzymatic hydrolysis and it is permissible to determine the monomeric yields of the extract directly by acid hydrolysis. Hydrolysis of the extracts was carried out after freeze-drying. Lyophilized samples (100 Enzymatic hydrolysis of the fibers was conducted with 21 FPU (filter paper units) Celluclast 1.5 Prior to the GF The biogas formation potential from the combined samples was determined volumetrically by using eudiometers at 35 Furthermore, the inhibitory effect of furans on the biogas production was tested by using Avicel as a model substrate. For this purpose the biogas production from Avicel was measured after the addition of 2.5 The carbohydrate content in the hydrolysates was analyzed by borate-anion-exchange-chromatography with after-column derivatization and detection at 560 Furfural and 5-HMF contents of the extracts were analyzed by reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatography (RP-HPLC) with separation on an Aquasil C18 column (Thermo Scientific,Waltham, MA, USA) and UV detection at 210 The effects of temperature, time and SO The parameters were scaled and centered, so that the highest value corresponded to 1 and the lowest to −1. To fit the formula to the experimental results, a backward stepwise regression was used, following a given scheme within the statistical software ( All experiments were conducted with spruce forest residues containing a bark proportion of 8%. The wood was utilized with bark in order to include possible inhibitory effects of the extractive rich bark proportion on steam treatment, enzymatic hydrolysis and biogas production. The optimization of steam refining for subsequent enzymatic hydrolysis or biogas production is based upon a factorial design of 25 experiments. Furthermore, After steam refining two fractions are obtained. The liquid extract is made up mainly by hemicellulose sugars and some degradation products. The fiber fraction consists mainly of lignin and cellulose.  Compared to carbohydrates, lignin has a much greater stability during steam pretreatment ( Considering the forementioned reactions the maximum of the extract yield can be explained by the degradation of the dissolved carbohydrates to furans and further degradation products. When the main hemicellulose fractions are hydrolyzed the further degradation and condensation reactions are dominating and the extract yield declines. Furthermore, the high reactivity of furans with lignin and with their own degradation products result into lignin modification and into additional high molar mass condensation products, which are insoluble and remain in the fiber fraction. Accordingly, it can be postulated that at high temperature and low SO As pointed out before the furans formed under harsh steaming conditions are predominantly accumulated in the extract. These compounds are toxic and can affect the enzymatic hydrolysis as well as the growth and metabolism of several microorganisms ( The steam pretreated spruce was used for enzymatic hydrolysis and biogas tests (GF The decrease of the total carbohydrate and biogas yields at SO The possible inhibitory effect of the furans on the biogas production was tested by the use of Avicel (microcrystalline cellulose) as a model substrate. In parallel to the effect of the furans on cellulose digestion the inhibitory influence of the fiber and extract fraction to each other was tested directly. For this case fibers and extract, obtained from steaming under optimal process conditions (220 The extract produced a high biogas volume of 540 According to the surface response model, a maximum biogas production of 231 For highest total monomeric carbohydrate yields after enzymatic hydrolysis as well as for highest biogas yields, steam pretreatment conditions of 220 Based on the model equations, a total carbohydrate yield of 39.3% (based on starting material) and a biogas production of 231 The total carbohydrate yield after enzymatic hydrolysis is equivalent to 55% of the theoretical available polysaccharides. (see Section On basis of a total yield of 80% after steaming (see This work was supported by the