The thermogravimetric (TG) and derivative thermogravimetric (DTG) analysis of compatibilized blends of low density polyethylene (LDPE) and poly(dimethyl siloxane) rubber (PDMS) in the proportion of 50:50 containing different proportions of ethylene methyl acrylate co-polymer (EMA) as compatibilizer have been studied. EMA acts as a chemical polymeric compatibilizer for the binary blend system of LDPE and PDMS, the proportion of which varied from 0 to 15 wt.%. The TG and DTG of the blends show that the thermal degradation takes place in two stages, where as neat LDPE shows a three stage degradation and neat EMA and PDMS show only single stage degradations respectively. The activation energies at 10% degradation have been determined using Freeman and Carroll's method and found to be maximum (171 kJ/mol) for the blend containing 6 wt.% of EMA. Half life periods at 200 °C have been evaluated by the Flynn and Wall method and found to be maximum for the blend containing 6 wt.% of EMA.The thermal stability of polymer blends and alloys has been extensively studied by several authors Santra et al. Silicone rubber has long been recognized as a specialty rubber for applications over a wide range of high and low temperatures. Low density polyethylene (LDPE) being the most abundantly used commodity plastic today is used extensively as the base polymer for insulation coating of wires and cables over a wide voltage range. Most of the synthetic rubbers e.g. styrene butadiene rubber (SBR), ethylene propylene diene rubber (EPDM), chloroprene rubber (CR) and other rubbers have been replaced by LDPE for its low dielectric loss properties and for its superior mechanical properties at ambient temperatures and because of its lower cost. Santra et al. Poly(dimethyl siloxanes) rubber (Silastic W-50) of Dow Corning Inc., USA having density of 115 kg m LDPE, PDMS and EMA were reactively blended in a Brabender Plasticorder (PLE-330) at 180 °C and at 100 rpm rotor speed for 10 min. The processing conditions were optimized earlier TG and DTG of the blends and pure components were carried out in a Stanton Redcroft Simultaneous Thermogravimetric Analyzer (Model: STA 625) equipped with a computer data analyser version C 4.20 and kinetic package. The studies were done in nitrogen atmosphere at a flow rate of 50 ml/min and heating rate of 10 °C/min. The weight of the sample used was 5 mg in all cases. TG and DTG curves of the crosslinked polymers are shown in The initial decomposition temperature ( Neat polyethylene (P100) shows an initial degradation temperature ( In contrast, S100 shows initial degradation temperature at 363 °C before any major degradation commences in the main chain. It may be due to higher bond energy of –Si–O– bonds, (–Si–O– bond dissociation energy=443 kJ/mol). On the other hand LDPE/PDMS blend in the proportion of 50:50 shows only a marginal improvement in thermal stability as depicted by its It has also been observed that at higher proportion of the EMA (i.e. 10 wt.% and 15 wt.%) EMA-g-PDMS tends to form a separate phase thus destabilizing the phase morphology and lowering the thermal stability. This initiates degradation at a much lower temperature than expected ( The activation energy (Δ The thermograms were analysed graphically to determine the ΔE value and half-life period by using the Freeman–Carroll and Flynn–Wall method with the help a software package supplied by Stanton Redcroft, version C4.20. The values obtained for the three neat components and their blends are reported in The experimental values of activation energy for all the blends are higher than the theoretical values, calculated using the additivity rule. The theoretical activation energy of the thermal degradation of a blend (Δ The half-life measured by the Flynn and Wall method at 200 °C for various blends and individual polymers are shown in  The initial degradation temperature (T The LDPE/PDMS blend (50:50) containing 6 wt.% of EMA exhibits the highest thermal stability of all the blends studied. The compatibilized blend vulcanizates exhibit a two-stage degradation. Half-life is maximum for the compatibilized blend containing 6 wt.% of EMA. Experimental activation energy is found to be higher than theoretically calculated values for all compatibilized blend systems and is the maximum for E6 system.