Practical methods of recycling spent automotive catalysts and their main disadvantages in industrial using are described. The hydrometallurgy method with electrochlorination is proposed as the basis of the platinum-group metals extraction technology after electric arc melting of ceramic catalysts carrier material with iron collector. The recovery of Platinum metals group materials from spent automotive catalysts was examined. Data obtained of the platinum, palladium, rhodium extraction are analyzed.To neutralize harmful emissions, the exhaust system of the car is equipped with an exhaust gas catalyst. The catalyst is a porous ceramic carrier, on the inner surface of which platinum group metals (PGM), such as Pt, Pd and Rh, which neutralize harmful exhaust gases, are deposited. Catalysts have a limited lifetime. All the platinum group metals used in them are rare and expensive. Their explored reserves are limited, and the increase in PGM production in the long-term will not meet the needs of the automotive industry, which determines the relevance of spent catalysts processing. Currently, more than 80 000 tons of spent automotive catalysts are formed annually in the world and their processing technologies are far from perfect. Existing methods of used automotive catalysts processing cuold be divided into hydrometallurgical and pyrometallurgical ones. Hydrometallurgical processing methods are inefficient, associated with hazardous materials and the formation of new waste. Pyrometallurgical methods are more effective, since they have a higher degree of extraction (up to 99%), and also do not use and do not form harmful compounds. However, high redistribution costs reduce the cost-effectiveness of the technology. The development of an optimal and energy-saving technology for an iron metal collector containing PGMs processing is still an economically relevant task. One of the main methods of processing spent catalysts to extract PGM is electric arc melting of ceramic material Iron, which has a high solubility of PGM, is the main material of the collector. Usually, the total content of PGM (Pt, Pd, Rh) in the iron concentrate does not exceed 3–5%. Also there are silicon, carbon, titanium, zirconium and other metals, passed into the reservoir from the main raw material, reducing agent and fluxes, in the resulting alloy. The resulting metal collector is heterogeneous in the composition and content of PGM in its various parts, it has high hardness due to the formation of carbide and silicide phases. It significantly complicates the crushing of the collector by traditional mechanical methods (crushing, grinding) in order to obtain a homogeneous material for sampling and certification. In addition, the low content of PGM (3–5%) in the presence of acid-resistant phases makes it difficult to analytical certification and subsequent refining of the material. It affects to the cost of refining and the rate of PGM extraction. Therefore, the collector enrichment directly at the final stage of catalyst processing is the relevant task, as it allows to increase the profitability of processing. Authors have developed a new iron collectors processing technology based on the electrochlorination method under the superposition of direct and alternating currents Electrolyte is an aqueous solution of hydrochloric acid. Decomposition of hydrochloric acid at the anode by passing a direct current leads to the formation of reactive chlorine, which reacts with the base of the collector, PGM, translating them into a water-soluble form. PGM transition into the aqueous phase allows to perform their subsequent selective electrochemical extraction from the solution on the cathode. In a laboratory demonstration facility, the modes of maximum dissolution of the iron collector with the maximum extraction of PGMs into the electrolyte and further selective deposition on the cathode were developed. The collector pieces of typical size 20–30 mm and 120 g weight were filled in the interelectrode space with the initial content of Pt = 2.33%, Pd = 1.42%, Rh = 0.21%. The amount of PGM is 3.96%. Then the electrolyzer was filled with an electrolyte based on an aqueous solution of HCl in a volume ratio of the solid state to liquid – 1:4, respectively. Recycling of the collector was carried out in two stages. The first stage is the chlorination of the material with its maximal transfer into solution, the second is the selective separation of PGMs from the solution. The installation was heated due to the direct transmission of high-frequency alternating current I = 100 A, U = 8 V. Turning to the chlorination mode with temperature parameter of 98–105 °C occurred in 10 min. Then, on the AC electrodes, the frequency was changed from high to low and reduced the current–voltage characteristics to 70 A, 4.5 V. In this mode, the processing of raw materials spent 100 min. Simultaneously with the transition to a low frequency of alternating current, direct current was switched on for selective extraction of PGM from the electrolyte. Electrodeposition on the central cathode, located in a cassette with a membrane, led for 2 h. The starting content of PGM in the electrolyte at the beginning of the precipitation, measured by ICP method, was Pt = 255 mg/l, Pd = 170 mg/l, Rh = 12 mg/l. During electroprecipitation, forced electrolyte recondensation was performed. The process of selective electrochemical extraction of PGMs is based on the establishment of optimal currents for their electrodeposition in solutions obtained after electrochlorination, as well as the most favorable temperature-hydrodynamic mode of electroextraction. The transfer of PGM into a solution proceeds under relatively harsh conditions of electrochlorination, which, most likely, causes the oxidation of platinoids to higher degrees. The reduction of such anions usually proceeds stepwise with the formation of intermediates - compounds in the intermediate oxidation state, including anions. This causes a direction of the migration flow of the reacting particles from the cathode to the anode, which under diffusion restrictions on PGM ions must inevitably lead to a rapid depletion of the cathode space and a decrease in the rate of recovery of platinoids. To improve mass transfer, it is necessary to intensify convection by mixing the solution in the interelectrode space mechanically or by forced pumping from the anode to the cathode. The influence of the temperature and hydrodynamic conditions on the kinetics of the cathode process in solutions after electrochlorination of the collectors was carried out by polarization measurements in a three-electrode thermostatic cell using an Elins P20X potentiostat. Graphite was used as a working electrode, platinum served as an auxiliary electrode, electrode potentials were measured relatively to a silver chloride reference electrode. The solution was stirred with a magnetic stirrer.  It is advisable to extract PGM at current densities below the limiting diffusion current in order to avoid violent hydrogen emission and, accordingly, disruption and entrainment of weakly bound dendritic cathodic deposits formed during similar electrolysis conditions. Thus, from the point of view of selective separation of PGM, the process of electroextraction must be carried out at temperatures not lower than 80 °C, the developed hydrodynamic regime in the interelectrode space and at current densities below the limiting diffusion in terms of PGM (in the example shown on After the experiment completed, the undissolved catalyst residue was removed from the reactor. The residue was a fine powder. The material did not exhibit magnetic properties. The mass of the residue was 24% of the original mass of the collector. The material composition was analyzed on a Zetium instrument using X-ray photoelectron analysis. The content of platinum in terms of oxides to metal was Pt = 1.9%, Pd = 0.78%, Rh = 0.31%. The amount of PGM = 2.99%. After annealing in air, the mass of the residue decreased by 10%, which indicates the presence of carbon in the material after processing. The residue is apparently based on iron silicides with PGM dissolved in them. To test this assumption, the residue was treated with concentrated hydrofluoric acid. The reaction proceeded violently with great heat release. The mass of the residue after treatment was 2.5% of the collector initial mass with a total content of PGM of about 24%. After the process completed, the cathode was removed from the cassette and treated with aqua regia. The ICP solution was analyzed for PGM content. According to the results of the analysis, the concentration of PGM in the resulting precipitate was calculated, as well as the extraction of PGM, which was, respectively, by mass Pt = 2.19 g (78.3% of the initial content), Pd = 1.47 g (86.2%), Rh = 0.16 g (63.5%). Taking into account the content of PGM in the rich balance, the loss of processing amounted to Pt, Pd not more than 2% each, Rh about 5%. At the same time, iron hydroxide with residual PGM (Pt = 210 ppm, Pd = 180 ppm, Rh = 280 ppm) was extracted from the final electrolyte by chemical precipitation, which can be used as a material for the collector in the new process. Using the electrochlorination method, it is shown that it is possible in principle to efficiently process a pyrometallurgical collector obtained after smelting spent automotive catalysts, with high selective electrochemical extraction of PGM to the cathode and obtaining an MPG-rich undissolved residue and returning iron. The recovery of PGM from the spent automotive catalysts by combination of pyrometallurgy and hydrometallurgy methods can in fact be considered an environmentally friendly technology and a profitable business. The combination of both processes on one enterprise allows to make a closed production cycle and obtain a high final PGM concentration for subsequent refining. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This research was funded by