The indirect Schmidt hammer test is used to determine the mechanical behavior of rock materials. The method has so far been widely applied to intact rock, and therefore researchers have developed procedures for its use on rock cores and blocks. However, there is currently little information about using the Schmidt hammer for in-situ testing. The purpose of this study was therefore to evaluate the application of the Schmidt hammer test in-situ on a coal face. In this study, a measurement area of 72m2 was selected in the center of a 330m2 longwall face. The main measurement area was divided into a grid system, with each grid section having an area of 0.375m2. The tests were conducted as a single hammer impact at the center of each grid section. One thousand nine hundred and sixty-five records were constructed using the data obtained from 10 face positions, and these were used for statistical analyses. The statistical results suggested that the total number of tests carried out on the main measurement area was more than the minimum required. An equation was then developed that not only gives the appropriate test number, but also provides information about the grid system. Hence, a new approach is proposed for determining the optimum grid system and test number for in-situ testing of coal faces.Rock mechanics engineers design structures built in rock for various purposes, and therefore need to determine the properties and behavior of the rock. The mechanical strength of rock is one of the most important factors of concern to engineers who carry out mining operations; information about rock strength is used in rock excavation operations, especially for performance testing of excavation machines. Rock strength can be assessed directly by the uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) test suggested by ISRM and ASTM. However, in order to carry out these standard tests, special samples, such as cylindrical core or cubical samples, need to be prepared. Preparing core samples has several drawbacks, as it is difficult, expensive, and time-consuming. Moreover, the preparation of irregular-shaped samples from weak or fractured rock masses is also difficult. The other standard tests are indirect tests such as the Schmidt hammer and point load index tests, which do not require regular samples. Therefore, these tests are increasingly being used by rock engineers, since they are simpler, need less preparation, and are also portable. The Schmidt hammer test is preferred by rock engineers for measuring surface hardness and is widely used to estimate the mechanical properties of rock materials. In the mining industries, it is used to determine the quality of rock, which is common practice when constructing rock structures such as those found in longwall mining, room and pillar mining, open-pit mining, gate roadways, tunnels, dams, etc. The Schmidt hammer test was developed in 1948 for non-destructive testing of concrete hardness Schmidt hammer models are designed with different levels of impact energy. The standard L- and N-type Schmidt hammers are built to generate different levels of impact energy: 0.735 and 2.207 In rock mechanics studies, it is assumed that mechanical properties such as hardness and strength are not intrinsic material properties. The type of the testing instrument and the test procedure will affect hardness and strength values obtained from the rock unit. Considering its long history and widespread use, standard methods for the Schmidt hammer test have been prepared by ISRM According to a literature survey carried out for this study ( At the beginning of this study, the research group faced an important problem concerning the Schmidt hammers have been used to estimate the empirical correlation between rebound readings and compressive strength values obtained from standard tests for concrete and rocks There are a number of studies investigating the usefulness of the Schmidt hammer test on different rock types. Miller It is known that the performance of machines used in excavation work is influenced by the intensity and orientation of the discontinuities encountered in the rock mass. If the Schmidt hammer is applied on the face, the characteristics of the rock material are affected by rock mass properties such as rock quality designation (RQD) and the orientation of discontinuities, so that the excavation performance of the machine may be predicted or further improved. However, research published on To estimate the hard and weak rock mass properties, to characterize mine roof stability, and also to estimate the performance of roadheaders, several researchers have studied the Cayirhan coal mine, located 125 Rebound tests on the longwall face were carried out with a Proceq L-type digital Schmidt hammer with impact energy of 0.735 The Schmidt hammer rebound hardness tests were performed on coal faces with the instrument held horizontally at right angles to the vertical coal face. In this study, the test surfaces on the coal face were polished manually with the grinding stone provided by the Schmidt hammer manufacturer, in accordance with the base study carried out by Katz et al. As shown in Schmidt hammer tests were initiated within the preliminary study to give direction to the main study. The preliminary test area was a 6 After the Schmidt hammer tests had been carried out on the preliminary experimental area, the research group analyzed the test results. For To evaluate and interpret the rebound values measured on the face, According to the preliminary results and our engineering experience and judgment, the research group decided to divide the test area into a grid with each cell having an area of 0.375 The coal on the face was a heterogeneous material with impact values ranging from 14 to 60. The test results obtained by the Schmidt hammer on the coal face were evaluated, using both approaches suggested by Young and Fowell Coal production on the longwall face may stop due to changing shifts or other mining activities. This period during which there was no production was named as the time that passed before excavation. Before Schmidt hammer was applied for each longwall face position ( The difference between The values graphed to evaluate the test results were calculated as shown in Schmidt hammer tests results obtained from 10 different regions of the coal face were processed as illustrated in Typical curves for each model derived by the statistical program are given in As shown in ASTM Schmidt hammer test numbers determined by Eq. The procedures developed for the In order to determine the optimum test number and to find the optimum grid section area for coal-face testing in underground and open-pit coal mines, rock mechanics engineers can use Eq. The optimum Schmidt hammer test number ( The area of one grid section for The selected test area is divided systematically using the grid section dimensions calculated from stage 2. From the midpoint of each of the formed one grid section areas, only one single impact value is read by the Schmidt hammer. To determine the average Schmidt rebound value, the mathematical average of the single rebound values read from each grid section area is calculated. The results presented in this paper are a part of Niyazi Bilim's Ph.D. thesis. The aim of the study was to analyze the cutting performance of a drum shearer used at the coal face to cut coal. The authors wish to thank Park Holding for permission to publish this paper. This study was supported by the Research Foundation of Selcuk University under Project no. BAP-2004/077.