A novel liquid membrane system, denoted strip dispersion hybrid liquid membrane (SDHLM) containing tri-n-octylamine-secondary octanol in kerosene, was reported for the transport and separation of Cd(II) from Zn(II) ions. The experiments show that Cd(II) can be efficiently transported into stripping solution with SDHLM. In the experimental comparison of transport flux, permeability coefficient, recovery percentage or concentration of solute in stripping solution, efficiency of uphill transport, loss of membrane solution, and separation efficiency of membrane for two types of liquid membrane, SDHLM has superiority over SLM.Facilitated transport of solute through supported liquid membrane (SLM) has been widely studied in the literatures and attracts extensive attention in the separation and hydrometallurgy field For solving the above difficulties of application of liquid membrane in industry and devising the liquid membrane system of high efficiency, the new liquid membrane configurations have been reported. For example, as early as 1980 Boyadzhiev and Kyuchoukov have described a very similar hybrid system In the study a novel liquid membrane system, incorporating concepts of supported liquid membrane (SLM) and emulsion liquid membrane (ELM), denoted strip dispersion hybrid liquid membrane (SDHLM), is reported. SDHLM possesses three characteristics. Firstly, it does not utilize the high surface active surfactant and demulsification device when stripping solution is dispersed in organic solution. Secondly, microporous support material can be hydrophilic or hydrophobic, and ion exchange membrane However, differing from the above studies, in this study we conducted the SLM and SDHLM experiments, using the same feed, carrier, strip solution, hydrophobic membrane, diffusion cell, and circulating rate. The aim of our experiment is to compare the transport of Cd(II) through SLM or SDHLM. Comparison of the data obtained enables a more comprehensive understanding of the advantages and disadvantages of SDHLM for the application in industry. At the same time, comparison of transport data help us to realize the potential of SDHLM in order to overcome the instability and lower transport flux of SLM. Strip dispersion hybrid liquid membrane has high selectivity, “uphill concentration” availability, long membrane lifetime, and continuous operation, etc. In this way, the SDHLM is expected to be an environmentally friendly and economical liquid waste management technology. In this study SLM configuration employs a polypropylene microporus film as the liquid membrane support. The aqueous strip solution comprises an aqueous phase containing a stripping agent in solvent extraction, while the organic phase contains an extractant in an organic solvent. SDHLM contains two steps. First, a feed solution containing one or more metal ions is passed on one side of the SLM embedded in a microporous support material. In the step the extraction takes place in the interface between feed solution and membrane. Meanwhile, the metal–carrier complex diffuses to the other side of the SLM and treated to remove the metal ions by the use of a strip dispersion phase. In general, the usage of a mixer can disperse an aqueous strip solution in an organic liquid and form the droplets of the aqueous strip solution dispersed in a continuous organic phase because the extractant is weak surface-active. It is called as the strip dispersion phase. Essentially, the droplets of the aqueous strip solution dispersed in a continuous organic phase are water in oil-type emulsion (w/o type). In the experimental process there is a constant supply of the organic membrane solution, i.e. the organic liquid of the strip dispersion phase, contacting the pores of SLM. This constant supply of the organic liquid ensures a stable and continuous operation of the SLM and diffusing of the metal- carrier complex to the interface between the aqueous strip solution and the organic liquid from the pores of SLM. In this way, the direct contact between the aqueous strip solution and the organic liquid provides efficient mass transfer for stripping. Secondly, once removal of the target species is complete, the mixer for the strip dispersion is stopped. The strip dispersion, or a part of the strip dispersion phase is allowed to stand, resulting in separation of the strip dispersion phase into two phases: the organic phase readily wetting the pores of support to form a stable SLM and the aqueous strip solution phase containing concentrated metal ions. The concentrated strip solution is the product of this process. On the feed side interface of SLM, the extraction of Cd(II) from feed phase with tri- Firstly, complex of cadmium(II) by chloride ions in the feed solution: The reaction on the stripping side–membrane interface in the presence of CH All the reagent such as CdCl A stock solution of Cd(II) was prepared by dissolving CdCl Stripping solution was prepared taking the required amount of CH A microporous polypropylene membrane was used as solid support and obtained from Hunan Plastic Research Institute. It was a 0.02 The flux measurements for the strip dispersion hybrid liquid membrane (SDHLM) were performed as follows: the experiments were accomplished at 30 The experiments were performed at 30 In this study, the loss of membrane liquid determined by the weighing method is thus the sum of the loss of the carrier plus membrane solvent. Moreover, the loading of metal into the membrane liquid and the possible water molecules associated with the carrier and/or metal complex within the membrane pores might cause extra errors in the determination of membrane liquid loss. Ref. The content of TNOA dissolved in feed and stripping solution is analyzed by bromophenol blue-spectrophotometry For convenience of discussion, a parameter, The effect of As seen from  CH  The use of carrier-coupled SLM in the separation and concentration of metal species has received much attention because of the uphill transport or chemical pumping of a metal species against its concentration gradient. Logically, the uphill transport of solutes through SLM has been extensively studied by investigators It is seen from This result indicates that the rate of mass transport for SDHLM is faster than SLM. The following parameter is defined Since relatively few studies concerning the separation of two or more competitive solutes are encountered in the actual literature, more work is required in this field in order to approach more practical separation problems and examine the advantages or shortcomings for SDHLM and SLM. Instability of SLM is due to the loss of carrier and/or membrane solvent from membrane phase into the adjacent aqueous solution. The amounts of carrier and solvent lost from the organic membrane phase exert a great effect on the lifetime of membrane. The present work reported the results of loss of membrane liquid from the organic membrane phase into the aqueous solutions for SDHLM and SLM. If combination of Up to date, most of the research work on liquid membrane published in the literatures deals mainly with the study of three parameters: permeation, stability, and selectivity. As a consequence, a great quantity of good-quality relevant parameters data will be required.  In the study cadmium(II) can be effectively transported into the stripping solution from the feed phase by the SDHLM using TNOA in kerosene as carrier. The advantages of SDHLM are summarized as follows in comparison with SLM. The efficient contact between organic and stripping solution with high-shear mixing results in an extra mass transfer surface area and lead to a 1.5–4-fold increase of transport rate of Cd(II) and the concentrated strip solution in SDHLM. In uphill transport, the permeability efficiency, extraction or recovery percentage of Cd(II) for SDHLM are entirely superior to SLM, respectively. It indicates that SDHLM exhibit higher efficiency of membrane transport than SLM in uphill transport. SDHLM can continuously and automatically replenish membrane supports pores by the organic phase in order to prevent membrane from rupture, whereas the loss of membrane solution in the adjacent aqueous solution for SLM is about 11–14% in our experimental conditions. The loss of membrane solution for SLM is mainly uptake of kerosene into adjacent aqueous solution from membrane. During competitive transport of Cd(II) or Zn(II) SDHLM can achieve higher selectivity for Cd(II) than SLM and exhibits the higher separation efficiency. SDHLM has several advantages over conventional SLM and ELM (emulsion liquid membrane) technology. These advantages include increased membrane stability, improved flux, improved recovery of target species concentration, no usage of high active surfactant and demulsification device, and reduced costs.