In the present study, two vanadium-microalloyed 10Mn-18Cr TWIP-type stainless steels with low and high Si contents were designed to achieve a stacking fault energy of 25 mJ/m2. Hot deformation behavior was investigated using compression tests in the temperature range 950–1100 °C and strain rate range 0.01–10 s−1. Microstructural features of the rolled slabs were studied using optical microscopy and those of the hot deformed specimens by electron backscatter diffraction. The low-Si steel possessed a higher hot deformation resistance and a higher activation energy of deformation (507 kJ/mol) compared to the high-Si steel (477 kJ/mol). This unusual trend is attributed to an increasing fraction of soft ferrite in the latter steel with increasing temperature. At lower test temperatures, where partial dynamic recrystallization occurred in the high-Si steel, ferrite possessed high-angle grain boundaries, while the austenite contained dislocation substructures. The hot deformation behavior of the steels was modeled using the dislocation density based Bergström model and the dynamic recrystallization based Avrami model. The rate of increase of Bergstrom's hardening parameter as a function of the Zener-Hollomon parameter is seen to be higher for the high-Si steel.A recent trend in the automotive industry is the increasing use of lightweight materials with ultrahigh strength. The eco-concept of using lightweight structures is to decrease the negative impact of the environmental pollution through lower CO Twinning induced plasticity (TWIP) and Transformation induced plasticity (TRIP) steels, Fe-Mn based materials, are promising materials for the automotive industry. According to the open literature, these types of steels exhibit very high strain hardening capability due to the dynamic effect of twins and martensite on the grain structure [ However, due to their high Mn content, TWIP steels have poor resistance to wet corrosion [ The use of microalloying elements such as Nb and V to control the grain size and improve the yield strength of steels is widespread. However, microalloying is rarely applied to TWIP steels. A few publications have reported studies on microalloyed TWIP steels with V, Nb and Ti. For example, Scott et al. [ Reyes-Calderón et al. [ The above-mentioned steels are high-Mn (>20 wt%) TWIP type steels. Regarding Mn-Cr-alloyed stainless steels, most of the investigations focus on the parameters influencing mechanical properties. For instance, Berns et al. [ The hot deformation characteristics of these materials are important for the efficient design of their manufacturing processes, such as hot rolling, forging and stamping. Investigation of the hot workability of the steel is essential to be able to control its grain structure and thereby to achieve optimal mechanical properties. Hamada et al. have extensively studied the hot deformation behavior of high-Mn TWIP steels [ The aim of this work is to provide a detailed description of the effect of Si on the hot deformation behavior of TWIP stainless steels. The high temperature deformation of the steels under study are investigated both experimentally and analytically using the well-known Bergström and Avrami models. It has been established that the deformation twinning mechanism is active in the SFE range 18–35 mJ/m The designed steels were prepared by using an open-induction furnace with a 50 kg capacity. The raw materials in the melting process were steel scrap, low-carbon master alloys of ferrochrome, ferromanganese and ferrosilicon, and pure nickel. Nitrovan, a source of nitrogen and vanadium, was added to the molten steel in a ladle furnace. Subsequently, the melt was cast as 50-kg ingots into Y-shaped blocks of 60 mm thickness. The cast ingots were subjected to homogenization at 1473 K (1200 °C) for 4 h to reduce segregation of the alloying elements, especially that of Mn. Subsequently, the homogenized cast materials were hot-rolled to 12-mm-thick bands with an 80 pct reduction using a laboratory rolling mill. The rolling process started at 1200 °C and involved deformation passes with 20 pct reduction and 10 s interpass time. At the end of rolling, the temperature of the ingot was ~1050 °C from which it was water cooled to room temperature. The chemical compositions of the investigated steels, given in To study the hot deformation characteristics of the present steels along with the effect of Si on the constitutive behavior at high temperatures, single-hit compression tests were conducted using a Gleeble 3800 thermo-mechanical simulator (Dynamic Systems Inc., Poestenkill, NY). Cylindrical specimens with the dimensions of 10 mm length and 8 mm diameter were machined from the hot rolled sheets with their axes parallel to the rolling direction. A typical thermo-mechanical cycle is shown in After the hot deformation, the specimens were immediately fast cooled to preserve the high temperature microstructure. The fast cooling was achieved in the present work by using compressed air blowing giving a cooling rate of 100 °C/s. Equilibrium phase diagrams were calculated using the Thermo-Calc software package based on the CALPHAD method using TCFE9 thermodynamic database for Fe-based alloys. Selected hot deformed specimens were sectioned in the longitudinal direction parallel to the compression axis and prepared for metallographic examination. A field emission gun scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM, Zeiss Sigma) equipped with an EDAX Hikari XP electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) detector and accessory device (EDAX, TSL OIM Data Analysis) was used for direct microstructural investigations. An acceleration voltage of 15 kV and step sizes of 0.1–0.2 μm were used during the EBSD scans. Before the EBSD examination, the steel surfaces were mechanically polished down to 0.5 μm by using a diamond suspension, and finally chemically polished by using a 0.05 μm colloidal suspension of silica for about 10 min. For optical microscopy, an electrolytic polishing using 60% nitric acid was applied with a voltage of 1.1 V for 45 s at room temperature. X-ray diffraction (XRD) data acquisition was carried out for phase analysis using Co-Kα radiation in a powder diffractometer (Rigaku SmartLab XRD diffractometer) equipped with a secondary beam monochromator. The step scan mode, with a preset holding time of 10 s at each 0.01° step in 2θ, was used to improve the counting statistics. The hot flow stresses of the two steels before the peak stress were modeled using Bergström's equation: On the other hand, assuming dynamic recrystallization to be the dominant phenomenon after the peak stress, the hot flow stress was modeled using the well-known Avrami equation: The terms The values of the peak and steady state stress ( The isopleth equilibrium phase diagrams showing the fraction of equilibrium phases in wt% for both steels are plotted in According to the equilibrium diagrams, in both steels, Cr Typical microstructures of the hot-rolled steels are shown in Microstructural observations showing fully austenitic structure for the low-Si MnCr steel and duplex austenitic/ferritic structure for the high-Si MnCr steel are in agreement with the Thermo-Calc predictions presented in the previous section ( The true stress-strain curves recorded in compression tests at various temperatures and strain rates are presented in It is well established that DRX and DRV are the main restoration mechanisms during hot deformation of materials. For instance, Lin et al. [ Typically, DRX occurs under certain limited conditions. Also here, for example, at 950 °C and the strain rate of 0.01 s As reported by McQueen and Ryan [ The stress multiplier Most commonly, the peak stress ( During isothermal deformation, the parameters The parameters Similarly, the stress exponent Therefore, the stress exponent The hyperbolic sine relation of Eq. The regression analysis of the slopes of the plots between ln[sin In contrast, studying the influence of Si on the hot deformation behavior of austenitic high-Mn TWIP steels with base compositions of 25 wt% Mn and 3 wt% Al, showed that the hot deformation resistance of 25Mn3Al containing 3 wt% Si is significantly higher than that of the 25Mn3Al steel without Si [  It is well known that the activation energy of hot deformation of steels is dependent on the chemical composition [ It is generally accepted that the crystal structure of the steel could affect its activation energy of hot deformation. For instance, the presence of the open The hot deformed microstructures of selected specimens of both steels were examined using EBSD to identify the microstructural features and the related restoration mechanisms. Although no peak stress could be seen in the flow curves of the low-Si steel compressed at 1100 °C at 1 s At a high magnification, new DRX grains can be detected inside a deformed grain, as observed in The microstructure of the high-Si MnCr steel after hot compression to 0.6 true strain at 950 °C/0.1 s  Some micrographs of the high-Si MnCr steel deformed at the higher temperature of 1100 °C and the strain rate of 1 s Hence, it can be concluded that DRX was accompanied by serrated grain boundaries forming necklace structures in both the studied steels. Also, the DRX grain sizes were comparable in the two steels. However, in the case of the high-Si steel which consisted of a ferrite + austenite duplex structure, DRX was first initiated in ferrite. Furthermore, comparison of The hot flow stresses of the two steels were successfully predicted by Bergström and Avrami equations. In the instance of the flow curves without a peak stress, only the Bergström equation was applied. But, a combination of the Avrami and Bergstrom equations was used to model the behavior of specimens which showed peak stresses. Some representative flow curves are shown in The values of the hardening and softening parameters and the resultant values of the dislocation density at the peak stress, i.e. U, Ω, and The values of the Bergström parameters and the peak dislocation density which were calculated under various test conditions are plotted as a function of Z as depicted in Expectedly, the hardening parameter ( The rate of increase of U and decrease of Ω with Z for the high-Si MnCr steel is higher than that of the low-Si steel. Therefore, although there exists a small difference between the dislocation densities of the two steels, this difference slightly increases as Z is increased ( In the instance of the tests which showed a certain peak stress and subsequent softening behavior, the Avrami exponent (n The hot deformation behavior of two austenitic 10Mn-18Cr V-microalloyed steels bearing a low (0.42 wt%) and a high (2.22 wt%) silicon content was studied by carrying out hot compression tests in the temperature range 950–1100 °C and the strain rate range 0.01–10 s According to the Thermo-Calc analyses, the most significant consequence of silicon alloying is the promotion of ferrite, which was then confirmed metallographically and with X-ray diffraction studies. Ferrite only becomes stable at a significantly higher temperature (1240 °C) in the low-Si steel compared to the high-Si counterpart (1030 °C). From the flow stress curves, it could be observed that for most of the test conditions, both the peak stress and strain were slightly higher for the low-Si steel compared to the high-Si steel. The activation energies of deformation of the studied steels were higher than those typical of high-Mn TWIP steels, but were close to the values of austenitic stainless steels. The high silicon content of the high-Si steel induced the formation of ferrite, which lowered the activation energy of deformation of this steel (477 kJ/mol) by 13 pct compared to the low-Si steel (507 kJ/mol). EBSD examinations showed that the degree of DRX was much higher in the high-Si steel than in the low-Si steel under the same test conditions. In the low-Si steel only partial dynamic recrystallization occurred. Sub-grains with 10–15° misorientation transformed into effective nucleation sites for dynamic recrystallization. At high temperatures (low Z values), the Bergström hardening parameter (U) was higher and the softening parameter (Ω) lower for the low-Si steel compared to the high-Si steel. This was due to the presence of ferrite in the high-Si steel at high temperatures. However, at low temperatures, the opposite is true as a result from the promoting influence of higher Si content on hardening. The rate of increase of U with Z was higher for the high-Si steel. This was attributed to the presence of a higher fraction of ferrite at higher temperatures (lower Z). One of the authors (Atef Hamada) expresses his gratitude to the Science and Technology Development fund (STDF), Egypt for funding the production of the novel TWIP steels through the financial support granted to project number 10751 of the National Challenges Program. The hot and cold rolling processes; machining; hot deformation tests and metallography in this manuscript have been conducted at the Materials and Production Engineering unit in the Faculty of Technology, the University of Oulu, Finland.