It has been found that disintegration of kimberlite in contact with water is associated with the swelling of clays (such as smectite). This work investigates the possibility that cation exchange between kimberlite and the aqueous weathering medium could enhance or retard disintegration. A strong effect of cations has been found, with the extent of disintegration of kimberlite decreasing in the order Cu2+
                     >Fe3+
                     >Fe2+
                     >Mg2+
                     >Li+
                     >Ni2+
                     >Ca2+
                     >Al3+
                     >Na+
                     >
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 NH
                              
                              
                                 4
                              
                              
                                 +
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     >K+. It was found that K+ retards disintegration. The concentration of cations and temperature have strong effects, whereas the identity of the anion (sulphate or chloride) has little effect. The relationship between the ionic potential (cation valence and effective radius) of each cation, and the observed extent of kimberlite disintegration, holds well for all cations except the trivalent species. Fe3+ and Al3+ have the tendency to form hydroxy species in the interlayer and therefore exhibit a very different mechanism of adsorption. The interlayer spacing of the basal planes of the clays (after exposure to solutions containing the different cations) does not have a clear relationship with the extent of disintegration. It is suggested that it may not only be swelling that determines the weathering behaviour of kimberlite but that the cations possibly influence the surface energy.Diamonds are normally liberated from kimberlite through a series of mechanical size degradation processes such as crushing or milling before recovery. However, if kimberlite disintegration could be accelerated, this could be employed as an alternative to or in combination with crushing (for size reduction), especially at smaller kimberlite deposits. Therefore this subject has seen ongoing interest and research at De Beers. Retardation of kimberlite disintegration would also be useful in some circumstances, for example for improved tunnel wall stability and to maintain integrity of drill core samples. Previous work ( Swelling of kimberlite can occur because of the presence of specific layered silicates. Kimberlite is described as complex hybrid potassic, ultrabasic rocks which occur as pipes, dykes and sills ( Smectite clays also exhibit the property of exchanging cations, where the type of cation/s influence the smectite minerals and hence kimberlite properties when smectite is present. Adsorption and desorption studies on Na Crystalline swelling is the dominant smectite swelling mechanism and occurs by hydration of cations in the interlayers of the silicate sheet structure. The ionic potential ( Kimberlite from Dutoitspan ( Different cation-containing solutions were tested. The monovalent cations tested were potassium, sodium, ammonium and lithium, divalent cations were magnesium, calcium, ferrous and cupric, and the trivalent cations were aluminium and ferric; all of these were added to distilled water as the chlorides, to achieve a concentration of 0.5 The results of the investigation on the effect of monovalent cations are shown in The results from All divalent cations tested increased the rate of disintegration of kimberlite. Calcium showed a 15% increase in cumulative percentage passing 11.2 Two trivalent cations were tested with aluminium yielding 24% passing 11.2 Comparing the differently charged cations yields the disintegration series (from most effective to least effective) as Cu A correlation of ionic potential ( For investigation of the effect of cation concentration, tests were done at 0.005, 0.025, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2 and 0.4 The results of the concentration tests are reported in The time dependence of the disintegration process was investigated by exposing the kimberlite to a 0.2 The effect of the anion on weathering was evaluated by comparing kimberlite disintegration in a cupric chloride and in a cupric sulphate solution, both at 0.3 The influence of temperature was tested by comparing the effects of kimberlite exposure to distilled water and a 0.1 Possible effects of cation identity on the interlayer spacing as measured by X-ray diffraction ( Dutoitspan kimberlite was exposed to 0.5 From these results it is concluded that the interlayer spacing (swelling) cannot in itself explain the disintegration behaviour of kimberlite. The absence of an effect of cation type on the extent of smectite swelling is in apparent contradiction with the central role of swelling clay in kimberlite disintegration, which is proposed in this paper. To state the apparent contradiction simply: swelling causes kimberlite disintegration; kimberlite disintegration is strongly affected by the identity of cations in the solution; yet cation identity has little effect on swelling. This apparent contradiction can be resolved by invoking other elements of the failure process. Griffith-style fracture of brittle materials depends on defect length, applied stress and surface tension. Of these, the defect length is expected to depend on the kimberlite structure, and this does not change if the weathering solution is changed. The stress is applied by swelling; this can be seen to be little affected by cation identity. By elimination, this leaves an effect of cation identity on the surface energy of the crack; such an effect could arise from cation adsorption on the crack surface. A study of Cu Further work could also include X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) which can provide information on the binding energy and changes in binding energy when cations are adsorbed. This information could contribute to a better understanding of the mechanism of cation weathering of kimberlite. This work has demonstrated that the cation-exchanging ability of smectite can be used to affect kimberlite disintegration strongly. Cupric ions show the strongest disintegration effect, but other cations can also be used for accelerated disintegration. The interlayer spacing, which is established by exposure to the different cations does not correlate generally with kimberlite disintegration – although collapse of the interlayer spacing (for potassium and ammonium ions) is associated with decreased disintegration. This means that the fundamental effect of cation exchange on kimberlite disintegration does not only involve swelling. An effect on the surface energy of crack surfaces is a likely second role of the exchanged cations. The writers wish to thank Pete Sergeant from Debtech for his inputs and efforts. Thanks to Richard Kekana for arranging ore supplies. Gratitude to the De Beers mines that supplied various kimberlite ores for test work. Acknowledgements to De Beers and the University of Pretoria for supporting this research work and allowing publication.