Thin layers of about 30μm thickness were grown on upgraded metallurgical (UMG) silicon substrates by liquid phase epitaxy (LPE) from an indium solvent. Instead of adding electronic grade silicon to the solution, a melt back step was carried out before each growth process to supply silicon to the melt from the UMG-Si wafers. We present an LPE technology which is capable to be directly scaled up to a few hundred layers per run. Solar cells have been fabricated based on phosphorous paste diffusion with efficiencies up to η=10.0%.While R&D is ongoing to develop a Solar Grade silicon feedstock, recent results show that existing metallurgical grade silicon (MG-Si) can be modified without the need for complex high cost chlorosilane chemistry to purify the product. Such UMG-Si material gives a reasonable efficiency solar cell provided a thin film of silicon is used on the substrate cast from the UMG material. The UMG-Si was fabricated at Elkem in a pilot scale (300 The major task of our present investigations is the development of an LPE technology on UMG-Si substrates, which can be scaled up to a few hundred layers per run. The standard sliding boat approach Solar cells have been fabricated by an industrial low cost process. Both emitter and contact formation were carried out by screen printing. PECVD SiN was used as a antireflection and passivation layer and served as a hydrogen source for bulk passivation. Efficiencies of up to Metallurgical grade silicon melts were refined to remove in particular the harmful SiC particles and some metallic impurities Large cast ingots were fabricated by Eurosolare in a furnace specially adapted for the use of UMG-Si Thin layers of 30 Instead of adding electronic grade silicon as a source to the solution, a melt back step was carried out before each of the growth process to supply silicon to the melt from the UMG-Si wafers. It is expected that the upgrading of the indium by zone melting needs less energy and effort than the purification of metallurgical silicon to electronic grade Si. Up to three substrates are dipped horizontally into the indium solvent with an equidistant spacing of 3 Solar cells have been fabricated based on emitter diffusion by screen printing and firing of a phosphorous dopant paste. The cells were finished by industrial processes like PECVD SiN Recently, after implementation of the batch process ( It is demonstrated that metallurgical silicon is an important candidate to replace the shortcoming EG-Si feedstock for the production of thin film solar cells. The UMG-Si feedstock is developed at pilot scale and can be produced in large quantity for the need of the PV-uses. LPE was used to provide a thin silicon layer onto the UMG-Si wafer in a batch type system. The solar cell parameters demonstrate the high quality of the LPE layers on the UMG-Si substrate. Further improvement of the solar cell performance is expected by the implementation of POCl In principle, a horizontal batch apparatus can be scaled up to 300 wafers (125×125 The authors are grateful to Francesca Ferrazza (Eurosolare, Italy) for ingot casting and wafering and Bernhard Fischer for IQE calculations. This work was supported by the ‘Ministerium für Wissenschaft, Forschung und Kunst, Baden Württemberg’, Germany within the COSOLAR project.