The reactivity of cemented paste tailings (CPT) that contains sulphide mineral-bearing tailings is a key parameter that influences its environmental performance and durability. This reactivity can be influenced by several factors, such as the initial sulphate content of the CPT. In this paper, the effect of the initial sulphate content of the CPT on its reactivity is experimentally investigated by conducting oxygen consumption (OC) tests on CPT specimens. Microstructural testing is also conducted on CPT specimens to better understand the mechanisms responsible for the changes in the reactivity of CPT. These specimens are prepared by mixing defined amounts of pyritic tailings (45wt%), varying proportions of Portland cement type I or Portland cement partially replaced with different types and amounts of mineral admixtures, and mixing water with various sulphate contents (0, 5000, 15,000 and 25,000ppm). The samples are cured for 150days at room temperature. The results show that regardless of the type of binder, the reactivity of the CPT specimens increases with increasing contents of sulphate except for a sulphate content of 5000ppm. Also, partial substitution of Portland cement type I with mineral admixtures, such as granulated blast furnace slag or fly ash, reduces the chemical reactivity. Regardless of the initial sulphate content, increasing the cement content and/or replacing cement with mineral admixtures leads to the reduction in the reactivity of the paste.Mining is an important economic activity in Canada as well as in many parts of the world. In 2015, the mining industry added a value of $67 billion to the gross domestic product (GDP) in Canada ( Commonly, sulphide-rich tailings are stored under water in tailings disposal impoundments and/or covered with inert materials such as soil. The principle behind these disposal methods is to isolate sulphide bearing tailings from coming into direct contact with oxygen and/or water (triggering agents). As a result, the formation of AMD will be prevented or minimized to acceptable levels. However, the implementation of these traditional disposal methods has some environmental and economic issues ( CPT can be simply described as a cementitious material that mainly consists of three ingredients, namely, thickened tailings (dominant material; solid percentage commonly between 75% to 85%), binder (commonly 3–7% by dry mass of tailings) which can be Portland cement solely or the partial use of mineral admixtures in lieu, and mixing water which can be either fresh or processing water. The fresh CPT mixture is transported by gravity and/or pumping through pipeline systems to fill the mined voids (stopes) in underground mines. This fluidic mixture will solidify with time and gain the necessary strength (mainly due to the progression of binder hydration) to stand like a “concrete” structure in underground mines. Environmental performance and durability are two important aspects in the design of CPT structures. They are strongly influenced by the ability of the sulphide minerals (pyrite) to oxide (chemically react with oxygen) within the CPT system. This chemical reaction could lead to the generation of sulphate ions and acidity, and thus to the degradation of CPT through sulphate attacks and consequently, the formation of AMD ( Hence, there have been several direct and indirect methods proposed and conducted to determine the reactivity of mine waste or CPT, such as the sulphate release and oxygen gradient methods, and oxygen consumption (OC) testing ( During the last decade, the majority of studies performed on CPT have mainly focused on the mechanical properties and behavior of CPT (e.g., Pure silica powder (SIL-CO-SIL 106, manufactured by U.S. Silica Co.), which is essentially made of quartz (99.8 To prepare the tailings that 45 Portland cement (PC) type I was used as the basic binder agent in the CPT mixes. In addition to PC, two mineral admixtures, namely, granulated blast furnace slag (SA) and fly ash (FA) - Type C, were used to partially substitute PC at 25%, 50% and 75% of its total weight. These blended binders are denoted as PF for a mix of PC with FA and PS for a mix of PC with SA. The chemical properties of PC, SA and FA are presented in Distilled water (DW) was used as the basic mixing water to prepare all of the CPT specimens. The DW also serves as a control. To study the influence of the initial sulphate content, the mixing water was prepared with various amounts of sulphate (0, 5000, 15,000 and 25,000 Over 100 CPT specimens were prepared by using selected amounts of ST that contained 45 The experimental work was divided into three parts to study the: (i) effect of the initial sulphate content on the reactivity of CPT that contain different types of binders, (ii) combined effect of binder content and sulphate on the reactivity of CPT that contain different types of binders (initial sulphate content The OC testing method, which was proposed by The reactivity of the CPT specimens was calculated by measuring the flux of oxygen (F In this study, a variety of microstructural analysis techniques are used to evaluate the influence of the initial sulphate content on the microstructure of the CPT specimens, such as pore structure and binder hydration progress and products. X-ray diffraction (XRD) and thermal analysis (thermogravimetry/difference thermogravimetry (TG/DTG)) were used to identify and characterize the mineralogical composition of the selected CPT and hardened cemented paste (hcp) specimens with different sulphate contents cured at room temperature for 150  Moreover, it can be observed in   This paper presents the results of experimental work that has investigated the influence of various initial sulphate contents on the reactivity of CPT specimens made with different types and contents of binders as well as mineral admixtures (slag and FA) and cured in laboratory conditions for 150 Generally, the reactivity of CPT specimens increases with increasing initial sulphate contents with the exception of specimens with 5000 The initial sulphate content either has a beneficial or detrimental role on the reactivity of CPT specimens. If the sulphate content is relatively low, the reactivity can be reduced due to the refinement of the pore structure of specimens of the studied CPT as the capillary pores are filled with appropriate amounts of secondary expensive minerals (ettringite and gypsum) that do not generate effective internal stresses. Above this amount of sulphate, the specimens may be exposed to detrimental effects that depend on the concentration of sulphate. The addition of mineral admixtures (e.g., slag and FA) in lieu of PC in the CPT mixtures will enhance the resistance of CPT backfill to sulphate attacks as well as reduce the chemical reactivity (with respect to oxygen) compared to mixtures that only contain PC. The addition of mineral admixtures to partially replace PC in CPT systems results in an increase in the degree of saturation of CPT specimens and enhanced microstructure due to the micro-filler effect. The higher degree of saturation and enhanced microstructure reduce the diffusion rate of oxygen through the CPT sample with mineral admixtures. Increased binder content can enhance the microstructure of CPT systems with sulphate as well sulphate resistance and thus can lead to reductions in reactivity. Despite the results obtained in this study, the experimental program does not include the coupled effects of the initial sulphate content and curing temperature of CPT on its reactivity, although CPT can be subjected to various curing temperatures in the field. A variation of the curing temperature can have a significant effect on sulphate attack on CPT and, consequently, on the void space and/or microcracks that can develop within the cemented matrix of CPT. These void spaces and microcracks significantly affect the oxygen diffusion, i.e. the reactivity of CPT. Therefore, further studies are necessary to assess the coupled effect initial sulphate content and curing temperature on the reactivity of CPT.