The effect of hydrolyzable metal cations, i.e. calcium and magnesium, present in mineral suspensions on starch–kaolinite interactions was studied through zeta potential, adsorption and turbidity measurements. The results demonstrate that hydrolyzable metal cations in mineral suspensions can significantly affect starch adsorption on kaolinite under typical conditions of iron ore flotation and selective flocculation. The effect of calcium and magnesium on starch adsorption on kaolinite surfaces correlates to their abilities to reduce the electrostatic repulsion between the anionic starch molecules and the negatively charged kaolinite particles. The hydrolyzable metal cations cause fast coagulation of kaolinite particles at pH 10.5 by reducing the repulsive electrostatic forces between kaolinite particles, when their concentration is ≥0.001M. The presence of starch further enhances such effect at low dosages, but re-disperses kaolinite particles at high dosages by inducing steric forces between the kaolinite particles coated with starch.Kaolinite, a layered clay mineral of general chemical formula Al Starch is the universal depressant of hematite in iron ore flotation. According to According to The kaolinite sample from Georgia, USA was provided by Ward's Natural Science Establishment. Quantitative X-ray diffraction analysis shows that the sample contains 93.0% kaolinite and 7.0% illite. Particle size analysis was conducted using standard laboratory wet and dry screening methods. Its average particle size was determined using Malvern Mastersizer 2000 and was found to be 4.2 Corn starch was obtained from Wintersun, USA. Starch was gelatinized using sodium hydroxide at room temperature to a 1 In the adsorption tests, 2 The colloid stability of the starch–kaolinite system was investigated through turbidity measurements with the use of a Hach 2100AN turbidimeter. In these experiments, the same suspensions prepared for adsorption measurements as mentioned above were used for turbidity measurements, so a direct correlation could be obtained between polymer adsorption and the colloid stability of the minerals. Turbidity values are expressed in nephelometric turbidity units (NTU). Zeta Potential measurements were performed with the use of a Zetacompact Z8000 model (CAD Instrumentation, France). An electric field of 80 Selective flocculation of iron ore is usually performed at pH 10.5, which is in the pH range of reverse cationic flotation (10–10.5), the most widely used flotation route in iron ore industry. As hydrolyzable metal cations, Ca The effect of CaCl According to In addition to reducing zeta potential of kaolinite, hydrolyzable metal cations form surface metal-hydroxylated species on minerals ( Hydrolyzable cations are highly effective in dispersion destabilization. The colloid stability of kaolinite in CaCl The effect of starch dosage on kaolinite stability in 0.01 The hydrolyzable metal cations present in mineral suspensions can significantly affect starch adsorption on kaolinite at pH 10.5, which is a typical condition of iron ore flotation and selective flocculation, with MgCl The hydrolyzable metal cations cause fast coagulation of kaolinite particles at pH 10.5 by reducing the repulsive electrostatic forces between kaolinite particles, when their concentration is ≥