A direct solvent-extraction process was developed to selectively recover indium from solutions generated by reductive leaching of zinc residues. This approach avoids the traditional steps of intermediate precipitation, solid–liquid separation, and re-leaching. Copper in the leach solution is easily removed by cementation with iron powder and the remaining Fe(III) is reduced to the ferrous state, which avoids the possibility of its co-extraction with indium. Indium is effectively extracted from the zinc sulfate solution by 20% (v/v) di(2-ethylhexyl)phosphoric acid (D2EHPA) dissolved in kerosene at an initial pH of 0.5 and aqueous-to-organic phase ratio (A:O) of 6:1 using three countercurrent stages. Indium extraction is 96.1%, zinc and iron are barely extracted, and the separation factors of indium with respect to zinc and iron are 3640 and 4809, respectively. The complete stripping of indium from the loaded organic phase is achieved using 4mol/L HCl at an A:O of 1:6. A scheme for direct solvent extraction of indium in zinc hydrometallurgical processing is suggested, by which indium can be concentrated into a small volume of strip solution containing 11g/L of indium, which is 85 times its concentration in the feed solution.Indium consumption is growing at an increasing rate, mainly owing to applications in indium tin oxide, semiconductor materials, and low melting point alloys ( In the hydrometallurgical treatment of zinc concentrates, more than 98% of the indium reports to the neutral leach residue, usually in isomorphic form in zinc ferrite (ZnO Solvent extraction is commonly used for extraction and separation of indium from various indium-containing solutions. Extractants employed include di(2-ethylhexyl)phosphoric acid (D2EHPA) ( A direct solvent-extraction process avoids the intermediate precipitation, solid–liquid separation, and re-leach steps of traditional indium recovery processes, potentially leading to lower capital and operating costs. This approach has been applied in the recovery of nickel and cobalt from laterite leach solutions ( Zinc residue (from Yunnan Province, China) was the indium source employed. Spent zinc electrolyte was used as the leachate and zinc concentrate was used as the reductant. The feed solution was generated by reductive leaching of the zinc residue in 190 Commercial D2EHPA was purchased from Luoyang Zhongda Chemical Co., Ltd, China, and used without further purification. The extractant was dissolved in sulfonated kerosene to achieve the required concentration. Commercial iron powder with a specific surface area of 2.10 The concentrations of Fe Extraction and stripping experiments were carried out by contacting the organic and aqueous phases at given volume ratios in 125 Metal ion concentrations in the aqueous phases before and after extraction were determined by ICP–OES and ICP–MS, while metal contents in the organic phases were obtained by mass balance. The distribution ratio, The objective of copper cementation is to remove copper and reduce the remaining ferric iron to the ferrous state by reaction with iron powder. D2EHPA extracts ferric iron under the same conditions as indium, but the ferrous state is hardly extracted: it is therefore necessary to reduce ferric iron to the ferrous state before indium extraction. The effects of experimental parameters, such as contact time, aqueous pH, D2EHPA concentration, and phase ratio, were investigated to determine the optimum operating conditions. The effect of initial pH on indium extraction at different D2EHPA concentrations is shown in   An extraction isotherm was prepared to determine the number of stages required for quantitative extraction of indium at the chosen A:O. Aqueous and organic phases were contacted at A:O from 1:2 to 10:1, while keeping the other experimental parameters constant (pH The indium-loaded organic phase was stripped with different HCl concentrations at various phase ratios. The results ( A stripping isotherm for indium was prepared to determine the number of stages required for stripping at the chosen phase ratio. The indium-loaded D2EHPA and 4 Based on the extraction and stripping isotherms described in Direct solvent extraction of indium from a solution generated by the reductive leaching of a zinc residue produced in a zinc hydrometallurgical process was carried out using D2EHPA. The following conclusions are drawn from the present study: Indium is preferentially extracted from the reductive leach solution using 20% D2EHPA, and is quantitative using three stages of countercurrent extraction at an A:O of 6:1 and initial solution pH of 0.5. 96.1% of indium is extracted, while negligible concentrations of zinc and iron are co-extracted. Separation factors of indium with respect to zinc and iron are 3640 and 4809, respectively. A stripping isotherm using 4 A scheme for direct solvent extraction of indium from a zinc residue reductive leach solution by D2EHPA is given. By recycling 60% of the strip solution for the re-stripping of indium, four countercurrent stages yielded a strip solution containing 11 Direct solvent extraction using D2EHPA is an effective method for the concentration and recovery of indium from low concentration solutions, and is applicable to recovering indium from zinc residue reductive leach solutions. This research was financially supported by the