The removal of fluoride from water by induced crystallization using fluorapatite (FAP)/calcite seed crystals was investigated. Batch experiments were conducted to determine optimal operating parameters. The effect of FAP/calcite mass ratio of the seed crystals, initial seed crystal concentration, molar ratios of Ca2+:PO4
                     3−:F− and contact time were examined. FAP/calcite with any mass ratio reduced fluoride concentrations from 9.5mg/L (0.5mM) to less than 1mg/L. The use of FAP alone and calcite alone was not effective. Use of initial seed crystal concentrations greater than 4.0g/L were correlated to residual fluoride concentrations less than 1.0mg/L. The optimal parameters for fluoride removal were an initial seed crystal concentration of 6g/L (FAP 4.8g/L, calcite 1.2g/L), Ca/P/F molar ratio of 8:4:1, and contact time of 1h. The final pH was always close to neutral. The presence of natural organic matter (NOM) in the raw water was found to not affect fluoride removal. SEM–EDS and XRD analysis showed that fluoride removal was due to crystallization of Ca5(PO4)3F on the surface of FAP. Phosphate, but not fluoride, accumulated on calcite by adsorption. The seed crystal could be regenerated easily, and used repeatedly, and used seed crystals could also be used as resources in phosphorus fertilizer production. Induced crystallization using FAP/calcite as a seed crystal is an economically and environmentally friendly process, and has the potential to remove fluoride from groundwater.The presence of high levels of fluoride in groundwater is a worldwide problem. Release of fluoride into groundwater is attributed to the dissolution of fluoride rich minerals Defluoridation techniques for drinking water include adsorption, precipitation, reverse osmosis, nanofiltration, and electro-dialysis The precipitation of fluoride from drinking water using calcium and phosphate salts, such as calcium fluoride and/or fluorapatite (FAP), is theoretically feasible. The slow reaction kinetics of this process can be catalyzed in a contact bed containing a saturated bone charcoal medium We investigated the mechanisms of fluoride removal in an aqueous solution during induced crystallization using FAP/calcite as the seed crystal. Batch experiments were conducted to investigate the influence of FAP/calcite mass ratio, seed crystal concentration, Ca/P/F molar ratio, contact time, natural organic matter (NOM) and reuse of seed crystal on the induced crystallization process. Scanning electron microscopy combined with energy dispersive spectroscopy (SEM–EDS) and X-ray diffraction (XRD) were performed to characterize the surface morphology, surface chemical elements, and crystal structure of the seed crystal material before and after fluoride removal. FAP used in this study was preformed according to methods proposed by McCann The fluoride removal experiments were carried out in 1 When Ca To investigate the influence of FAP/calcite mass ratio on the removal of fluoride, seed crystal with a mass ratio (FAP (g) Different amounts of seed crystal FAP/calcite were added to investigate the influence of initial seed crystal concentration on the removal of fluoride. A FAP (g):calcite (g) ratio of 4:1, ranging from 2 to 12 Concentrations of fluoride, phosphate and calcium ions were determined using ion chromatography (IC; ICP-1100; Thermo; USA). Aqueous samples were filtered through a 0.22-μm membrane filter before IC tests. The pH value of each solution after reaction was measured using a pH meter (STARTER 2100/3C pro; OHAUS; USA). Seed crystals (FAP (g) Induced crystallization was used to remove fluoride from water with an initial concentration of 9.5 As seen from  Residual calcium concentrations were all about 180–190 The effect of initial seed crystal concentration on residual fluoride, phosphate, and calcium concentrations and final pH is shown in The residual phosphate concentration decreased as seed crystal concentration increased ( Considering only the residual fluoride concentration, seed crystal at 4 The Ca/P/F molar ratio was adjusted to achieve a residual fluoride concentration less than 1.0 Residual phosphate concentration increased with increasing of P/F molar ratio ( Effect of Ca/F molar ratio on residual fluoride, phosphate, and calcium concentrations and final pH was evaluated ( Effect of contact time on residual fluoride, phosphate, and calcium concentration and final pH was examined ( NOM, especially humic acid, are material commonly present in both groundwater and surface water, so dissolved fluoride often coexists with NOM. Therefore, the effect of NOM on fluoride removal should be ascertained before applying the induced crystallization method. The effect of NOM on residual fluoride, phosphate and calcium concentrations and final pH are shown in SEM micrographs of unused FAP/calcite, used FAP/calcite, and the corresponding EDS spectra are shown in Two morphologic specimens of unused FAP/calcite were analyzed ( Two morphologic specimens of used FAP/calcite were analyzed ( The XRD spectra of FAP, calcite, unused FAP/calcite and used FAP/calcite are shown in Together, these results suggest that the main reactions involved in the induced crystallization process to remove fluoride might include the crystallization of FAP on the surface of granular FAP and the adsorption of phosphate on granular calcite, which are illustrated in Seed crystal regeneration studies were conducted to examine repeated uses of seed crystal over 9 cycles. The residual fluoride and final pH (a) and residual phosphate and calcium concentration (b) in cycle use of seed crystal are shown in FAP used in this research was preformed in lab with potassium nitrate, monopotassium phosphate, potassium fluoride and potassium acetate, which are all commonly available chemicals. Although FAP production is complex, the FAP can be used repeatedly without adding new FAP and, to the contrary, this process should discharge excess FAP at set intervals. Calcite used to regenerate FAP is a commercial material which is both cheap and easy to buy, together suggesting that the induced crystallization process has low operating cost. The main constituents in the discharged seed crystals are FAP and calcite, and FAP is rich in phosphorus (phosphorus mass content of 18.5%), so the used seed crystals could be used as resource for phosphorus fertilizer production, indicating that this induced crystallization process is environmentally beneficial. A novel method of induced crystallization using FAP/calcite as seed crystal was used to remove fluoride from water. The optimal removal parameters were an initial seed crystal concentration of 6 This work was supported by the