The presence of inclusions greatly influences the mechanical and the corrosion resistance of metallic alloys. These influential effects become more crucial when using metallic scrap, due to the high levels of inclusions and other contaminants such as non-metallic and oxides particles. Metal cleanliness requirements are becoming more striking, enforcing higher demands on the efficiency and flexibility of refining methods. Recently electromagnetic separation technique has been considered as a new method for the production of metals free from inclusions. In this study, a mathematical model has been developed to simulate the flow of molten metal through a channel in the presence of electromagnetic force field generated by interaction between a stationary electromagnetic field and DC current passing through the melt. A generalized model based on Newton's second law of motion was developed for the motion of inclusions in the melt flowing through the channel of separator by considering different forces acting on particle including electromagnetic force. A physical model was designed and constructed to visualize the inclusion separation phenomena and to verify the mathematical model. The predicted particle trajectories and separation in the physical model were compared with those obtained from experiments which showed reasonably good agreement. Parametric studies were performed using the mathematical model to evaluate the effects of various parameters, such as electromagnetic force strength, particle size and melt inlet velocity on the inclusion removal efficiency.It is well known that the presence of inclusions in metals adversely influences the mechanical and physical properties as well as corrosion resistance of the final products. Molten metals become contaminated with inclusions at various steps in the production route, e.g. during smelting, holding, alloying, metal transfer and casting. Melt contamination becomes more crucial when using recycled scrap, due to inherently high levels of inclusions and other contaminants. The increasing demand for cleaner metals in different industries makes the inclusion removal from molten metals as an essential process in the production of metallic components. Various melt treatments are currently used in industries to remove inclusions from molten metals, including settling, flotation and filtration using ceramic foams and fluxing Recently, the electromagnetic separation of inclusions for production of metals free from oxides and other types of non-metallic inclusions has been considered as an emerging technology When a suspended non-magnetic particle in a molten metal is subjected to crossed electric and magnetic fields, electromagnetic forces will be generated. These forces will act on both the molten metal and the particle. If the electrical conductivity of the particle is different from that of the liquid metal, a net electromagnetic separating force will be experienced by the particle. The ratio of the electrical conductivity of particle to the molten metal affects the direction of the separation force. If the electrical conductivity of particle is greater than that of the melt, then the separating force will be in the same direction as the electromagnetic force acting on the melt and vice versa. For the particles having equal conductivity to the melt, the electromagnetic separating force would be negligible. Since most of the non-metallic and oxide inclusions encountered in practice are electrically non-conductive and non-magnetic, the separating force acts opposite to the electromagnetic force field, which causes it to migrate. The electromagnetic force acting on a particle suspended in an electrical conducting fluid was first derived by Leenov and Kolin Based on different sources of electromagnetic force, various methods have been proposed and studied for particle separations from liquid metals. Marty and Alemany In the present study, a three dimensional mathematical model was developed to simulate the continuous removal of inclusion from magnesium melt using an electromagnetic force. The model consists of fluid flow in the presence of electromagnetic force field. This was calculated based on the simultaneously imposed direct current and stationary magnetic fields. The calculated velocity and electromagnetic force fields were further used to determine the trajectory of inclusion particles in magnesium melt. In order to verify the mathematical model and to better visualize the trajectories of particles in a melt flowing in the presence of an electromagnetic field, a physical model was constructed using NaCl solution. The verified model was further used to simulate the inclusion removal from the melt under various operating conditions. Parametric studies were performed to evaluate the effect of key independent variables, such as magnetic field intensity, inlet fluid velocity and particle size on the efficiency of inclusion removal. A schematic of the electromagnetic separating system is shown in In order to determine the repulsive force experienced by the particle, one has to solve the 3-dimensional equations of fluid motion (the continuity and Navier–Stokes equations), in the presence of an electromagnetic force field generated by crossing DC current and DC magnetic field. On the basis of flow field obtained from the fluid flow model, a particle's trajectory within the system is then calculated by the solution of the equations of particle motion. The following section elaborates on the details of mathematical model. The source of electromagnetic force in the system under study is the crossing of DC current passing through the melt with a steady magnetic field generated by a pair of magnets. A power supply is connected to the melt flowing through the channel using immersed electrodes at inlet and outlet of channel. The electrical current generates an electric field while the DC current passes parallel to the flow direction. On the other hand, current is also induced within the melt crossing the magnetic field. The applied magnetic field is generated by a suitable magnet, so that the field strength, Introducing the scalar variable Leenov and Kolin This is shown schematically in The liquid metal is assumed incompressible with constant properties, and the flow is considered to be laminar and steady. Under these assumptions, the problem may be stated by writing the continuity and Navier–Stokes equations including the electromagnetic force Computation of the flow field in the channel allows one to investigate the factors affecting the location of inclusion particles. The motion of a particle in the channel can be predicted on the basis of Newton's second law of motion, as expressed in equations In the above equations Defining four more dimensionless variables as given in Eq. The boundary conditions applying to the above equations are zero-slip along the wall. At the inlet boundary, the fluid velocity is assumed to be constant across the channel, while at outlet, the velocity gradient is considered to be zero. The electric current density and magnetic intensity are constant along and across the channel. The respective fluid flow governing equations The solution of the fluid flow equations provides the hydrodynamic conditions for the calculation of the motion of particles. Eqs. In order to visualize the electromagnetic particle separation and to evaluate the mathematical model, a cold model was designed and constructed as shown in In order to evaluate the efficiency of particle separation, a number of particles were fed into the system. The particles inside the channel experienced the electromagnetic forces, which pushed them towards the side wall. By installing a separator at the end of the channel to divide the clean solution from contaminated stream, the latter could be drained into a separate vessel. There, the number of particles separated could be measured, allowing the removal efficiency to be determined. The removal efficiency was calculated based on the ratio of cross-sectional area where entering inclusions reach the separation part at the channel outlet to the total cross section of channel. The physical properties and geometrical parameters of cold model are given in Numerical calculations were carried out for continuous removal of inclusions from the molten metal as it flowed steadily through a rectangular channel with insulating walls. The geometrical and physical properties of the melt used for the calculation of fluid flow and electromagnetic fields are listed in As can be seen, a higher current is induced in the fluid layer with higher velocity. A Lorentz force is generated along the channel opposite to The effect of magnetic brake on the velocity profile across the channel is presented in In order to evaluate the mathematical model, a series of experiments were performed using the physical model. In In this section, the effect of various parameters, such as particle size (particle to channel size ratio,  The effect of The other important parameter affecting the inclusion trajectory is the size of particle. This is shown in  In A mathematical model was developed in this study to simulate the continuous removal of inclusions from magnesium melt using electromagnetic filtration. The mathematical model was tested by a cold model constructed in this work. The predicted particle trajectories and separation in the physical model compared reasonably well with those obtained from experiments. A new design was proposed based on this modeling study for continuous removal of inclusions from the molten melts. The proposed design comprises a vertical channel equipped with a DC magnet and a DC power supply systems. The channel is separated into two parts at an outlet in which the contaminated melt is separated from the clean melt. The numerical simulation showed that the trajectory of particles and removal efficiency were affected by magnetic flux intensity, melt inlet velocity and inclusion particle size. By increasing the magnetic flux intensity, the particles face larger electromagnetic force which pushes them towards the separating part of the channel more effectively, thereby increasing removal efficiency. A low melt inlet velocity is likewise favorable in moving the particle further towards the separating part of the channel. Since the electromagnetic forces acting on small particles is lower than those on larger inclusions, the magnetic flux intensity and current density need to be appropriately adjusted to achieve higher removal efficiency for particles.