A series of woodceramics derived from carbonized tobacco stems and phenolic resin composite heated by microwave irradiation was prepared and effects of microwave irradiation time, power and mass fraction of phenolic resin in woodceramics on the mass loss ratio, volume shrinkage ratio, apparent density, open porosity and volume electrical resistivity were investigated systematically. The pyrolysis behaviours of tobacco stems, phenolic resin and carbonized tobacco stems/phenolic resin composite were also evaluated using thermogravimetry. The experimental results showed that the mass loss ratio, volume shrinkage ratio and apparent density increased, while the volume electrical resistivity and open porosity decreased with increasing microwave irradiation time. The apparent density increased, while the mass loss ratio, volume shrinkage ratio, volume electrical resistivity and open porosity decreased with an increase in the mass fraction of phenolic resin. The mass loss ratio, volume shrinkage ratio and open porosity increased, while apparent density and volume electrical resistivity decreased with an increase in the microwave power. Microstructures of woodceramics obtained at various microwave irradiation time were characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) technique, which confirmed the results of pyrolysis analyses of samples and effects of microwave irradiation on basic properties of woodceramics prepared.Woodceramics, a new kind of porous carbon materials, is usually prepared by carbonizing wood or woody materials impregnated with phenolic resin or liquefied wood under vacuum at elevated temperatures of 300–2800 Microwaves are now being used in various technological and scientific fields in order to heat dielectric materials. The main advantage of using microwave heating is that the treatment time can be considerably reduced, which in many cases represents a reduction in the energy consumption as well. In addition, the consumption of gases used in the treatment can also be reduced. Microwave-induced chemical reactions can be used to solve the above problems associated with conventional surface heating (the surface heating from the hearth wall does not ensure a uniform temperature for different shapes and sizes of samples) because microwave heating is both internal and volumetric heating. Therefore, the tremendous thermal gradient from the interior of the char particle to its cool surface allows the microwave-induced reaction to proceed more quickly and effectively at a lower bulk temperature, resulting in energy savings and shortening the processing time ( In the past few years, tobacco industry has gained considerable importance as one of the economic sources in Yunnan province, PR China, due to the governmental policy of developing economy. However, thousands of tobacco stems remain unused as agricultural wastes in fields and factories. Therefore, it is important to develop the effective utilization of tobacco stems. A large number of studies on the thermo-chemical conversion of biomass, particularly on pyrolysis, have been carried out. It has been found that the pyrolysis may be a promising route for the biomass utilization in the production of valuable products ( The properties of woodceramics are affected by a variety of factors such as the density of the wood or wood-based materials, the carbonizing temperature, the temperature rise rate and the cooling temperature. Moreover, resin impregnation has an important influence on the property of woodceramics, converting the materials into glassy carbon during the process of carbonization. In the present study, the woodceramics derived from carbonized tobacco stems/phenolic resin composite heated by microwave irradiation was developed; and the effects of microwave irradiation time, power and mass fraction of phenolic resin in woodceramics on the mass loss ratio, volume shrinkage ratio, apparent density, open porosity and volume electrical resistivity were investigated systematically. The pyrolysis behaviours of tobacco stems, phenolic resin and carbonized tobacco stems/phenolic resin composite were evaluated using thermogravimetry. The microstructures of woodceramics obtained at various microwave irradiation time were characterized by SEM technique. All chemicals used were of analytical reagent grade. Tobacco stems, a typical agricultural waste, were collected from Yuxi city, Yunnan Province, PR China. The raw materials were washed thoroughly with deionized water, and dried at 100 Microwave reactor was a self-made device, which was a single-mode with continuous controllable power apparatus, as depicted in Tobacco stems were carbonized at 673 The weight loss and volume shrinkage were calculated by the mass and volume of materials before and after carbonization; the apparent density was calculated by the mass and apparent volume of woodceramics; the open porosity was calculated using water boiling method and by the equation Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) and differential thermal analysis (DTA) analyses were performed with a thermogravimetric analyzer (TGA/SDTA851E, METTLER-TOLEDO) in order to investigate the pyrolysis processes of tobacco stems, phenolic resin and carbonized tobacco stems/phenolic resin composites. Samples were analyzed in an Al A scanning electron microscopy (XL30ESEM-TMP, Philips) was used to observe the microstructure morphology of the woodceramics obtained at different microwave irradiation time. Thermogravimetry (TG) is a convenient technique for studying the kinetics of processes involving solids, such as decomposition and gas–solid reactions, by following the weight loss and/or the rate of weight loss (DTG) of the samples with time.  Phenolic resins are a large family of low-cost polymers composed of a wide variety of structures. Usually phenolic resins undergo solid-state pyrolysis when heated to 1000  The temperature range from room temperature to 620 The temperature range 1100–1273  The range from room temperature to 380 The temperature range 580–1000 The TG/DTG curves were flattened in the range of 1000–1273 Effects of microwave irradiation time on the properties of woodceramics were investigated when the microwave power was 800 Effects of microwave irradiation time on the mass loss ratio and volume shrinkage ratio were illustrated in  It was observed in Effects of microwave power on the properties of woodceramics were investigated when the microwave irradiation time was 80    Effects of mass fraction of phenolic resin on the properties of woodceramics were investigated when the microwave power was 800    Microstructures of woodceramics obtained at microwave power 800  It was found in SEM images ( From the results discussed above, the conclusions were summarized as follow: The pyrolysis of tobacco stems mainly included three stages: (a) dehydration stage; (b) fast pyrolysis stage, most of the hemicellulose, cellulose and lignin in tobacco stems were degraded during this stage; (c) carbonizing stage at higher temperature, lignin was degraded and a large amount of gas products were evaporated. The pyrolysis of phenolic resin mainly included three stages: (a) drying and solidifying stage, stable cross-linkage was formed at this stage; (b) aromatization process, during which three-dimensional structure of phenolic resin was turned into six-ring carbon network structure of graphite; (c) restructuring stage, during this process, the structure of samples had been converted from two-dimensional to three-dimensional, which was six-ring carbon network of ordered layer graphite. As the formation of stable and hard glass-like carbon, carbonized phenolic resin did not form ordered graphite easily, while formed non-graphite carbon of stratic layer. The pyrolysis of carbonized tobacco stems/phenolic resin composite mainly included four stages from the TG/DTG curves of tobacco stems/phenolic resin composites and comparisons to those of tobacco stems and phenolic resins: (a) dehydration stage; (b) solidifying stage; (c) carbonization stage; (d) structural ordering stage. The carbonized tobacco stems had no significant effects on the pyrolysis of phenolic resin in composite under the dehydration and solidifying stages. It was ideal to choose the structural ordering stage as the carbonizing and holding temperature range. During this stage, the basic structure of woodceramics was formed and woodceramics with excellent characteristics could be obtained. Woodceramics could be prepared from carbonized tobacco stems/phenolic resin composite heated by microwave irradiation. The mass loss ratio, volume shrinkage ratio and apparent density increased, while the open porosity decreased with increasing microwave irradiation time, and there were great changes over the mass loss ratio, volume shrinkage, apparent density and open porosity of the woodceramics after 50 The mass loss ratio, volume shrinkage ratio and apparent density increased, while the open porosity decreased with increasing microwave power, and there were great changes over the mass loss ratio, volume shrinkage, apparent density and open porosity of the woodceramics when the microwave power was larger than 720 The mass loss ratio, volume shrinkage ratio, open porosity and volume electrical resistivity of woodceramics decreased, while apparent density of woodceramics increased with an increase in the mass fraction of phenolic resin. The mass fraction of phenolic resin had less effect on the volume electrical resistivity of woodceramics compared to that of microwave irradiation time. SEM images of woodceramics showed that the woodceramics were typically porous carbon materials, which was a kind of composite of porous amorphous carbon and glassy carbon, which supported the results of pyrolysis analyses and the effects of microwave irradiation on the basic properties of woodceramics prepared. Financial support for this work from Specialized Research Fund for the Doctoral Program of Higher Education of China and Nature Sciences Foundations of Yunnan Province of China (No.2003E0012Q) was gratefully acknowledged.