This paper reports a simple theoretical approach aimed at studying palladium extraction with two different dithizone derivatives. In particular, we applied a modelling scheme and the quantum-mechanical semiempirical PM3 method to the description of extractants, palladium chlorocomplexes and Pd(II)–extractant complexes. The results of computer calculation of geometries, conformational energies, formation enthalpies, and reaction enthalpy changes are presented and analysed. Comparison of these results with some available from experiment suggests that the semiempirical PM3 method, a useful tool considering the computational cost, could be used with some caution as an aide for the examination of chelating liquid–liquid extraction systems.Precious metals are used extensively in advanced material applications because of their special properties, such as high catalytic reactivity, large surface area and high surface energy ( Formazans, a family of metal chelating compounds containing a characteristic azo-hydrazone chain (Ph–N As expected, the introduction of a longer alkyl chain, as in Novel There has been a large amount of research effort focused on the development of improved chelating agents, which can be viewed as a two-step process: i) choosing a set of donor groups and ii) choosing the connecting structure that ties them together ( The application of computational modelling in the field of solvent extraction is in an initial stage.  In this work, we used the quantum-mechanical semiempirical method PM3 to study the complexation of palladium, originally in aqueous chloride solution, by the dithizone derivatives DH ( The species involved in the extraction equilibrium were divided into three main groups: extractants, metal chlorocomplexes, and metal–extractant complexes. The geometry of each species involved in the extraction equilibrium was optimized by a computational search for a structure with minimal energy, using the semiempirical PM3 method. This method is contained in the PC Spartan Plus package of programs ( A confirmation that a given geometry corresponds to an energy minimum requires evaluation of second derivatives of the energy respect to each atomic coordinate. In a true minimum, all second derivatives must be positive. Since the square root of second derivatives and vibrational frequencies are related by a constant, all quantum-mechanical computational packages allow the calculation of second derivatives in an evaluation of vibrational frequencies. If a second derivative is positive, the corresponding frequency is real; otherwise, the frequency is imaginary. In this paper, we calculated the vibrational frequencies of all optimised geometries. Enthalpy changes were taken as stability criteria instead of Gibbs free energy changes. Since the There are several schemes to include the solvent effect in quantum-mechanical calculations. The first strategy in aqueous solution is the inclusion of one or more water molecules hydrogen-bonded to polar atoms in the complex molecule; however, the calculated energy decreases with each added water molecule with slow approach to an energy minimum; this procedure becomes computationally expensive even for small molecules ( Many ligands exhibit several conformers and isomers. The conformational mobility of the ligands affects both their metal ion selectivity and binding affinity. When multiple conformers exist, binding abilities are often decreased, the main reason is that a significant percentage of the ligand molecules may reside in conformers where it is impossible for all the donor groups to simultaneously contact the metal ion. In some cases there is more than one conformer in which all the donor atoms can bind the metal ion.  In this work, numbers were assigned to the atoms of the azo-hydrazone chain (Ph–HN Since palladium does not interact with the decyl chain in DH or DoC, we used model compounds with a methyl instead of a decyl for those extractants. Under conditions used in the experimental work, most of the Pd(II) species exist as the tetrachloro complex, [PdCl In this work, the extraction equilibria were investigated assuming the existence of: (1) several monomeric and dimeric Pd(II)–DH complexes, and (2) one monomeric Pd(II)–DoC complex. At present there are no reliable experimental data on the geometrical structure of the Pd(II)–DH and Pd(II)–DoC complexes. For this reason, several isomers of each class were postulated. For dimers, the three different structures proposed by A structure minimization calculation of several Two structures were used as models of the DoC tautomers. In the case of this extractant, the minimal enthalpy difference between the two tautomers established the existence of tautomeric equilibrium ( Our calculations about the relative energies of chlorocomplexes indicate that square–planar complexes are more stable than any attempted octahedral or five-coordinated geometry, in agreement with experimental observations mentioned above. The calculated formation enthalpies of square–planar complexes are shown in Those results indicate that the trichlorocomplex [PdCl The dichlorocomplex [PdCl  The enthalpy changes for the two most stable structural isomers, along with some bond distances of the complexes are given in  Based on reaction exothermicity, as calculated by the PM3 method and using the most stable isomer in each case, we propose the dominant reactions shown in The PM3 method predicts the spontaneous extraction of palladium by DH, in agreement with experimental results ( With DH, dimer complexes are preferred over monomer complexes as proposed by The method fails to predict the observed spontaneous extraction of palladium by DoC. The solvent extraction of Pd(II) with two dithizone derivatives was studied by means of the semiempirical PM3 method. The study considered mononuclear and binuclear complexes and the stoichiometry reported after an experimental work. The molecular modelling approach proves to be reasonably successful in predicting some experimental results: it agrees with the expected favourable extraction of Pd(II) by DH from aqueous chlorocomplexes, matches the expected coexistence of DH and DoC conformers in solution, and agrees with the proposed existence of Pd(II)–DH dimers. However, the PM3 model fails to predict the [PdCl Finally, additional modelling using refined theoretical methods and more experimental information is required to fully evaluate the prediction capability of theoretical modelling. The authors thank the Consejo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnología of México for financial support. We are also grateful to Prof. Manfred Grote (University of Paderborn, Germany) and his team, who synthesized and studied the extractive properties of the reagents. We also thank Prof. Grote for the invaluable discussion of the modelling results.