The common occurrence of hammerstone percussion damage (pits, striae, notches and impact flakes) on the fossil limb bones of ungulates indicates that marrow extraction has been an important component of hominid butchery for over two million years. Beyond this level of basic inference, it would be behaviorally informative if three deeper aspects of marrow harvesting were understood more clearly: (1) whether inter-element patterns of bone fragmentation vary when processing intensity is held constant; (2) whether butcher investment in marrow extraction correlates positively with the number of percussion marks generated; (3) whether taphonomic effectors can be identified based on percussion mark morphology, frequency and placement. Some experimental work has been conducted previously in service of exploring these questions, but we set out here to address them explicitly through the analysis of a large sample of white-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus) limb elements fractured by hammerstone percussion. Our results indicate that (1) measures of bone fragmentation, which supposedly reflect processing intensity, are highly contingent on the research question being posed. This stresses the fact that researchers must be explicit in their definition of processing intensity. (2) In addition, hypothesized covariance between number of hammerstone blows and percussion mark frequencies are not met in our sample, corroborating previous conclusions of a lack of covariance between cutting strokes and cutmark frequencies. These results highlight the contingent nature of butchery mark production, and emphasize the need to investigate carcass resource exploitation by posing questions that do not rely on mark frequencies, but instead utilize other zooarchaeological measures. (3) Finally, our results—showing high incidences of impact notches and flakes created by direct anvil contact and “anvil scratches” created by direct hammerstone contact—suggest caution in using specific categories of percussion damage to infer their taphonomic effectors.Increasingly, zooarchaeologists have employed actualistic approaches to go beyond the basic inference that hominids have been involved in the butchery of large mammals for well over two million years Recognizing the ubiquity of prehistoric marrow harvesting, we designed an experimental study to address three questions about this important aspect of hominid carcass foraging. First, do inter-element patterns of bone fragmentation vary when processing intensity is held constant? Zooarchaeologically, the assumption in most cases is that higher levels of fragmentation (however measured) reflect increased processing intensity Our sample consists of all bone fragments >1 Metal knives were used to deflesh bones, with processors at K.W. removing the major muscle masses for their clients and TRP and CPE subsequently removing any flesh that still adhered to anticipated impact surfaces. Periosteum was never removed before hammerstone percussion. We used two hammerstone–anvil sets for our experiments, one a “coarse” set, the other a “smooth” set ( After a bone was breeched sufficiently for marrow extraction, all resultant fragments (including those that adhered to the hammerstone and anvil) were collected, bagged in cheesecloth and then boiled together until clean. Each fragment was labeled with an experimental episode number (one per whole element) and an individual specimen number (e.g., IMP/072/3 In a general sense, zooarchaeologists expect increased processing intensity to be reflected by (1) the utilization of lower-ranking carcass parts; and (2) the extraction of multiple carcass tissues (e.g., butchering a carcass or carcass part not only for meat but also for marrow and grease) and/or increased investment in the removal of one particular carcass tissue (e.g., filleting a carcass or carcass part not only for large muscle masses but also for small flesh scraps). In this study, we attempted to isolate the variables responsible for patterns of bone fragmentation by holding processing intensity constant. Thus, differential fragmentation We investigated several variables in our experimental sample relevant to understanding marrow harvesting by early hominids. Before discussing these, however, we define several important terms:     We follow White       For each fractured element, we recorded the following information (many, but not all, of these variables are adapted from Bunn Number of blows required to expose the medullary cavity for complete marrow extraction with the 12-inch pharmaceutical spatula (see above). Number of epiphyseal specimens produced. Number of cylinders produced. Number of shaft splinters produced. Number of impact flakes produced. Types (pits versus striae fields), frequency and distribution of percussion marks per specimen type (2–5 above). As the name suggests, stria fields Number and distribution of percussion notches per specimen type (2–5 above). Length and width maxima of each epiphyseal specimen, cylinder, shaft splinter and impact flake produced. Remaining diaphyseal circumference of each specimen produced. Following Bunn Fracture angle for each measurable fracture plane on each specimen.  Notchless splinters predominate, followed in frequency by notchless epiphyseal specimens, impact flakes, notched splinters, notched epiphyseal specimens and cylinders. The disparity in frequencies of total impact flakes ( Most of the “pseudo-notches” in our sample occur on radius specimens. We suspect that this has to do with the fact that our hammerstone blows landed on the sharp-edged medial border of each radius and the force generated was absorbed across its sharp-edged lateral border that rested on the anvil. The multiple blows that were incurred by radii in this fashion resulted in many fragments that possessed unexpected morphologies. Of the 996 fracture angles we measured on radius specimens, 167 (16.8%) were right or near-right angles (i.e., 85–95°), types of breaks usually associated with dry bone fracture. In contrast, specimens deriving from the more easily fractured and tubular-shaped humeri possess a greater proportion of measured angles that conform to that expected on fresh broken bone. Only 66 (10.6%) of 621 angles we measured on humerus specimens were between 85° and 95°, a difference with the radius sample that is statistically significant ( Three standard measures of bone breakage indicate that the radii are more highly fragmented than are the humeri. First, there is a significant difference between the humerus and radius samples in the proportion of epiphyseal (humerus Percussion marks occur on every type of specimen in our experimental sample. As summarized in In addition, although there is a statistically significant difference in mean percussion mark frequency per marked specimen imparted by smooth (mean Taken as a whole, there is a statistically significant negative correlation between number of hammerstone blows and percussion mark frequency ( Given the preceding, it is of note that percussion mark frequencies mirror closely in some ways Egeland's Our results confirm a growing awareness that an array of confounding variables, impossible to control over time and geography or to measure archaeologically, hold the potential to obscure meaningful linkages between butchering intensity and bone surface damage Thanks to Bob Brain and Manuel Domínguez-Rodrigo, our collaborators on the Swartkrans zooarchaeology project, from which this study was an outgrowth. Thanks to K.W. Deer Processing of Bloomington for supplying the deer legs and to Pat Munson for putting us in touch with them. Thanks to Lee Lyman, R. Balzac, and an anonymous reviewer for insightful comments that improved the paper markedly. Thanks to Melanie Everett for confirming our identifications of the tool set raw materials. The work of Rob Blumenschine, Henry Bunn, Manuel Domínguez-Rodrigo, Lee Lyman, Curtis Marean and Tim White provided much inspiration and a solid framework for us. TRP thanks Nick Toth, Kathy Schick and the Stone Age Institute for continued support and camaraderie, and his family for unconditional understanding.