This technical contribution is aimed at studying the physicochemical properties of cashew gum as well as its performance as a limestone depressor during the phosphate minerals flotation. Cashew gum and starch characterizations were accomplished by identifying their functional groups through infrared spectroscopy. After that, some physicochemical properties of calcite were investigated, having cashew gum as a depressant, by using microflotation and flotation techniques.
                  It was observed, by comparing the infrared spectra of both substances, that one was dealing with quite similar structures. The microflotation tests showed that flotability decreases as the cashew gum or starch concentrations increase.
                  The flotation of limestone confirms the depressing power of cashew gum, showing that it is possible to reduce the insoluble residues (IR) from 10.5%, in the original ore, to near 0.6% with carbonate recovery in the range of 70–80%.The influence of polysaccharide stereochemistry on the separation selectivity in the direct anionic flotation of calcite/apatite systems has been recently studied ( According to Studies of adsorption mechanisms of organic depressors, accomplished by Starch is the most widely used reagent because it is very cheap and efficient. The use of natural plant gum is growing fast as they have multiple and profitable industrial possibilities and a large international market. Cashew gum should be another good depressant since its composition, after hydrolyses, is around 82% of glucoside, galactose and arabinose ( This research work aims at showing the depressor power of cashew gum on calcite, in particular. The particle size of calcite from Amorinópolis-Goiás State, varies from −104 to 37 μm. The calcareous mineral from Cachoeiro do Itapemerim-Espı&#x0301;rito Santo State with particle size of −44 μm with 10.5% of insoluble residues as quartz, diopsite, silicate and tremolina. The natural cashew gum was obtained from the EMBRAPA (Empresa Brasileira de Pesquisa Agropecuária) experimental plantations of Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra of starch and cashew gum samples were recorded using a Bomem spectrometer, model MB 102. The samples were analyzed as KBr pellets. Calcite samples were used for the flotation of the minerals under consideration to study the influence of starch, cashew gum and sodium oleate pretreatment in a Hallimond tube. The flotation was made in 1 min and the material was dried and weighed to calculate the flotability of calcite. The pH was fixed at 8.5 and the cashew gum and starch concentrations were varied from 5 to 1000 mg/l. These tests were accomplished in a Denver flotation cell. Cashew gum was used as a depressor and ethylene diamine as a collector. The pH range was from 8 to 10. The rotor stirring velocity was initially 1500 rpm and reduced to 1200 rpm during the flotation. The insoluble residue was treated with HCl, filtered and roasted at 900 °C. Both species are very similar, showing a band at 2929 cm Similar results for cashew gum and the starch were expected due to the presence of glucosidic compounds in both compositions. However, it was necessary to experimentally confirm a new use for the cashew gum as a depressor for calcite, as a substitute for starch. The depressing power of cashew gum was confirmed when compared with starch in microflotation tests. These results showed the best value of pH for the separation of calcareous from the insoluble residues is 8.0 as the lowest IR value and largest recovery for carbonates are obtained. Thus, it is possible to use cashew gum as a flotation depressor.  The depressant power of cashew gum was observed in all experiments and confirmed through microflotation and flotation tests. But the strongest confirmation was provided by the fact that cashew gum can depress calcareous minerals and reduce the IR to values as low as 0.64 % in the flotation tests. The authors wish to thank the chemical engineers Luciana Mesquita and Antonieta Middea, from CETEM, for their invaluable suggestions and fruitful discussions, also CNPq for funding of the research fellowship.