Total hip replacement has an important role in the treatment of acetabular fractures. Immediate total hip arthroplasty is only indicated for some rare cases but late reconstruction is performed more frequently and may follow failed non-operative or operative treatment of the original acetabular fracture.
               
                  Introduction
                  The purpose of this study is to determine the results of the use of total hip replacement for the treatment of acetabular fractures and to compare the results of the early and late reconstruction group.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  121 acetabular fractures treated with total hip arthroplasty between 1983 and 2003 at the University Hospitals Gasthuisberg in Leuven, Belgium were retrospectively studied. The patients were divided into two groups. In the “early reconstruction group” total hip arthroplasty was performed as primary treatment of the acetabular fracture. In the “late reconstruction group”: total hip arthroplasty was performed following failed operative or non-operative treatment of the acetabular fracture. The indications for total hip arthroplasty and the surgical technique in both the early and late reconstruction group were compared. Secondly, complications were reviewed in both groups and a functional scoring system was applied for each patient.
               
                  Results
                  Primarily there was a significant difference in the age of the patient population of each group with a predominance for older patients in the early reconstruction group. Secondly, less revisions were performed in the early reconstruction group: 8% compared to 22% in the late reconstruction group.
               
                  Discussion
                  The results obtained in our patient groups were compared to the results found in literature by a Medline search. In general, our results were comparable to the results found in literature but a remarkable difference was found between different authors.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Total hip replacement for acetabular fractures is rarely indicated in the acute phase. After failed treatment of an acetabular fracture, total hip replacement has to be considered as a salvage procedure. In both cases, one may not forget total hip arthroplasty is a severe intervention associated with a high number of complications.Acetabular fractures have to be considered as a major injury to the hip joint and place the long-term performance of the hip joint in jeopardy. In the management of acetabular fractures, total hip arthroplasty plays an important role. This includes immediate total hip replacement for certain rare cases and late reconstruction following failed non-operative or operative treatment, leading to symptomatic arthritis, malunion or non-union. Recent studies confirm the association of a good reduction and a better long-time result. The purpose of this study is to review the indications for and the results of the use of total hip arthroplasty for the treatment of acetabular fractures. A comparison is made between the early and late reconstruction group. Between 1983 and 2003, total hip arthroplasty was performed for 121 acetabular fractures in 121 patients in the department of Traumatology of the University Hospitals Gasthuisberg in Leuven, Belgium. The results were reviewed retrospectively using the patients’ hospital and operation charts. 65 men and 56 women were included in the study. The mean age of the patients at the time of the accident was 65.5 years; the mean age of the patients at the time of total hip replacement was 67 years, with a range between 18 and 95 years. The aetiology of the acetabular fractures could be classified as follows: high energy trauma in 62 patients (51.2%), low energy trauma in 55 patients (45.4%) and pathological fracture in four patients (3.3%). The fractures were classified using the Letournel classification. 49 fractures were included in the elementary fracture group and 72 fractures were included in the associated fracture group (for details of fracture classification: see Total hip arthroplasty was performed for acute fractures in 64 cases ( The indications for early total hip arthroplasty could be classified into three groups: high age or extensive osteoporosis (54 patients), combined acetabular and femoral neck fracture (six cases) and pathological fracture (four cases). The indications for total hip replacement after failed treatment of acetabular fractures could be classified into two groups: avascular necrosis of the femoral head and symptomatic posttraumatic or postoperative arthritis. In this “late” total hip replacement group, previous surgery was performed in 51 patients, in six patients, previous therapy of the acetabular fracture had been conservative. In the majority of the cases, the surgical approach used was anterolateral (108 cases). A posterior approach was used in eight cases and in five cases another approach was used. 51 of the 121 patients included in our study underwent previous surgery for their acetabular fracture. An anterolateral approach was used in 18 of these patients, a posterior approach in 17 patients, an ilio-inguinal approach in nine cases and a combined approach was used in seven cases. In 73 of the 121 patients, bone grafts were used. For structural defects of the posterior rim, femoral head grafts were used. In case of segmental defects, morselised cancellous bone grafts were used. An autograft was used in 58 patients, an allograft was used in nine patients and in six patients, both auto- and allografts were used. The technical details of the surgical procedures performed were as follows: Concerning the acetabular component, an uncemented technique was used in most of the cases (116). In 59 cases, a screwed Schüster cup was used; a Duraloc cup was used 33 times; a Moscher ring was used in 16 cases; a Moscher cup in 4 cases and a Bürch-Schneider reinforcement cup in 4 cases. In five patients, a cemented cup was used. Concerning the femoral component, a cemented technique was used in 73 cases and an uncemented technique in 44 cases; in four cases, a Wagner uncemented stem was used. A retrospective review was performed by using the patients’ hospital and operation charts. 13 of the 121 patients were lost to follow-up. For the remaining 108 patients, follow-up time varied between 12 and 180 months with an average of 30.7 months. Six patients died during follow-up due to unrelated causes. Postoperative complications and functional results using the Harris Hip Score were determined for each patient. A statistically significant difference in age between the primary and secondary total hip replacement group was found: mean age in the early arthroplasty group was 78 while the mean age in the secondary total hip arthroplasty group was 53 ( There were 30 general complications: four dislocations, six nerve lesions (four femoral nerve palsies and two sciatic nerve palsies), one femoral artery lesion and 19 infections of which eight evolved towards persisting low grade infections. To evaluate late follow-up, the Harris Hip Score was used. The Harris Hip Score was excellent in 33 patients, good in 38 patients, fair in 28 patients and bad in nine patients. The walking ability was normal in 49 patients, 18 patients had a slight limp, 27 patients walked with a cane or crutches, six patients were in a wheelchair and for eight patients the postoperative walking ability was not relevant because they were bedridden pre-operatively. Postoperative pain could be classified as follows: 69 patients had no pain, 21 patients had mild pain, 14 patients had moderate pain and four patients had severe pain postoperatively. Finally, the functional results in the early and late arthroplasty groups were compared. There was a significant difference ( Concerning heterotopic ossification and revision operations, a difference could be seen between the groups although none of these results were statistically significant. In the primary arthroplasty group, there was heterotopic ossification in 18 patients (28%) versus 23 patients (41%) in the secondary arthroplasty group. In the primary total hip replacement group, only four patients (8%) needed a revision operation versus 12 patients in the secondary total hip replacement group (with a total of 18 revision operations in this group: one revision in eight patients, two revisions in two patients and three revisions in two patients). The Harris Hip Score was slightly better in the secondary total hip replacement group: 76% of excellent and good results in this group versus 58% of excellent and good results in the primary total hip replacement group, but these results were not significantly different (For details of the Harris Hip Score: see When we look at the Harris Hip Score in the patients with secondary total hip replacement, there is a statistically significant ( An acetabular fracture is a major injury of the hip joint. The causes can be very different and especially in the aged, even a low energy trauma can cause an acetabular fracture. In the literature, very different causes of acetabular fractures were found. In the series of Mears Fractures of the acetabulum generally are classified using the system of Judet and Letournel In our study, the indications for total hip arthroplasty after failed operative or non-operative treatment of acetabular fractures was symptomatic posttraumatic or postoperative arthritis or avascular necrosis of the femoral head. This corresponds to the indications found in literature: Boardmann, Rogan, Romness and Stauffer all mention avascular necrosis with collapse of the femoral head or symptomatic posttraumatic arthritis as most important indications for secondary total hip replacement after failed operative or non-operative treatment of acetabular fractures The results of secondary total hip replacement after failed treatment of acetabular fractures as found in the literature, are various. Pritchett and Bortel Initial management of an acetabular fracture with primary total hip prosthesis is rarely indicated because of the difficulty to achieve stability of the acetabular component. As to Jimenez et al. Concerning the results of primary total hip replacement for acetabular fractures, only very limited numbers of patients could be found in the literature. Kelly and Lipscomb Concerning the type of femoral and acetabular components, we see an evolution towards an uncemented technique, for the femoral component as well as for the acetabular component. This corresponds to the findings in the literature. Huo In our series, we also see a trend towards the use of uncemented acetabular and femoral components. Corresponding to Tidermark et al. Only few reports could be found concerning the topic of primary and secondary total hip replacement in the acetabular fractures. The results found in literature are also very variable, so no meta-analysis could be performed. The results of our study correspond to the findings in the literature: there are only few indications for primary total hip arthroplasty in acetabular fractures. After failed treatment of acetabular fractures, total hip arthroplasty may be used as a salvage procedure. One should not forget this is a severe intervention which may lead to major complications. Nevertheless, early or late total hip replacement for acetabular fractures has an acceptable final result and functional outcome and has an equal revision rate compared to total hip replacement for femoral neck fractures. All authors hereby disclose any financial and personal relationships with other people or organisations that could inappropriately influence this work.