In this study, a particle flow model was employed to study the dynamic behavior of a thin porous coating layer containing mineral pigments under compression. The model for coating layer consisted of a packed box filled with randomly arranged spherical pigments and latex particles that were generated according to some desired size distributions. Effects of coating porosity, pigment size and size distribution, latex stiffness, and particle–particle micro-friction on the mechanical properties of the coating layer were investigated. It was observed that the pigment size distribution and the initial porosity of the coating layer had a significant effect on the elastic modulus of the coating layer. In addition, simulation results showed that pigments with a narrow size distribution resulted in stiffer coating structures than pigments with a broad size distribution. Furthermore, it was shown that a stiff coating structure could also be formed by using stiff latex particles as binders. Simulation results also demonstrated the significance of particle–particle micro-friction on the compressive response of the coating layer.In order to achieve a high quality printing paper, a thin coating layer, mainly consisted of inorganic pigments and latex, is typically applied on the surface of paper. The coated sheet is often calendered to further increase its surface smoothness and gloss. During the calendering process, coated paper is subjected to a compressive pulse in a rolling nip with a peak pressure of the order of 10–100 Coating consolidation and mechanical properties have been investigated intensively by many researchers in recent years Critical review of literature shows that the relationship between properties of coating components and the dynamic response of the coating layer in the calender nip is not well understood In this work, a particle flow model is employed to investigate the deformation of a thin coating layer under high-speed compressive loading conditions. The model consists of a packed box filled with randomly arranged spherical particles, representing pigment particles that are generated according to the desired size distribution. Latex particles are also included in this model as fine spherical particles of a uniform size. Macro-mechanical properties of the model coating layer are simulated using the micro-scale properties and geometry of the coating constituents as input variables. Discrete element method is widely used for the modeling of the systems which have a large number of molecules or particles. The most popular applications of DEM are in geomechanics (i.e., modeling the compression of rock or granular sands), oil and gas industries (i.e., fluidized beds) and mining engineering. In addition to these fields, DEM has been used in powder handling (i.e., modeling the toner particles) and bulk materials in storage silos. A particle flow model simulates the behavior of a system built up by spherical particles of arbitrary sizes. This method is the simplified version of the discrete element method (DEM) where particles are assumed to be both spherical and rigid. Although particles are assumed to be rigid, they can overlap one another during contact (soft contact). The magnitude of this overlap is related to the contact force and stiffness of the particles in contact, but it is generally limited to less than 10% of the particle radius (see In particle flow model, two factors contribute to the overall deformation of system, (a) movement of the particles and (b) interaction between the particles. Forces in such a system can be either unbalanced, which cause particle movement, or static, that exist at equilibrium and do not result in any particle movement. These forces may be tensile or compressive forces. In order to introduce tensile forces into the system, particles are allowed to bond at their contact points. To simulate the compression process, at the beginning of each time step, the corresponding position, velocity, momentum, and forces acting on each particle are updated based on the laws of motion and linear contact theory. The governing equations for updating particle positions and the contact forces are as follows: Here, it is assumed that particle normal and shear stiffness coefficients have the same value A finite amount of cement-like materials, or so called parallel bonds, are generated among the latex particles to represent the binding characteristic of latex. These bonds act as springs between the latex particles and the resultant force is parallel to the contact force. According to Eq. A packed box with dimensions of 10 The model coating layer consisted of three components: pigment particles, latex particles, and walls. In the model, the top wall was free to move vertically at a constant speed to achieve the desirable compression level; however, the other walls were maintained stationary to confine the particles. In this work, the speed of the moving wall is maintained constant at 0.5 In order to form a closely packed system, particles are generated and positioned randomly one by one, starting from the largest particles. To avoid particle–particle overlapping, the initial structure is made by generating particles with a radius equals to 80% of their actual diameters. Particles are then enlarged to their actual sizes and the system is allowed to relax by shaking without any external force for releasing the locked-in stress caused by the particle overlapping. Following this step, an external force is applied normal to the movable top wall, and the position of particles and inter-particle stress values at prescribed time intervals are tracked. The simulation is continued until the desired maximum normal stress is reached on the moving wall. Using this approach, several coating structures with various types of pigment particles were generated. Pigments considered in this study were simulated according to two types of commercial ground calcium carbonate pigments; Hydrocarb 60 (HC-60) and Hydrocarb 90 (HC-90) (Omya AG), and a hypothetical pigment with a bimodal particle size distribution. As shown in The bimodal pigment size distribution was composed of two fractions of mono-dispersed spherical particles. The density and modulus of these particles were assumed to be the same as those of the GCC pigments. The diameter of the smaller size fraction was calculated so that they were able to fill the voids created among the larger particles arranged in a simple cubic form Latex particles were considered to be spherical and mono-dispersed. The density and modulus of these particles were set at 1020 The relative amount of pigment and latex particles was determined by assuming that the volume fraction of the pigment with respect to the total solid content (i.e., pigment volume concentration) was 80%.  In order to examine the effect of the method of generating particle arrangement on model predictions, two coating layers with the same porosity and particle characteristics but with different spatial distribution of particles were generated and analyzed. From  The coating layer made of a bimodal pigment size distribution was least compressible (only about 6% at stresses higher than 40 The comparison between the simulation results obtained in this study and findings in Ref. As discussed earlier, the porosity of coating layer is expected to affect its compressibility. To determine the extent of this effect, compression of a coating layer containing pigment For porous pigmented coatings, like paper coatings, latex (or binder) fills the void space and covers pigment particles, and therefore, contributes to the load transfer within the coating layer during the compression process. In such a system, latex stiffness is expected to influence the effective modulus of the coating layer. In the present work, for simplicity, latex is assumed to be elastic and its viscoelastic characteristics were not considered. As it can be seen in In the compression process, particle–particle slippage may occur if the shear force exceeds the force of friction, i.e., the product of normal force and micro-friction coefficient. Although there is no reported value for micro-friction coefficient of GCC pigment particles, it is expected to be between 0 and 0.1 In the present work, a particle flow model is used to obtain the macro-response of simulated coating structures containing different pigments size and size distribution. It was found that the initial porosity of the coating layer had a significant effect on the compressive modulus of the coating. In addition, at a given porosity, simulation results confirmed that pigments with narrow size distributions resulted in stiffer structures than pigments with broad size distributions. Furthermore, it was shown that a stiffer coating structure could be formed by using stiff latex particles as binder if the coating layers have the same porosity. Although the model predicted the effect of latex stiffness on coating modulus properly, using a more realistic porosity which corresponds to the given latex may improve the accuracy of the model, particularly for the binders with high glass transition temperature. Finally, a quantitative analysis illustrated the significance of particle–particle micro-friction on the compressive response of the coating structures. Financial support from NSERC CRD program and Surface Science Consortium at the Pulp and Paper Centre, University of Toronto, is gratefully acknowledged. Authors also wish to express their appreciation to Professor Paul Young for providing access to PFC3D software.