Ethereal compounds act as good extractants for Au(III) from hydrochloric-acid media. We developed a novel aromatic ethereal compound 1-methoxy-2-octoxybenzene (o-MOB) as an extractant for Au(III). Au(III) extraction using o-MOB in hydrochloric-acid media reached equilibrium rapidly within 10 min. Of a series of ethereal extractants, including positional isomers, o-MOB showed the highest extractability for Au(III). Additionally, o-MOB showed a higher extractability for Au(III) than a commercially available extractant, dibutyl carbitol, under diluted conditions. Au(III) was extracted selectively using o-MOB over other precious- and base-metal ions in 0.1–1.0 M HCl. Au(III) that was extracted by using o-MOB was stripped quantitatively using hydrochloric-acid solution that contained thiourea.In addition to its use in jewelry and investment, gold is used in electronic devices such as mobile phones, personal computers, and laptops. An annual excess of 300 t of gold is used in electronic components ( Solvent extraction is a promising method for the separation and recovery of precious metals from WEEE. Because many element types are contained in WEEE, the extractant extractability and selectivity are key factors that are required in the development of the separation process. Various extractants, such as sulfur-containing extractants and amine extractants, have been developed for the extraction of Au(III) ( Ethereal compounds are effective for Au(III) extraction from hydrochloric-acid media ( Although DBC is powerful for the extraction of gold, it has a few problems, such as low levels of contamination of the aqueous phase and an elevated viscosity. Other ethereal compounds act as powerful extractants for Au(III) with fewer problems. However, limited reports exist on the solvent extraction of gold using aromatic ethereal extractants. In this study, 1-methoxy-2-octoxybenzene ( Analytical-grade gold(III), palladium(II), platinum(IV), rhodium(III), iron(III), aluminum(III), gallium(III), indium(III), cobalt(II), nickel(II), copper(II) and zinc(II) chlorides (Wako Pure Chemical Ind. Ltd., Japan) were used to prepare test solutions of the metal ions. The molecular structures of ethereal extractants that were used in this study are shown in The synthesis scheme for 1-methoxy-2-octoxybenzene (   OB was prepared using phenol and 1-bromooctane, in a manner similar to that of The synthesis scheme for 1-methoxy-2-octoxyethane (MOE) is shown in Liquid–liquid extraction tests were conducted batchwise with a typical procedure as follows. An aqueous solution was prepared by dissolving each metal ion (Au(III), Pd(II), Pt(IV), Rh(III), Fe(III), Al(III), Ga(III), In(III), Co(II), Ni(II), Cu(II) or Zn(II)) to form 0.1-mM solutions in HCl. The initial concentration of hydrochloric acid was adjusted to 0.1–8.0 M. An extracting solution was prepared by dissolving 200 mM of an extractant ( The forward extraction of 0.1 mM Au(III) using    The effect of diluent on the extraction of Au(III) using  The extraction capacity of Au(III) using an organic phase that contained 200 mM   An aromatic diether compound, We thank Edanz Group (