Hip fractures represent one of the biggest healthcare problems and an epidemic is expected to arise due to the ageing population. Various classifications have been proposed over the years which failed to achieve high reliability in defining the whole spectrum of proximal femoral fracture deformity. Nevertheless, orthopaedic surgeons commonly communicate using the most popular differentiation which divides hip fractures to intracapsular or extracapsular, with further subclassification to displaced or undisplaced. Based on this broad categorization, sliding screw devices or cephalomedullary systems dominate the fixation of extracapsular fractures, whereas intracapsular fractures are treated with screw/plate fixation or arthroplasty. Early surgical treatment facilitates best outcomes and return to pre-injury level of activity. Hip fracture pathology covers a huge part of routine orthopaedic practice and orthopaedic surgeons at every level should be well versed on them. In this review we will summarize all the basic and current evidence regarding the classification and treatment of hip fractures.Each year over 300,000 people over the age of 65 sustain a hip fracture in America. In 2017, 67,000 people older than 60 years of age presented with neck of femur fractures (NOF) in the UK. Despite these already significant numbers, the incidence of hip fractures is increasing. It is estimated that by 2050 the global incidence will approach 4.5 million. This increase comes as a result of human ageing, frailty and osteoporosis. Hip fractures in younger people are usually the result of high-energy trauma and therefore their incidence is relatively low. The current annual healthcare cost of hip fractures in the UK is estimated to be £2b, possibly extending to £3b if social care costs are included. This huge impact signifies the importance for improvement in hip fracture care. Orthopaedic surgeons function in the heart of this problem and therefore every attempt to improve our understanding regarding these injuries should be made. Classifying a fracture is the first step to understanding its pathophysiology. Classification also facilitates communication between healthcare providers regarding diagnosis and treatment. As well as being fundamental to data collection for research, an ideal classification should be simple, reproducible, and easily applicable. It should also help provide information relating to post-reduction stability, postoperative mobilization plans, and surgical outcomes. It should be validated and allow for good inter-observer and intra-observer reliability. Hip fractures are broadly characterized by their relationship to the hip capsule as either intracapsular or extracapsular, ( The two factors that dictate stability in extracapsular fractures are the integrity of the posteromedial cortex (calcar femorale), and the condition of the lateral femoral wall. Taking into account the relationship of the fracture line relative to the greater and lesser trochanters, we can classify the fracture as intertrochanteric, peritrochanteric, trans-trochanteric, subtrochanteric (exceed up to 5 cm distal to the lesser trochanter), or reverse oblique. Reverse oblique describes the extracapsular fracture extending from proximal medial to distal lateral. Reverse oblique and subtrochanteric fractures are considered unstable because the femoral shaft tends to medialize due to the action of the adductor muscles. In 1949, Evans organized extracapsular fractures to six different subtypes whilst highlighting the relevance of the medial and posterolateral support ( In 1979, Jensen further modified Evans classification into three groups: stable or unstable two-fragment fractures, unstable three-fragment fractures with greater or lesser trochanteric fractures, and four-part fractures According to that classification, extracapsular proximal femoral fractures are coded as 31 A. A1 corresponds to simple (two-part) fractures extending from the greater trochanter to the medial cortex with the lateral cortex and greater trochanter remaining intact. A2 applies to fractures with comminution, an intact lateral cortex, and a posteromedial fragment of variable size. In the A3 group, the fracture line extends across both medial and lateral cortices which therefore includes reverse oblique and subtrochanteric fracture patterns. A study examining the intra- and inter-observer reliability of the AO/OTA and Jensen classifications concluded that the AO/OTA classification without subgroups is the most reliable and recommended classifying trochanteric fractures into three groups: stable trochanteric, unstable trochanteric and trans-trochanteric. Pauwels in 1935 attempted to classify intracapsular hip fractures according to the angle formed between the fracture line and the horizontal (tangential to the superior part of femoral head). The concept of this classification was that as the angle increases, the deforming forces transition from compressive to shear resulting in greater instability, loss of reduction, risk of nonunion, and risk of avascular necrosis. This modality is generally utilised in physiologically younger patients with high-energy fractures but has been subject to scrutiny due to its inherent difficulty in accurately assessing the fracture line inclination, especially in displaced fractures coupled with rotation. In 1961, Robert Symon Garden, a British orthopaedic surgeon, tried to address the above problems publishing his classification of four types for intracapsular hip fractures. A modification of the Garden classification was proposed consisting of two types: stable (undisplaced) and unstable (displaced). According to the AO/OTA classification, intracapsular hip fractures are 31 B. Subtype 1 includes subcapital fractures with valgus impaction or with minimal displacement, subtype 2 includes transcervical fractures, and subtype 3 includes displaced subcapital fractures ( In conclusion, the modified Garden classification along with the AO/OTA classification seem to describe intracapsular fractures adequately. However, as all of these classifications are based on plain radiographs, it remains to be answered whether modern imaging modalities can offer a better classification system. In order to minimize morbidity and mortality, the treatment goal for every hip fracture is to achieve a stable hip construct allowing for early mobilization with a low complication rate. The multi-disciplinary cooperation of orthogeriatrics, orthopaedic surgeons, physiotherapists, rehabilitation specialists, nutritionists, general practitioners, and many other specialties, is therefore of fundamental importance. Elderly patients should be promptly optimized in order to facilitate surgery within 36 hours of admission. Non-surgical treatment is reserved only for extreme cases where severe co-morbidities preclude survival postoperatively or if death is expected imminently. The American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons (AAOS) in September 2004 has published evidence-based guidelines for the management of hip fractures in the elderly. Similarly in the UK, the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE) offered their guidance on this complex healthcare problem in 2011, with subsequent review in 2017. Fixation options depend on fracture stability as is dictated by the proximal femoral posteromedial cortex and integrity of the lateral wall. If the calcar is displaced or lateral wall is broken, then an intramedullary device should be the implant of choice due to the fracture pattern's inherent instability. In cases of stable fractures, a sliding hip screw with side plate (dynamic hip screw (DHS)) is usually the chosen implant. An adequately reduced or intact posteromedial cortex offers a medial buttress able to redistribute stress and resist medial compressive forces. Therefore, DHS is indicated in AO/OTA A1 or A2 when adequately reduced. With posteromedial fracture instability, intramedullary implants are able to withstand the greater medial compressive loads as they are closer to the force vector line through the hip centre of rotation, and thus exhibit a shorter lever arm. This enables the nail to resist greater loads to failure than the sliding hip screw as for the same force withstands less moment. Moreover, the lateral cortical wall biomechanically acts as a lateral buttress and therefore if this is disrupted, as would be the case when using a sliding hip screw, it may result in fixation failure with medialisation of femoral shaft and lateralization of proximal femoral fragment. On the contrary an intramedullary implant functions as a substitute lateral wall offering support and preventing abnormal femoral shaft movement. Therefore, reverse oblique, transtrochanteric or subtrochanteric fractures should always be treated with an intramedullary device. Biomechanical studies found that using cephalomedullary devices resulted in significantly less displacement and similar load to failure compared to sliding hip screw in both stable and unstable intertrochanteric fracture models. Prospective randomized controlled trials suggest that intramedullary nailing is associated with better radiographic results (femoral neck shortening) and higher rates of complete union than sliding hip screw in unstable intertrochanteric fractures. In case of reverse oblique fractures, the fracture line is parallel to the sliding hip screw so loss of fixation with femoral neck shortening should be anticipated. Basicervical fractures are considered rotationally unstable and various studies have shown that intramedullary devices do not perform well therefore the use of sliding hip screw is generally advised. The addition of an antirotation (or derotation) wire perioperatively during drilling is recommended to control the femoral neck rotation which can subsequently be replaced with a screw or removed once the lag screw is finally inserted. The most common mechanism of lag screw failure is considered to be varus collapse of the femoral head leading to screw cut-out superiorly. Baumgaertner in 1995 introduced the tip-apex-distance (TAD) which is an index expressed as the sum of the distance from the tip or lag screw to the apex of the femoral head both on the AP and lateral X-ray views. A helical blade with side plate was introduced in an attempt to offer superior anchorage in osteoporotic cancellous bone of the femoral head. Biomechanical studies demonstrated that a helical blade exhibits greater pullout resistance and greater rotational stability when compared to a standard lag screw. Clinical studies showed that helical blade designs had less implant migration into the femoral head, however reoperation rates and screw cutout were similar to the lag screw. In studies examining the use of a helical blade combined with an intramedullary nail construct, however, a high rate of cutout (in one study was double the cutout rate of lag screw) was observed. In more than one study, they exhibited a form of medial rather than the typical superolateral cutout with an apparent lateral migration of the femoral head relative to the blade. It is believed that the cause for this may be due to the femoral head fixation piece binding inside the nail and failing to slide. The osteoporotic bone around the blade collapsed and as the sliding mechanism did not function, the sharp edge of the helical blade protruded medially. A predisposing factor to that may be that the impacted superior bone resisted superior movement and obliged the blade to move medially. It is also worth mentioning that medial cutout was irrelevant to TAD and in some studies was found to correlate with smaller TADs (15–20 mm) suggestive of the fact that the principles of Baumgaertner may have to be reconsidered in the case of new implants. Despite the initial promising results with helical blades, it therefore seems that more studies are needed to investigate this newly described phenomenon of medial cutout when nails are combined with helical blades. In cases of severe osteoporosis, adjuvant techniques to augment the fixation with the use of cement or calcium phosphate are also useful. Other devices that allow for expansion inside the femoral head to potentially improve fixation, such as the X-bolt, have been introduced but their use has not yet been widely adopted or studied. Surgical treatment of intracapsular fractures depends on the fracture orientation and stability, as well as on patient factors such as age, pre-injury functional status, and bone quality. Valgus impacted and non-displaced femoral neck fractures (Garden type I, II) are commonly treated with either multiple cancellous lag screws or a DHS. The operative procedure aims to prevent displacement of this stable fracture pattern. In younger patients with displaced fractures (Garden type III, IV), closed or open reduction followed by internal fixation is often attempted. In the elderly population, however, it is more common to replace the femoral head with a form of hip arthroplasty due to the increased risk of avascular necrosis. In the case of lag screw fixation, three partially threaded cancellous screws (6.5, 7.0 or 7.3 mm) are inserted parallel in an inverted triangle configuration with one screw inferior, one anterosuperior, and one posterosuperior. The inferior screw insertion point should be at, or above the level of the lesser trochanter, to avoid creating a stress riser potentially leading to an iatrogenic subtrochanteric fracture. The inferior screw is inserted first in the strong calcar bone to act as a guide and buttress for the placement of the other two screws. The use of a fourth screw is controversial but it has been recommended in cases with significant posterior comminution. Other configurations have been postulated, such as divergent or random parallel screws, but biomechanically the inverted triangle seems to be the strongest. The screws are advised to abut the lateral cortex in order to increase the screw insertional torque and hence compression strength and stability. In case of osteoporosis, usage of washers is recommended as it can distribute forces over the lateral cortex, thereby increasing insertional torque, improving fracture compression, and decreasing the risk of screw backout. The operating surgeon should ensure that the screw threads do not cross the fracture site as this would inhibit compression. The tips of the screws should be positioned up to 5 mm from the subchondral bone. Revision rate at 1 year for stable intracapsular fractures treated with cannulated screws has been estimated at around 10%. The most common reason for revision was found to be subtrochanteric soft tissue irritation due to screws backing out secondary to femoral neck shortening. The DHS is an alternative to multiple cancellous screws for neck of femur fixation. Independent cancellous screws compared to DHS offer the advantage of a relatively minimally invasive technique, shorter operative time, and less blood loss. On the other hand, DHS is superior in cases of more unstable or vertically oriented fracture patterns like the basicervical (Pauwels type III). When DHS is applied, the TAD principles should also be followed to optimize lag screw position in the femoral head and minimize screw cutout. Several studies have evaluated multiple cancellous lag screws versus DHS. Biomechanical cadaveric studies showed that DHS is stronger in axial loading but both constructs share similar torsional stiffness. Others failed to show a significant difference. It seems that DHS is stronger in patterns involving higher shearing forces. The FAITH (Fixation using Alternative Implants for Treatment of Hip fractures), a recent multicentre randomized controlled trial evaluating 1108 patients 50 years and older who sustained low-energy femoral neck fractures, compared sliding hip screws versus cancellous screw fixation within the first 24 postoperative months. Union rate, failure rate and reoperation rate was the same between both constructs. Sliding hip screw exhibited significantly higher rates of avascular necrosis but significantly lower reoperation rates in smokers or in patients with unstable fracture patterns like basicervical. This higher rate of osteonecrosis may be attributed to the higher insertion torque resulting from the bigger lag screw, and a suggested intervention could be the protective application of an antirotation screw. The above study proved that although both modalities provide similar outcomes, cancellous screws may preserve blood supply and that DHS is superior in poor bone quality or more unstable fracture patterns. A secondary finding of this large study has recently reported that Garden I and II fractures with initial preoperative posterior tilt greater than 20° exhibited higher revision rates to arthroplasty. It was therefore concluded that such patients should be treated by arthroplasty at first instance. The implications of these findings are evident if we consider that hip arthroplasty after failed fixation carries elevated risk for dislocation and periprosthetic fracture. Displaced intracapsular hip fractures carry an inherently high risk of avascular necrosis. Therefore, femoral head preservation is not advisable because if fixed, an unacceptably high revision rate should be anticipated. In such cases, arthroplasty is the best option, either in the form of total hip replacement (THA) or hemiarthroplasty (HA). Both have high success rates and offer high patient satisfaction with THA reserved for biologically more active patients. When compared with THA, HA is a technically easier procedure associated with lower costs, less operative time, less blood loss, and lower dislocation rate (due to high head-neck ratio), and is therefore the treatment of choice for medically compromized or physically limited patients. Elderly or biologically compromised patients cannot afford failed or revision operations. THA is associated with better functional outcomes especially in physiologically younger patients who are more active. It is known that acute THA for hip fracture carries a 10-fold higher 30-day mortality rate than elective THA for osteoarthritis. HA in active patients leads to early acetabular erosion, pain and an early conversion rate to THA. Pre-existing arthritis is also another consideration for THA. NICE recommends cemented femoral implants for HA as in such ages bone stock is compromised and cementless implants are associated with perioperative or periprosthetic fractures and overall inferior outcomes. Cardiovascular compromise during cement insertion is well described and can be lessened by avoiding pressurization and informing the anaesthetic team prior to cementing. This approach has decreased incidence of cement-related deaths by threefold. Regarding the surgical approach, the anterolateral is recommended as it is considered to carry a lower dislocation rate than the posterior approach. However, for high volume hip surgeons regularly utilizing the posterior approach, this trend is negated. There is some emerging evidence that the direct anterior approach may offer enhanced rehabilitation and outcomes in this cohort of patients, however further research is required. Bipolar heads were initially considered to be better than unipolar heads regarding dislocation rate, possibly due to greater control allowable when attempting to achieve the correct anteversion of the cemented stem. More recent studies however, have failed to show this trend but have suggested that unipolar heads cause accelerated acetabular erosion. It must also be taken into account that implants utilising bipolar heads are generally significantly more expensive. THA is gaining popularity due to the growing active population amongst the elderly age group. It potentially offers favorable outcomes which are considered to offset for the higher implant cost. When comparison is made between THA and HA, the 30-day mortality rate is similar, however THA patients experienced a higher rate of postoperative dislocation. Despite this higher dislocation rate, multiple studies have showed better quality of life and less reoperation of THA when compared to HA. More recently, Bhandari et al. Published a large multicentre and international (80 centres/10 countries) trial evaluating 1495 patients of 50 years of age or older, who had a displaced femoral neck fracture, and were randomly assigned to receive either THA or HA. They found similar incidence of secondary procedures between both groups at 24 months, and a statistically insignificant improvement in quality of life and function in the THA group. Despite these conflicting findings, we believe that THA will continue to gain popularity in the treatment of intracapsular fractures. Tidemark et al. compared THA to fixation and at 2-year follow-up found a revision rate of 4% compared to 42% respectively. It is worth noting however that the fixation technique used only two cannulated lag screws as opposed to three. Hip fractures have been extensively studied for many years but the basis of their understanding has been established during the era of plain radiography. We therefore envisage that with the more widespread use of advanced imaging, new classification options should allow us to more accurately categorize these fracture types. This will ultimately allow for more focused research in order to rationalize treatment pathways and identify prognostic indicators. Improvements in reduction techniques for displaced fractures are more than welcome in order to facilitate joint preservation especially for the younger patient group. Currently, diagnostic modalities which can predict real-time risk of AVN are missing. New indexes (apart from TAD published 25 years ago) tested in new implants should be evaluated. Moreover, there are no clearly defined criteria guiding the preference for a total hip replacement over hemiarthroplasty. Current guidelines such as ‘activity level’, or ‘biological age’, are slightly vague and therefore often interpreted differently by different surgeons. Different classifications of hip fractures present varied and diverse anatomical and biomechanical challenges regarding hip fracture treatment. As the incidence of hip fractures is increasing every year, the orthopaedic surgeon should be well versed in the classification of and treatment options for these common injuries. Their treatment will continue to evolve alongside the evolution of diagnostic and treatment options.