The effect of mechano-chemical activation of Indian sea nodules, while recording the zeta potential, particle size distribution and surface area, on the bio-dissolution of metals by Aspergillus niger has been investigated. Activation is a term used to indicate what takes place when increasing grinding time does not result in significant change in particle size but rather results in the accumulation of energy that may lead to the development of lattice defects within the particles that can aid biological attack. It was observed that the mechano-chemical activation improved the bio-dissolution of metals such as copper, nickel and cobalt from the sea nodules at initial pH in the range 4.0–5.0. With 10min milling of particles of ⩽75μm size, 86% material was reduced to ⩽10μm size with a change in zeta potential from −18 to −34mV. Above 95% copper, nickel and cobalt each was leached out in 15days time from the nodules activated for 10min at 5% (w/v) PD and 35°C temperature with initial pH of 4.5; the biorecovery being almost similar when the material was activated for 30min. In the case of nodules without activation, ⩾89% metal bioleaching was achieved in 25days time at an initial pH of 4.5 under this condition. The mechano-chemical activation of sea nodules has thus influenced the bio-dissolution process, while providing a wider pH range available for processing of nodules with the involvement of organic acids such as oxalic and citric generated from the fungus.Bioleaching of valuable metals from the deep sea nodules ( The role of activation of minerals for extraction of metals is well documented in literature ( Sea nodules were obtained from NIO, Goa. Phases identified by XRD in the nodules were todorokite, birnesite, and lithiophorite as major Mn(IV) constituents while iron phases being goethite, maghemite and ferrihydrite. Copper, nickel and cobalt were a part of manganese oxide and iron phases. The sea nodule sample was crushed and ground to less than 300 The activation of the sample was accomplished in a high energy attrition mill (PE 075, Netzsch, Germany) under the following conditions: 500 Particle size distribution and specific surface area were determined by laser particle size analyser (Mastersizer, Malven, UK). The zeta potential of the particles after milling was measured by zeta meter (model 501 PENKEM Inc., USA).  Bioleaching experiments were carried out in conical flasks of 250 Redox potential was measured against saturated calomel electrode (SCE). All the experiments were carried out in duplicate to check the consistency and variation in metal recovery was found to be within ±2%. To determine the amount of metals adsorbed in the fungal biomass, the leach residue consisting of exhausted ore and the biomass was thoroughly washed with dilute sulphuric acid (pH: 1) for 10 The mechano-chemically activated nodules were characterized for particle size distribution ( In Surface charge characteristics of particles in terms of zeta potential (ZP) are expressed in In the bioleaching of nodules activated for 10 It may be seen that the size of non-activated particles (ball milled) ranged from 5 to 75 At initial pH of 4.5 and 35 The bio-dissolution of metals from the nodules may also be correlated with the amount of organic acids produced from the metabolic activity of the fungus when 30 The leach liquor obtained in 25 The next experiments were conducted for the bioleaching of activated (attrition milling) and non-activated sea nodule (from planetary milling) particles both of same size (⩽38.5 The XRD phase identification of leach residue after bioleaching of nodules with activation (10 Bioleaching with The valuable metals viz., Cu, Ni and Co associated with the two lattices viz., manganese dioxide and goethite are thus released and get dissolved at lower pH, besides forming soluble metal complexes with oxalic and citric acids generated as a metabolic process by the fungus (  Mechano-chemical activation of Indian Ocean nodules is accompanied by reduction in particle size and accumulation of surface charge. In 5 Activation of nodules improves the bioleaching kinetics with Improved metal recovery in activated material of similar size range (⩽38.5 Authors are thankful to National Institute of Oceanography, CSIR, Goa, India for providing the Indian Ocean nodule samples. One (C. Das) of the authors is thankful to CSIR, New Delhi, India for the award of Research Associate-ship.