Scanning acoustic microscope techniques enable determination of mechanical properties of small samples. These techniques can be applied to a single trabecula of the cancellous bone. This paper describes nondestructive methods for assessing the bone tissue elasticity for samples accessible from one side only. Two methods are applied in the same area of a trabecula. The first one allows determination of the tissue impedance, based on the correlation between the grey levels of the scanning acoustic microscope images and of the reference material of a known impedance. The second newly-developed technique enables measurement of the velocity of surface waves with a spatial resolution less than 100 μm, using theoretical and experimental analysis of the position of the first interference of the V(z) curve. These two experimentally-derived parameters were used to calculate the density and elasticity coefficient for trabecular bone samples of patients who suffered from metabolic bone diseases, such as osteoporosis, osteomalacia and osteoidosis. Medical descriptions of these diseases explain the differences in mechanical properties of trabecular bone tissue found experimentally. (E-mail: jlitn@ippt.gov.pl)The mass of a bone, structure and material properties of the bone tissue can seriously influence the bone strength and its fracture resistance. It has been shown ( The scanning acoustic microscope (SAM) techniques make it possible to measure and to image the mechanical properties of very small samples of hard materials. These methods can be applied to bone samples. Most of the published results of microscopic ultrasonic measurements of bone tissues concern the cortical bone. Flat, parallel samples of a cortical bone have been used to measure the longitudinal wave velocity variation for osteoporotic subjects before and after menopause ( In the investigations described in this paper, the custom-designed SAM system operating at 100 MHz has been applied to measure the impedance and longitudinal wave velocity and to determine the density and elasticity coefficient (defined as a product of density and square of velocity, A SAM built in our laboratory was used for imaging and measurements. The microscope works at the frequencies of 35, 100 and 200 MHz and makes it possible to obtain amplitude and phase images. The images are stored in the computer memory, greatly facilitating their further processing. The measuring curves, The voltage When a flat sample is considered, the voltage The amplitude and phase values of the reflection coefficient vary with the angle of incidence of the ultrasonic wave on the interface, as shown in Using the reference sample (of well-known impedance value = The value of the measured impedance ( The The phenomenon of The values of these components (magnitudes = The position of oscillation maximum or minimum depends on the phase difference (φ The method is based on two assumptions, these are that the phase difference of the The accuracy of the method was assessed by evaluating the influence of the parameters mentioned in eqn The velocity in the coupling fluid, as well as geometrical parameters of the microscope lens and transducer, can be determined with high accuracy, making the errors associated with these three parameters quite small. In the Validation of the proposed method was performed by comparing the surface wave velocity values determined using the The results obtained by means of both these techniques reveal that the newly-developed method of LLS wave velocity determination can be successfully applied to measurements of the velocity in a single trabecula. Both techniques described in this paper were used to measure the impedance and velocity values in trabeculae of a cancellous bone. The samples of a porous pelvic bone presubmerged in methyl methacrylate were prepared at the Food and Nutrition Institute in Warsaw ( A Teflon sample with the impedance In exactly the same regions of the trabecula, the velocity of LLS waves were measured by recording the All results were divided into three groups, according to the category (disease) of a sample and, for each group, the average values of impedance and velocity were found. Then, the values of density and elasticity coefficient were calculated ( The unique properties of the acoustic microscope make it possible to measure and to image the acoustic properties of a single trabecula; namely, the acoustic impedance and the velocity of longitudinal waves in selected areas of a porous bone, also in the case of samples from patients who suffer from metabolic bone diseases, such as osteoporosis, osteomalacia and osteoidosis. Then, the density and elasticity coefficient of these samples can be determined. The method proposed in this paper enables measurement of surface wave velocity for small samples (starting from the diameters of 100 μm) accessible from one side only. The author is aware of the fact that the method averages the measured velocity value over all propagation directions. The bone also, the single trabecula, is an anisotropic structure ( The results of measurements show that osteoporotic trabecula can be clearly distinguished from other bone samples. They are characterized by relatively high velocity, impedance, density and elasticity that are close to the values found for a cortical bone. Much lower values are found for samples taken from patients with osteoidosis and osteomalacia. Medical descriptions of these metabolic bone diseases explain the results found experimentally. Osteoporosis is characterized by the lack of the mass of trabecular bone, but the bone tissue building the trabecula remains almost unchanged. In the cases of osteoidosis and osteomalacia, the mineralization process is disturbed, which results in lowering the acoustic parameters. The value of the elasticity coefficient ( This study was supported by the State Committee for Scientific Research, Poland (grant no. 4 T08D 010 24).