This work investigates the function of additives in the electrolytic preparation of copper powder under various conditions: without additive, with traditional additive, or with polyvinylpyrrolidine (PVP) and sodium polyoxyethylene alkylphenol sulfonate (APES) additives. The influences of the additive on the composition and particle size distribution of copper powder as well as on the current efficiency are also studied. The results show that the particle size distribution of copper powder cannot be reduced without additive or with traditional additive, but the mixture of PVP and APES is an ideal additive because it can make the copper powder particle size distribution reach the level of practical demand and widen the particle size distribution range.Copper powder is widely used in electronics and powder metallurgy ( The powder production process is essentially identical the that of electrolytic refining of blister copper in that a copper anode dissolves and is reduced at the cathode ( However, the copper powder always bonds to the cathode in flocs, which lower the quality of the copper powder. Therefore, the technical key to the electrolytic preparation of copper powder is the control of the particle size of copper powder. Additives change the polarization of the cathode and improve the composition of the copper crystal ( There are many studies on the use of additives such as bone glue, casein and thiourea to improve the quality of the cathode copper ( In this work we explore the influence of additives on the quality of copper powder in the electrolytic preparation process. In these experiments, copper was used as the anode and lead as the cathode. Typical conditions used were a current density of 500–1000 A/m In the absence of additives, solid sheets of copper were plated onto the cathode. The sheet was highly adherent and could not be removed readily using brushes. Thus it can be seen that it is necessary to use additives in producing copper powder by means of electrolysis. Adding bone glue or thiourea resulted in a shorter electrolysis time, but the morphology of the copper was the same as in their absence. Adding different concentrations resulted in powder whose impurity levels are shown in  When using PVP, the cathode deposit was granular instead of coherent and spalled off the cathode, the final deposit was readily brushed off the cathode. The particle size distribution is shown in From Using APES resulted in a similar particle size distribution to that with PVP. In order to change the particle size distribution range, a mixture of APES and PVP was tried. The results with a mixture of APES and PVP are shown in From From Choosing the ratio of PVP to APES higher than 6/4 and leaving other conditions the same as before, we obtain the particle size distribution in In the electrolytic process for producing copper powder it is essential to use additives or the particles adhere to the cathode. PVP can change the size of copper powder in cathode. When the PVP concentration is 5 g/L, the current efficiency is highest and the particle size distribution range is narrow. APES has the same effect as PVP, however, a mixture of the two decreases the average particle size and widens the particle size distribution. So using the mixture of PVP and APES is a good measure to improve the quality of copper powder.