Minas-Rio is an Anglo American property, located in Brazil, which started its operation at the end of 2014. The Minas-Rio regrind circuit is currently the largest Vertimill™ installation in the world with sixteen Metso VTM-1500s installed in closed circuit with hydrocyclones. The grinding efficiency of this circuit was verified through a sampling campaign, and the results showed that the measured specific energy consumption was similar to the predicted specific energy consumption estimated at the engineering design stages of the project. Although essential for plant design, the specific energy consumption for a given product size is not sufficient to predict the performance of the circuit under different operating conditions. A more detailed model and simulations are required to predict performance under different operating conditions, so that the required product specifications can be achieved. A vertical stirred mill model, based on the Population Balance Model (PBM) technique, has recently been developed and validated using extensive data from pilot scale vertical stirred milling tests. This model is the subject of this investigation. Industrial scale data has been generated through a careful sampling campaign at the Minas-Rio plant, and used to further validate the model. PBM ore breakage parameters were obtained from the feed samples using simplified tests carried out in a laboratory scale conventional tubular ball mill and the results are discussed here.There are many references showing vertical stirred mills in successful applications in the mining industry. These mills typically operate 30–50% more efficiently than ball mills ( The vertical stirred mills have a screw agitator centrally located in the mill chamber, which promotes the grinding action by stirring the media and circulating it throughout the mill ( The population balance model concept was first applied for chemical engineering purposes by The selection function for each size class, Parameters obtained from simple laboratory batch grinding tests can be used for simulating and scaling-up large industrial mills. The energy specific selection function The breakage function model can be described by The hydrocyclone classification can be described by three different models: Rosin-Rammler, Logistic and Exponential Sum, as show in the Eqs. The scale-up and simulation model used here is based on the population balance modeling technique using the Herbst & Fuerstenau scale-up procedure for ball mills, adapted for vertical stirred mills. The model was originally validated with extensive data from pilot scale vertical stirred mill tests ( Data from the Minas-Rio regrind circuit has been obtained through a comprehensive sampling campaign around the regrind circuit. The Minas-Rio regrinding circuit is currently the largest Vertimill™ installation in the world and consists of sixteen VTM-1500 mills, grinding in closed circuit with eight hydrocyclone batteries. The Minas-Rio project, an Anglo American property located in Brazil, started operations at the end of 2014. The design production is 24.5 MTPY of Pellet Feed, obtained by processing an itabirite iron ore.   The specific energies (SE) shown in Although essential for plant design, the specific energy consumption for a given product size, as described by a The objective of this work is to validate the vertical stirred mill scale-up and simulation model, using the data from the sampling campaign at the Minas-Rio regrind circuit. The samples collected during the survey of the Minas-Rio regrind circuit were used to generate a mass balance. The particle size distributions were measured using standard laboratory sieving techniques. Most samples are relatively fine so wet sieving was used for all determinations. The fractions passing 38 Batch ball mill tests were carried out on a sample of the new feed to the regrind circuit. The tests followed the same procedures used by Metso to estimate the Vertimill™ specific energy consumption ( The specific energy for the test material (kW During plant start-up, the Vertimill™s were loaded with a single diameter ball charge of 12.7 The mass of balls The mass of solids to the batch mill The critical speed Instead of a prony brake test, the net power This method avoids sophisticated power measurement instruments that are not always available in mineral processing laboratories. It is important to point out that the internal walls of the test mill must be smooth (no charge lifters) in order for Eq. The specific energy The particle size distributions and mass partition through the circuit streams of the industrial regrind circuit can be estimated by simulation using PBM techniques. Data required to perform the simulations include; the ore breakage parameters determined from the batch mill test results, classification parameters from a mass balance around the hydrocyclones, the feed particle size distribution, the ore specific gravity, circuit feed rate and the industrial mill net power draw. The simulation was performed using the vertical stirred mill model ( The batch mill tests were carried out using the sample of new feed to the regrind circuit collected during the sampling campaign. The product size distributions were measured for three different grinding times, at 20, 40 and 60 The grinding parameters were determined using specialized optimization software developed by Mineral Technologies International, Inc. called  According to The Vertimill™ efficiency factor could be back-calculate from pilot or industrial circuits using commercial software, but this procedure was avoided because the main idea of the methodology presented in this investigation is perform the vertical stirred mill scale-up from laboratory tests. The factor of 1.35 is derived off standard vendor practice when scaling VTMs from laboratory batch milling data, and fits well with all data available. Using this methodology it is possible to simulate any circuit configuration. This methodology is very useful for conceptual studies, being not necessary any data from similar operations or spend significant budget to run a pilot test program. The resulting energy specific selection function The energy specific selection function is essentially linear, and did not exhibit reduced breakage rates of the larger particles due to improper nipping. This means that the top ball size was large enough to break the top size particles in the feed effectively. The classification parameters were obtained from the plant mass balanced data using the  The Exponential Sum model ( The available gross specific energy consumption for the industrial circuit is 5.9 These calculations are based on the Vertimill™s total power. Reducing the available power by 10% for the no-load power, the net power available for grinding is 1007 The maximum available net specific energy at design tonnage would therefore be 5.3 The product specification considered during the design phase was During the sampling campaign the fresh feed rate (t/h) and the gross power (kW) of one of the mills were measured to be equal to 168  The design project considered a specific energy of 5.3 VTM-1500 Vertimill™ operating data has been made available through a careful sampling campaign at the Minas-Rio plant. Population Balance Model breakage parameters were obtained from the samples using simplified tests carried out in a laboratory scale conventional tubular ball mill. The results showed that it is possible to scale-up and simulate an industrial vertical stirred mill, with good accuracy, using the methodology recently developed by The authors would like to thank Anglo American for permitting the publishing of the results from the Minas-Rio regrind circuit.