MAX-phases being usually composed of transition metals, group A elements and carbon/nitrogen are considered interesting materials for many applications because of their tremendous bulk modulus, “reversible” plasticity, and machinability. This is mainly due to their unique kind of bonding comprising covalent, ionic as well as metallic bonds providing “easy” planes of rupture and deformability due to the layered crystal structures.
                  In transition metal boride systems, similar types of bonding are available. In particular the W2B5-structure type and its stacking variations allow the synthesis of strongly layered crystal structures exhibiting unique delamination phenomena.
                  The paper presents ab initio calculations showing the similarities of bonding between the ternary carbides and the corresponding ternary or quaternary borides. Formation of boride-based nano-laminates from auxiliary liquid phases, from the melt as well as during sintering and precipitation from supersaturated solid solutions will be discussed by means of SEM and TEM studies. The role of impurities weakening the interlayer bonding will be addressed in particular. The pronounced cleavage parallel to the basal plane gives rise for crack deflection and pull-out mechanisms if the laminates are dispersed in brittle matrices such as boron carbide, silicon carbide or other transition metal borides.“MAX-phase” is a term usually assigned to ternary metal carbides of the general formula The peculiar characteristic of these ternary compounds is their layered structure, which is composed of alternating hexagonal planar networks of A-group elements and MAX-phases appear in three major classes of chemical stoichiometry, (i) the so-called 211 class, of which Ti Layered structures exhibiting strongly anisotropic bonding are also known from borides based on the AlB In order to investigate chemical bonding between metal and boron sublattices ab initio calculations were carried out with the Vienna ab initio software package (VASP) Materials synthesis was carried out by (i) powder route and (ii) auxiliary bath method. The starting powders used in the following experiments were supplied by H.C. Starck, Goslar, Germany. Powders of TiB The samples were characterised by XRD (Philips PW3020), SEM (LEO 440i with Oxford EDX System Link Isis). For TEM studies the samples were thinned by cutting, polishing, dimpling, and ion beam milling. For EFTEM investigations a Philips CM30ST/STEM and the Philips CM300UTFEG, both operating at 300 In order to obtain large crystals without matrix phase the auxiliary bath method was applied. W powder (Fulka, 99,8%) and B powder (Fulka, 98.5%, res. O, N, C) were mixed together with metallic Al flakes (Merck-Schuchardt, 0.14 Another kind of large crystals were prepared by melting W Both the auxiliary bath method and melt-derived crystal growth yielded large hexagonal crystals of several millimetres’ diameter ( In order to understand the behaviour of the individual crystals, polished cross sections perpendicular to the basal plane were analysed by SEM/EDX and TEM. For the crystals grown from Si melt the phenomenon of cleaving was observed without an external mechanical load. A detailed analysis reveals that the crystals contain an average of 32.9±0.1 HR-TEM studies prove the existence of foreign metals on basal planes in the case of polycrystalline CrB Because the weak bonding between the particular layers gave rise to a paper-like bending behaviour it was tested whether this effect may be used to reinforce ceramic matrices such as boron carbide, silicon carbide, or other AlB As described in previous work In the case of SiC matrix composites, where W In transition metal boride ceramics prepared from TiB Ab initio calculations of the W Similar to particular ternary carbides and nitrides of layered structures there is also a group of transition metal borides which crystallise in a layered structure with weak interatomic bonding between the layers. An interesting candidate is the AlB In case of W In order to take advantage of this “nano-laminate” behaviour, W A comparison with studies on single phase W Surprisingly, another phase being precipitated from (Ti, W, Cr)B Besides carbon and nitrogen-based MAX-phases there is a group of unexplored transition metal borides which exhibit the rather unique behaviour of “nano-lamination”. Ab initio data suggests that the bonding in the in ( This work was financially supported by the Stiftung Volkswagenwerk (Volkswagen Foundation) within the programme “Micro characterisation of materials and parts” which is gratefully acknowledged.