The 13th National Analytical Chemistry Meeting of Brazil (13° ENQA) and the 1st Ibero–American Analytical Chemistry Congress (1° CIAQA) were held in Niterói, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, September 13–16, 2005, at the Universidade Federal Fluminense—UFF. The meeting was held jointly with the Analytical Chemistry Division of the Brazilian Chemical Society (DQA-SBQ). This meeting was first organized in 1983 and since then it occurs every 2 years in a city around the country to disseminate Analytical Chemistry in Brazil. The CIAQA congress was conceived by Prof. Mauro Korn of Universidade Estadual da Bahia while Director of DQA-SBQ, to integrate Brazilian and Ibero–American analytical chemists. In the 13° ENQA/1° CIAQA there were more than 800 participants from Brazil and also from Argentine, Bolivia, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Spain, Portugal, Paraguay, the United States, Venezuela and Uruguay who presented more than 700 papers in 19 oral and 4 poster sections, covering all branches of Analytical Chemistry. Leading world specialists in various fields of Analytical Chemistry presented 4 plenary conferences and 19 conferences. Also, two workshops dealing with Biodiesel and Doping Control Analysis as well as five short courses were simultaneously held. This Special Issue represents 15 peer reviewed papers carefully selected from 34 manuscripts submitted by the ENQA/CIAQA attendees. During these events the Organizing Committee has done specials honors to five Brazilian Analytical Chemistry Professors by their contributions to the development of Analytical Chemistry. The profiles of their lives are summarized below. Tribute to Prof. Adilson José Curtius (Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina). Adilson José Curtius was born in Santa Catarina State, Brazil, 60 years ago. He received a Bachelor Degree in Chemical Engineering from Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul in 1968, his M.Sc. Degree from Lehigh University, USA, working on polymeric networks in 1971, his PhD Degree in Analytical Chemistry from Pontifícia Universidade Católica do Rio de Janeiro (PUC/Rio) in 1974, working with migration of radioactive elements. In 1985–1986, he worked in the Application Laboratory of the Bodenseewerk Perkin–Elmer, Germany, in a post-doctorate level. In this period, he worked on atomic absorption spectrometry, especially devoted to phosphorus determination. In the Chemistry Department at PUC/Rio, he was the Graduate Coordinator from 1980 to 1981 and its Director from 1981 to 1985, when the Inorganic Analytical Chemistry graduate course obtained maximum evaluation levels according to CAPES (Brazilian agency that regulates the graduate courses). Also, from 1979 to 1994 he was a part-time Professor at Universidade Federal Rural do Rio de Janeiro. In 1994 he moved to Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina, Florianópolis, Brazil, where he keeps developing his academic and research activities until today. In this University, he was appointed as a Full Professor in Analytical Chemistry. Professor Curtius' research interests have been the development of analytical methods for the determination of trace elements in environmental, biological and industrial samples, using atomic spectrometry techniques, such as AAS, ICP OES and ICP-MS. Direct solid and slurry samplings, cloud point and solid phase extractions for separation, flow analysis, chemical vapor generation and high resolution continuum source AAS are some of the topics of his latest investigations. Professor Curtius is an active board member in different scientific committees and in the organization of several conferences, including as one of the founders of the ENQA (1983) and of the Rio Symposium on Atomic Spectrometry (1988). He has published 120 scientific refereed papers and has supervised 47 M.Sc. and PhD Brazilian students and several post-doctoral students (written by Prof. Ricardo Erthal Santelli).  Tribute to Prof. Eduardo F. de Almeida Neves (Universidade Federal de São Carlos). Passionate inclination for creative intellectual activity, rooted in profound knowledge of all branches of Chemistry, broadminded thinking, sound experimentation, generous scientific cooperation, true friendship: these are just some of the personal qualities of Emeritus Professor Eduardo F. de Almeida Neves. Born in 1933, in Pedra Azul, MG, Brazil, he studied Chemistry at the University of São Paulo (USP) (1954–1957). Professor Paschoal Senise, pioneer of Analytical Chemistry at USP, supervised his thesis on interactions between pseudo-halides and metallic cations, approved in 1966. The advent of chronocoulometry in Professor Fred Anson's laboratory attracted Neves to post-doctoral work at Caltech, USA, in 1971–1972. His brilliant career as teacher, scientist and supervisor resulted in a prolific science school in Analytical Chemistry counting near sixty PhDs and masters in the “first generation” and many hundreds in the third and fourth ones, spread throughout the country. Professor Neves published over 100 papers and conducted technological research projects for government companies of electric power generation and communications, e.g., developing batteries and solving corrosion problems. He is the co-founder of the remarkably successful Brazilian Symposium of Electrochemistry and Electroanalysis (SIBEE, biannual since 1978, nowadays with 400 participants), of great significance in the dissemination and intensification of researches in this field in the country. Neves filled a Full Professorship at IQ-USP in 1983 and in 1991, 2 years after his retirement from IQ-USP, he conquered the same position at the Department of Chemistry of the Universidade Federal de São Carlos, where he organized and launched a high level post-graduate program in Analytical Chemistry. He became the first Emeritus Professor of this university in 2004 and received various other honors and awards. A seven-page tribute article, downloadable from  Tribute to Prof. Aida Espinola (Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro). Aida Espinola was born in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, in 1920. She received Bachelor's Degrees in Industrial Chemistry (1941) and Chemical Engineering (1954), from the University of Brazil. She completed her M.Sc. in Analytical Chemistry, supervised by Ernest B. Sandell, at the University of Minnesota (1958); in 1974, her PhD with Joseph Jordan at Pennsylvania State University. Her first job (1942–1971) was at the Laboratory of Mineral Production, DNPM/Mines and Energy Ministry; in 1955, became Professor of the Chemistry at School of Chemistry, later at the Institute of Chemistry, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ), as Full Professor, from 1981 to 1990. She was Interim Professor at Florida Atlantic University (FAU), Visiting Professor at the Federal Universities of Bahia and of Pernambuco, Full Professor at Materials and Metallurgical Engineering Program of COPPE/UFRJ; Visiting Professor at the University of Auckland, New Zealand. In 1973–1974, a researcher, at the Aerospace Technical Center (CTA). As a participant of the CNPq/NAS (Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico/National Academy of Sciences), as Coordinator, she installed the Graduate Program at the Institute of Chemistry/UFRJ. She also conducted several technical consultation projects. Her research in Applied Electrochemistry (fuel cells/batteries) and Environmental Chemistry (biosorption for decontamination of industrial effluents). As publications, ca. 175 papers; she authored/co-authored/edited 12 books. As awards, from U.S. Government, the American Microchemical Society (Best Assistant Professor of the year, 1969), Syndicate of Chemistry–Chemical Engineering, and, in 1979, the Golden Retort, Regional Conseil of Chemistry of RJ; from School of Chemistry/UFRJ (the Silver Plate, and Medal, at 60th and 70th anniversary celebrations, 1993 and 2003); from Institute of Chemistry/UFRJ (Honor Merit Silver Plate—1984; Medals “Augusto Araujo Lopes Zamith”—2002, and “Fritz Feigl”—2003). In 1993–1997 Prof. Aida Espinola was Researcher—1A of CNPq, the highest scientific position for a Brazilian Scientist (written by Prof. Angelo da Cunha Pinto).  Tribute to Prof. Paschoal Américo Senise (Universidade de São Paulo). Born in São Paulo in 1917, Paschoal Américo Senise entered the course of Chemistry in the just-founded University of São Paulo (USP) in 1935. Hired as Assistant at USP, he completed his PhD in 1942 under supervision of the prominent German professor Heinrich Rheinboldt, and became the pioneer in Analytical Chemistry at this University. After post-doctoral work with professors P. W. West and Paul Delahay (University of Louisiana, 1950–1952), Senise introduced research on microchemical analysis and electroanalytical chemistry at USP, while supervising 10 PhD theses and publishing over 40 papers. His disciples—the most prolific being Eduardo F. A. Neves, Alcídio Abrão, Oswaldo E. S. Godinho and Jaim Lichtig—supervised 200 PhDs and masters, mainly in Analytical Chemistry, that spread around the country. Senise was the first (and third) Director of the Institute of Chemistry (IQ-USP, 1970–1974 and 1978–1982) and he has successfully amalgamated in one institution professors of chemistry relocated from various Colleges and Faculties of USP. As president of the Central Council of Post-graduate Studies (USP, 1969–87), Senise played a key role in establishing conditions for the vigorous and steady growth of Brazil's leading academic institution in research and higher education (nowadays, neither Brazilian nor USA University graduates have as many PhDs as USP, except all  Tribute to Prof. Antonio Celso Spinola Costa (Universidade Federal da Bahia). Antonio Celso Spinola Costa was born in Salvador, Bahia, Brazil in November 19, 1930. He is graduated in Industrial Chemical Engineering (1953) and had post-doctoral studies, under supervision of Professor T.S. West, at Imperial College of Science and Technology, London—1972. Professor Spinola Costa was Full Professor of Analytical Chemistry at the Institute of Chemistry of the Universidade Federal da Bahia (UFBA) till his retirement in 2000. At UFBA he was responsible for several courses and has occupied several positions, including Director of the Institute of Chemistry and Dean of the research and graduate studies. Nowadays, he is a member of the Brazilian Academy of Sciences and Emeritus Professor at the UFBA, and keeps supervising students and doing researches with Organic Reagents for Inorganic Analysis and Sample Preparation. His first paper was published in the journal  The Editors would like to acknowledge to whom that have contributed with manuscripts and helped with the peer reviewed processes and also for aiding with the profiles of the Professors' honors. Sérgio Luis Costa Ferreira Universidade Federal da Bahia  Ricardo Erthal Santelli Universidade Federal Fluminense  Francisco Radler de Aquino Neto Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro  Joaquim Araújo Nóbrega Universidade Federal de São Carlos  Ricardo Jorgensen Cassella Universidade Federal Fluminense 