An acoustic diode (AD) was constructed of two acoustic transparent membranes with good initial contact to allow the transmission of the positive pressure of lithotripter shock wave at an almost unaltered level, yet attenuate significantly its negative pressure, was fabricated. It was evaluated systematically on a Dornier HM-3 lithotripter to assess its application potential to reduce vascular injury without compromising stone fragmentation efficiency during shock-wave lithotripsy. By inserting the AD, the maximum compressive pressure, maximum tensile pressure and tensile duration of the lithotripter shock wave were formed to drop from 49.7 to 47.8 MPa, −7.5 to −7.0 MPa and 6.0 to 5.1 μs, respectively. Damage of a 0.2-mm inner diameter vessel phantom (cellulose hollow fiber) was reduced from rupture after 31 ± 11 shocks to no rupture after 100 shocks. Maximum bubble size in free-field, maximum dilation of the vessel phantom wall and bubble collapse time became smaller with the use of the AD. However, stone fragmentation showed similar results without a statistically significant difference between the case with and without the AD. All these evidences suggest that the use of an acoustic diode may be a feasible approach to reduce tissue injury without compromising stone comminution in shock-wave lithotripsy. (E-mail: slzhu@duke.edu)Since its introduction at the beginning of the 1980s, shock-wave lithotripsy (SWL) has become a primary treatment modality for the removal of kidney stones without open surgery ( Cavitation is often considered to be an important contributor to the tissue injury produced in SWL ( Previous studies have shown that the inversion of a LSW ( In this study, an AD was used to reduce the tensile pressure of the LSW produced by a clinical Dornier HM-3 lithotripter to reduce the maximum bubble expansion in a small blood vessel phantom. An AD is a mechanical device that was proposed to reduce negative sound pressure ( In this study, a Dornier HM-3 lithotripter, which employs a truncated ellipsoidal reflector with semimajor axis An AD was fabricated by using two clear polyester membranes (thickness = 114 μm, Corp., Minneapolis, MN), which were held at the periphery by an aluminum ring (see From the preliminary results, it was found that, at the 0 mmHg vacuum level, the AD reduced the compressive pressure of the LSW by 61% when the lithotripter was operated at 1-Hz repetition rate. Hence, this condition is not suitable for SWL. Comparing results at the vacuum levels of 254 mmHg and 508 mmHg, no significant differences in peak compressive and tensile pressures were observed. Based on this, we selected the vacuum level of 254 mmHg to access the effects of the AD in subsequent experiments. Spherical stone phantoms ( To mimic stone comminution in the renal pelvis, a holder was fabricated using a rubber finger cot (VWR Scientific Products, Suwanee, GA) and a plastic cylinder ( Phantoms for small blood vessels were made of cellulose hollow fibers with 200-μm inner diameter and 8-μm thickness (Spectrum, Gardena, CA) ( The pressure waveform around the lithotripter focus was measured by using a fiberoptic probe hydrophone (FOPH-500, Physics Institute, University of Stuttgart, Stuttgart, Germany) ( Considering shock-to-shock variation in the HM-3, more than 70 pressure waveforms were recorded at each configuration to facilitate statistical analysis. The SAS software was used to process the data ( To visualize cavitation bubble dynamics in the free-field and inside the 200-μm cellulose hollow fiber vessel phantom, a three-cabin chamber was constructed to house the lenses and mirrors used for high-speed imaging. The chamber was placed inside the water tub of the HM-3 lithotripter and the central cabin was directly set on top of the HM-3 reflector ( Acoustic emission (acousE) associated with LSW-induced bubble oscillation in free field was detected using a PCD system with two 1-MHz focused transducers (V392-SU, Panametrics, Waltham, MA) with a focal length To visualize bubble dynamics inside the vessel phantom, degassed water (O  When the AD was used, the profile of the waveform was found to be similar to that produced by the HM-3 lithotripter. However, the absolute values of To determine the effect of the membranes on the transmitted shock wave, the AD was placed at the same position in the lithotripter field and filled with degassed water in the AD cavity. With this setup, the changes of  With the AD, the maximum bubble size was found to be reduced to 1.7 mm (see  Based on the relationship between LSW and cavitation bubble dynamics ( Bubble dynamics induced by a LSW inside a 200-μm inner diameter hollow fiber are shown in With the AD, although the bubble dynamics inside the hollow fiber were similar, the initial bubble size, maximum dilation of the fiber wall and elongated bubble length were observed to be less than those without the AD. Without the AD, the fiber wall dilated from its original size of 216 μm to a maximum size of 300 μm. With the AD, the maximum size dropped to 254 μm, which represents a 15% reduction in maximum dilation. With the AD, it was also noticed that the fiber wall did not shrink during the final collapse of the bubble, which is consistent with the reduced maximum dilation by the AD. To assess the effect of the AD on dose-dependent rupture of the small blood vessel ( The stone fragmentation efficiencies (see LSW-induced cavitation bubbles generally experience an expansion-to-collapse cycle. During expansion, bubbles may significantly dilate the small blood vessel wall, leading to vessel rupture ( It is important that any improvements of SWL technology to reduce the potential of tissue injury should not compromise stone fragmentation efficiency. Suppression of cavitation may reduce vascular injury but, if cavitation is overly suppressed, the violent collapse of cavitation bubbles near a stone surface may become too weak to disintegrate a kidney stone into passable fragments ( Ideally, the compressive pressure of LSW should not be altered because of the presumed complete contact of AD membranes ( The delay ( This work was supported by a Research Grant from the Whitaker Foundation, and in part by NIH (grant no. RO1-DK52985). The authors acknowledge the technical assistance of Yufeng Zhou in processing the data measured using the FOPH-500.