Separation of heavier-than-water plastic mixtures had been investigated via the fluidization of their packed beds induced by an upward flow of water. The samples examined were resin pellets and crushed plastic products including PVC, PET and PBT. On the onset of a flow, a mixed bed was swelled to the state of fluidization and separated into layers of respective resins depending on their density. The effects of the flow rate, an amount of the samples and their density difference were examined on the separation of resin pellets. Under an appropriate condition, the process was completed within a few minutes, and satisfactory separation was attained when the density difference of the samples exceeded 0.05gcm−3. By using a column equipped with several sample outlets sorted resins could be recovered with their purity intact by withdrawing each layer successively from above through a suitable outlet. Multi-stage separation was also found to be effective in treating close-density samples. Compared with uniform-sized resin pellets, size distribution of crushed plastic samples deteriorated the separation to some extent.Waste management of plastics has been prompted by increasing awareness for environmental protection and resource conservation. In Japan, the domestic production of plastics in 2002 reached 13.85 million tons and the waste generation came to as high as 9.90 million tons in the same year. Since 2000, a number of recycling-relating laws have been enacted by the government for the purpose of achieving sustainable development. Thanks to these initiatives, the effective utilization rate of plastic wastes has been steadily increasing to 55% in 2002. Among 45% of the non-utilized plastic wastes, 17% is simply incinerated and the rest, 28%, is treated in landfilling ( Recycling of plastics is categorized into three main groups of mechanical recycling, feedstock recycling and energy recovery. The first one is preferred, if available, to the other two from the viewpoint of energy efficiency, and increasing its rate is of great significance. At present, most sources of mechanical recycled plastics come from the loss in production and processing because of their stable quality and supply. On the other hand, mechanical recycling of used plastic products from end users is still in the minority, since the wastes often consist of many kinds of plastics and need to be dismantled and sorted based on their raw material. For the separation of plastic wastes, wet process is relatively easy to apply and a multiple of techniques have been developed and some are in practical use. The followings are typical examples. Sink and float separation is the most fundamental and mainly used for separating heavier- and lighter-than-water plastics. Some modifications have been done on liquid media to meet a wide density range of plastics ( Liquid-fluidized bed technology is another wet process worth searching for its availability in separating plastic wastes. It is known that mixed particles undergo segregation based on their density and size when fluidized in a liquid flow ( A glass column used in this study was 550 A prescribed amount of resin pellets was inserted into the column with water, and a trace quantity of a surface active reagent was added to make the pellet surface hydrophilic. After degassing and mixing the resin bed, water was introduced upwardly from the inlet tube using a magnetic pump and discharged through the outlet tube. The flow rate was adjusted using a flow meter, and a height of the resin bed was recorded before and after the onset of water flow. The transition of the resin bed against the elapsed time was captured on a video and image-analyzed by color (Scion Image β 4.0.2) at an appropriate time interval. All the experiments were carried out at a room temperature. A series of operations consisting of charging, separation and withdrawal of samples was examined using a column equipped with six sample outlets. The sample outlets were attached to the side of the column at an interval of 50 After separating plastics in the column in a similar manner as described above, each sorted portion, or layer, was withdrawn from an appropriate outlet. The withdrawal was carried out by removing a silicon cap from the sample outlets while keeping water flow to avoid a blockade of samples at the outlets. The resin content in the collections was determined by hand-selecting each resin by color and measuring its mass after drying. For the experiments, both resin pellets and crushed plastics were used as sample. The crushed samples were prepared by grinding bulk plastic products using a one-axis crushing machine and screening out fractions less than 1.4 In  The history of separation was picture-recorded and the abundance ratio of each resin at a particular position in the resin bed was determined by means of image-analysis based on color. A typical result for the separation of PVC (1.216 The width of the mixed layer varies depending on the experimental conditions. For the sake of convenience, however, the resin bed is divided into three equi-length portions along the longitudinal line to quantitatively estimate the separation. An average percentage of the lighter resin is calculated for the upper (  The effect of the amount of each resin brought into the column was investigated on the separation of the two resin pellets, PVC (1.216 In For mutual separation of plastics, a difference in their density (Δ  In For several combinations of two resins, their mutual separation was examined and the results are shown in In Separation factors were read out from In this section, a simple setup is proposed for attaining both separation and subsequent recovery of sorted plastics. A typical procedure is shown in A quantitative description of mutual separation is shown in The results for the separation of two PVC pellets are shown in In Finally, the technique was applied to the crushed samples prepared from bulk plastic products with the intention of examining the effects of size distribution on the separation. The results are summarized in Given that the study had been carried out within the limited combinations of samples due to a difficulty in providing varied plastics with relevant density, reasonable performance was attained in terms of rapidity and accuracy with this simple method. Further study is expected. Now in our laboratory, the separation of lighter-than-water plastics using a similar technique is in the pipeline. Fluidized bed technology has been applied to the separation of heavier-than-water plastics. In an upward flow of water, a mixed resin bed was swelled to fluidize and separated into respective resin layers dependent on their difference in density. The following is knowledge obtained in this study: For the binary system of resin pellets, the separation was completed within a few minutes and little affected by the initial amount of the samples and the column diameter used. The maximum efficiency was obtained when the flow rate was adjusted to swell the resin bed more than 120% of its initial height. The density difference of 0.05 Resin withdrawal after the separation was easily attained by using the column with several sample outlets vertically aligned along the column side. Multi-stage operation was useful for separating plastics having very close density. Size distribution of sample plastics showed a negative effect on the separation because of the classification effect in the flow.