Fish hook in classifier efficiency curves has been receiving attention in the last three decades, more so with the advent of laser diffractometry. In the first part of this paper, we analyse two occurrences of fish hook reported recently in Separation and Purification Technology. It is shown that in both the cases, inaccuracies in measured particle size distributions could be the likely cause of the observed fish hook. In the second part, we re-examine the present state of knowledge on fish hook including the limitations of experimental observations reported so far and the drawbacks of theoretical explanations. Finally, we provide a basis on why it is to be considered nothing more than a scientifically insignificant placebo.Typically, in any classifier, recovery of particles to underflow, the actual efficiency, can be expected to increase monotonously with size. However, an inflexion in the efficiency curve showing a dip at sub sieve sizes, now commonly referred to as ‘fish hook’, was reported in early 1980s In the second part, we re-examine the present state of state of knowledge on fish hooks and show that experimental observations of the phenomenon reported so far are not based on robust data. We then explain why it cannot be regarded as a scientifically significant physical effect. This is followed by an elucidation of why theoretical explanations proposed so far need considerable improvement. Finally, we show why exclusion of fish hook in simulation models is of little consequence for all practical purposes. The precision and accuracy of the efficiency curve in classifiers are dependent on particle size distributions (PSDs) from which they are derived. If the mode of particle size analyses is not specified, the reliability of the PSDs and consequentially the accuracy of the efficiency curve cannot be ascertained. The efficiency curve reported by Lv et al. Noticeably, Lv et al. In a second report While Laser diffractometry (LD) is a fast and reliable method for determining PSDs over a broad range of sizes, it could give highly misleading results if the technique is not properly applied. We discus briefly the problems with LD which could be a source of erroneous PSDs and which significantly influence the results and conclusions of Lv et al. ISO 13320:1999 for particle size analysis by Laser diffraction methods recommends application of Mie theory for all <50 The software of recent LD instruments includes a database of optical properties of many common materials and dispersants. The data are available as standalone documents as well (for example, We illustrate this with an example of sourcing RI value for SiO Also, it is highly desirable to recheck the data supplied by manufactures. Rawle The imaginary refractive index (IRI) depends on physical properties, such as, colour, surface roughness etc. in addition to chemical composition. Unfortunately, there are no methods by which IRI can be directly measured for use in laser diffractometry. Malvern Instruments Ltd The influence of optical parameters (RI, IRI) of the test material on the size analysis results from laser techniques has been a subject of thorough investigation. It has been established conclusively 330–905 284–1005 79–465 Similarly, for a bimodal mixture, the distributions as obtained from LD were monomodal, bimodal, trimodal, tetramodal and even pentamodal depending upon the RI and IRI values used. Their thorough investigation establishes They conclude categorically that any laser diffraction data without information of the optical parameters and also those using guessed parameters must be doubted. They estimate that probably 90% of all published PSD data in sub sieve range obtained from laser diffractometry is false. It is apparent from the above that by simply selecting the RI and IRI values form databases of the instrument software, or literature or from data provided by material suppliers could cause erroneous inputs for calculation of scatter pattern and hence the resulting size distribution. The only option for getting accurate RI and IRI values of the test materials is to determine them experimentally. Apart from the necessity to pick up a representative sample It is reasonable to state at this juncture, that the reliability of PSDs particularly in the sub sieve range is largely dependent on the accuracy of the optical properties of the test material. Consequentially, inaccurate optical properties cause errors in size distributions from LD. It is our contention that the so called ‘fish hook phenomenon’ observed in the sub sieve range is an outcome of such errors in measured PSDs. For research applications for which standard operating procedures are not established, it appears to be a good practice to verify at least some results by alternate methods (Ray et al. The procedure for size analyses followed by Lv et al. Earlier we Vakamalla et al. We recapitulate that the same considerations, namely probable inaccuracies in optical parameters of test materials prompted us In this section we discuss and critically analyse the current state of knowledge on fish hook with regards to the experimental observations. Based on this analysis, we examine whether or not it is to be treated as a scientifically significant phenomenon. We later re-examine the theoretical explanations to explain this phenomenon. Finally, we discuss the practical utility of fish hook in simulation models We begin our discussion with experimentally reported fish hook phenomena. Noticeably, all reported occurrences of fish hook are in the sub sieve range, that is, <30 Eswaraiah et al. Further, there are a number of reports in which the method of particle size analysis is not mentioned, for example, Aydogan and Ergun Noting that fish hook is observed in the sub sieve range (<30 Those reports of fish hook which are based on PSDs obtained from using Fraunhofer approximation may be considered to be unreliable. The reliability of those occurrences which are based on interpretation of scatter data with full Mie theory, but with guessed optical parameters is uncertain. They carry errors in PSDs which are unpredictable Additional information is necessary to assess the quality of PSDs and the calculations based on them. For example, we could gather that Bourgeois and Majumder It is only when optical properties, experimentally determined to the required accuracy are used as inputs to instruments which use Mie theory can the PSDs be robust When the experimental conditions reporting fish hook are scrutinised taking the above into consideration, we arrive at the following conclusion. There is absolutely no doubt regarding the repeatability of experimental observations of every occurrence of fish hook. By repeatability we mean here that successive measurements agree within acceptable limits of experimental error. This is different from reproducibility Clearly, repeatability of results does not imply that systematic errors are not present, in particular those which are due to usage of incorrect optical parameters in LD. The recent’ proof of existence of fish hook’, based on data from closely controlled experiments As illustrated above, repeatability and reproducibility are distinctly different. Nevertheless, they have been arbitrarily used to mean the same in literature on this topic (for example, Zhu and Liow As noted earlier, no reported occurrence of fish hook is based on robust PSD data, which implies that they are not reproducible. It is thus not surprising that the conditions under which it is reproducible are not specified categorically in literature. It is also important to emphasise here that not even a single reported occurrence is corroborated by independent investigators. In view of the above, we can conclude that fish hook does not meet the criteria proposed by Popper Evidently, any theoretical model to explain fish hook should really be an adaptation of the normal efficiency curve model. Since in any discussion on efficiency curve of hydrocyclones, the notion of ‘bypass’ proposed by Kelsall To explain the regular observation that recovery of near zero size particles is equal to that of water ( Over the years, presumably due to its highly successful application in modelling of hydrocyclones, the concept of bypass started gaining acceptance as the true physical representation of the classification process itself. The ‘mechanistic’ model proposed by Lynch and Rao Even if a physical meaning could be attributed, it is certainly an oversimplification to conceptualise that particles of all sizes ‘bypass’ to underflow in the same proportion as water. As Napier-Munn and Lynch As reports of occurrences of fish hook started appearing, the need for an alternative to the constant bypass model of Kelsall became inevitable. It is at this juncture Finch Significantly, Napier-Munn and Lynch Accordingly, we cannot attribute any physical meaning to ‘bypass’. It is simply a mathematical object, used for transforming the actual efficiency to corrected efficiency with a numerical value equal to Earlier, we The important point to be noted is that The elaborate model proposed by Neesse, Dueck and colleagues As mentioned earlier, they did not specify the method of size analysis in most of their reports. However, in two reports It is important to note that the PSDs of test materials in both the studies Similarly, the mechanism proposed by Schubert For the sake of completeness, it is worthwhile to mention here that the ‘entrainment model’ is also beyond the experimental domain. We cannot conceive any experiment by which we can distinguish the particles reaching underflow due to ‘entrainment’ from those reporting to underflow due to centrifugal forces. A similarity between the entrainment model and the ‘bypass mechanism’ with regards to the criterion of ‘testability’ is noteworthy. A more elaborate discussion on this model is not useful as it is validated with efficiency curves derived from erroneous particle size distribution data. Similar reasoning applies for the mechanism proposed by Schubert as well. The ‘mechanistic’ approach Finally, we may take note that validation of any theoretical/ empirical models with efficiency curves determined from robust size analysis data is indispensable. At present, lack of such data is a critical drawback for validating future modelling efforts. From the foregoing, we can summarise that experimental observations on fish hook are not based on robust data. Theoretical explanations likewise need considerable improvement. However, the suggestion of Lyttleton Taking the above into consideration, we can anticipate that new experimental evidence for fish hook phenomenon should be based on ‘reproducible’ efficiency curves. Also, it is absolutely essential to verify the accuracy of optical parameters of test material (s) if laser diffractometry is the mode for size analysis. Further, ascertaining the accuracy of sizing analyses by one or more alternate methods is highly desirable. We wish to emphasise here that to begin with, it is necessary to ascertain the ‘authenticity of occurrence of fish hook’ beyond any reasonable doubt. It is only then can a theory be developed to explain it. At present, suitably modified Whiten function (Eq. In Eq. Of the three parameters in Eq. It is also relevant to mention that following Plitt’s notion of variable sharpness index More recently, Altun and Benzer Currently, there is no provision for assessing the influence (if any) of the operating and design variables on fish hook parameters In the light of above, any future modifications which attempt to show the necessity to include fish hook parameters in Whiten function (that is values of It is also relevant to recall that earlier we termed fish hook as a  Although, there are numerous reports of occurrence of fish hook in efficiency curves, none of them is based on robust size distribution data. The studies by Lv et al. So far, the conditions under which fish hook can be reproduced have not been specified by the proponents. None of the occurrences are corroborated by independent investigators. As such it cannot be regarded as a scientifically significant physical phenomenon as yet. Early models to explain fish hook based on size dependent ‘bypass’ are beyond the reach of experimental domain. As such, they can be thought of as mere mathematical transformations. Their utility is limited only to fitting an equation for any efficiency curve showing fish hook or to generate one for use in simulation models. They do not shed any light on the physical processes taking place in the classification process The entrainment model developed by Dueck, Neesse, Minkov and colleagues validates experimentally determined efficiency curves which themselves are derived from erroneous particle size distribution data. Similarly, the mechanism proposed by Schubert explains fairly well the experimentally determined efficiency curve(s) with a fish hook which in turn was calculated from erroneous PSDs. The mechanistic explanation that settling velocity falls in a centrifugal field with change in flow regime is based on dubious assumptions in total disregard with known principles of physics. In short, theoretical explanations developed so far need considerable refinement, if fish hook phenomenon is proved to be scientifically significant in future. However, at present a major drawback for future efforts in this direction appears to be lack of reliable experimental data showing fish hook in efficiency curves for model validation. The exclusion of fish hook in simulation models causes little difference to the mass flows and size distributions of the products. There are no reports to the contrary. As such it can be regarded as a Nagu (Nageswararao) Karri is indebted to Satya Simha, now with Mawarid Mining LLC, Oman for introducing the Works of Sri Aurobindo on Nature, which have a profound influence on his understanding of particulate systems. We One may note that for Kelsall transformation,