During the last decade, Electro Active Polymers (EAPs) have attracted much attention especially because of their high level of generated strain. Mainly ferroelectric materials are used as fillers with elevated volume percentages in order to create a reasonable strain level. Aggregation problems should also be considered. With silicone or acrylic elastomers as the matrix, very high strains, even more than 300%, can today be obtained, however this requires a very high electric induction, e.g., 120MV/m. Such a high electric requirement prevents these materials from being utilized with other electric components. There exist intermediate materials between traditional actuator materials, such as PZTs, and EAPs. These materials can generate higher strain levels than traditional PZT materials, and are expected to be driven with a low electric level. The present paper shows the easy fabrication method of such intermediate materials. Conductive fillers were incorporated into the polymeric material. As opposed to for ferroelectric filler materials which have many dipoles, there was no electric field inside the conductive fillers. As a consequence, electric charges were distributed over the surface of the filler particle surfaces. This mechanism increased the electric coefficient so that a high strain level could be obtained more efficiently than in the case of ferroelectric fillers. The improvement of electrostriction by adding very small volume percentages of fillers, 0.1–2Vol.%, was thus confirmed. The composite films, fabricated by a very easy method, could generate more than 20% of strain at 15MV/m.Electro Active Polymers (EAPs) have attracted much attention recently due to their interesting electromechanical properties. The advantages of polymeric actuators are not only their soft actuation, easy manufacturing or their being lightweight, but also especially the fact that some dielectric polymers can exhibit very high strain levels. The concept started with medical applications, such as micro-pumps or micro-valves, and prospective application fields of EAPs are expanding day by day. At the present time, they are also expected to be used as replacement materials for other actuators where increasingly large strains are required. Dielectric polymer actuators, with electric dipoles within the polymer, can generate large strains. For this reason, they are one of the most studied types of polymer actuators today. In many research investigations, large strains of more than 10% have been observed. In the case with a silicon matrix, and even more so with an acrylic rubber matrix, an extra large strain of up to 380% has been obtained Traditionally, ceramic PZT has been the most used sensor/actuator material due to its numerous advantages, such as presenting precise and high electromechanical responses, elevated response speeds and being easily formed. Nevertheless, drawbacks exist. Ceramic PZT can generate only 0.2% of strain at maximum, and although single crystal PZT can generate slightly more, strain levels are today no higher than around 1.7%. The Shape Memory Alloy (SMA) is famous for being a large-displacement sensor/actuator material. Still, the maximum strain is limited to around 8% and is lower when the material is employed under cyclic loading because of its rapid fatigue. Despite this, SMA has a great advantage: it can generate large forces. But, problems of temperature control, its small response speed and its large energy requirement need to be improved in order for it to be discussed in the same application fields of PZT. As mentioned above, the strain level of EAPs is quite impressive and it is true that it has significantly increased the potential of these materials. Nevertheless, we should note that these values have been obtained under a high applied electric field, e.g., 120–150 EAPs often contain ferroelectric fillers, such as PZT particles, mixed in a polymeric matrix. The relative permittivity In the present study, a conductive material, as opposed to a ferroelectric one, was chosen as the filler and was incorporated into the polymeric material. This concept differs from that of EAPs with ferroelectric fillers. In the case of the latter, each particle is supposed to become a dipole when an electric field is induced on the composite film, and a high volume percentage is essential in order to obtain a reasonable strain. Instead, in the case of conductive particle fillers, a small volume percentage is assumed to be sufficient for generating a reasonable strain. It is believed that the electrons stay on the surface of each conductive particle during electric field induction on the composite film since the electric field is null inside. An explanatory schematic is given in The chosen materials were the following: commercially available polyurethane (PU) granules, and a polyether-type thermoplastic TPU5888 from Estane Company, used as the matrix. Carbon black (CB) was chosen as the conductive filler material. There were two types. In order to avoid aggregation problems, a premixed solution with carbon particles, i.e., CB in micellar form denoted ‘CB-ink’, directly obtained from the carbon ink from Salor Company, was selected. Furthermore, for the sake of comparison, simple nano-sized CB particles, denoted ‘CBP’, were also employed. The latter were amorphous carbon nanopowders obtained from Aldrich Company, with an average particle size of 30 The composite films were prepared by a simple solution casting method The films were cut into discs with a diameter of 25 The relative permittivity The field-induced thickness strain was measured with a double beam laser interferometer (Agilent 10889B) with a precision on the order of 10 The pure PU sample was completely transparent. If care was not taken, numerous aggregates were easily formed with the CBP addition. This film was basically transparent but many black aggregates could be visualized with the naked eyes. With the ultrasonic activation, no large aggregates were observed. The well-mixed specimen was completely black and the color deepened as the percentage of CB increased.   These micaceous aggregates were formed with small particle-like spots. Although difficult to properly visualize in the printed photos, the surfaces of these spots did not seem attached to each other. Rather, interfaces were observed. This signifies that they were a kind of primly particles. The aggregates here were different from those that are often found in polymer composites with particles, as shown in   With a low induced electric field, the relation is always found to be quadratic according to the following:  The almond shape of the polarization was due to the generated current The typical change of current when increasing the maximum electric field is shown in A polymeric composite can be considered as a capacitive material. Consequently, the current is expressed as Simultaneously, a change of material from capacitive to resistive occurs. A schematic of this is shown in When the loss is big, i.e., when the electrical induction is high, the current has a triangular shape with sharp peaks, and the polarization becomes round at the peaks as shown in  The maximum strains of these samples at 5, 10 and 15 It is clear that the CB-ink/PU samples presented much higher strain levels than their Pure PU and CBP/PU counterparts. Moreover, the coefficient of the quadratic relation with a low electric field, The permittivity For the sake of comparison, it was here determined from the line connecting two knots of an almond shaped curve at ±5 In the comparison between the permittivity and strain, it is clear that the permittivity of whole composite films increased the strain level. However, we can see that the rate of increase of the permittivity was not directly related to that of the strain. The 1.73 When comparing values of permittivity obtained by different methods, the rate increased in the following order: Pure PU, CBP, and CB-ink. An equivalent trend was found for the strain. In fact, some specimens showed a clear increase in permittivity, as measured from There are two possible explanations for the convergence of strain: the change in material characteristics caused by the induced electric field, from capacitive to resistive, as already mentioned above, and an effect of the measurement. When an electric field is induced, whether positive or negative, there occurs a deformation of the thickness in the direction of compression. The strain in the present study has been based on the compressed deformation. Simultaneously, the elongation occurs in the direction of the diameter of the disk-shaped specimen. This elongation, stimulated by the electric field, is however limited in the elastic domain. It differs from the force application measurement, and it is thus natural that the conversion occurs also with regard to the thickness deformation. Still, a convergence around 10% of strain (Pure PU) seems quite low when caused by such a phenomenon. A certain effect should occur, but it is assumed to be quite small. Simulations are on-going. A large-strain and low-powered composite polymer was developed by a simple fabrication method with a small quantity of conductive fillers in a polymer matrix. Using carbon black ink (CB-ink), of which the particles were in micellar form, a good dispersion could be readily obtained. No ultrasonic treatment was required. Some important results are listed below: The generated strain demonstrated convergence and was found to decrease even when the applied electric field increased. A hysteresis and electrical losses were observed. When raising the applied electric field, the composite film material changed from being completely capacitive to being capacitive as well as resistive. An increase in permittivity was obtained with the addition of CBP and this increase was even more efficient when adding CB-ink. The permittivity changed with the maximum applied electric field. The presented CB-ink/polyurethane (PU) composite films were able to create more than 20% of strain at only 15