Although nitrification/denitrification processes have been used to remove ammonia and nitrate from municipal and industrial processes, there are few reported results on the removal of these ions from mine effluents. Ammonia and nitrate are present in the effluent due to the widespread use of ammonium-nitrate-fuel oil (ANFO) as a blasting agent, and the use of other nitrogen-containing reagents in the mill. Unlike other process effluents, there is very little nutrient content in mine effluents. The objective of this work was to develop a microbial process for the removal of ammonia from simulated mine effluents. Biologically, this is accomplished in two steps. In the first step, ammonia is oxidized to nitrate, and in the second step, nitrate is reduced to dinitrogen gas. Ammonia oxidation (nitrification) was tested using both continuously stirred tank reactors and trickling filters. The stirred tank reactor was chosen for the combined system because it produced final effluents with lower ammonia concentrations. For nitrate reduction (denitrification), a packed bed reactor operated in the upflow mode was tested with methanol being used as a carbon and energy source. The nitrate profiles within the denitrification reactor showed an exponential decay, a characteristic of plug flow conditions. A simulation model was developed for the denitrification reactor which described performance as a function of feed nitrate (NO3) and methanol concentrations (MeOH) and retention time (RT): Productivity (mg NO3/l per hour)=0.722(NO3)+(MeOH)[1.416−0.024 (MeOH)+0.0011(NO3)−0.776(RT)]. The methanol to nitrate ratio required for denitrification was 0.86:1. When the two processes were set up in series, it was successful in removing ∼90% of the nitrogen.Mine and mill effluents can contain appreciable quantities of ammonium and/or nitrate ions. The discharge of appreciable quantities of ammonia to receiving waters has adverse environmental effects because it is toxic to fish and other aquatic organisms. Both ammonia and nitrate are nutrients for aquatic plants, which could also result in the production of algal blooms and would contribute to the eutrophication of receiving waters. Ammonium-nitrate-fuel oil (ANFO) is widely used as a blasting agent; nitrogen-containing reagents such as amines are used in the mill and ammonium sulphate is used to elute uranium from ion exchange (IX) resins. Ammonium hydroxide is also used to precipitate uranium and ammonia is used as a lixiviant in copper and nickel hydrometallurgy. Ammonium ions are in equilibrium with dissolved ammonia as expressed by the following equation: Sequential biological ammonia oxidation and nitrate reduction reactions are commonly used to remove nitrogen from both municipal and industrial wastewaters Nitrifying bacteria are subject to inhibition by a variety of organic compounds Denitrification, the biological reduction of nitrogen oxides to dinitrogen gas, is also referred to as nitrate respiration and is mediated by a number of bacterial genera Two possible sequences for a nitrification/denitrification plant can be used The types of reactors that can be used for nitrification and denitrification are the fluidized bed reactor The RBC consists of a series of discs on which the biomass grows; the discs are partially submerged in a trough and mounted on a rotating shaft. The shaft alternately contacts the biomass with the wastewater and the atmosphere for adsorption of oxygen. The RBC was designed for aerobic processes. A series of RBCs is used at the Homestake Mine in Lead, South Dakota to degrade cyanide and thiocyanate and to nitrify the ammonia resulting from the degradation of those compounds The objective of this study was to evaluate, at the laboratory scale, the feasibility of biological nitrification/denitrification for the removal of ammonium nitrogen from simulated mine effluents. The treatment system employed a CSTR for nitrification followed by a packed bed reactor operated in the upflow mode for the denitrification phase. The effectiveness of the CSTR was compared to a trickling filter bed for the nitrification step. Review of available data from mine and mill operations suggests that “typical” treated, untreated, and pre-concentrated effluents have the approximate compositions listed in Nitrification was first tested in two 19.5-l stainless steel CSTRs (R1 and R2) connected in series. Air was sparged into the tanks at a flow rate of 2.4 l/min and agitation was maintained at 1000 rpm with Lightnin® TS2010 mixers. A heater was available for temperature control but most of the tests were performed at room temperature. Initially, each reactor was filled with 16 l of a modified nitrifier medium Nitrification tests were also performed with trickling filter reactors packed with glass, granite, and ceramic. The glass rings (0.953 cm ID×0.953 cm long), granite (+0.635–0.953 cm), and ceramic (+0.653–0.953 cm) packing were placed in plexi-glass columns (5.63 cm ID×60 cm long). The total reactor volumes were 1494 ml, which was used to calculate the retention time. To colonize the reactors, some solution from the continuously stirred tank reactors was circulated through the columns for 5–10 days. In order to compare the performance of the column packing materials, the columns were operated with similar flow rates. For the trickling filter reactors, the nominal consumption rate (reported as milligram of ammonia consumed per litre of total reactor volume per day) is also affected by packing volume and wetted area (liquid/gas throughput). The denitrification reactor was a plexi-glass column (5.63 cm diameter, 74 cm high) packed with 2.73 kg of gravel (+0.653–0.953 cm). The total volume of the reactor was 1494 ml and the liquid or void volume was 950 ml. The reactor was operated in an upflow mode in order to maintain anaerobic conditions. Two columns with the same internal dimensions were used, one with sampling ports (distance from inlet: 4, 11, 20, 36, 54, 61.5, and 67 cm) located at varying locations in order to obtain profiles of pH and nitrate as well as other chemical species within the reactor and one without sampling ports. A soil inoculum was used to colonize the column with a population of denitrifying bacteria. The initial feed contained: 800 mg/l nitrate; 400 mg/l methanol; 1000 mg/l KH The overall process, including nitrification and denitrification, was performed by placing the modules in series. A schematic showing the overall process is shown in Microbial populations were characterized by taking samples from the influent, the effluent, and the various ports in the column. The samples were plated on 10% trypticase soy agar The Eh and pH were measured on samples collected at the column outlet using a Fisher Accumet pH meter. An ion-selective electrode (Fisher Scientific) was used to measure the ammonia concentration. Sulphate, nitrate, and nitrite analyses, were performed with a Dionex High Performance Liquid Chromatograph (HPLC); sulphate was analysed with a conductivity detector; and nitrate and nitrite with a UV detector. All samples were passed through 0.2-μm filters before analysis. Calcium analysis was performed by Inductively Coupled Plasma (ICP) Spectroscopy on acidified (HCl) solutions. Data were analysed using Statgraphics (Statistical Graphics), a statistical applications software.  Nitrification was also examined in trickling filter reactors with different packing materials. A comparison of the outlet concentrations for the three different packing materials used in the trickling filters is shown in Most comparisons of packing media for trickling filters have focused on the removal of biological oxygen demand (BOD) and total suspended solids (TSS) removal After the startup of the denitrification reactor, samples were taken to determine the bacterial distribution. The results are provided in Results from one experimental run with the ported column where the methanol and nitrate were nearly all consumed are shown in  The main nutrients required for denitrification are carbon and phosphorus, which are available as methanol and phosphate. To determine the quantities that were required for complete removal, a number of tests were performed at various concentrations of nitrate, methanol, and phosphate, as well as at different retention times. The ranges of inlet nitrate concentrations tested were 51–405 mg/l, which are typical of the concentrations encountered in the mine effluents. The concentrations of the other variables tested were 29–529 mg/l methanol, 12–61 mg/l phosphate, and retention times of 0.30–1.14 h (83 separate data points were collected). The amount of methanol and phosphate used as a function of the amount of nitrate consumed in these tests is shown in In order to determine the effect of these variables on the performance of the reactor, an empirical equation was fit to the data. A stepwise variable selection procedure (Statgraphics) was used to obtain a model that has a small set of significant variables. It relates the reactor productivity to the inlet concentrations of nitrate, methanol, and phosphate, and the retention time in the reactor, as follows: The correlation coefficient was 0.97. Even though the equation is empirical, it provides a good estimate of the data in the range of the variables tested. The phosphate concentration did not significantly affect the productivity at the 95% confidence level. The amount of phosphate in these tests was present in excess amounts. This equation enables one to predict the amount of nitrate that will be present in the effluent from a packed bed reactor given the inlet nitrate and methanol concentrations and a reactor retention time. It is important to keep in mind that this equation is valid only in the experimental range tested. To test the overall biological process for ammonia removal, the nitrification and denitrification modules were connected in series The results given here show that nitrification/denitrification processes can be successfully used to treat mining effluents. In the nitrification process, ammonia was oxidized to nitrate in CSTRs and trickling filter reactors. It was noted that the final effluent quality was better in the CSTRs so they were used for further experiments. A packed bed reactor operated in the upflow mode was found to be suitable for the removal of nitrate from simulated mine effluent. An effluent that is low in nitrogen with very short retention times can be obtained with this system. The critical parameters for denitrification are nitrate concentration, temperature, and flow rate (retention time). The ratio of methanol consumed to nitrate consumed was 0.86:1. An empirical model was successfully fit to the data and enabled the productivity and final effluent concentrations to be calculated if the inlet nitrate and methanol concentrations and retention time are known. By employing an integrated process comprising nitrification and denitrification, high ammonia removal efficiencies can be obtained. The kinetics of denitrification were an order of magnitude more rapid than nitrification, and the denitrification was also more robust. To improve the reliability and reaction rate of the nitrification process, either additional work on improving the trickling filter system should be done or the biological process should be replaced with a chemical one. Future work can also be directed towards scaling up the process to pilot scale with real mine effluents to be tested. The authors gratefully acknowledge the thorough reviews of the manuscript by J. Skeaff, C. Hogan, and J. Nadeau of the Environment Laboratory of Natural Resources, Canada.