A kinetic study of the sulphuric acid leaching of oxidised copper ore, primarily malachite, was carried out. The effects of leaching time, stirring speed, acid concentration, solid to liquid ratio, reaction temperature, and particle size of the ore were investigated. Using the best conditions, the copper recovery was nearly 94% at 25 °C and 99% at 80 °C after 180 min leaching. Dissolution of malachite during the leaching was described by a logarithmic function, y=a ln(x)+b. The data obtained for the leaching kinetics indicated that the initial dissolution of malachite is a diffusion controlled reaction.Copper was the first metal to which hydrometallurgical processes including leaching, solvent extraction and electrowinning (L-SX-EW) were applied The cost of acid may be the most important economic factor in the leaching of oxidised copper ores. Carbonate rocks, such as limestone and dolomite, are often significantly found in the ores and consume additional acid according to the reaction given below To determine the leaching parameters, the dissolution of malachite in sulphuric acid solutions has been recently studied by the Taguchi method The aim of this present study is to determine and discuss the dissolution kinetics of malachite in sulphuric acid. For this purpose, the initial dissolution rate and activation energy were determined and the effect of other minerals on leaching reactions were taken into the consideration. Oxidised copper ore was used for the leaching experiments. Mineralogical analysis, performed using a Rigaku DMAX IIIC model X-ray diffractometer using CuKα radiation at 35 kV and 15 mA, indicated that malachite, pyroxene group minerals, quartz, goethite and magnetite were the major mineral phases in the ore. The chemical analysis of the malachite ore sample is presented in The leaching experiments were performed in a 600 mL Pyrex beaker in a thermostatically controlled water bath, and equipped with a thermometer and Teflon stirrer agitated mechanically. The ground copper ore was added into the agitated sulphuric acid solution at the required temperature. After pre-determined time intervals, 5 mL of leaching solution sample was withdrawn from the reactor and 5 mL of fresh sulphuric acid solution was added immediately to leaching medium. After filtration, the clear leach solution sample was analysed for copper by AAS. The weight loss during leaching was calculated by difference. The acid consumption was determined by titration of the leach solution with NaOH, using dimethyl yellow+methylene blue as indicators. For the leaching experiments where the acid concentration and solid to liquid ratio were examined, the ore sample has a P The effect of leaching time on the dissolution of malachite is shown in The effect of sulphuric acid concentration on the dissolution of malachite was investigated. The copper recovery, acid consumption and weight loss are given in For the acid concentrations higher than 1.02 mol/L, both acid consumption and copper dissolution rate decreased. When 2.04 mol/L of sulphuric acid was used, the acid consumption was 20% and the copper recovery remained 91%. The weight loss increased with acid concentration and reached 48% when 2.04 mol/L of sulphuric acid was used. It was found that this value was also equivalent to the malachite dissolution from the sample. The experimental results showed that the acid consumption was 0.92 mol/L for 90% copper recovery. From   As seen from The effect of particle size was studied using eight crushed and five ground size fractions. For the copper recovery calculations, the copper grade of each fraction was considered. These samples were all leached using 1.02 mol/L sulphuric acid used at 25 °C. The results are given in Malachite can be easily dissolved by acidic reactions. The experimental results showed once more that, as the amount of acid consumed is increased, the dissolution of malachite increases Accordingly, XRD analysis of the leaching residues showed malachite to be completely dissolved, whereas goethite, magnetite, pyroxenes and quartz were not dissolved in the acid leaching conditions applied. It was also determined that the amount of these gangue minerals in the residue increases as the copper recovery or the amount of dissolved malachite increased. Combining the chemical analysis and XRD analysis, it can be estimated that the ore consisted of 49.35% malachite, 22.56% goethite and magnetite, 27.36% quartz and pyroxene group, leaving only 0.73% unaccounted for by XRD analysis. The kinetic evaluation of reactions occurring during the acidic leaching of malachite indicated that neither chemical nor diffusion models applied. These models are unable to explain the dissolution of malachite for the rapid initial reaction and the complete leaching period studied. However, the initial dissolution can be modelled using a logarithmic function: It is possible to calculate the dissolution rate after 0.1 min of leaching at different temperatures by using the model. From these rates, an Arrhenius curve can be drawn The following conclusions can be drawn from the kinetic study of the malachite dissolution: Malachite was readily dissolved by sulphuric acid giving high recoveries of copper, other minerals, such as iron minerals, were only slightly affected from sulphuric acid medium. The most important parameters affecting the leaching were time, acid concentration, stirring speed and the temperature of medium. Acid concentrations of less than 1.02 mol/L were insufficient for complete dissolution, for higher concentrations there is a direct relationship between the acid concentration and the dissolution of malachite. Leaching was found to comprise two steps, an initial, very rapid dissolution with ∼85% copper recovery within ∼15 min and a slower second step. After 210 min of leaching, the effect of particle size on dissolution was found to be negligible. The malachite dissolution increased slightly with temperature, going from 94% to 98% as the temperature increased from 25 to 80 °C. The initial dissolution kinetics may be modelled by a simple logarithmic function. From this model, the activation energy was found to be 1.3 kJ/mol, clearly malachite dissolution is controlled by solution diffusion. Sulphuric acid consumption for 90% copper recovery was computed to be about 450 kg per ton ore.