An increasing number of studies demonstrate that tree species biodiversity can affect primary productivity and nutrient cycling in forests due to several factors, such as complementarity, facilitation or selection effects. For instance, resource partitioning in soils has been found to allow a more optimized nutrient uptake in mixed species plots compared with monocultures. However, how these effects will be modified by climate change – such as water availability – is not as well understood, especially in deep soil layers. Therefore, we specifically asked how water availability may influence the effect of tree mixtures on soil microorganism activity by measuring extracellular enzyme activities (EEAs) and available nutrients along the soil profile (down to 90 cm) in a 10-year-old plantation in southwestern France, which manipulates tree species composition (Pinus pinaster and Betula pendula, in monocultures and in mixed plots) and irrigation. Our results showed that EEAs directly depend on tree species composition and water conditions in interaction with soil depth; we found a positive effect of mixing birch and pine on carbon and nitrogen-related EEAs at an intermediate soil depth (15–30 cm soil layer), while the effect of increasing water availability increased phosphorus-related EEAs mostly in the upper soil layers (0–30 cm). However, we found no significant interactive effect between tree diversity and water availability on EEAs, underlying that the negative effect of lower water availability cannot be offset by the positive effect of mixing tree species. Differences in EEAs and available nutrients along the soil profile highlight the importance to look at different soil depths to better understand how nutrient cycling may be affected by increasing tree diversity and changes in water availability.Forest biodiversity provides a multitude of ecosystem goods and services ( An important step of carbon (C), nitrogen (N), and phosphorus (P) cycling is the decomposition of organic matter that derives from leaf and root litter ( Tree species may also have important effects on EEAs due to their varying litter qualities ( In this study, our primary objective was to investigate the interactive effect between tree diversity and water availability on available nutrients and EEAs along the soil profile. In practice, we sampled soils at five depths in an experimental plantation where both tree diversity and water availability (through irrigation) were manipulated and tested three hypotheses. First, we tested the hypothesis (H We conducted this study at the Among all of the plots, we chose to work with three species composition treatments: pure silver birch ( We sampled plots in all eight blocks (4 irrigated, 4 dry) from March 19th to 21st 2018. In each plot, we collected samples at four different locations, each surrounded by four trees, i.e. four pines, four birches, or two pines and two birches. The forest floor (layer of litter above the soil mineral layers) was collected using a quadrant (10 cm × 20 cm). Samples were dried at 40 °C until weight stabilization and ground. At each sampling location, we also collected a soil core down to 0.9 m depth in two steps. The top 0–15 cm of soil was collected manually with a soil corer (8 cm width). The bottom 15–90 cm of soil was collected with a mechanical drill, attached onto an auger (4 cm width). Afterwards, the soil cores were divided into five layers: 0–5, 5–15, 15–30, 30–60, and 60–90 cm. Soil samples were immediately placed in coolers and transported to the nearby lab, where each sample was sieved to 2 mm and homogenized. The roots were cleaned and stored in 10% alcohol until further analyses. One soil subsample was kept at 4 °C for immediate extraction of available nutrients, and a second subsample was stored at −20 °C for enzyme assays. Soil moisture was assessed for each sample by comparing the fresh to the dry soil weights after at least 72 h at 50 °C. There were thus a total of 480 samples collected for nutrients, enzymes, soil moisture and root analyses (3 species composition × 2 water levels × 4 blocks × 5 depths × 4 replicates, In addition to the soil samples, we collected litterfall sampled from litter traps that were installed in all plots in three blocks per water treatment at the beginning of the 2017 fall season. Two circular traps were installed in each plot: the traps were plastic cylinders with a height of around 20 cm, a metal net on the inferior opening, and a surface area of 0.716 m After sample collection, Available ammonium (NH In the same samples previously described for available nutrients, on the other aliquot stored frozen at −20 °C, we measured the potential activity of seven hydrolytic soil enzymes. We measured enzymes that catalyze the degradation of organic carbon (β-1,4-glucosidase [BGLU]), 1,4-β-D-cellobiohydrolase [CBH], α-1,4-glucosidase [AGLU], and β-xylosidase [XYL]), nitrogen (β-1,4-N-acetyl-glucosaminidase [NAG], L-leucine aminopeptidase [LAP]), and phosphorus (acid phosphatase [AP]) ( Roots were extracted from the same soil samples in which available nutrients and enzymes were analyzed. Root extraction consisted of sieving the collected samples and then watering the remaining roots to clean them and remove the soil. The live roots were sorted and separated into the different species. A representative portion of each root sample was oven-dried for 4 days at 40 °C and weighed. For each soil sample, the root biomass data of both the tree species (pine and birch) and the understory species were used in our statistical analyses to determine their effect on the potential enzyme activities in a redundancy analysis (see section The subsequent soil analyses were done at the plot level by making composites of the four soil cores at each of the five depths along the soil profile (3 species compositions × 2 water levels × 4 blocks × 5 depths = 120 samples). The soil pH was determined in a 1:10 soil:water suspension. The C:N ratios were determined after measuring total C and N by dry combustion (NF [i.e., French standard] ISO [i.e., international standard] 10694 and 13878; All of the statistical analyses were done using R software (version 3.5.1). First, extreme values were removed following the outlier labelling rule with a conservative tuning parameter of g = 2.2 ( Mixed models were used to assess the effect of the following fixed effect factors: tree species composition (pure birch, pure pine, mixed birch-pine), water availability (irrigation, control), soil depth (five depths as levelled factors) and their interaction, on the enzyme activities and available nutrients. Block was included as a random factor to account for the spatial structure of our experimental design. Plots were then nested within the block random factor to enable a comparison of treatments within each block separately. Finally, the sampling replicate number was nested within the plot to account for the non-independency of soil horizons within a soil core of a certain plot. Soil moisture was added as a co-variable in the mixed model. We then applied contrasts and performed post-hoc tests Tukey HSD post-hoc tests, with α = 0.05 used as the level to define significance. We calculated non-additive effects of mixing birch and pine trees by comparing observed values in the mixed-species plots to expected values, calculated as the mean enzyme quantities of the component species in the monocultures ( Soil texture did not vary between irrigated and control blocks with on average 95% sand, 2% silt, and 3% clay ( The forest floor C:N ratio was significantly higher in irrigated than in control blocks ( There was a significant effect of the interaction between the plot species compositions and soil depth for the C-related EEAs ( Our results also showed an overall positive effect of irrigation on N-related EEAs ( Although total N varied in the top 0–5 cm soil layer from an average of 1.06 mg N g Mantel tests showed that the seven individual hydrolytic enzymes were significantly correlated with the available nutrients and the belowground root traits (ρ = 0.569, As a whole, we found no correlation between the available N and the C By using a 10-year-old plantation which manipulates tree species composition and irrigation in southwestern France, we investigated the effect of mixing birch and pine, water availability, and their interaction on seven hydrolytic extracellular enzyme activities (EEAs) and available nutrients along the soil profile. Our results are partly in agreement with our two first hypotheses, thereby demonstrating that EEAs directly depend on tree species composition and water conditions. In contrast to our last hypothesis, we did not find any effect of the interaction between water availability and species mixing on EEAs, underlying that the negative effect of lower water availability cannot be offset by the positive effect of mixing tree species. In agreement with our first hypothesis, we found that mixing birch and pine had a positive effect on C- and N-related EEAs in interaction with soil depth ( Indeed, higher tree productivity in mixed stands may stimulate soil microbial biomass through an increase in root exudate quantity and diversity ( Contrary to C- and N-related EEAs, we found that there was a decrease in the P-related EEA in the 30–60 cm soil layer in the mixed-species plots compared to both birch and pine monocultures ( In accordance with our second hypothesis, we found an increase in both N- and P-related EEAs with irrigation. Overall, EEAs were lower in the control blocks ( In line with our expectations, the effect of irrigation was higher in the topsoil for the P-related EEA ( Furthermore, because C-related enzymes were not as affected as other EEAs by irrigation, the result reinforces the idea that changes in organic matter quality are also important drivers of EEAs under low water availability. The lower litterfall and forest floor C:N ratios in dry blocks compared to irrigated blocks support this hypothesis ( Although we hypothesized that mixing birch and pine could mitigate the effects of lower water availability on nutrient availability and EEAs, we did not find such a compensatory effect ( Finally, the lack of effect due to the species mixing may be simply the consequence of the lack of differences between the tree species themselves. Indeed, we did not see different patterns of the effect of water availability on EEAs between the two monocultures. This might be surprising given that The RDA gives us new insight into how environmental variables may have an effect on different enzyme activities ( Interestingly, although soil microorganisms are primilarly limited by C ( This study revealed that water supply and mixing pine and birch trees could have important long-term effects on soil extracellular enzyme activities (EEAs). First, from a management perspective, our results suggest that overall C sequestration in our system is likely to be constrained by P availability, regardless of water availability. Second, we found C–N–P decoupling effects as a result of tree species mixing or improved water availability, which may alter microorganism stoichiometry and belowground C, N, P fluxes. Finally, the lack of interactive effects between mixing birch and pine, and water supply, suggests that the negative effect of lower water availability on microbial activity cannot be offset by the positive effect of mixing these two species. The next step will be to sample at different seasons to investigate the possible temporal variations of EEAs and to measure other belowground processes such as protein depolymerisation and mineralization, in order to assess the dynamics of interactive effects between water availability and tree diversity over seasons and disentangle underlying mechanisms. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. We thank Coralie Chesseron, Nathalie Gallegos, Cathy Lambrot, and Kathina Müssig for their help in the field and the laboratory, Bastien Castagneyrol for his guidance and help, Els Dhiedt for the tree graphics, and Lukas Weilguny for help with supplementary figure design. We thank the Forest experimental Facility and especially Bernard Issenhuth for maintenance of the ORPHEE experiment. This work was supported by the The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at