Photographic images were collected of the underflow slurry stream of a laboratory-scale hydrocyclone classifying Merensky, UG2 and Platreef platinum group metal ores. Textural descriptors of the images derived by means of a steerable pyramid algorithm could be used to predict the mean particle size of the underflow slurry streams. The model consisted of a linear discriminant classifier that first identified the underflow as comprising coarse, intermediate or fine particle flow. Use of the centroids or mean particle sizes of these three classes could explain on average approximately 81% of the variance in the mean particle sizes of the underflow streams. These measurements can be performed online, and could form the basis for more advanced control of hydrocyclones and mineral processing circuits in general.Hydrocyclones are widely used in the process industries, for their compact design, ease of operation, low running costs and versatility in applications such as liquid clarification ( In the mineral process industries, they are used to classify mineral slurries by particle size. Optimal separation of the slurry is critically important to the efficient operation of process circuits, such as closed grinding circuits ( Despite the delicate balance in operational conditions that needs to be maintained, operators have to do so mostly unaided, as there is currently no instrumentation used to directly measure the performance of hydrocyclones in the mineral beneficiation process. Research efforts to address this over the last couple of decades have only been partially successful. Most of these approaches have focused on determination of the operating state of the hydrocyclone by focusing on the shape of the air core inside the equipment ( Internal solids concentration has also been used as a basis for determining the operating states of the hydrocyclone ( Using a different approach, In this paper, this approach is extended by using image analysis to estimate particle size distributions in the underflow of hydrocyclones used in the separation of mineral slurries. However, instead of explicitly considering the spray profile of the underflow, the texture of the flow was considered instead. The study entailed the collection of images of the underflow of a laboratory hydrocyclone, together with samples of the underflow that could be analysed to determine the mean particle size of the slurry. Variables could be derived from the images and these were used to build statistical models to predict the particle size and solids concentration of the slurry, as described in more detail in the rest of the paper. Experiments were conducted with a 76 Digital images of the underflow discharge were captured with a Canon EOS 400D digital camera mounted on a tripod close to the underflow of the hydrocyclone. Since the underflow discharged inside a mixing tank, the camera was positioned so that it was not obstructed by the tank. Three different ore types were used in the experiments, viz. Merensky, UG2 and Platinum Reef ores, which were sourced primarily from the Upper Ground 2 (UG2) and Merensky mining reefs ( A given experimental run was started with a slurry containing a low concentration of solids in the flow system. After allowing time for stabilization, photographs were collected from the underflow and samples of the slurry were collected from both the underflow and overflow streams of the hydrocyclone. These samples were dried in an oven for a 12 Following this, the solids concentration in the flow system was increased, the system was allowed to stabilize and the cycle of sampling and image collection repeated. Incremental, step-wise increases in the solids loading continued up to the point where further loading would lead to roping in the underflow. As a result, 15 completely independent runs were made with the different ores, while the data collected in these runs comprised 300 different sets of images and mean particle size measurements ranging from 47 to 1400 As the set of images did not have identical resolutions, each image was cropped to a minimum width (3000 pixels) and minimum height (2262 pixels), retaining the central part of each image. The resultant images from the first cropping step still contained a significant portion of black background, which was not removed, as it provided additional information on the spray profile of the underflow. The size and position of a common cropping rectangle across all images were visually determined by overlaying all images on top of each other. Appropriate coordinates for the upper left corner of the cropping rectangle were determined to be (0, 100), and the size of the cropping rectangle was 2560 (width) Since colour was not expected to play an important role in the analysis, the images in RGB format were converted to grey scale, i.e., the grey scale image In order to ameliorate the effect of inconsistent lighting conditions, the images were also normalised. To obtain a normalised image In Eq. Steerable pyramids as proposed by The initialisation of the steerable pyramid algorithm and the subsequent procedure for decomposition at level It should be noted that the filter responses are complex (consisting of real and imaginary components). For visualisation purposes, only the real components are shown. In the final steerable pyramid with In wavelet texture analysis the energies of each set of coefficients in the final decomposition are used as features. Although it would be possible to proceed in the same way with steerable pyramids, the proponents of this representation have suggested a different feature set ( Since the filter responses or coefficients are complex, they have real and imaginary components, or alternatively magnitude and phase components. It is common practise to only include statistics of the real coefficient components, but The resultant feature sets tend to be large: for example,  The calibration model consisted of a linear discriminant model, which used the image features to assign an unknown image to one of the three size categories, i.e., coarse (Class 1), intermediate (Class 2) and fine (Class 3) particles. The mean particle size was then simply estimated from the mean particle size value or centroid of the size category (the third column in More formally, given a set of grouped observations This is accomplished via the solution of an eigenvalue decomposition problem, the details of which can be found in standard references on multivariate statistics, e.g., A random selection of 75% of the data in each class was used for training and cross-validation of the linear discriminant classification models, with the remaining 25% being reserved for independent testing of the models via cross-validation. Moreover, in each repetition or fold, the classification model was optimized over 12 combinations of the three hyperparameters, viz. An example of the separation of the three groups of samples (coarse, intermediate and fine particles) is shown in The test error shown in the second column of  In addition, these results appear to support the visual observations that the smoothness or texture of the underflow of the hydrocyclone, as captured photographically, could be used as a basis to infer the particle sizes of the slurry, at least within the particle size range considered. Even so, more work would be required to validate these findings of this preliminary study. The models are specific to the slurry system and the equipment used in this study, as well as the operating regime considered. Also, there are other variables that can affect the flow structure of slurries, not all of which are related to particle size, and this should also be investigated. This could include different particle size distributions with the same mean particle size, changes in the fluid viscosity, particle density distributions, etc. Cyclone geometry could also be expected to play a major role. For example, cyclones from different manufacturers have different underflow characteristics, e.g., different spray profiles, but it is not known whether or to what extent underflow textures would be influenced by geometrical variables. If the textures generated by different equipment are different, it would also be unknown whether the different textures are affected in equal measure by geometric and (possibly interacting) rheological variables. In this study, these effects were assumed to play a negligible role and would require closer scrutiny based on additional experimental data. Although a reasonable effort was made to optimize the features extracted from the images, plenty of scope for improvement remains, among other by considering other feature extraction algorithms or combinations of such algorithms. It should also be noted that in practice, unknown mineral grinds or compositions that yield textures and flow profiles different from those for which the system has been calibrated, could likewise have an adverse effect on the performance of the system. In principle, it could be addressed by checking the similarity of the new data with the calibration data of the model, before passing the data to the model to predict particle sizes. Any of a number of appropriate algorithms could be used for this purpose, e.g., based on the use of principal component analysis, support vector data description ( When unexpected flows are mapped, the estimates of the system would have to be considered invalid, until recalibration has taken place. This could in part be done online by so-called semisupervised learning methods, but would not be different from methods used to recalibrate online sensors in general. The conclusions of this preliminary study can be summarized as follows: Steerable pyramid features of images of the underflow streams of a hydrocyclone can be used to predict the particle sizes in the slurries, which implies that flow texture is an indicator of the particle size of the slurry. A linear classification model could reliably identify the underflow as consisting of coarse, intermediate or fine particles (approximately 92% accuracy) and as a simple model, this could explain approximately 81% of the mean particle sizes of the underflow in the hydrocyclone. Although a reasonable effort was made to optimize the models used to predict the properties of the underflow of the hydrocyclone, there is still scope for the extraction of more informative features from the underflow, which could potentially lead to significantly more reliable estimates of the performance of hydrocyclones. Finally, the models considered in this study could in principle be implemented online, once suitably calibrated and could form the basis for more advanced process control models for hydrocyclones.