The floatability of talc in the presence of six lignosulfonates was studied in a series of Hallimond tube flotation experiments in the alkaline pH range from about 7 to 11.2. The strongest depression of talc was observed at higher pH values (pH ∼11) when lime was used for pH adjustments. The depressing power of lignosulfonates correlated very well with the adsorption density of the polyelectrolytes on the talc surfaces. As the adsorption of lignosulfonates increased, their depressing action was also enhanced. The adsorption data strongly suggest that electrostatic repulsion between the negatively charged talc surfaces and the strongly anionic polyelectrolytes prevents lignosulfonates from adsorbing onto the talc surfaces and depressing the flotation of the mineral. The results demonstrate an “activating” role of calcium ions in the depression of talc by lignosulfonates. Calcium species on the talc surface appear to act as adsorption sites for the anionic polyelectrolytes, particularly at higher pH values adjusted with lime when increasing amounts of specifically-adsorbing calcium hydroxy-cations start appearing in solution.Talc is the most troublesome naturally hydrophobic gangue mineral. The presence of talc in valuable mineral deposits is a major technological issue in fine mineral flotation. The selective depression of talc is usually achieved using natural (guar gum) or synthetic (carboxymethyl cellulose) polysaccharides. The surface chemistry of talc depression by polysaccharides has been investigated in detail and a number of talc-polysaccharide interaction mechanisms have been proposed ( Lignosulfonates are strongly anionic polyelectrolytes which are obtained as a by-product of wood processing to extract cellulose. Although the exact structure of lignosulfonates has not been elucidated, it is generally accepted that a wide variety of functional groups are present in lignosulfonate molecules with aliphatic, aromatic, sulfonic, carboxylic and hydroxyl groups being the main constituents. These polyelectrolytes are commercially available as calcium, sodium, potassium or ammonium salts. So far lignosulfonates have found only limited application in mineral processing. In this work, lignosulfonates are tested as potential talc depressants. Since there is no fundamental data on lignosulfonate adsorption on talc and the resulting floatability of the mineral, the main objective of this study is to establish basic correlations between these interfacial phenomena. A talc sample was obtained from Ward's Natural Science (Rochester, NY). The mineral was received as large pieces (approximately 2 in by 3 in), dry-crushed to below 20 mm, and then dry-ground using a porcelain ball mill. The finely ground product was dry-screened on 150- and 38-micron sieves, and the − Six samples of well-characterized lignosulfonates were obtained from Borregaard–Lignotech USA. Some of the chemical properties of the reagents are shown in Analytical grade calcium oxide (CaO), potassium hydroxide (KOH),) and hydrochloric acid (HCl) were used for pH adjustments. Potassium nitrate and potassium chloride were used to provide constant ionic strength. Methyl isobutyl carbinol, (MIBC — Cytec Aerofroth 70) was used as the frother in the flotation tests. Natural guar gum (Rantec KP4000) was also utilized in a number of flotation tests as the baseline talc depressant. 2.5 g of the − The small amount of MIBC enhanced the kinetics of talc flotation while stabilizing the formation of smaller, more uniform-in-size gas bubbles. It was also observed that after approximately 75 s of flotation nitrogen bubbles were barren and no talc was reporting to the froth even under the best flotation conditions (no depressant). A flotation concentrate from each test was vacuum-filtered on a Q2 (fine porosity) Fisher Scientific filter paper. The wet product was then dried in an oven at 110 °C, and weighed on an analytical balance to the nearest 0.1 mg taking a correction for the mass of a dry filter paper. A “control” test for each type of lignosulfonate was also performed using potassium hydroxide (KOH) instead of lime for pH adjustment. The reference lignosulfonate concentration chosen for such a test depended on the relative depressing power of each lignosulfonate reagent. A 1.6-g talc sample was conditioned for 20 min in 100 ml of a lignosulfonate solution at the desired pH. The solids-to-solution ratio was the same as in the flotation tests. The initial lignosulfonate concentration in all the tests was 50 mg/L. Preliminary kinetic tests revealed that adsorption equilibrium was attained within the first 5 min of conditioning with lignosulfonates. After conditioning, each talc–lignosulfonate suspension was centrifuged at 10,000 × For each lignosulfonate, a number of scans in the wavelength range from 210 to 400 nm were run to determine the optimum wavelength for spectrophotometric measurements. It was quickly observed that the absorbance spectra of a 50 mg/L lignosulfonate solution varied significantly depending on pH and the reagent used for pH adjustments (KOH or CaO). However, the absorbance spectra for each lignosulfonate exhibited a common intersection point (wavelength) at which the absorbance was independent of the experimental conditions. Thus, rather than using several different calibration curves, a single calibration curve was prepared at the common wavelength for each reagent. The measuring wavelengths for the lignosulfonates were 229 nm for the D748, 233 nm for the D619 and D912, 308 nm for the D750, and 236 nm for the D659 and D648. In the course of the spectrophotometric tests, it was also observed that potassium nitrate produced a very strong background signal in the UV range, particularly below a wavelength of 260 nm. Therefore, the adsorption studies were carried out using 0.001 N potassium chloride which gave practically zero absorbance levels in the tested wavelength range. In order to investigate the effect of pH on the magnitude of the surface charge of the talc particles, electroacoustic measurements were carried out using a Zeta Probe (Colloidal Dynamics, Warwick, RI). The tests were run on talc suspensions at 5% (wt) solids using 0.001 N potassium nitrate as the background electrolyte. The same size fraction as in the flotation and adsorption tests was also used in the electroacoustic measurements. The tests were made as automatic titrations using a CaO suspension, or KOH and HCl solutions. The Electroacoustic Sonic Amplitude (ESA) effect occurs when an alternating electric field of known frequency and amplitude is applied to a suspension of fine, charged particles. As the particles oscillate in the applied electric field, the dynamic mobility/zeta potential of the particles is determined by the magnitude of particle motion. While oscillations of very fine colloidal particles easily keep up with changes in the electric field, the sinusoidal signal from large particles significantly lags behind the sinusoidal electric field and the phase angle between the two signals increases. For each solid there is a maximum particle size above which the particles are too heavy to produce any measurable signal. The operating frequency range of the Zeta Probe (from 0.3 to 3 MHz) allows the instrument to determine particle sizes up to 10 μm although the particle size/frequency distribution data are not available to the user. For coarser materials the instrument must be “told” the size distribution by inputting  It should be noted that the natural pH of a 5% talc suspension was around 9 so all the data points below pH 9 were obtained using hydrochloric acid for pH control. Above the natural pH value, two separate titrations were carried out using either a lime suspension or a concentrated potassium hydroxide solution as pH modifiers. As Additions of hydrochloric acid produce a rather well-know trend as the surface charge becomes less and less negative. An extrapolated isoelectric point for this talc sample can be identified at pH 2.  It can be seen from As  At natural or mildly alkaline pH, the D648 does not affect the floatability of talc in the studied concentration range. The maximum flotation yield corresponds well with the pure talc content in the sample (82%). At pH 11 there is a large difference between the floatability of the mineral in the presence of CaO and KOH. With lime additions, talc flotation is measurably depressed at very low lignosulfonate dosages, while high pH adjusted with KOH affects the flotation of talc only to a small degree. In the case of the D748 reagent, a weak depression of talc can be detected at neutral and weakly alkaline pH, and the mineral becomes completely depressed at pH 11 after lime additions. Interestingly, pH adjustment to 11 with the use of KOH almost fully restores the natural floatability of talc even in the presence of 100 mg/L of the lignosulfonate. Similarly to the D748, increasing concentrations of the D619 lignosulfonate induce only moderate levels of talc depression up to pH about 9.3 ( Thus, the D648, D619 and D748 reagents can generally be characterized by a poor depressing action at natural pH and the lack of significant depression at high pH set with KOH. In contrast to the data for the D648, D619 and D748 lignosulfonates, the main common feature of the results obtained in the presence of the D659, D750 and D912 reagents is the marked depression of talc flotation at natural pH ( The mineral is also completely depressed in the presence of these three lignosulfonates when pH is raised to around 11 using lime. However, in the presence of the D659, talc depression does not occur when KOH is used for pH modification, while the D750 and D912 are still capable of markedly depressing the mineral under the same conditions. Interestingly, the depression of talc at pH 11 using KOH in the presence of the D750 and D912 is at the same level as that observed at natural pH for these two reagents. Overall, talc depression by all the lignosulfonates is enhanced at high pH, compared to depression at natural pH, but only when lime is used as a pH modifier.  Using the level of talc depression at the natural pH levels as a reference, the depressing power of the tested lignosulfonates increases in the order: D648 As the electroacoustic data show, the talc particles are net-negatively charged over a wide pH range with an extrapolated isoelectric point about pH 2. However, depending on which pH modifier, KOH or CaO, is used for pH control above pH Lime is a very common pH modifier in many industrial flotation processes. As a secondary effect of lime additions, increasing amounts of calcium ions are introduced into the system at higher pH values. The speciation of calcium in solution is a function of pH and it has long been known that calcium adsorption on negatively charged mineral surfaces (e.g., quartz) is closely associated with the presence of calcium hydroxy species (CaOH In contrast, pH adjustments with KOH cause a continuous decrease of the electroacoustic signal towards more and more negative values suggesting that the talc surface becomes strongly negatively charged. Talc particles possess two types of surfaces; hydrophobic faces and hydrophilic edges. The hydrophobic faces consisting of –Si–O–Si– groups should nominally be uncharged, while the surface charge on the edges depends on pH. The results of The adsorption of all lignosulfonates increases as the pH is raised using lime, but it decreases to zero for all the samples, except the D912 reagent, when KOH is used for pH modification. These trends show that lignosulfonate adsorption on talc closely follows the adsorption of calcium hydroxy species, but the anionic polyelectrolytes are unable to adsorb on the strongly negatively charged talc surfaces after KOH additions. Although the exact adsorption mechanism of each lignosulfonate is difficult to identify at this stage, it seems that strong electrostatic repulsion (in the absence of the specific adsorption of calcium ions) between the negatively charged talc particles and the anionic macromolecules overcomes any other talc–lignosulfonate interactions, prevents lignosulfonate adsorption and subsequent talc depression. Lignosulfonates are known to be only weakly surface-active. Their effect on the surface tension of aqueous solutions becomes pronounced only at concentrations on the order of several weight-percent ( It should be noted that the adsorption density of the stronger lignosulfonate depressants at natural pH values is quite substantial. Therefore, there is a direct correlation between the depression of talc flotation by lignosulfonates and the adsorption density of the polyelectrolytes on the talc particles. Several additional observations can be made in this context. The D912 reagent is the only calcium salt among the tested lignosulfonates and its adsorption on talc is very high even when KOH is added. It appears that the amount of calcium present in the reagent is sufficient to activate the talc surface for lignosulfonate adsorption and talc depression. There is also a good qualitative correlation between the content of sulfonic groups and the depressing power of the lignosulfonates. The three weakest and least adsorbing depressants – the D648, D748, and D619 – have the highest concentrations of sulfonic groups, which also make these reagents most anionic in the series at natural pH. The other three lignosulfonates – the D659, D750, and D912 – have relatively low contents of sulfonic groups and their adsorption densities are comparatively higher. These three lignosulfonates are able to moderately depress talc flotation at neutral pH values. At pH 11 adjusted with KOH, the D750 lignosulfonate characterized by the lowest sulfonate group content is the only sodium salt still giving a measurable adsorption, and hence producing weak depression of talc flotation. In strongly alkaline solutions, the dissociation of carboxylic and phenolic groups of lignosulfonates should also contribute to the overall anionicity of the polyelectrolytes, but the presence of calcium cations and calcium-hydroxy ions in solution very likely counteracts the influence of high pH on the dissociation of the weakly acidic groups. Only the strongly anionic sulfonic groups remain unaffected by calcium ions or pH under the studied conditions. Therefore, at high pH adjusted with lime, charge neutralization reactions between cationic calcium species and the weakly acidic groups of lignosulfonates would further reduce the magnitude of electrostatic repulsion between the reagents and the mineral surface, increase the adsorption of lignosulfonates, and thus enhance the depression of talc flotation. It should also be observed that at pH 11 adjusted with lime the talc surface is still net-negatively charged so electrostatic attraction alone cannot be responsible for the increased adsorption of all the reagents under these conditions. The D648 reagent is the poorest talc depressant and is also the most anionic polyelectrolyte in the series. The D648 does not adsorb on talc at all until pH 10 is reached with CaO additions. Between the D648 and D912, the depressing power of the remaining lignosulfonates directly correlates with their adsorption densities — the higher the lignosulfonate adsorption, the stronger the depression of talc at a given pH value. Lignosulfonates completely depress the flotation of talc at higher pH when lime is used for pH adjustments. The role of lime in the system is to provide calcium ions that specifically adsorb onto the talc particles at higher pH values and activate the mineral surfaces for lignosulfonate adsorption. The degree of the depression of talc flotation correlates directly with the amount of lignosulfonates adsorbed on the mineral. The adsorption density of lignosulfonates on talc decreases with increasing surface charge and increasing degree of anionicity of the reagents suggesting that electrostatic forces largely control the adsorption process on the net-negatively charged talc surface. Since the adsorption density of lignosulfonates correlates well with the specific adsorption of calcium hydroxy-species on the talc surface, it seems that these sites also play a role in the lignosulfonate adsorption process at higher pH values. It is also entirely plausible that calcium ions in solution affect the degree of dissociation of the weakly acidic groups of lignosulfonates further reducing electrostatic repulsion between the reagents and the mineral surface thus leading to higher lignosulfonate adsorption and talc depression. The results show that the presence of calcium in solution is a critical factor determining the ability of the lignin-based reagents to depress the flotation of the mineral. Because of the activating role of calcium ions, calcium lignosulfonates are stronger talc depressants than sodium salts. Financial and in-kind support for this study was provided by Borregaard Lignotech USA through a Grant-In-Aid of Research.