We reviewed medical records of patients with unstable intertrochanteric fractures (AO/OTA type 31-A2, A3) treated with percutaneous non-contact bridging (NCB) plates and with gamma nails and compared operative data and outcomes. Fifty-two patients received NCB plates (27 males and 25 females; median age, 77.0 years) and 36 received gamma nails (15 males and 21 females; median age, 77.0 years). Fluoroscopy time in the NCB plate group was 34.0 s (IQR: 30.0, 37.5), and in the gamma nail group was 45.0 s (IQR: 39.0, 51.5, p < 0.001). Hospital stay in the NCB plate group was significantly shorter than the gamma nail group (15.0 days [IQR: 13.0, 16.5] vs. 17.0 days [IQR: 14.0, 19.0], respectively; p = 0.004). Harris hip scores were similar between the groups at 6 months and 1 year postoperatively. The percutaneous NCB plate provides satisfactory results for the treatment of unstable intertrochanteric fractures.Intertrochanteric fractures of the hip are one of the most common fractures in elder osteoporotic patients, and usually treated by internal fixation. Stable intertrochanteric fractures (AO/OTA type 31-A1) can be successfully treated with conventional implants such as dynamic hip screws (DHSs) and proximal femoral nails (PFNs). However, unstable intertrochanteric fractures are challenging injuries that are prone to complications The non-contact bridging (NCB) plate (Zimmer, Inc., Warsaw, Indiana, USA) was introduced in 2008. Compared with standard locking systems, a major characteristic of the NCB plate system is the polyaxial locking screw. The non-threaded connection between the plate and screws allows screws to be used as lag screws for fracture reduction at an angle of 0–15° before locking them into a final position. Angular stability is achieved by locking the screw head into the plate with a locking cap. This makes it possible to place the screws as needed, achieving mechanically optimal fracture fixation. To date, no NCB plate specifically designed for the proximal femur has been introduced. However, we found it was anatomically suitable for the proximal femur when reversed, i.e., a plate that would normally be used for the contralateral femur was turned upside down ( The purpose of this study was to evaluate the clinical and radiological outcomes of unstable intertrochanteric fractures treated with the NCB plate as compared to fractures treated with conventional gamma nails. We retrospectively reviewed the medical records of the 117th Hospital in Hangzhou City for patients with AO/OTA type 31-A2 and 31-A3 intertrochanteric fractures treated with NCB plates from 2008 to 2010. We also reviewed the records from 2006 to 2009 to identify patients with the same type of fractures treated with gamma nails. Data of all patients identified were recorded, and included demographic characteristics, operation time, blood loss, the duration of image intensification, outcomes, and Harris hip scores. Comparisons between the 2 groups were performed. This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of the hospital, and the requirement of patient informed consent was waived. All patients had provided consent for the surgical procedures performed. The NCB DF A skin incision was made from the tip of great trochanter which extended distally about 6 cm. After a longitudinal incision of the iliotibial band and the vastus lateralis muscle, a submuscular tunnel was made on the surface of the femur. The aiming device was attached to a suitable length NCB plate, and the plate was inserted between the vastus lateralis muscle and the shaft of the femur from the great trochanter to the distal end of the femur. The proximal end of the plate was kept in contact with the great trochanter, and the distal end was kept in contact with the bone surface during insertion. Two, 2-mm Kirschner wires (K-wires) were then inserted through the aiming device for temporary fixation of the plate to the femur ( After induction of anesthesia and positioning of the patient as described above, a proximal greater trochanter vertex vertical incision of 3–5 cm was made. Dissection was performed to the level of the greater trochanter and gamma nails were inserted in a standard manner. Briefly, after exposure of the greater trochanter a guide pin was inserted followed by reaming and insertion of the nail. The position of the nail was examined, and if the position was satisfactory it was screwed firmly into the distal locking screw within the femoral neck. Active flexion and extension of the hip and knee of the affected side was initiated on the second day postoperatively. Partial weight-bearing rehabilitation was begun 4 weeks postoperatively. Weight-bearing was gradually increased as tolerated, and full weight-bearing was allowed at about 12 weeks postoperatively when signs of bone healing were present. Radiographs were performed at 4 weeks, 12 weeks, and 6 months postoperatively. We collected Harris hip function score data at 6 months as well as 1 year postoperatively. Bone healing was defined as the fracture line blurred or absent on radiographs, and the patient was able to freely perform activities without pain. Continuous normally distributed variables were presented as mean and standard deviation and compared between groups by the Student's There were 52 consecutive patients ≥60 years of age who received NCB plates for unstable intertrochanteric fractures from 2008 to 2010, and were included in the analysis. The patients included 27 males and 25 females with median age of 77.0 years (IQR: 71.0, 79.0). In addition, there were 36 consecutive patients ≥60 years of age who received gamma nails for unstable intertrochanteric fractures at the same hospital from 2006 to 2009, and were included in the analysis. The patients included 15 males and 21 females with median age of 77.0 years (IQR: 70.5, 80.0). In the NCB group, there were 29 patients with AO/OTA type 31-A2 fractures and 23 with type 31-A3 fractures. In the gamma nail group, there were 15 patients with type 31-A2 fractures and 21 patients with type 31-A3 fractures. There were no significant differences between the 2 groups with respect to demographic and clinical characteristics ( The surgical data of the 2 groups are shown in There were 3 proximal screws that loosened in 2 patients in the NCB plate group; however, no plate or screw breakage occurred. There were 2 postoperative complications in the NCB plate group: 1 case of a pulmonary infection and 1 case of a urinary tract infection, and both resolved after treatment with antibiotics. In the gamma nail group, there was 1 case of a pulmonary infection and 1 case of delirium, and both resolve with treatment. In NCB plate group, 7 patients were lost to follow-up at 6 months after surgery, and 12 patients at 1 year after surgery. Thus, the follow-up rate for the NCB plate group at 1 year after surgery was 76.9%. In gamma nail group, 5 patients were lost to follow-up at 6 months after surgery, and 8 patients at 1 year after surgery. Thus, the follow-up rate for the gamma nail group at 1 year after surgery was 77.8%. Outcomes of the gamma nail and NCB plate groups are shown in The results of this study showed that the NCB locking place provides good outcomes when used for the treatment of unstable intertrochanteric fractures. Results are comparable to those of gamma nails, and the hospital stay is shorter. Intertrochanteric femoral fractures are one of the most common fractures seen in the elderly, and are usually treated by internal fixation. Stable intertrochanteric fractures (AO/OTA type 31-A1) can be treated successfully with conventional implants such as DHSs and PFNs. Nevertheless, the optimal implant for fixing unstable intertrochanteric fractures remains a matter of debate All intramedullary nails now used have a larger diameter in the proximal end (PFNs 17 mm, gamma nails 15.5 mm). During the process of reaming and inserting the nails in the proximal femur, it is possible to worsen the comminution and separation of the greater trochanter fracture fragments. Additionally, the lateral wall of the proximal femur may be broken during drilling or inserting the lag screw. As an extramedullary device, a lateral plate attached to greater trochanter and the lateral wall of proximal femur could offer substantial support and protection of the lateral wall of the proximal femur in cases of intertrochanteric fractures, especially in cases in which there is a major fracture fragment. There have been several clinical studies using proximal femoral locking plates Compared with standard locking systems, a major characteristic of the NCB plate system is the polyaxial locking screw. The non-threaded connection between the plate and screws allows screws to be used as lag screws for fracture reduction at an angle of 0–15° before locking them into a final position. Angular stability is achieved by locking the screw head into the plate with a locking cap. This makes it possibility to place the screws as needed, and to achieve a mechanically optimal fixation of the fracture. Stoffel et al. Study has shown that the volume of implant in the femoral neck has an influence on the blood supply of the femoral head There are many methods for fracture fixation including IM nails with an additional antirotational mechanism like an antirotation screw (PFN) or a helical neck blade (PFNA). We have found that a PFN dual nail design is not as easy to place as a single nail, and it may produce a zig-zag effect. In our hospital, we primarily use gamma nails and PFNAs. PFNAs have a strong anti-rotation capability and are better for patients with osteoporosis, but they cannot be used to apply any pressure to the fracture site. There are limitations of this study that should be considered. First, is the retrospective nature; however, the 2 groups were similar with respect to demographic and clinical characteristics. Second, the number of cases was relatively small. We did not calculate the distance between the screw tip and the apex of the femur very precisely, and a greater tip-apex distance may increase the chances of screw cut-out in osteoporotic patients. Lastly, postoperatively partial weight-bearing was allowed before full weight-bearing which can be difficult for many elderly in countries where the elderly predominately live independently. According to conventional Chinese medical practice, elderly hip fracture patients need to rest for some time, regardless of the use of internal fixation, and they are not immediately allowed full weight bearing. Almost all elderly hip fracture patients in China live with their children for some time after discharge, and in this situation partial weight bearing can be achieved. Thus, there are differences in implementation between countries. The results of this study showed that the NCB plate system provides satisfactory results for the management of unstable intertrochanteric fractures. The outcomes are comparable to those with gamma nails, with a shorter hospital stay. This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of The 117th PLA Hospital. Number: 011. This study was supported by the Key Scientific Research Project of Nanjing Military Command, China (12Z42). Zhenhai Hou: guarantor of integrity of the entire study; study concepts; study design; definition of intellectual content; clinical studies; experimental studies; data analysis; statistical analysis; manuscript preparation; manuscript editing; manuscript review. Jianguo Shi: guarantor of integrity of the entire study; literature research; experimental studies; data acquisition; manuscript review. Hong Ye: guarantor of integrity of the entire study; clinical studies; experimental studies; data acquisition; data analysis; statistical analysis; manuscript review. Zhijun Pan: guarantor of integrity of the entire study; study concepts; study design; definition of intellectual content; data analysis; statistical analysis; manuscript preparation; manuscript editing; manuscript review. None. This study was supported by the The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at