Using waste Zn–Mn dry batteries, waste scrap iron and pyrolusite as raw materials, Mn–Zn soft magnetic ferrite powders were prepared through the process of simultaneous leaching, purification and co-precipitation. The experimental results indicated that the leached yields of Fe, Mn and Zn were 92.02%, 96.14% and 98.34%, respectively. The leached liquor was purified through these processes of sulfuration precipitation, fluorination precipitation and double salt precipitation deep purification process. Therefore, high removal yields of impurities could be achieved. Removal yields were as follows: Ca 99.7%, Mg 92.33%, Al 96.48%, Si 63.64%, Cu 99.86%, Pb 98.51%, Cd 53.0% and Ni 78.72%. Among these co-precipitation powders, the average mass content of the main components were Fe 41.41%, Mn 13.92% and Zn 4.49%, and the mass ratio of Fe:Zn:Mn was 69.2:23.3:7.5. Compared with the theoretical prescription (Fe:Mn:Zn=67.3:24.4:8.3), the absolute errors of main components were Fe +1.9%, Mn −1.1% and Zn −0.8%. Because of content impurities in co-precipitation powders (Ca<0.0028%, Mg<0.0053%, Al<0.0084%, SiO2
                     <0.0023%, Pb<0.0031% and Cu<0.0010%), the qualities of these gained co-precipitation powders could compete with the demand for the preparation of soft magnetic ferrite. The magnetic properties also demonstrated that the soft magnetic ferrite samples, which were made from the co-precipitation powders prepared by used batteries, had the same qualities as PC30 made by the TDK Company.The environmental impact of mercury bearing in used batteries attracts much of the attention of the domestic media ( For years, many countries all over the world, according to their own specific characteristics, developed many kinds of treatment technologies for waste Zn–Mn dry batteries. These technologies were roughly divided into two types, pyrometallurgical processes and hydrometallurgical processes. In the case of the pyrometallurgical processes, such as the Japanese patent’s reports ( Iron, manganese and zinc are not only the main components of waste Zn–Mn dry batteries, but they are also the main components of Mn–Zn soft magnetic ferrite. Therefore, based on a large amount of our research on the preparation of Mn–Zn soft magnetic ferrite ( Waste Zn–Mn dry batteries were collected from the Garbage Station of the Central South University. Pyrolusite was supplied from Hu’nan Xiangtan. Iron scraps were acquired from the Mechanical Plant of Central South University. The chemical analysis results of these raw materials are shown in Auxiliary reagents including ammonium sulfide, ammonium fluoride and ammonia were chemically pure. The ammonium acid carbonate was used for the agriculture. Manganese sulfate, zinc sulfate and ferrous sulfate were analytically pure. Mn These experiments included both condition and comprehensive experiments. The leaching condition experiments were carried out in a 1000 The experimental flow chart is given in First, the used batteries are dismantled into scrap and powder. In the leaching experiment process, H While adjusting the pH, Al Purifying processes include the two steps of preliminary purification and deep purification. The preliminary purification includes removal of the heavy metal by the vulcanized precipitation and removal of Ca The sediments of double salt are dissolved and blended with distilled water and the co-precipitation procedure is performed by anti-charge processes, using the mixed solution of ammonium bicarbonate and ammonia as precipitator. These reactions are shown below: According to these conditions ( From Under these proposed optimal experimental conditions, four comprehensive condition experiments are carried out. The chemical analysis results of the leached solution are shown in On the basis of the data in Three procedures of purification including the removal of all other heavy metal ions, except for the three main metals, by sulfuration precipitation and the removal of Ca From A single factor experimental design is applied to determining the optimal conditions of co-precipitation process and the optimal conditions of co-precipitation process are shown as follows: the factual consumed amount of NH From According to reported technological conditions ( The data in Based on our results, we make the following conclusions. The research demonstrates that high quality soft magnetic ferrite powders can be prepared from waste Zn–Mn dry batteries. Compared with the traditional ceramic method and co-precipitation method, this technology does not need to be separated into main components. Therefore, the production process and periods are simple, as well as the industrialization. The comprehensive utilization of the Fe, Mn and Zn in the waste Zn–Mn dry battery has become a reality. Therefore, the battery recycling process, having great benefits to society and the economy, is an environmentally acceptable technology for use in battery reclamation. It also can be predicted that the ability of these products to compete in the market will greatly increase due to the characteristic of this method, which has the advantages of inexpensive raw materials, high purity and low cost.