Cables and wires, which are essential parts of equipment for the transmission of both information and electricity, contain valuable materials including copper (Cu) and aluminum (Al). This experimental work evaluates the use of mechanical processing (grinding and sieving), followed by spouted bed elutriation, for separation of the valuable materials (steel-coated copper, copper, and aluminum) present in waste coaxial and internet cables. A recovery efficiency of approximately 90% was achieved for the steel-coated copper in coaxial cables. For internet cables, the copper recovery efficiency was approximately 87%. These findings demonstrate that it is possible to separate, recover, and recycle the valuable materials (metals) present in waste cables using simple, low-cost, and efficient mechanical processing followed by spouted bed elutriation.With the rapid development of the power and information technology (IT) industries, the production and use of cables have increased exponentially. This development has led to increased generation of waste cables whose reutilization is essential for both environmental conservation and resource recycling ( The common copper-containing cables consist of an assembly of a polyvinyl chloride (PVC) or polyethylene (PE) insulating layer, a flame-retardant protective layer, and a conductive copper core ( Copper is considered the most important metal in electrical applications owing to its high electrical conductivity, malleability, chemical stability, and corrosion resistance. The metal has many uses, such as in electrical and data cables, electrical and electronic equipment, cooling systems, heat exchangers, and automobiles ( The processes employed to recycle waste cables usually focus on the recovery of metals, especially copper, although processes to recycle polymers are also being developed. The process consists of various mechanical–physical separation steps, such as dismantling, grinding, size classification, and separation according to physical properties. The techniques used include gravity, electrostatic, eddy current, air current, and magnetic separation methods ( An alternative method for separation of the different cable materials is the use of spouted bed elutriation based on differences in particle size and/or specific mass. The present work focuses on the separation of different materials (steel-coated copper, copper, aluminum, and polymers) using inexpensive mechanical processing followed by spouted bed elutriation. In the first step, coaxial and internet cables were characterized manually to determine the quantities of the different materials present in the samples. In the second step, mechanical operations (grinding and sieving) and spouted bed elutriation were used to separate the valuable components of the waste cables. The coaxial and internet cables were obtained from a hardware shop in the city of Santa Maria (Rio Grande do Sul State, Brazil). First, the cables were manually dismantled to determine the amounts of metals and polymers present in each sample. This characterization employed 10-cm lengths of the cables, with cutting tools being used to separate the different components. The mass percentages obtained in the characterization step were considered the total amounts of the materials present in the cables and were used as a basis for comparison with the final mass balance for the recycling process. Characterization of the metals was performed using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) coupled with energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS; VEGA 3SBU, TESCAN, Czech Republic). Thermogravimetric measurements (TGA-50, Shimadzu, Japan) were used to evaluate the thermal stabilities of the polymers from the coaxial and internet cables. The analyses were performed using 5–10 Physical and morphological characterization were performed after the mechanical processing (grinding and sieving) and spouted bed elutriation operations. This characterization was used to determine the terminal velocities ( The metal sphericity was determined by considering cylindrical objects as follows ( For a cylinder with radius Mechanical processing is a physical treatment widely used in various waste cable recycling processes. In the first stage of mechanical processing, manual sorting of the different types of waste cables is required. Next, separation equipment is used to separate the conductive copper core and plastics of the waste cables. Finally, the separated copper core and plastics can be recycled (  In this step, 5 The spouted bed elutriation was performed using a pilot-scale system ( After the first separation ( In the second size separation step ( For isometric particles, the terminal velocities ( The dimensionless terminal velocity, Manual characterization was performed before the mechanical processing. The mass percentages (wt%) of the different materials present in the cables were determined, in triplicate, using 10 The thermal stability of the polymeric fraction was characterized using thermogravimetric analysis (TGA). The two PE insulations (  After mechanical processing (grinding and sieving), the separated materials were subjected to physical and morphological characterization to determine the terminal velocities (  In summary, for the coaxial cable, the final results for the separated materials after mechanical processing and spouted bed elutriation were 12.72  In summary, for the internet cables, the final mass balance was 45.25 The results were compared with those of other studies on the recovery of metals from waste cables.    The final operation to recover the materials was spouted bed elutriation (the second separation step) ( The inlet air velocity ( For the coaxial cable, the inlet air velocity in the spouted bed ( Similar performance was observed for the internet cable. At low inlet air velocity ( In summary, it was possible to separate the different cable materials using a simple, low-cost, and efficient mechanical processing procedure, followed by spouted bed elutriation, to obtain the individual materials (steel-coated copper, copper, aluminum, and polymers). The recycling of these waste materials from secondary sources represents an important source of metals that can supplement the raw material supply in metal industries. The following conclusions were drawn from the experimental results of this study: Manual characterization of the cables indicated that the coaxial cable consisted of 25 Mechanical processing and spouted bed elutriation of the coaxial cable resulted in a steel-coated copper recovery efficiency of approximately 90%. For the internet cable, the copper recovery efficiency was approximately 87%. These unit operations can provide precise and efficient separation, potentially enabling their use in various recycling processes. In the spouted bed elutriation, it was possible to separate the different materials based on differences in particle size and/or specific mass by applying a range of spouted bed inlet air velocities ( Recycling of the different materials present in waste cables can be performed using the proposed simple and efficient mechanical processing procedure followed by spouted bed elutriation. Furthermore, the separated materials can be directly marketed as raw materials for use in metal industries. The authors would like to thank