The use of ion exchange resins for the extraction of platinum and palladium from a synthetic cyanide leach solution is described in this paper. An increase in the concentrations of both platinum and palladium cyanide in solution from 0.15 to 0.45mg/L and from 0.40 to 1.2mg/L respectively resulted in higher equilibrium loadings while the first order constants remained constant. The solution pH did not have a significant effect on the equilibrium loading of platinum cyanide and palladium cyanide in the ranges 9 to 11. However, improvements in the loading kinetics of both these complexes were noticed with an increase in solution temperature from 30 to 60°C. Changes in zinc cyanide and nickel cyanide concentrations in the range 5 to 20mg/L did not have a significant effect on the adsorption of platinum cyanide and palladium cyanide. It was concluded that strong base anion exchange resins could effectively recover platinum and palladium cyanides from dilute synthetic cyanide solutions and that the exchange capacity and functionality of these ion exchange resins might have played an important role in their affinity for different metal anions in solutions.The traditional mill-float-smelt-refine process route for the recovery of platinum group metals (PGMs) from ore or concentrate is becoming more difficult to implement, because of factors such as the location, complexity and grade of new ore bodies, the lack of skilled labour and the availability of utilities such as water and electricity. Moreover, as the more easily recoverable high grade South African PGM-reserves are depleted, new resources have to be exploited that are usually more difficult to mine and show complex metallurgical behaviour due to variable composition, mineralogy and hardness. These factors make the use of conventional recovery methods less attractive. For these reasons there is an opportunity to develop new processes for the recovery of PGMs from ore or concentrate. One of the options currently being investigated is to leach low-grade concentrate or ore directly, with further recovery by hydrometallurgical steps and with elimination of smelting ( The direct leach investigated by The cyanidation of PGMs, however, is not a commonly used process, and has only found significant application in the automobile industry, where recycled automobile catalyst have been leached with cyanide to recover the PGMs contained in the material ( The use of ion exchange resins for the recovery of metal cyanide complexes, especially those of gold and silver, from either low or high-grade cyanide solutions has received considerable attention over the past few decades, both on laboratory and industrial scale ( Studies on the recovery of platinum and palladium from cyanide solutions with the use of ion exchange resins is, however, limited to qualitative discussions on the subject, with no in-depth investigation on either the adsorption or elution of platinum and palladium cyanide complexes on or from ion exchange resins ( The recovery of platinum group metals from acidic media has received more attention. In an overview, This study investigated the extraction of platinum and palladium from a dilute (< The aim of this study was to compare different anion exchange resins for the recovery of platinum and palladium from synthetic cyanide leach solutions and, by performing loading and kinetic evaluations, to make recommendations on the feasibility of using ion exchange resins for a cyanide heap leach process. Eleven anion exchange resins were screened to investigate their potential for PGM and gold recovery over other metal-cyanides present in a synthetic cyanide leach solution. The properties of the resins are shown in The weak base and chelating resins, Purolite S 985 and S 920 respectively were expected to be less suitable at an operating pH The ion exchange resins were pre-treated in a 12 The resin bed was subsequently treated with 6 BV of a 1 When weak base and chelating resins were used, the resins were washed with 5 BV of a 1 Synthetic solutions were prepared using K Many metal cyanide complexes are relatively stable and require moderate to strongly acidic conditions to liberate cyanide. The stability of metal cyanide complexes with respect to dissociation is expressed by their formation constants, and shown in PGM and other elements were analysed on an Agilent 7700 ICP-MS, using the standard configuration of quartz spray chamber and torch, and Ni-plated sampling and skimmer cones. A 0.4 The instrument was optimised for sensitivity and oxide formation before calibration. Instrument parameters were set as per All elements were analysed in He mode in order to correct for plasma and matrix-based interferences on the analytes of interest, particularly low concentrations of The instrument was calibrated using NIST traceable standards purchased from Inorganic Ventures. A drift monitor standard was analysed after every 12 samples, with internal standard elements added online to correct for drift and matrix differences between samples and standards. The free cyanide concentration was determined by potentiometric titration with silver nitrate. All single component experiments as well as all Pt and Pd mixed solutions experiments were repeated with the mean standard deviation for Pt found to be 4.9 The concentrations of metals in the synthetic leach solution used in the screening tests are shown in The screening tests involved contacting each resin with 1 The percentage recovery of each metal from the solution, with each of the ion exchange resins screened, is presented in The screening results in The four resins were contacted with 1 From the extraction profile for Dowex 21K XLT shown in Similar metal-cyanide recoveries were observed for Amberjet 4600, as seen in Rapid recoveries of platinum cyanide, palladium cyanide, zinc cyanide and nickel cyanide were observed for Amberlite PWA5 in Minix, as shown in Two kinetic models were fitted to the experimental kinetic data for platinum cyanide, palladium cyanide and aurocyanide. In integrated form the pseudo first and second order models take the following forms respectively in equations below (see e.g. Kinetic and statistical fitting data for the pseudo first and second order models for platinum cyanide, palladium cyanide and aurocyanide on all four exchange resins are shown in From the data in The rate constants in The equilibrium loadings of all the metals that were present in the solution after 48 The loading results in In the case of the base metal loadings, significant quantities of copper cyanide, nickel cyanide, zinc cyanide and iron cyanide were loaded onto Dowex 21K XLT and Amberjet 4600. The loading of iron cyanide was reduced with use of Amberlite PWA5, however the copper cyanide, nickel cyanide, and zinc cyanide loadings were still high. The loading of all base metals cyanides could be reduced to a significant degree with the use of Minix. Complexes such as Fe(CN) Although the fractional recoveries of both precious and base metal cyanides were typically of the order of 80%, with the exception of the recoveries onto Minix and iron cyanide onto Amberlite PWA5, it can be seen from Isotherms from single component solutions at 22  When considering the exchange capacities of these strong base anion exchange resins, Dowex 21K XLT has the highest theoretical capacity of 1.4 The Freundlich and Langmuir equilibrium models were linearized as shown in Eqs. It should also be noticed that this experiment was performed using solutions that contained either only platinum or palladium in their respective cyanide complexes. Thus the maximum loadings shown in From the batch kinetic tests and isotherm evaluations, Amberlite PWA5 showed the highest affinity for the platinum and palladium cyanides present in the solution. Lower iron loading was also achieved onto Amberlite PWA5, which is very important, because Fe(CN) The equilibrium loadings of platinum cyanide and palladium cyanide were examined at various pH values in the range of 9 to 12. The solution used in the investigation is shown in The results in Three experiments were conducted with the solution shown in The initial rate of extraction of either platinum or palladium, during each experiment was obtained with the use of Eq. Both The results presented in Zinc and nickel form cyanide complexes Zn(CN) It can be seen that the concentration of zinc and nickel did not have a significant effect on the loading of either platinum cyanide or palladium cyanide onto Amberlite PWA5, up to concentrations of 10 From these results it can be stated that even with the similarity between the cyanide complexes of zinc and nickel and those of platinum and palladium, the strong base anion exchange resin maintained its high affinity for Pd(CN) The drop in initial loading rate of platinum cyanide and palladium cyanide might also be explained by the higher ionic strength of the solution, caused by an increase in the nickel cyanide and zinc cyanide concentrations. This will result in more competition between the anions in solution for the active sites on the strong base anion exchange resin, which will cause a decrease in the loading rate of the anions. It might be possible to draw from this trend that, for Pd and Pt to be efficiently extracted from a heap leach pregnant solution, it is crucial that all the zinc and nickel in solution to be extracted prior to adsorption. This is similar to conclusions reached for gold extraction from plant solutions ( The loading of platinum cyanide and palladium cyanide onto Amberlite PWA5 was investigated at different temperatures in the range of 30 Arrhenius plots for platinum cyanide and palladium cyanide, using the first order rate constants of these metal cyanides according to Eq. From the initial loading rates of platinum and palladium in The experimental results revealed that platinum and palladium cyanides could be effectively recovered with the use of commercially available strong base anion exchange resins from synthetic dilute cyanide solutions. The exchange capacity and functionality of different strong base anion exchange resins had an influence on the affinity that these resins exhibited for different metal cyanide anions in solution. The strong base anion exchange resins, which contained smaller functionalities and higher exchange capacities, co-extracted significant amounts of base metal cyanides, such as those of iron, copper, nickel and zinc. The base metal cyanides loading could, however, be reduced with the use of strong base anion exchange resins that contained larger functionalities and lower exchange capacities, without significant loss in the loading of platinum cyanide and palladium cyanide. The solution pH had no significant effect on the loading of platinum cyanide and palladium cyanide at pH values between 9 and 11. On the other hand, an improvement in the initial loading kinetics of these complexes was observed with an increase in solution temperature from 30 From the results obtained in this paper, the recovery of platinum and palladium from pregnant synthetic cyanide heap leach solutions with the use of strong base anion exchange resins appears to be promising. Gratitude is expressed to