During the last decades several authors have shown that the spatial distribution of earthquakes follows fractal and multifractal laws This multifractal tool is essentially used for the characterisation of spatial scaling properties, in particular the method that is mostly used is the correlation dimension Studies with multifractal tools are widely applied to natural and induced seismicity The purpose of this paper is to verify the relationship between the decrease of the value of The events with magnitudes In order to improve the resolution, the complete data set was separated in six time periods. The multifractal analysis was carried out in each time period, each one contained 9.320 data points. A moving window was used, containing a constant number of events in order to guarantee the precise estimation of the fractal dimension. After different trials, we chose 200 data points for the number of the data points in each window. Two consecutive windows were shifted by 20 points, opening each time and looking for a change in the parameter The multifractal analysis of each time period shows that there is a systematic decrease of the fractal dimension ( Creighton mine is located in the southern edge of the Subdury Igneous complex, of Northern Ontario, Canada. We have considered the deepest microseismicity in Creighton mine, between 1.828 and 2.377 In order to improve the resolution, the complete dataset was separated in time periods. The method of Correlation–Integral Partioning was applied in the multifractal analysis Using this value of The Grassberger and Procaccia method Finally, the Rényi multifractal spectrum dimension is given by This result is valid in the linear range of We used the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) in order to quantify the performance of the multifractal method Performance is measured by metrics where The perfect classifier, then, is produced when We calculate the fractal spectrum dimension The multifractal spectrum for the complete data set was divided in six time periods (see For each time period we note a decrease in the value of In order to measure the performance of this method we choose the spectrum for In order to quantify the efficacy of the multifractal spectrum dimensions to warn the proximity of a relevant seismic event in a mine, we have evaluated the decrease of the In It is interesting to note that the TPR value increases along with the threshold magnitude; this behaviour was presented in each time period, except in the fifth time period. Values for this index are greater than 0.5 for the time periods 1, 2, 4 and 6; the The value of The This study suggests the existence of an universal behaviour in seismicity, either natural or induced, because the system seems to react in the same way for both sources. On the other hand, the fact that These results emphasize the relevance of applying multifractal analysis in the evolution of the spatio-temporal distribution of seismicity, natural or not, in relation to the occurrence of a relevant event for the system under study. We thank No. 3120237 FONDECYT Grant. The authors wish to acknowledge the permission of the mine to publish this work.