Intramedullary nailing (IM) is a technique universally accepted to treat femoral diaphyseal fractures. The treatment of fractures located in the distal third remains a controversial issue though. A finite element model of the femur has been developed, analyzing distal fractures with several gap sizes combined with different interlocking combinations of distal screws with one oblique screw proximally to stabilize the intramedullary nail. The mechanical strength of the nail against bending and compression efforts was also studied. Beside the FE simulations, a clinical follow-up of 15 patients, 6 males and 9 females, with mean age of 53.2 years was carried out. Localizations of fractures were 10 in the right femur and 5 in the left femur, respectively.
                  A fairly good correspondence agreement between clinical results and the simulated fractures in terms of gap size was found. Non-comminuted fractures had a mean consolidation time of 20.5 weeks (4.8 months), a tendency corresponding well to the mobility obtained in the FE simulations; Comminuted fractures on the other hand exhibited a higher mean consolidation period of 22.2 weeks (5.2 months) secondary to the excessive mobility at fracture site obtained by means of FE simulations.
                  The best stability at fracture site was found for the system with three distal screws and the system with two distal screws placed medial lateral. The highest leverage of distal screws was obtained maximizing the distance between them and choosing the coronal plane for their orientation. The results obtained with both nail materials (stainless steel and titanium alloy) show a higher mobility when using titanium nails. Steel nails provide stiffer osteosyntheses than the titanium nails.
                  In conclusion, the best screw combination in terms of stability to produce fracture healing and the least difficulties during treatment is the one which had one oblique proximal screw with two distal lateral screw implanted in the coronal plane.intramedullary nailing finite element three dimensional computed tomography computer-aided design cobalt–chromium–molybdenum lateral–medial antero-posterior post-operative Intramedullary nailing (IM) is a technique universally accepted to treat femoral diaphyseal fractures. However, the treatment of fractures located in the distal third of the femur remains a controversial issue. Distal femoral fractures account for 1% of fractures, and between 3% and 6% of femoral fractures, the incidence increases with age The fundamental objectives of surgical treatment include adequate fracture stability, maintaining the length and axis of the limb, and a good functional result with a surgical intervention less aggressive as possible Several authors have reported that it is appropriate to treat fractures in the area 5 of Wiss For distal femoral fractures, anterograde IM is possible when the fracture is located more than 3 Computational techniques and particular finite element (FE) simulations are considered to be a powerful, time-efficient and proven tool to reproduce biomechanical behavior of a wide range of phenomena globally and locally The objective of the present work is to determine the best screw combination for distal femoral fractures with three gap sizes analyzing different material for the nail for a given accidental load in the early post-operative stage, without considering the onset of biological process focussed on fracture healing. Four locking screw combinations and two materials (stainless steel and titanium) were analyzed. A three-dimensional (3D) finite-element model of the femur from a 55–year-old male donor was developed. The outer geometry of the femur was obtained by means of 3D scanner Roland3D Roland® PICZA (Irvine, CA, USA) scanner, whereas a set of computed tomography (CT) of the donor’s femur was treated using Mimics® Software (Materialise, Leuven, Belgium). Once the inner interface between cortical and trabecular bone was determined, by means of an in-house algorithm material properties were assigned to the FE model in I-Deas The studied femoral nail Stryker S2™ (Stryker, Mahwah, NJ, USA) was 380 Nail surgery was reproduced in I-Deas in a virtual way, inserting the nail into the femur with the corresponding screws. Afterward the assembly of the computer-aided design (CAD) model was performed under the supervision of a surgeon. Bone, nail, and screws were meshed with linear tetrahedron. They were assumed for the bone linear elastic isotropic properties ( A sensitivity analysis was performed to determine the minimal size mesh required for an accurate simulation. For this purpose, a mesh refinement was performed in order to achieve a convergence toward a minimum of the potential energy, both for the whole model and for each of its components, with a tolerance of 1% between consecutive meshes. The purpose of this study was to investigate the optimal screw combination for a single distal fracture location and gap size. The transverse fracture was modelled using an irregular surface remaining faithfully to a comminuted fracture considering three gap sizes: 0.5, 3, and 20 The present study was considered the immediate post-operative stage. Consequently, no biological osseointegration process was considered. Contact interaction was assumed between the outer surface of the nail and the inner cortex of the medullary canal of the femur ( Regarding boundary conditions for all the simulations, fully constrained conditions at the condyles were considered and a load case associated with an accidental support of the leg at early postoperative (PO) stage ( Beside the FE simulations, a clinical follow-up was also carried out in 15 patients, 6 males and 9 females, with mean age of 53.2 years; all of them were treated with anterograde femoral nail Stryker S2™. Localizations of fractures were 10 in the right femur and 5 in the left femur. The distribution of cases corresponding to fracture localization and fracture grade is shown in The FE simulations allow obtaining the mobility results for the different cases analyzed. The study of micromotions at the fracture site was measured as the relative motion between pairs of homolog points defined from opposed nodes depicted in Conversely, except from the fourth screw combination (8.14%), all models with gap size of 0.5 The maximum amplitude of micromotion between homolog points at the fracture site for steel and titanium nail is reported in   With respect to the clinical follow-up, non-comminuted fractures had a mean consolidation time of 20.5 weeks (4.8 months), whereas comminuted fractures (grade 2 and 1 Winquist and Hansen) were found to have a higher mean consolidation period of 22.2 weeks (5.2 months). One case resulted in pseudarthrosis. The choice of method of surgical treatment to stabilize the extra-articular fractures of the lower third of the femur remains a controversial issue but the appearance of new locked nails, can extend the indication of anterograde nailing to this type of fracture The originality of our work is based on the fact that no simulation studies have been previously made on the stability of fracture site by evaluating the number and orientation of the distal locking screws using different alloys of material with different fracture site gaps. The use of computational techniques has been an excellent tool to verify whether the stability provided by different interlocking systems is consistent with the completion of consolidation in case of comminuted distal femoral fractures. In the locked intramedullary nail the load is transmitted from proximal to distal to the distal screws, which are subjected to high stress. This stress of distal screw decreased as the length of nail-cortical contact and the distance between the distal locking screw and the fracture site increased Works have been published on the safety lock that gives a static screw Interestingly, there are works about the position and number of distal screws in the tibial nailing The stability at fracture site measured in terms of relative micromotions of homologous points provides a more accurate measure for bone ingrowth. Evaluating results obtained for steel nail, the fourth interlocking system produces the best results in terms of local and also global stability for non-comminuted fractures; for comminuted fractures the first and the fourth interlocking systems provide the same stability. On the other hand, for titanium nail, the best results were obtained for the fourth interlocking system for the minimum gap (0.5 The highest locking rate is achieved when the distance between distal screws is bigger, as the lever arm produced to block the movement of the nail is higher. Thereupon, the use of screw #3 for the first locking model is not leveraged and thus, micromotions produced by the second and third interlocking systems are within the same high rate as the distance between both distal screws is minimal. Besides, the inclusion of a third screw in a different plane (antero-posterior) does not improve results compared to two lateral/medial locking system. Thus, this anterior/posterior option does not account for the extra difficulties assigned to the surgical technique: longer surgery times, higher radiation exposition and bigger difficulties associated to the screw insertion in two anatomical planes (sagittal and coronal). Therefore, an alternative design of the nail can be proposed to maximize the distance of L/M threads with the restrictions of proximity to distal fracture and femoral condyles. From our data analysis comparing the three materials used for the nails, the titanium nail screw combination plays the most important role. This is even more marked for comminuted fractures (gap size of 20 Although the correspondence of clinical results with the simulations made is fairly good, they are not conclusive, as the number of patients is rather small. In addition to this, the concept of consolidation is normally under debate, as it is defined according to clinical criteria related with symptomatology and interobserver radiological procedures. FE models developed in the present work permitted characterization of the stability of different interlocking systems and identification of the optimal one for every type of fracture. Moreover, the results were compared to a set of clinical cases included in the follow-up. Non-comminuted fractures have the minimum mean consolidation time, which coincides with the appropriate mobility at fracture site obtained in the FE simulations, whereas comminuted fractures have the higher mean consolidation period, corresponding to the excessive mobility at fracture site obtained by means of FE simulations. The healing time rises as the comminution grade increases. Among the studied combinations of distal screws, the one with two distal screws medial lateral provided the best results in terms of stability at fracture site and global movement at the top of the nail along the three fracture gaps sizes. This tendency is explained as the locking effect is maximized when the distance in between the distal screws is increased. This parameter is limited by the proximity to fracture site and the distance to femoral condyles. Mobility rate with titanium screw was higher than with steel nail as it confers a stiffer fixation system which is better for osteosynthesis. AH, JA, and LG conceived the design of study. LG, SG, EI, and SP conceived and developed the finite-element models and carried out all the simulations. AH and JA realized the medical supervision of models. All authors participated in the drawing up of the manuscript, and read, and approved the final manuscript. This research has been partially financed by None declared.