To date, various delivery systems have been developed to improve chemical stability and increase the bioavailability of polyphenolic compounds. In the present study, the micronization of two flavonoids, quercetin and rutin, and their coprecipitation with polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) were studied using the supercritical antisolvent process (SAS). SAS process parameters were optimized with the aim of obtaining composite microspheres with controlled mean size and particle size distribution. Spherical microparticles (with mean diameters in the range between 0.47 and 9.52 μm for PVP/quercetin and in the range 0.84–8.17 μm for PVP/rutin) were precipitated, depending on the operating conditions. In correspondence of the best operating conditions, the entrapment efficiency in PVP, for both flavonoids, was 99.8% and the dissolution rate from the coprecipitated powders was 10 and 3.19 times faster compared to the dissolution rates of unprocessed flavonoids for quercetin and rutin, respectively.Quercetin is a flavonoid compound, belonging to the class of flavonols [ Considering that they are very interesting in the pharmaceutical and nutraceutical fields because of their numerous benefits to human health, flavonoids are frequently taken as supplements, and functional foods. Therefore, in order to preserve their properties and improve their bioavailability, different delivery systems, based on the coprecipitation of flavonoids with a suitable polymer, have been developed [ Some conventional micronization techniques, such as, for example, spray-drying, emulsification/solvent evaporation, centrifugal extrusion, freeze-drying and coacervation have been used to obtain coprecipitated particles [ The literature regarding flavonoids coprecipitation using conventional techniques is scarce and is related to the formation of cyclodextrin inclusion complexes [ The literature concerning the production of quercetin and rutin coprecipitated particles by SAS process is limited. For example, Montes et al. proposed the use of SAS technique to micronize rutin [ Summarizing the literature results, to the best of our knowledge, the SAS micronization of quercetin and rutin and their coprecipitation with polymeric carriers have been attempted only in a limited number of articles without obtaining satisfying results. In particular, SAS coprecipitation can be considered efficient when well-separated composite particles are produced [ The objective of this study is to obtain an effective SAS coprecipitation of quercetin or rutin with PVP, enhancing the dissolution rate, and, therefore, improving the bioavailability of these natural antioxidant compounds. In particular, optimal conditions in terms of the type of solvent used, operating pressure, overall concentration and polymer/flavonoid ratio for the formation of spherical composite microparticles were determined. Morphology, mean size and size distribution of the particles were analyzed and discussed. The effectiveness of the process was also verified through entrapment efficiency and dissolution tests. Polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP, average molecular weight 10,000 g/mol), quercetin dihydrate (purity 98%), rutin hydrate (purity 95%) and dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO, purity 99.5%) were supplied by Sigma-Aldrich (Italy). Ethanol (EtOH, purity 99.9%) was purchased from Carlo Erba (Italy). Morlando group (Italy) provided carbon dioxide (purity 99%). Solubility tests performed at room temperature showed that the solubilities of the materials in EtOH are about: 200 mg/mL in the case of PVP, 10 mg/mL in the case of quercetin and 20 mg/mL in the case of rutin; whereas, the solubilities in DMSO are: 250 mg/mL in the case of PVP, 90 mg/mL in the case of quercetin and 240 mg/mL in the case of rutin. A schematic representation of the SAS apparatus used for micronization and coprecipitation is shown in A SAS experiment starts with the pressurization of the precipitation vessel with preheated scCO At the end of the solution injection, scCO The morphology of the precipitated powder was observed through a Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope (FESEM, mod. LEO 1525, Carl Zeiss SMT AG, Oberkochen, Germany); considering that the powder has to be conductive to be analyzed, it was placed on a stub with a sticky carbon cover and then coated with gold-palladium with the aid of a sputter coater (mod. 108 A, Agar Scientific, Stansted, United Kingdom). Mean diameters, standard deviations and particle size distributions (PSDs) of the powders were determined using an image analysis software (Sigma Scan Pro 5.0, Aspire Software International Ashburn, VA). The samples were taken from various locations inside the precipitator and the corresponding PSD was elaborated considering approximately 1000 particles, whose diameters were measured using FESEM images taken at high enlargements. The elaboration of the PSDs was carried out using Microcal Origin Software (release 8.0, Microcal Software, Inc., Northampton, MA). Calorimetric properties were studied using a differential scanning calorimeter (DSC, TC11 from Mettler-Toledo) under a nitrogen atmosphere (flow rate 50 mL/min); the sample (about 5 mg) was heated from 25 to 400 °C at 10 °C/min. X-ray diffraction (XRD) analyses were performed by an X-ray powder diffractometer (model D8 Discover; Bruker, USA) with a Cu sealed tube source. Powders were placed on a holder and flattened with a glass slide to minimize preferred orientation of the particles. XRD patterns were recorded using the following conditions: Ni-filtered An UV/vis spectrophotometer (model Cary 50, Varian, Palo Alto, CA) was used to perform dissolution studies for each flavonoid compound (FC) at a wavelength of 369 nm and 257 nm for quercetin and rutin, respectively. A phosphate buffered saline solution (PBS) at pH 7.4 was used as release medium. A dialysis sack, containing the powder samples with an equivalent amount of FC (5 mg) suspended in 3 mL of PBS, was then incubated in 300 mL of PBS at pH 7.4 and 37 °C, continuously stirred at 150 rpm. The mean profiles were proposed in the present paper, since each analysis was performed in triplicate. The entrapment efficiency of PVP/flavonoid coprecipitated particles (EE%) was also measured by UV–vis analysis, measuring the absorbance in PBS medium at the end of the release, when all FC was released from the particles to the outer phase. The absorbance was converted into FC concentration using a calibration curve. EE% was determined as follows: Considering that quercetin and rutin are not particularly soluble in PBS, the EE% measurements were repeated using ethanol as medium. Total antioxidant capacity was performed by 2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH) assay according to Kumaran [ SAS experiments were carried out using a CO  Some preliminary tests were carried out processing the polymer and each flavonoid separately, to investigate their behavior when processed by SAS. In particular, micronizing PVP at 40 °C, 9.0 MPa and a solute concentration in DMSO equal to 40 mg/mL (run #1 in Each FC was processed at 40 °C, 9.0 MPa, fixing the solute concentration in DMSO at 20 mg/mL (runs #4 and #12 in The flavonoids alone were also processed at the same operating conditions in terms of temperature and solute concentration but at higher pressure (13.0 MPa, runs #5 and #13 in Based on these preliminary experiments, it is possible to assert that both active compounds were not good candidates for SAS micronization because of their solubility in the mixture formed by the organic solvent and the antisolvent; whereas PVP was a compound that can be effectively processed by SAS. Therefore, the following experiments were performed attempting the coprecipitation for the systems PVP/quercetin and PVP/rutin. Considering the results of the preliminary experiments, the coprecipitation at pressures higher than 9.0 MPa was not attempted. The first set of coprecipitation experiments was carried out to investigate the effect of the solvent on particle morphology, mean size and particle size distribution. Firstly, fixing PVP/quercetin ratio at 20/1 w/w, a test was performed with a total solute concentration in ethanol equal to 20 mg/mL (run #2). Then, another experiment was conducted by using a higher overall solute concentration (40 mg/mL) (run #3). The FESEM analyses of the powders showed that some microparticles were precipitated, but also the presence of material with an irregular morphology was detected, both using a total concentration of PVP/quercetin in EtOH equal to 20 mg/mL ( Considering that in both experiments not well defined particles were recovered, for the system PVP/quercetin, in the following experiments, DMSO was used as the organic solvent. Regarding the system PVP/rutin, the effect of the solvent was investigated fixing a total concentration of the solute equal to 20 mg/mL and a PVP/rutin ratio to 20/1 w/w. Using ethanol as the solvent ( The effect of the total concentration in the liquid solution for the systems PVP/FC 20/1 w/w at 9.0 MPa and 40 °C was investigated, varying this parameter from 20 mg/mL In the case of PVP/quercetin, coalescing microparticles were precipitated when the total concentration of PVP/quercetin was equal to 20 mg/mL Comparing the volumetric cumulative distributions in In the case of the system PVP/rutin, coalescing microparticles ( A comparison between the volumetric cumulative PSDs for PVP/rutin powders was shown in In order to complete the screening on the effect of the operating parameters on morphology, mean particle size and particle size distribution, the PVP/FC ratio was decreased from 20/1 w/w to 10/1 w/w. In the case of the system PVP/quercetin, the total concentration in DMSO was fixed first at 30 mg/mL (run #9) and, later, at 40 mg/mL (run #10). When the total process concentration was fixed at 30 mg/mL, sub-microparticles characterized by a high degree of coalescence were obtained. This prevented the determination of the mean particle size and PSD. At 40 mg/mL, coalescing sub-microparticles with a decrease in particle dimensions with respect to the powders obtained at PVP/FC ratio equal to 20/1 (run #8) were precipitated. Therefore, in the case of the system PVP/quercetin, the 10/1 w/w ratio is not sufficient for the attainment of well separated coprecipitated particles. The decrease of the PVP/flavonoid ratio from 20/1 to 10/1 w/w was also investigated in the case of the system PVP/rutin, fixing the total concentration of the solutes in DMSO at 40 mg/mL. Slightly coalescing microparticles were produced with a PVP/rutin ratio equal to 10/1 w/w and a decrease of particle size was observed, by reducing the polymer/flavonoid ratio. Indeed, the mean diameter ± standard deviation varied from 8.17 ± 2.29 μm (in the case of the ratio 20/1 w/w, run #16) to 0.94 ± 0.25 μm (for the test in correspondence of the ratio 10/1 w/w, run #17). DSC thermograms of unprocessed flavonoids, unprocessed PVP and SAS processed PVP/FC 20/1 w/w were reported in XRD patterns of unprocessed and SAS processed PVP (run #1), unprocessed and SAS processed FC (runs #4, 12), SAS powders PVP/FC precipitated using EtOH (runs #2, 11) and DMSO (runs #7, 15) as the organic solvents were reported in Dissolution tests were performed using UV–vis spectroscopy on unprocessed FC and SAS processed PVP/FC composites. Release kinetics of each sample in PBS at pH 7.4 was monitored plotting the percentage of dissolved FC as a function of time ( Dissolution profiles of unprocessed rutin and SAS coprecipitated powders PVP/rutin 20/1 and 10/1 precipitated from DMSO were reported in Encapsulation efficiency (EE%) was determined for all SAS samples using UV/vis analysis at the end of each release test; the results were reported in Regarding PVP/rutin samples, the EE% was found to be 33.3 and 34.7 %, respectively in the case of using ethanol (run #11) and DMSO (run #14) as the organic solvent with 20 mg/mL overall concentration. The maximum EE% (from 90.1 to 99.8 %) was obtained at PVP/rutin 20/1 w/w samples precipitated from DMSO using an overall concentration of 30 mg/mL (run #15) and 40 mg/mL (run #16) as well as PVP/rutin 10/1 w/w with an overall concentration of 40 mg/mL (run #17), indicating a successful coprecipitation. DPPH assay was used to evaluate the antioxidant stability of the original quercetin/rutin, SAS processed PVP/quercetin and PVP/rutin coprecipitated particles and SAS processed PVP particles. The antioxidant capacity results are shown in Summarizing the experimental results, different morphologies, such as coalescing particles, microparticles, nanoparticles, sub-microparticles and crystals, were obtained varying the operating conditions. It is well known in the literature on SAS process that particle formation is explainable considering the interplay among different aspects; i.e., fluid dynamics of the injected solution in contact with scCO When the jet break-up occurs and the operating pressure is slightly higher than that of the MCP, spherical microparticles are generally precipitated. Micro-drops are formed during the liquid jet break-up, then the liquid is removed by drying with scCO When the process conditions are located far above the MCP of the solvent-antisolvent system (at pressures much higher than MCP pressure), nanoparticles are commonly obtained. Indeed, the surface tension of the injected liquid disappears before the liquid jet break-up and a gas plume formed [ The study of the effect of process parameters on the obtained morphology and on the average particle size allowed the ideal conditions for the PVP/flavonoid coprecipitation to be identified. When the starting solutions were prepared by using ethanol as the organic solvent (runs # 2, 3 and 11), some microparticles together with material not well defined in morphology (see The effect of the total concentration (at fixed polymer/FC ratio) and of polymer/FC ratio (at fixed total concentration) can be discussed together. Indeed, at 20/1 w/w ratio, in correspondence of the lower total concentration (20 mg/mL) (runs # 6 and 14), and at 10/1 w/w ratio for all the tested total concentrations (runs # 9, 10 and 17), coalescent particles were obtained. It is also possible to note that the EE% in correspondence of these experiments is, in general, low. It is possible to hypothesize that, in these cases, the amount of PVP is insufficient to incorporate all the flavonoid, which partly precipitated on its own and was extracted by the mixture consisting of DMSO and scCO When, instead, higher total concentrations (30 and 40 mg/mL) in correspondence of a sufficient PVP/FC ratio (20/1 w/w) were chosen, the coprecipitation was successful: microparticles, with a mean diameter that increased and a PSD that enlarged at increased concentrations, and with high entrapment efficiency, were obtained (runs # 7, 8, 15 and 16). Ultimately, PVP is confirmed as an excelled polymeric carrier for the SAS coprecipitation. Indeed, PVP can hinder the tendency of quercetin and rutin to precipitate in an irregular morphology, because it has the capability of blocking and controlling the morphology of the compound that precipitates in its presence. Similar results were previously observed, for example, by coprecipitating PVP with other vitamins or drugs [ In this work, it was demonstrated that it is possible to coprecipitate some poorly water-soluble flavonoid compounds (quercetin and rutin) by using the SAS technique with PVP as the polymeric carrier. The results obtained in terms of morphology and dissolution rate for the tested flavonoids using the SAS technique are very promising. The effect of the main parameters of the SAS process on the mean size, on the particle size distribution as well as the dissolution rate in water was studied. The operating conditions were chosen in order to obtain well-separated microparticles by means of an accurate selection of the type of solvent, of the operating pressure, of the total concentration of solutes and of the polymer/FC ratio. As indicated by the results, amorphous microparticles using solute concentrations greater than 20 mg/mL and high polymer/flavonoid ratios were obtained. Indeed, microspheres with mean diameters in the range of 8.33–9.52 μm for the system PVP/quercetin and 1.15–8.17 μm for the system PVP/rutin were obtained under optimized conditions. Furthermore, release studies confirmed an improvement of the flavonoids dissolution rates: 10 and 3.19 times faster dissolution rate than unprocessed quercetin and rutin, respectively were obtained. Besides, the high entrapment efficiencies, up to 99.8%, were achieved for quercetin and rutin coprecipitated particles using DMSO, which was the solvent chosen to coprecipitate the flavonoid compounds with PVP by the SAS process. Consequently, the characteristics of the powders and the high encapsulation efficiencies of PVP/quercetin and PVP/rutin systems obtained by SAS could allow the production of supplements with antioxidant and anticancer benefits for pharmaceutical and nutraceutical applications, in which the flavonoid compounds have high stability and bioavailability. This work was supported by the None.