The linear solvation energy relationships (LSER) analysis of the distribution constants of the nonionizable crown ethers between aqueous phase and organic solvents has been carried out applying the cohesive energy density and dimensionless solvatochromic parameters of dipolarity/polarizability, hydrogen donating and accepting abilities of solvents. The molar intrinsic volume and hydrophile–lipophile balance in McGowan scale have been proposed as a descriptors of different crown ethers. The derived correlations permit to predict and/or estimate: (i) distribution constants of nonionizable crown ethers and their benzo derivatives in organic solvent/water systems; (ii) hydration number of crown ethers in the organic phase; (iii) thermodynamic functions followed the distribution of nonionizable crown ethers and their benzo derivatives in organic solvent/water systems; (iv) effect of ionic strength of the aqueous phase and properties of organic solvents on the distribution constants of dicyclohexano-18-crown-6, its alkyl derivatives and higher analogues in the two phase liquid systems.Crown ethers (CE) developed by Pedersen The stability of cationic complexes, [MCE] The extraction and carrier mediated transport of metal cations with crown ethers depend on the properties of solvents. The solvent effects have been mainly investigated in the extraction systems with metal picrates. It should be noted, however, that the number of solvents studied by different authors may differ significantly. Iwachido and coworkers The distribution of an extractant between both phases of the extraction system is one of the most fundamental equilibria followed the extraction of neutral complexes and ion pairs as well The present work deals with the following subjects: (i) hydrophilicity and lipophilicity of crown ethers of different structure which are the factors governing their distribution in a fixed organic solvent/water system; (ii) analysis of the solvent effects on the distribution constants of crown ethers and their benzo derivatives; (iii) hydration of crown ethers and their benzo derivatives in the organic phase; (iv) thermodynamics of distribution of crown ethers and their monobenzo derivatives in organic solvent/water systems; (v) distribution of dicyclohexano-18-crown-6 ether in organic solvent/water systems; (vi) effect of the ionic strength of the aqueous phase on the distribution of crown ethers in the system organic solvent/aqueous solution of an electrolyte. The structures and names of considered crown ethers are indicated in The model of Kamlet and Taft of solvent effects is multiparametric linear model: In the present work, For the distribution constants of different crown ethers in the same extraction system the following model has been proposed: Combination of Eqs. All calculations have been performed as previously The distribution constants of selected crown ether in different organic solvent/water systems depend on the properties of solvents. The derived correlations ( The attention should be paid to 15C5, B15C5, 18C6, B18C6, DB18C6 and DB24C8 ethers in the system 1,2-dichloroethane/water. Except of 16C5 and 15M, 15L-16C5, the experimental values of distribution constants of 15C5, B15C5, 18C6, B18C6, DB18C6 and DB24C8 ethers determined in 1,2-dichloroethane/water system by Takeda and coworkers Crown ethers may differ in the number of ether oxygen atoms and the size of macrocyclic ring as well as in the number and properties of substituents. In general, the hydrophobicity of homologues with fixed number of oxygen atoms It has been established that the distribution constants of different crown ethers in the fixed extraction system fulfill nicely the correlation of general formula: Correlation The distribution constants of crown ethers in a given system could be also evaluated from the contributions of structural subunits distinguished in their structure. Takeda et al. The increments of methylene groups reported for crown ethers For each crown ether the values of The dataset of distribution constants of crown ethers in organic solvent/water systems ( prediction cannot be made for the systems involving such strong hydrogen bond donors like 1-octanol; prediction for the systems with distribution constants predicted for 1,2-dichloroethane/water are always lower than those determined experimentally in Refs. Correlation Crown ethers distributed between both phases of an extraction systems transfer some additional amount of water into the organic phase. The increase of equilibrium concentration of water in the organic phase, The hydration number of different crown ethers, i.e. B12C4, 15C5, B15C5, 18C6, B18C6, DB18C6 and DB24C6 are known for water-saturated nitrobenzene From the inspection of data obtained for nitrobenzene/water system Hydration numbers of B15C5 and B18C6 ethers in different extraction systems B15C5 B18C6 Combining the results from Refs. The enthalpy change, The number of experimental studies on thermodynamics of crown ethers distribution in organic solvent/water systems is surprisingly low. The free terms and the slopes of straight line dependences: ln In all cases the experimental values of Except of 18C6 ether in the system tetradecane/water, the enthalpy changes followed the distribution of other crown ethers in tetradecane/water, benzene/water, dichloromethane/water and chloroform/water systems, respectively, conform to the correlation The experimental entropy changes determined for the distribution of each crown ether in a given system are positive and practically do not depend on temperature. The correlation Dicyclohexano-18-crown-6 ether is much more hydrophobic than its dibenzo analogue. The distribution constants of The analysis of distribution constants of DC18C6 ( Hydrophobic crown ethers are applied as extractants in the separation and recovery of Hasegawa et al. Horwitz and coworkers Lakkis et al. Both datasets from Correlation  It has been demonstrated that unsubstituted crown ethers, their benzo derivatives as well as 15,15-dimethyl- and 15-methyl, 15-L derivatives of 16C5 could be considered as a family of analogues. For the first time the distribution constants of these crown ethers in organic solvent/water systems have been quantitatively described by means of their molar intrinsic volumes, hydrophile–lipophile balance and the Kamlet and Taft model of solvent effects. For the first time the hydration numbers of unsubstituted crown ethers and their benzo derivatives in the organic phase have been correlated with the HLB of ethers and property parameters of solvents. The enthalpy changes followed the distribution of unsubstituted crown ethers and their benzene derivatives in a few organic solvent/water systems have been found to depend upon molar intrinsic volume and HLB of ethers and property parameters of solvents. The entropy changes followed the distribution of these ethers in organic solvent/water system depend probably upon the properties of solvents. Dicyclohexano-18-crown-6 ether, its alkyl derivatives and higher analogues do not conform to the correlations established for the distribution constants of unsubstituted crown ethers and their benzo derivatives. Consequently, they have been treated as a second family of analogues. This approach has been confirmed in the light of satisfactory correlations derived for their distribution between an organic solvent and water and/or aqueous solution of electrolyte. 