The photocatalytic ozonation of sulfamethoxazole (SMT) has been studied in water under different experimental conditions. The effect of gas flow rate, initial concentration of ozone, SMT and TiO2 has been investigated to establish the importance of mass transfer and chemical reaction. Under the conditions investigated the process is chemically controlled. Both, SMT and TOC kinetics have been considered. Fast and slow kinetic regime of ozone reactions have been observed for SMT and TOC oxidation, respectively. Application of different inhibitors allows for the establishment of reaction mechanism involving direct ozonation, direct photolysis, hydroxyl radical reactions and photocatalytic reactions. Rate constants of the direct reaction between ozone and protonated, non-protonated and anionic SMT species have been determined to be 1.71×105, 3.24×105 and 4.18×105
                     M−1
                     s−1, respectively. SMT quantum yield at 313nm was found to be 0.012moles per Einstein at pH 5 and 0.003moles per Einstein at pHs 7 and 9. Main contributions to SMT removal were direct ozone reaction, positive hole oxidation and hydroxyl radical reactions. For TOC removal, main contributions were due to positive hole oxidation and hydroxyl radical reactions.In recent years, pharmaceutical compounds can be catalogued as emerging priority pollutants in waste waters ( In a previous paper ( Most of the information related to this section can be found in a previous paper ( Experiments were carried out in 1 The aqueous solution was irradiated with a high pressure mercury lamp (Heraeus, TQ 718 700 W) immersed in a borosilicate type glass well placed at the the reactor middle. The efficient radiation of the lamp was only due to the 313 SMT was analysed by high-performance liquid chromatography (Elite La Chrom) with a Sinergi 4 A series of experiments of SMT photocatalytic ozonation were carried out to investigate the effect of main variables and inhibitors of photolytic and free radical steps as presented below. Photocatalytic ozonation of sulfamethoxazole is a complex gas–liquid–solid-photolytic reacting process involving mass transfer and photochemical, free radical and surface reaction steps. Basically, main variables affecting the process rate are intensity of radiation, gas flow rate, TiO Because of the heterogeneous nature of photocatalytic ozonation involving gas–liquid–solid mass transfer, some experiments were carried out at different gas flow rates (between 30 and 50 The fact that chemical reactions (in this case: photochemical, free radical and surface reactions) control the process rate means that rate equations can be directly derived from mechanisms of reactions likely involving Langmuir–Hinshelwood (LH) kinetics in the case of photocatalytic reactions ( Regarding the concentration of ozone in the feeding gas different effects were observed on SMT and TOC removal. Thus, Regarding TOC variation, the photocatalytic process in the absence of ozone (UVA/TiO  The influence of TiO If the effect of TiO Literature reports a huge amount of information on the mechanism of both ozonation and photocatalytic oxidation processes ( Regarding the photocatalytic ozonation of SMT, experimental results suggest (also kinetic results, see later) that SMT is mainly eliminated through the direct ozone attack and direct photolysis reaction with a low participation of free radical reactions ( Absorption of light which leads to oxidant positive hole formation on the valence band and electron migration to the conduction band: Adsorption of water on activated points of the semiconductor: Formation of hydroxyl radicals from positive hole oxidation: Oxygen electron trapping in the conduction band to avoid electron–hole recombination and process inhibition: Some other steps depending on the nature of reactants can be added. For example SMT adsorption on the semiconductor surface is low but this step has to be considered because of the importance of surface reactions in photocatalytic processes. Then, surface reactions of adsorbed SMT are also considered: Through direct oxidation with positive holes: Through direct oxidation with adsorbed hydroxyl radicals: Also, reactions in the liquid phase are considered: Through direct oxidation with the superoxide ion radical: In addition, if ozone is also present some other reactions should be taken into account: Direct ozone reaction: Direct photolysis: Hydroxyl radical oxidation in the liquid phase: Notice that step Because of the multiple possible ways of oxidation, some experiments were carried out in the presence of scavenger substances such as t-butanol, iodide ion and benzoquinone in order to confirm or neglect the presence of some of the steps above indicated. t-Butanol is a very commonly used hydroxyl radical scavenger in ozonation systems (  Finally some other experiments were carried out in the presence of iodide ions that rapidly react with the positive holes of the valence band ( The importance of reaction On the other hand, from the equilibrium of SMT in water and taking into account the p Also, UVA radiation was observed to be of relative importance for removing SMT ( Equation From The free radical rate contribution of ozone–hydrogen peroxide reaction is mainly due to the hydrogen peroxide formed during the first minutes. Notice that hydrogen peroxide is also formed from ozone photolysis (reaction On the other hand, the rate contribution of photocatalytic processes is mainly due to two pathways: reactions The photocatalytic ozonation process is then the contribution of four possible ways (direct ozonation, direct radiation, free radical oxidation and photocatalytic oxidation processes). Checking the contribution of these ways to SMT removal is a complicated task, especially when the kinetic regime of ozone reactions is fast or moderate ( According to the results shown in Regarding TOC removal kinetics, that is, mineralization kinetics, SMT photocatalytic ozonation was shown to be the most efficient oxidising system ( Then, the rate equation of photocatalytic processes for TOC removal should be similar to that of SMT. Although the kinetics of TOC abatement is more complicated due to the data related to many kinetic parameters such as Major conclusions reached in this study are: At the conditions here investigated chemical, photochemical and surface reactions control the photocatalytic ozonation of SMT. Rate constants of the direct reaction between ozone and protonated, non-protonated and anionic SMT species were determined to be 1.71 SMT quantum yield at 313 From the mechanism of reactions proposed, the SMT photocatalytic ozonation rate equation deduced contains contributions of direct ozone reaction, direct photolysis, hydroxyl radical reactions coming from the ozone–hydrogen peroxide reaction and ozonide ion radical formation from ozone–electron reactions and positive hole and adsorbed hydroxyl radical oxidation at the semiconductor surface. However, contribution of direct photolysis is negligible. The kinetic regime of ozonation corresponds to fast reaction while SMT is present in water. From the mechanism proposed, a Langmuir type rate equation was derived to explain the action of positive hole and adsorbed hydroxyl radical oxidation. For TOC removal, main contributions to oxidation are hydroxyl radical and photocatalytic reactions. For TOC removal kinetics in buffered SMT solutions, main inconvenient of photocatalytic ozonation is the presence of hydroxyl radical scavengers: phosphate salts and bicarbonates that accumulate in water as a result of mineralization. These scavengers completely inhibit TOC removal in buffered systems. This work has been supported by the CICYT of Spain and the European Region Development Funds of the European Commission (Project CTQ2006/04745). Mrs. Aguinaco also thanks the Spanish Ministry of Science and Education for a FPU grant.