Introduction
                  Intramedullary (IM) nailing is a well-accepted treatment for distal third tibia fractures in combination with injury to the fibula. However, the indications for operative stabilisation of the fibula remain controversial.
               
                  Methods
                  The authors performed a retrospective review on a consecutive series of patients who underwent intramedullary nailing of a non-comminuted distal third tibia fracture with or without fibular fixation at a Level I urban trauma centre. A review of surgical records identified 120 patients who initially were included in this study, while a total of 98 patients who met the inclusion criteria were included in the final analysis.
               
                  Results
                  Our results found no difference in the mean value of coronal and sagittal plane alignment in both the immediate post-operative and follow-up time periods. We also saw no statistically significant difference when comparing malalignment between patients treated with or without fibula fixation. There were no deep infections between the two groups. No significant differences were seen between the fibular fixation group and the non-fixation group. Distal screw removal due to prominence or pain was the most common reason for future surgery in both groups.
               
                  Conclusion
                  These findings suggest that the addition of fibular fixation does not affect whether or not alignment is maintained in either the immediate post-operative or short-term follow-up period.Several recent studies have attempted to answer whether or not fibular fixation is required for non-comminuted distal third tibia fractures. To date, no consensus or clinical guidelines for indications have been developed for intramedullary (IM) nailing of distal tibia fractures with associated fibular fracture. Currently, there is a wide assortment of accepted treatment options for this injury, including IM nailing alone, plating of the tibia alone, and the addition of operative stabilisation of the fibula with either tibial nailing or plating Recent literature has concluded that fibular fixation appears to improve fracture reduction at 12 weeks and maintain better overall axial alignment Intramedullary (IM) nailing of distal third tibia fractures has been a well-documented technique for reliable short and long-term clinical outcomes This study was performed as a retrospective review on a consecutive series of patients who underwent IM nailing of distal one-third tibia fractures with or without fibula fixation at a single Level 1 urban trauma centre. All surgeries were performed by one of seven orthopaedic trauma fellowship-trained surgeons. Institutional review board approval was obtained prior to initiating the study. A review of our surgical records, using surgeon logs and procedural codes, identified 142 patients that had sustained a distal one-third tibia fracture treated with IM nailing with or without fibula fixation between July 2008 and November 2011. Implant selection and basis for fibula fixation were at the discretion of the surgeon and were non-randomised. After meeting the inclusion and exclusion criteria listed below, we had a total of 98 patients for inclusion in this study. Patients were included in the study if they had: (1) an acute fracture of the distal 1/3 tibia and an associated fibula fracture, (2) tibia treated with IM nail, with or without fibula fixation, (3) an age of 18 years or older, and (4) sufficient follow-up to confirm fracture union. Patients were excluded from the study if they had: (1) an age of less than 18 years old, (2) a fracture proximal to the distal one-third of the tibia, (3) no fibula fracture, (4) a previous surgery on the same lower leg, and (5) insufficient postoperative follow-up to confirm fracture union. Chart review was initiated and a database was created recording multiple variables for each patient including age, sex, involved side, mechanism of injury, medical comorbidities, tobacco use, whether the fracture was open or closed, level of fibula fracture in relationship to the tibia fracture, and any associated orthopaedic injuries. The time from initial injury to operative management was documented as well as intraoperative data including the type of IM implant, size of nail, distal interlocking screws, estimated blood loss, operative time, and perioperative complications. All radiographs were reviewed and fractures classified using the OTA fracture classification system by two of the authors not involved with the initial care of the patients. Fracture union was defined by the radiographic evidence of healing on at least three cortices using the AP and lateral radiographs. A nonunion was defined by the absence of radiographic progression around the six-month postoperative period. Any disagreement between the two authors regarding the aforementioned variables was settled by the senior author (BCT). After data collection, stats were analysed with means, ranges and confidence intervals calculated for continuous variables and compared using Student's A total of 142 patients underwent IM nailing of distal tibia fractures with or without fibular fixation between July 2008 and November 2011. Forty-four patients were excluded from the study, most due to insufficient radiographic follow-up. Of the remaining 98 patients that were included in this data set, 15 were in the fibular treatment group and 83 in the non-fibular fixation group ( No significant differences were found between the treatments regarding age, sex, diabetes, or smoking status ( No significant differences were found regarding use of blocking screws, number or orientation of distal interlocking screws, estimated blood loss, and operating room time ( When looking at fracture alignment between our two groups, there was little difference in the mean value of coronal and sagittal plane alignment in both the immediate post-operative and follow-up time periods. The follow-up sagittal alignment did show a statistically significant difference in the sagittal plane ( Comparing malalignment between our two groups, there were no significant differences. At the immediate post-operative radiographs, 28/83 without fibular fixation were >5 degrees of coronal malalignment, compared to 6/15 in the fixation group ( There were two tibial nonunions (13.3%) in the fibular fixation group and 11 (13.3%) in the non-fibular fixation group; this was not significant ( Our study examined the necessity of fibula fracture fixation to help prevent ankle malalignment after IM nailing of distal tibia fractures. We looked at post-operative alignment at two points: immediately after surgery and at the latest time in follow-up when the tibia had radiographically united (minimum 4 months, average 11.7 months). This study modelled several previous studies, most notably Egol et al. in 2006 Morin et al. and Kumar et al. performed cadaveric studies showing that axial and rotational control of these fractures was improved with fibular plating, respectively It is this view that may lead many to believe that fibular fixation is essential to a stable construct when performing IM nailing of distal tibia fractures. However, to date this has not been definitively proven in the literature. Our study shows no definitive immediate or long-term benefit from fixation of the fibula, and the negatives of the addition of implant cost and increased operative time (average 21 There are several hypotheses for the decreased necessity of fibular fixation. One reason may be due to current advances in tibial nail design, while another is the added stability from increased numbers of locking screws in the proximal and distal portions of the nail As with any retrospective analysis, several inherent biases are present. A potentially important subset of patients were excluded from the study due to lack of long-term follow-up, and although it is possible that the inclusion of these patients would alter the results, no significant changes were noted in alignment between study groups on the radiographs obtained at the longest follow-up available for each patient excluded from the study. The lack of randomisation may lead to a selection bias by the surgeons as well, but the large proportion of patients treated without fibular plating would indicate that the surgeons do not typically utilise fibular fixation; this was discovered during final review of the data, with the vast majority of fibular plating being performed by only two of the surgeons. Distal third tibia fractures continue to be a subject of much debate, particularly concerning when fixation of the fibula is necessary. To the authors’ knowledge, this study is the most recent and largest study to date trying to answer this question. In contrast to past literature, we found no evidence of a real benefit from fibular fixation. It is our belief that this change from previous studies is largely due to changes in nail design, the addition of more proximal and distal locking screws, and increasing use of blocking screws. However, earlier studies, as well as this one, have been retrospective in nature. Future prospective studies aimed at comparing these same two groups may be beneficial. Of note, no outside funding was utilised in the development or execution of the above research or the creation of the manuscript. None.