Underground mining becomes more efficient due to the technological advancements of drilling and blasting methods and the developing of highly productive mining methods that facilitate easier access to ore. In the perspective of maximizing productivity in underground mining by drilling and blasting methods, overbreak control is an essential component. The causing factors of overbreak can simply divided as blasting and geological parameters and all of the factors are nonlinearly correlated. In this paper, the blasting design of the tunnel was fixed as the standard blasting pattern and the research focus on effects of geological parameters to the overbreak phenomenon. 49 sets of rock mass rating (RMR) and overbreak data were applied to linear and nonlinear multiple regression analysis (LMRA and NMRA) and artificial neural network (ANN) to predict overbreak as input and output parameters, respectively. The performance of LMRA, NMRA, and optimized ANN models was evaluated by comparing coefficient correlations (R
                     2) and their values are 0.694, 0.704 and 0.945, respectively, which means that the relatively high level of accuracy of the optimized ANN in comparison with LMRA and NMRA. The developed optimum overbreak predicting ANN model is suitable for establishing an overbreak warning and preventing system and it will utilize as a foundation reference for a practical drift blasting reconciliation at mines for operation improvements.In underground mining, overbreak has long been recognized as the principal cause of hazards and deterioration costs in mine management and as such numerous related research projects have been conducted. Many research papers have been devoted to clarifying the overbreak phenomenon, but they are still unable to explain the exact occurrence process. According to former research, factors causing overbreak can be classified into two groups. Different terminology has been used by different researchers, but geological and blasting factors were the principal groups influencing overbreak ( Blasting parameters are changeable factors. Excavation conditions affect the likelihood of overbreak and these influencing parameters are highly correlated with each other. Some particular overbreak occurrences can be accounted for certain major influencing parameters, but it cannot be generalized without interpreting other influencing factors. In modern underground blasting, techniques are reasonably organized with advanced final wall blasting methods such as, smooth blasting and presplitting. Along with the advanced blasting methods, final wall customized explosives and computer base drill operating systems significantly reduce the possible failures on blasting operations. Geological factors, however, are unchangeable and they have a significant influence on the overbreak phenomenon. In fact, if the rock is not strong enough to support itself, possibly no blasting techniques can stop the occurrence of overbreak. Notwithstanding the significance of overbreak in underground mining and tunneling, it is known as an unpredictable phenomenon. Acknowledging the importance of overbreak phenomenon, it is critical that it should be managed by proper systems. Predicting overbreak is the first step in developing an overbreak management and blasting reconciliation system. Throughout the history of mining and tunneling, there has been only one attempt to predict overbreak. In this paper, the blasting design of a tunnel was fixed as a standard blasting pattern and the study focuses on the effects of geological parameters to the overbreak phenomenon. RMR parameters were collected through 49 blasting sections as geological data and overbreak data were individually investigated. Various methods have been applied in engineering for overbreak prediction. In this study, linear and nonlinear multiple regression analysis (LMRA and NMRA) and artificial neural network (ANN) are used to predict potential overbreak. The geological data sets are put as input parameters and encountered overbreak results are used as output parameters to ANN models and simultaneously to LMRA and NMRA. Consequently, the optimum overbreak predicting model is selected by comparing measured and predicted overbreaks and the correlation coefficient ( Overbreak is a surplus excavated area of rock beyond the theoretical contour in an excavation, and it can occur in any kind of underground excavation method. It is known to be inevitable when drilling and blasting method, and it is affected by the majority of conditions of excavation. Although excavation by drilling and blasting is known to be an inexpensive method, it becomes exorbitant when safety of structures is endangered. Overbreak of rock beyond the designed periphery of a tunnel is one major factor that puts excavated spaces at risk and significantly affects operational and management efficiency. Overbreak jeopardizes both workers and equipment in the underground excavations and increases dilution of the ore in mine operations. In addition, it adversely affects mine management by creating unproductive works such as dilution, requirements for additional supports and their removal, all of which adds to production costs. For example, Overbreak is known as an unavoidable phenomenon, and the causing factors for overbreak have significant mutual correlation. As mentioned earlier, the causing factors of overbreak can split into two categories – blasting and geological parameters. As blasting parameters are able to be modified, overbreak can be managed by varying these parameters. The components of blasting parameters include blasting geometry, subdrilling, guide holes, firing sequences, cut design, blasting hole deviation, explosive characteristics, charge concentrations, coupling ratio, powder factors, blast-induced shock wave and energy levels, etc. All blasting parameters affect overbreak in complex mutual correlation within just a few milliseconds. Actually, to obtain a smooth fracture plane without any wall damage, proper blasting design and accurate drilling should take precedence and influence the selection of other blasting parameters. With these large influences on overbreak and the flexibility to manipulate blasting parameters, many research projects have been undertaken to understand the management of overbreak and to unveil the influences of blasting parameters on the overbreak phenomenon. For example, Geological parameters are fixed factors and most of them, such as the strength of rock mass, discontinuous characteristics, water conditions, stress conditions, and the topography of the surrounding area, have significant influence on the overbreak phenomenon. Many research projects have been conducted to understand the relationship between geological factors and overbreak. For instance, Among the geological factors, the orientation of discontinuity is one of the major factors influencing overbreak phenomenon. Although the perpendicular orientation of discontinuity strikes against tunnel axis has been considered to have advantageous drivage conditions than parallel, it still has significant influences to overbreak phenomenon. Over the past 60  Recently, In 2010, data were collected at Bigye tunnel, which is located in the Gumi city, South Korea. The tunnel was constructed as part of the local road improvements plan and is 12.08 The general blueprints of tunnel supporting types and blasting designs were subdivided into six patterns based on the RMR rates. Powder factors of each pattern varied from 0.723 As input data for the overbreak predicting models, RMR criteria, such as unconfined strength of rock ( MRA and multiple layer perceptron (MLP) ANNs were applied to find an overbreak predicting model using the collected data sets. MRA is a statistical analysis method for interpreting the variance of dependent variable by using given independent variables and it has been widely used for prediction and forecasting. ANN is a branch of artificial intelligence (AI). ANN does an impression of the way which a human brain works in processes such as studying, memorizing, and reasoning and one of the fascinating abilities of ANN is a prediction by performing massive parallel computations. In order to find the overbreak predicting model, MRA was employed by using collected RMR criteria and overbreak data sets as independent and dependent variable, respectively. The purpose of MRA is to identify RMR criteria that explain variations in the overbreak. In this paper, both LMRA and NMRA were adopted and RMR criteria and overbreak results were set as independent and dependent variables, respectively. Pearson’s correlation values of RMR, RQD, and When multiple regression analysis is performed, the multicollinearity problem has to be controlled. It occurs when the correlation among the independent variables is strong. Hence, the standard errors of the coefficients are increasing, which leads to an erroneous conclusion of multiple regression analysis. Variance Inflation Factor (VIF) and Tolerance are commonly used to verify the multicollinearity problem. VIF measures how much the variance of the estimated coefficients increases over the case of no correlation among the independent variables. If two independent variables are not correlated, then all the VIFs will be equal to 1. Generally, if the value of VIF is over five, the model demonstrates strong multicollinearity problem. Tolerance is an inverse number of VIF, and if the tolerance value is less than 0.1, it is acknowledged that there is multicollinearity problem associated with the model. The simple solution of the multicollinearity problem is the elimination of the suspicious variable. LMRA is employed to generate a mathematical relationship that describes variations on the overbreak against RMR criteria. Before processing LMRA, the tolerance of where OB is the overbreak expressed in centimeter and The correlation coefficient ( Many problems in engineering are heavily complex when large numbers of variables are present. Regarding LMRA, it is limited in its ability to derive a proper mathematical relationship. As earlier mentioned, the independent and dependent variables have nonlinear relationship so NMRA was applied to improve the overbreak prediction. Before employing NMRA, the optimum nonlinear model of each independent variable against dependent variable was found and results are tabulated in Comparisons between measured and predicted overbreak by LMRA and NMRA are illustrated in ANN is one of AI methods and it is computation inference model simply mimicked by biological structure of the human brain. ANN has the ability to generalize a solution from the pattern presented to it during training. Once ANN is trained with sufficient numbers of sample data sets, a new input of relatively similar pattern, predictions can be done on the basis of the previous learning. ANN consists of group of neuron layers: input, hidden, and output. The artificial neuron, simply called neuron, is a simple processing element and it is complicatedly interconnected with each other. In a similar way with a biological brain, neuron receives signals from other neurons which can be intensified and weakened by proper activation functions and the connection weights modulate input signals as synapsis does in brain. Limited learning ability of ANN can achieve by adjusting the weights with chosen learning algorithm. The learning situation of ANN can be classified with unsupervised and supervised learning, and this research will focus on the back propagation algorithm which is one of the powerful supervised learning algorithms. The back propagation algorithm is firstly introduced by The perceptron learning algorithm is based on McCulloch and Pitts’s neuron model, and it is a single layer neural network that consists of adjustable synapse weights and a hard limit training function. For example, there is a set of learning samples consisting of input vectors ( where where Δ The back propagation learning algorithm with multilayer ANN similarly processes with perceptron and Unlikely from the perceptron, normally the sigmoid function is adopted as a transfer function and outputs of hidden layer are used as an updated input for the next layer. Through hidden layers, input data are processed until it reaches to the output layer which is named as the forward pass. In output layer, the output is compared with the target, measured value, and the error differences are processed back through the network by updating all weights of connections and biases of individual neurons, the backward pass. Those forward and backward pass processes are repeated until the network error converges to an initially setting minimum error. Historically, mining industry has close connection with the AI. In 1979, a knowledge base expert system, one of offshoot techniques of AI, earned great reputation with developing a computer-based consultation system for mineral exploration, PROSPECTOR, and it had been successfully identified the location of a molybdenum deposit in Washington State, US ( In recent years, the ANN model is more frequently used for developing high tech computer technologies and its abilities have developed significantly. Many mining researchers have been applying ANN to the various problems that cannot solved with fundamental statistical analyses such as predicting fragmentations, back breaks, ground vibrations, strength of mineral admixture concretes, fly rocks, effectiveness of blast wall barriers, and even optimizing blasting parameters in certain condition; however, none of researches have not been done on predicting overbreak with ANN. The prediction ability of ANN has been testified by comparing results with other statistical methods and it acknowledged as superior model than any other prediction method. The ANN related with mining literatures are list as When applying ANN, defining optimum number of hidden layers, the number of neurons in layers and preventing over-fitting are crucial confronting problems. The performance of ANN is widely affected by functional relations between input and output parameters, the architecture of model, and the learning algorithm. Few empirical formulas were suggested by researchers, such as Neural Networks version No. 4.3.8 of Alspace ( In order to optimize the architecture of ANN, a heuristic approach is used to choose appropriate number of neurons in two hidden layers and the optimum architecture of the overbreak predicting ANN model was decided at 6–13–5–1 and the model reached MSE value of 0.1 at 17,690 iterations. Comparison results between measured and predicted overbreak by the optimum ANN model are illustrated in The purpose of this study is to develop an optimum overbreak predicting model based on provided geological data. Multiple regression analysis models and the multiple layers ANN models were used to find the best description model for predicting overbreak. The performance of LMRA, NMRA, and the optimized ANN model was evaluated by comparing their correlation coefficients ( The causing factors of overbreak are complex and mutually correlated, so it is important to consider all parameters together. Some of parameters, however, such as Considering that the RMR survey is a fundamental routine task as part of the face mapping process before blasting, the optimized ANN model can practically be used as a prior warning system for potential overbreak. This allows the experienced blasting engineer to minimize overbreak by altering the base blasting scheme. While the optimized overbreak predicting ANN model cannot cover all of the rock condition, the model can generalize by adopting and retraining with other data sets. The main objective of this study is to build an optimized overbreak predicting model based on various geological data. LMRA and NMRA and multilayer ANNs were applied to find the most accurate model for predicting overbreak. The blasting design of the perimeter area of the tunnel was fixed as standard scheme, and RMR criteria and overbreak data were investigated on each face before and after blasting. The performance of the proposed overbreak predicting models that used different methods – namely LMRA, NMRA, and the optimized ANN – were evaluated by comparing their coefficient correlations ( The optimized overbreak predicting ANN can effectively predict potential overbreak by simply adopting RMR criteria. It can also be used as an overbreak warning and preventing system. Even though the proposed first version of optimized overbreak predicting ANN model would be reliably performed at limited conditions of sedimentary rock area, it can become a generalized model by retraining with additional overbreak and geological data sets.