The aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of the application of compost and biochar as soil amendments and planting of Brassica juncea L. to improve soil carbon fractions in a copper mine soil. A greenhouse experiment was carried out for 3months amending the mine soil with increasing proportions of compost and biochar mixture (20, 40, 80 and 100%) and planting Brassica juncea L. The results showed that the addition of amendments increased soil pH from 2.7 to 8.66, TC from undetectable levels to 149gkg−1, SOC from undetectable levels to 128gkg−1 and TN from undetectable levels to 11.13gkg−1. Organic amending also increased DOC (dissolved organic carbon) from undetectable levels to 25.56gkg−1, FOM (carbon in the free organic matter) from undetectable levels to 38.04gkg−1, FAP (carbon in fulvic acids removed with phosphoric acid) from undetectable levels to 15.57gkg−1, as well as increased the humification ratio, the humification index, the polymerisation rate and the organic carbon in the humified fractions (humic acids, fulvic acids and humin). Soils amended and vegetated with Brassica juncea showed lower values for FOM and FAP and higher values for humification ratio and polymerisation rate than the amended not-vegetated soils. Therefore, the combination of compost and biochar as soil amendment can be considered an efficient treatment to improve soil carbon fractions, making it suitable for a field scale application.Mine soils often have unfavourable conditions for plant growth, including a degraded physical structure, extreme pH, and low organic matter and nutrient contents ( Soil organic matter (SOM) can be classified into 4 chemical forms: free organic matter, humin, humic acids (C In the mine in Touro (Galicia, Spain), copper was extracted for 15 Several strategies have been developed to increase SOC in former mine areas. The application of organic amendments is currently one of the most popular strategies due to their low economic cost and high availability ( Several studies have evaluated the effect of organic amendments to recover degraded soils ( The sampling area was located at the setting pond from a depleted copper mine located in Touro (Galicia, north-west Spain) (Lat/Lon (Datum ETRS89): 8°20′12.06″W 42°52′46.18″N). Copper was extracted for 15 The mine soil used for this study (S) was collected in the settling pond of this depleted copper mine ( The greenhouse experiment was carried out in pots with the settling pond soil amended with the previously described mixture of compost and biochar and vegetated with Three seedlings of The soil samples collected from the field (mine soil) and from the pots were air dried, passed through a 2 Soil reaction was determined with a pH electrode in 1:2.5 water or KCl to soil extracts ( Pseudototal concentrations of Cu, Ni, Pb and Zn were extracted with The different chemical organic matter fractions were separated following the method described in All of the analytical determinations were performed in triplicate. The data obtained were statistically treated using the programme SPSS version 19.0 for Windows. Analysis of variance (ANOVA) and test of homogeneity of variance were carried out. In case of homogeneity, a post-hoc least significant difference (LSD) test was carried out. If there was no homogeneity, Dunnett's T3 test was performed. Correlated bivariate analyses and a principal component analysis (PCA) were also carried out. The untreated copper mine soil used in this study had an extremely acid pH and undetectable concentrations of soil total carbon and nitrogen ( The chemical characteristics of the mine soil changed significantly after being amended with compost and biochar and vegetated with The SOC concentrations were undetectable in the two control soils and significantly increased with the addition of organic amendment ( The The soils amended with compost and biochar showed significantly higher pH values than the untreated soils ( Additional benefits of the application of compost and biochar mixture to the mine soil were observed on the growth of The five fractions of carbon analysed were also selected to perform a PCA ( The results obtained in this study confirmed that the combined use of compost and biochar as soil amendment was highly useful to improve SOC fractions in a copper mine soil. Moreover, data showed that the addition of compost and biochar to the mine soil increased soil pH, SOC, IC, TN, DOC, FOM, FAP, the humification ratio, the humification index, the polymerisation rate and the carbon in the humified fractions (humic acids The authors would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their comments, which helped to improve the quality of this article.