Despite high pressure grinding rolls (HPGR) have been widely used in mining industry during the past decades, there are limited systematic quantifications on the properties of the particles after comminution. Furthermore, the influence of micro-cracks on gold ore leaching has not been further investigated.
                  Gold ore samples were subjected to two different open-circuit comminutions: conventional jaw crusher and HPGR. Particle size distribution was measured and the fractal dimension based on fractal theory was obtained. Combined with scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and stereomicroscopy, particle spherical indices and micro-crack properties were further explored. The results show that HPGR produced higher proportion of fines and less uniformity in comparison with the jaw crusher, reflected by the larger fractal dimension. There was a marked increase in spherical indices from HPGR in 9.5–4.0mm size fraction. Through the quasi-hydrostatic pressure, more micro-cracks were generated in the HPGR products, resulting in enhanced infiltration of leaching reagent and gold recovery in full-slime and heap cyanide leaching. This paper highlights the importance of the effective micro-crack formation and proposes a leaching kinetic model for further prediction of leaching cycle.Declining head grade and finer dissemination in gold ores have increasingly caused difficulties in mineral processing, attaching more and more importance to fine grinding or ultra-fine grinding. Increased findings of refractory gold ores have significantly increased the comminution costs. The “More crushing and less grinding” concept had been proposed to improve the processing capability of comminution circuits and further reduce plant energy consumption. It is considered to be the most effective way in terms of reducing costs and increasing capacity for the current mining industry. HPGR has been recognized as an alternative to the conventional tertiary and quaternary crusher and has wide industrial applications ( HPGR was first introduced into the cement industry in the 1980s. It is based on the principle of inter-particle comminution through the high pressure which results in micro-fracturing of the ore. This equipment offers several potential advantages including energy saving (  The objective of this paper is to explore the differences in product physical properties (particle size, shape and micro-cracks) between jaw crusher and HPGR, with particular focus on the leaching behaviors of different sizes of particles and its application in both full-slime cyanide and heap leaching process. Low grade and non-refractory gold oxide ore samples were taken from a mine in Fujian province in the southeast of China. Gold exists in the form of native metal. The ore sample has a notably high content of limonite (FeO(OH)·H The gold ore sample of 200 Fractal dimension was derived from Eqs. By taking the logarithm on both sides of the Eq. Given the important influence of particle shape on heap leaching behavior, changes in particle shape after comminution using the two different techniques were examined. Products were sieved by mechanical vibrating sieving machine with standard sieves and each size fraction was evenly mixed and divided to prepare sample for analysis. A total of seven particle size fractions (+13.20, 13.20–9.50, 9.50–6.70, 6.70–4.00, 4.00–2.00, 2.00–1.00, 1.00–0.15 The average spherical index was used to describe the particle shape quantitatively and the calculation formula is shown in Eq. Different minerals have different resistances to external mechanical forces. When the same pressure exerts on the minerals, stress deformation and crack formation usually occurs at grain boundaries due to its lower strength than the crystal interiors ( The 10 In order to assess the sample properties after comminution by two different methods, cyanide leaching was carried out to determine the rate of gold recovery. Three leaching tests were conducted namely full-slime, mini-column and laboratory-column leaching. Sodium cyanide was used as the leaching solution. The recovery of gold leaching 200 800 15 Particle size distributions of the feed and the products of two different comminution methods are shown in The uniformities of the PSD of the products from the two comminution methods are shown in While the single-toggle jaw crusher relies on extrusion and shear force, HPGR takes advantage of quasi hydro-static pressure exerted on the bed of feed particles. There is no difference between the two comminution methods in spherical indices for +9.50 It is clear that the samples from jaw crusher have slightly irregular shapes and sharper edges (  Micrographs from SEM and stereomicroscopy for micro-cracks in different size fractions are shown in A higher percentage of micro-cracks was also observed from the three coarse size fractions (13.20–9.50, 9.50–6.70, 6.70–4.00 Progeny ore particles of +6.70, 6.70–0.15 and -0.15 Higher gold recovery rates were observed for HPGR product of all the three size fractions. In +6.70 The permeation rate of a solution is directly affected by the forms and structures of the micro-crack but not all the micro-cracks can contribute to the heap leaching rate. In fact, the whole process of leaching is enhanced only if the micro-cracks reach the wrapped gold mineral’s surface and maintain direct contact with the mineral. These are effective micro-cracks, as shown in Dissolution of gold minerals can be divided into the following stages: leaching solution comes into contact and reacts with the fully exposed gold grains preferentially, then the partially wrapped or incompletely liberated grains, lastly particles with tiny effective micro-cracks. A kinetic model is established to study the effect of particle micro-crack characteristics from two different comminution methods on heap leaching. This kinetic model is based on the following assumptions: (a) the gold grains are spherical and have the same sphere center with the whole particle, (b) cracks on the particle surface are all effective micro-cracks, (c) the micro-crack forms approximately a straight line in the longitudinal direction and has a constant crack width, (d) gold grain size is directly proportional to the particle size of gold ore. The top and lateral sectional views are shown in According to the gold cyanide leaching regularity, the equation that was obtained to describe the dissolution rate of gold cyanide leaching is shown below (Eq.  Integration of the above expression gives rise to Eq. Combining Eq. As shown in Eq. In During the column leaching tests, relationship between the gold leaching recovery and the leaching time was obtained. A Graphical analysis was presented based on equation In order to verify the calculated column leaching times from the model, the time of the above tests was prolonged. The experimental times were shown in As shown in Investigation of particle breakage properties of the gold ore sample treated with the HPGR and jaw crusher was conducted. The investigation reveals that the HPGR comminution method generated more suitable sample properties in the gold ore leaching, with a higher proportion of fines, more regular particle shape and richer micro-cracks in comparison with the jaw crusher. Comparison of leaching tests between the HPGR and the jaw crusher products with the identical size fraction indicates that there is considerable increase for gold leaching effect based on the traditional comminution method change. The larger number of micro-cracks leads to a higher generation probability of effective micro-cracks. The heap leaching tests data were consistent with the trend of kinetic model which confirms the influence of micro-crack properties such as length and width on gold heap leaching. The outcomes of our paper are in agreement with the research work by The authors would like to thank Zijin Design and Research Institute of Mining and Metallurgy for their experimental support. We also appreciate the financial help from the