This paper concerns the local strong solution to the compressible Navier-Stokes-Smoluchowski equations with vacuum as far field density on the whole space 
                        
                           
                              R
                           
                           
                              2
                           
                        
                      without additional Cho-Choe-Kim type compatibility conditions, which provided the initial density and the initial particles density decay not too slow at infinity. In particular, we extend the results of Ding et al. (2016) [13] and Yang (2020) [24] to the 2D case.In this paper, we consider a fluid-particle interaction model called as Navier-Stokes-Smoluchowski equations in The fluid-particle interaction model arises in a lot of industrial procedures such as the analysis of sedimentation phenomenon which finds its applications in biotechnology, medicine, chemical engineering, and mineral processes. Such interaction systems are also used in combustion theory, when modeling diesel engines or rocket propulsors, see When the density of the fluid Throughout this paper, always denote  It is worth noting that no Cho-Choe-Kim type compatibility condition (see  We now make some comments on the key ingredients of the analysis in this paper. Notice that the local well-posedness of strong solutions for dimension three case established by Ding et al. In order to overcome these difficulties stated above, some new ideas and observations are needed. To deal with the difficulty caused by the unbounded domain, following the idea of The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Section As a key technical ingredient for our approach, we need the following weighted (See  (See Finally, the following  Let us first consider the following initial-boundary-value problem For convenience, in this section, we denote Firstly, we have the following local existence of solutions to   Now we devote to the    First, multiplying Moreover, multiplying  1. We always assume that 2. Multiplying   1. Multiplying Eqs. We estimate each term on the right-hand side of First, the Gagliardo-Nirenberg inequality implies that for all Next, noticing that Moreover, we have 2. Multiplying the equation 3. To estimate the last term on the right-hand side of   1. Differentiating 2. Multiplying 3. Multiplying   Notice that following the framework of Lemma 3.4 in  It follows from   Differentiating Let Next prove the uniqueness of the strong solutions. Take two strong solutions Firstly, multiply Secondly, multiplying Denoting The author is supported by the