Alumina powders were granulated in a prototype high shear mixer granulator as primary particles. The produced green granules were then sintered in an electric furnace. The sensitivity of the granule characteristics to the wet granulation parameters and sintering post-processing temperature was studied. The results showed that increasing the liquid binder to solid ratio led to the wide size distribution of granules. Furthermore, increasing the binder concentration could enhance the attrition and bulk compression strength of sintered granules. The strengths of the granules were strongly improved by increasing the sintering temperature due to densification progress and porosity decrease. In general, performing the granulation/sintering process by water (rather than PVA) binder, at the higher levels of the liquid to solid ratio, would improve the bulk compression strength, employing a proper sintering temperature.Granulation is a size enlargement process which is widely used in several processes including; pharmaceutical, chemical, mineral and food industries “The heat treatment step in which the dried, debinded green body is converted to a useful solid with the required microstructure is referred to as sintering” Although there are huge numbers of open-literature investigations on the granulation process via high shear mixing in chemical engineering such as detergents, pharmacy applications, etc., investigation on the granulation and sintering of ceramic alumina powders is more than scarce. This study focuses on granulation process, using a prototype high shear mixer granulator for production of green granules, and on final sintering process. The main objective of the research was to investigate the effect of sintering temperature on breakage strength of sintered alumina granules. However, the effects of binder (poly-vinyl alcohol, PVA) concentration and liquid to solid ratio on the structure and size distribution of green granules were also investigated. It should be noted that in all parts of the text the terms “particles”, “powder” or “primary particles” have been used as starting materials. The product of the granulation process is termed “granules” and granules after drying and before sintering are named “green granules”. At last “sintered granules” is referred to the material obtained after sintering of green granules. High purity α-Al In all tests, 300 The alumina powders were granulated with 68 The obtained granules were dried at room temperature and then sintered at 1400, 1500, and 1600 The size distribution of granules was analyzed using a series of ASTM standard sieves (with mesh numbers of 6, 8, 10, 12, 18, 20, 35, 40, 50 and 100) using a 50 For bulk compression strength tests, 10 For the attrition strength tests, 5 The surface area of granules was determined by means of nitrogen adsorption isotherm at 77 The granulation results showed that increasing the binder concentration led to coarse green granules as shown in The liquid to solid ratio, L/S, played a main role in wet granulation and affected the characteristics of green granules. The final granule size is controlled by competition among the rate control mechanisms of nucleation, consolidation, growth and breakage. The size enlargement process is fulfilled when equilibrium condition is established between growth and breakage. Two factors of binder amount (L/S) and its concentration (viscosity, adhesivity) are crucial in the formation of liquid bonds and their green strength. It is obvious that in the presence of enough binder (proper L/S), higher concentrations of PVA binder lead to more adhesiveness and higher viscosity and therefore formation of stronger bonds. Under the latter situation the growth mechanism prevails over breakage mechanism leading the granulation to the larger granules with less fine primary particles As shown in   Effect of sintering temperature on bulk compression strength of 1 Sintered microstructure and consequently, strength of granules could be affected by other parameters such as binder type. Liquid to solid ratio, L/S, was also considered as an influencing parameter on the properties of final sintered granules. In this regard, the compressing strength tests represented that increasing the liquid to solid ratio, L/S, is producing more strength for the granules sintered at 1400 and 1500   The effects of wet granulation parameters including binder concentration, liquid to solid ratio, as well as sintering post-granulation temperature on microstructure, and size distribution of sintered granules, and their attrition/bulk compression strengths were investigated. The results showed that increasing the binder concentration and liquid to solid ratio led to increase of coarse green granules and enhancement of sintered granule strength. Increasing the sintering temperature reduced the surface area, pore size, and extent of attrition/breakage of the sintered granules during the attrition and bulk compression tests. This study is a step forward in understanding the relation between the granulation and sintering processes for production of high strength granular materials such as catalysts.