The ever-increasing complexity of industrial product recycling calls for more efficient purification processes such as liquid–liquid (L/L) extraction. Because of the high complexity of L/L extraction, optimizing a large-scale extraction is both time and resource consuming and can only be justified to solve high volume and value purification problems. It is therefore difficult to apply to small scale and highly variable waste material influx. We believe using a fully automated and integrated microfluidic approach will enable fast and cost-effective studies of L/L extraction processes. This review presents an overview of L/L metal extraction performed using microfluidics platforms. We first give an overview of the extraction methods. We then review the most relevant characterization methods integrated with such platforms.Hydrometallurgy and more specifically liquid–liquid (L/L) extraction is a cornerstone of many metal extraction and purification processes. Formulations of such industrial processes are complex as they have many components, which interact at both molecular and mesoscale levels. Because of this high degree of complexity combined with the difficulty of studying liquid interfacial molecular phenomena, the field relies heavily on time-consuming and labor-intensive phase diagram determinations. Complex fluid modelling and simulation in ‘Ienaics’ Several requirements must be met to fabricate a useful microfluidic device for L/L extraction: Feed and extraction phases should be kept separate or be separable after extraction for chemical analysis. Sufficient contact area between the two phases, with respect to sample volume, needs to be maintained to keep contact times in a reasonable order of magnitude and hence for extraction to take place. The contact area must be known when full kinetics study is the target. The device needs to function under a large flow rate window to vary contact time, thereby investigating reaction kinetics. Devices must be made of materials resistant to all chemicals used. Materials should not intervene with extraction and complex fluids. Finally, the devices must be leak tight to a level well under the minimal flow rate. Several device methodologies were developed since the early publications [ Devices with guide structures are based on the principle of interfacial tension. Organic and aqueous liquids used in solvent extraction inherently have an interfacial tension, γ, keeping them from mixing. Nevertheless, in contact, they would at least form an emulsion. Hence, geometric barriers following Laplace pressure are required to prevent emulsification between aqueous and organic channels. Laplace pressure, ΔP, is connected to the radii R Radii R There lies the crucial point: contact area and thus channel geometry needs to be very thin to maintain the interface. A nice example is given by Priest et al. [ Such devices can now be found commercially and have recently been used for the study of L/L extraction (which used Y–Y geometry glass microchips from Dolomite®[ A further development was reported by Kikutani et al.[ A further approach on geometrically assisted separation is given by Berthier et al.[ Overall, the main disadvantage of separation devices using guide structures is the limited functional window concerning flow rates (and hence kinetic window) and viscosity difference. Firstly, counter-flowing phases are proscribed because immediate interface rupture would be the outcome. Secondly, even when working in coflow regimes, users need to dimension the device and the operating window in function of targeted functioning operating parameters. This can prove a difficult issue becauseviscosity might be changing in unpredictable ways when exploring new systems of complex fluids or unknown phase diagram windows. Indeed, since solvent chemistry implies complex fluid effects, many phases encounter viscosity alteration through molecular aggregation. This alters the required pressure to keep flow rates constant and may thus totally shift hydrodynamic pressure throughout extraction. For these reasons, most extraction systems will require different device approaches. This is particularly true for medium to highly concentrated systems. In addition, to reach fabrication resolution of less than 10 μm, device fabrication requires glass or silicon devices made using lithographic fabrication. This has two consequences: (i) fabrication processes required are more complex and costly than other examples discussed later in this section and (ii) inner channel volume is increasingly small compared with its surface, which can lead to different results from a bulk experiment due to interaction/adsorption of some of the components onto channel walls. This being said, glass devices exhibit excellent chemical properties concerning chemical compatibility with all solvents and most acids, which is a major advantage over polymer-based microfluidic devices. In addition, glass is very unlikely to interact with chemical reactions. Membrane-based L/L extraction microfluidic cartridges can be related to pertraction in macroscopic solvent extraction [ For coflow or counter-flow membrane-based devices, as discussed in the study by Theisen et al. [ When using the device, it is necessary to introduce the aqueous phase before the organic phase to avoid wetting the aqueous side with organic liquid. This wetting, even partial, would build capillary bridges for the organic phase to leak into the aqueous channel. In aadition, to secure the interface within the membrane, a positive overpressure of a few hundred Pa needs to be applied to the aqueous channel. Failure to do so would result in the same leakage of organic liquid into the aqueous channel [ Theisen et al. [ Another membrane-based solvent extraction approach uses supported liquid membranes. This approach consists in soaking the hydrophobic membrane considered earlier with the organic phase used for extraction. In this case, both channels, above and below the membrane, are filled by the aqueous phase: a first phase contains the leachate to be extracted into the organic phase contained within the membrane. The second phase is used for deextracting the extracted species from the solvent into this second aqueous phase. Both aqueous phases must be adjusted in chemical potential so that studied species will be extracted into the organic phase and further be deextracted into the second aqueous phase. With such an approach, Wang et al. [ This approach is very elegant because the organic phase only interacts temporarily to bridge extraction and stripping phases, and hence both steps are performed in one and the same device. However, some systems may coextract water, acid, or other reagents, which might impact on deextraction efficiency. Hence, phase diagrams should be well known before using such a device. Discrete microfluidics is mainly the usage of slug flows or bubble and droplet microfluidics. These approaches are inherently different from the examples discussed previously. The main difference is that the extraction takes place in a single channel using a ‘controlled emulsion’. Flows are therefore compartmentalized in a slug flow, and laminar mixing due to wall friction plays an important role. Flows with a high Péclet number One prominent example in slug-flow devices for lanthanide extraction is demonstrated by Nichols et al.[ The advantages of this elegant approach are (i) the very well-known exchange surface area that can simply be calculated from droplet geometry and (ii) the very large range of flow that can be addressed, reported to be two orders of magnitude wide (from 1 to 100 μL/min). Its main disadvantage is the complexity of the setup and of its fine tuning to separate both phases as realized here on chip, once extraction is performed. In a further approach, Wang et al. [ For all techniques using discrete microfluidics, an issue is that it is necessary to separate aqueous and organic droplets after extraction. This stops the process of extraction and contributes to proper on-chip or post-experimental analysis. One way of doing this, which was mentioned earlier in the study by Nichols et al.[ A different approach is to lead the mixed flow through a separator device which is composed of two channels sandwiching a hydrophobic membrane [ In an ideal instrumented microextraction study, one would need to vary all parameters in a controlled and automatic manner: temperature, concentrations, flow rate, and mixing ratio. With modern tools, most instruments can be computer controlled. Thus, simple programs can run a microextraction experiment. Yet, it is very challenging to accurately tune and assess the variation of these parameters. For example, the flows can be unstable because of poor injection or pressure drops within the tubing/channels. These challenges can be overcome using precise flow control systems, shorter tubing, geometry optimization, flow sensors, and efficient micromixers [ To develop experimental automation and enable screenings, we also must be able to vary the sampling, for example, if we want to perform a combinatorial study to determine the best extractant. One way is to simply prepare many solutions (one for each extractant) connected with automated valves to dispense the correct samples in sequence. However, this approach requires fastidious preparations and dissolutions of all molecules before the experiment. Ideally, the dissolution should occur within the microsystem. In this case, the biggest obstacle is to achieve consistent concentrations over time. In a recent article, Gökçe et al. [ When carrying out automated L/L extraction, these findings could improve combinatorial screening where several extracting compounds would be tested within the same automated experiment. For characterizing L/L extraction processes, the methods need to yield either quantitative (e.g. concentration) or thermodynamic information (e.g. chemical activity). In addition, the techniques must be interfaced and noninvasive. Ideally, it must allow measurements in both the aqueous and organic phase. In this section, we review the characterization methods that could be integrated on-line with a microfluidic L/L extraction experiment. For a more general listing of characterization methods used in microfluidics, beyond hydrometallurgy, the reader can also refer to a recent review by Rizkin et al.[ With modern optics, infrared (IR) technology can be scaled down to microfluidics level. Thus, by using an IR-transparent microfluidic chip, absorption of the species yields concentration. This approach has been widely used to perform in situ imaging of microfluidic flows and was thoroughly reviewed by Perro et al.[ For integration with L/L extraction, we selected some recent innovative approaches. Because quantification is important, we note that IR spectroscopy enables concentration measurements in the organic phase. An example can be found in the work of Chan and Kazarian [ Apart from concentration measurements, the accurate determination of thermodynamic parameters is a major challenge. Another drawback of previous IR approaches is that they do not allow for the measurement of the solvent's chemical activity, which is a key entry for ienaics modelling, as molecular aggregation and solvent interaction translate directly into solvent's activity [ An innovative approach to this problem is to measure the chemical activity of the liquids in the mixture by looking at their vapor phases. Indeed, the chemical activities of the species are related to their vapor pressures (modified Raoult's law [ Similar to IR techniques, Raman spectroscopy is vibrational; therefore, it provides information regarding chemical bonds. Raman spectroscopy has been used heavily in microfluidics because it is practical to implement with existing Raman microscopes. Both quantitative and qualitative information can be retrieved, so is compatible with a microextraction study. However, it is worth reminding that Raman spectroscopy measures only molecules. In L/L extraction, the technique would be ineffective at measuring pure ions being extracted from an aqueous phase. For studying thermodynamic parameters, we note a recent study dealing with the characterization of aqueous–organic interfaces with Raman spectroscopy [ Several reviews have been published on Raman Spectroscopy and microfluidics [ In a recent study, Höhn et al. [ Höhn et al. [ Using facilities such as X-ray laboratories or synchrotron radiation sources might seem paradoxical because the surrounding experimental support outweighs, at first glance, any space gain of the miniaturization of extraction processes. However, the significant advantage in using miniaturization over classical approaches lies in the time gains produced by automated mixing and on-line integration of characterization methods. Small angle X-ray diffraction spectroscopy (SAXS) is particularly popular with microfluidics because it uses a collimated X-ray beam that is compatible with the scale of the channels. It enables precise characterization of nanostructures present in the liquids and can be used both in aqueous and organic phases. In L/L extraction, complex formulations often contain micelles, emulsions, aggregates, and mesophases; therefore, we believe that SAXS is an interesting characterization method to study extraction processes [ It should however be noted that the main limitation of SAXS is that it is not easy to extract elemental information which is important when dealing with L/L extraction. One must indeed be able to determine the extraction efficiency. An interesting strategy would be to combine it with X-ray fluorescence (XRF) to retrieve elemental analysis. Thus, phase aggregation (SAXS analysis) can be combined with values for extraction efficiency (XRF analysis) on a single device. This would require a single X-ray source and two detectors yielding elemental and structural information, respectively. Compared with SAXS, a handful of studies combine XRF and microfluidics. In the view of studying extraction processes, XRF enables the detection of a very broad range of chemical elements. With accurate calibration, XRF can be used for both qualitative and quantitative measurements. In addition, XRF can be selective if multiple elements must be detected simultaneously. Another advantage, especially when compared with inductively coupled plasma, is that measurements can just as be performed in both aqueous and organic phases, although with proper calibrations. In terms of chip design, transparency to X-rays only needs to be achieved on one side of the chip, thus simplifying fabrication processes and costs compared with SAXS. In a recent study, Nagasaka et al. [ Other studies describe more quantitative approaches. Researchers performed XRF on single tubing/capillaries [ In his PhD work, C. Penisson presents preliminary results obtained with a homemade XRF apparatus (Christophe Penisson, PhD thesis, Institut de Chimie Séparative de Marcoule, 2018). This experiment highlights the potential of using XRF as an online characterization tool. We can use both commercial and custom-made chips. The main limitation of the XRF method is the fluorescence signal that inherently decreases with the volume of liquid. This goes against the microfluidics approach as we need smaller volumes for faster response times; therefore, a compromise must be found between liquid volume and limit of detection depending on the applications. In addition, the intrinsic design of the chip must be considered (surface area, thickness, and so on) to minimize scattering and increase the XRF signal. Among other promising methods, there are the end-of-line (EOL) methods. They differ from on-line methods because they destroy the sample to obtain data. Hence, they are usually implemented at the end of the microfluidic line. In addition, there can be only one EOL method within a given microfluidic line, whereas there can be multiple on-line methods (e.g. XRF and Raman). For accurate quantification, inductively coupled plasma systems are very attractive [ Among other optical techniques, UV–visible spectroscopy is widely reported and can measure ion concentration [ Ultimately, researchers integrate different characterization methods in the same microfluidic apparatus [ This review highlights that instrumented microfluidics could soon be a fast and efficient way to study L/L extraction processes with lower environmental impact than classic methods (e.g. Lewis cell). It will require accurate mixing and injection capacities, as well as suitable combinations of various characterization techniques. For instance, for inorganic species, X-ray techniques would be preferred, while IR/Raman spectroscopy will be used for organic species; the use of combined SAXS and XRF will also represent an innovative and fruitful approach for the automated study of L/L extraction of rare-earth elements, metals, and heavy metals. Hence, we therefore anticipate that automatically produced phase diagrams of complex formulations should be published in scientific literature within a couple of years. From an industrial point of view, one will need to study the correlation between results obtained using a microfluidic approach with those obtained in their process plant. Some improvements are still required such as more compatible materials for the microchip (such as glass). Other methods might also get integrated in the future which could prove useful and complementary to those presented here, as for example UV–vis spectroscopy, although its use to measure absolute concentrations will be particularly difficult to perform, especially in the case of mixtures of various elements and variable extractants. A further method would be the use of ultrasounds that could significantly accelerate kinetics or enable new separation methods [ Some of the modules developed in the framework of L/L extraction could also have a significant impact beyond this field as they give access to universal data in kinetics and thermodynamics. The most prominent example is the possibility to measure water or solvent chemical activity [ Regarding the market potential of integrated L/L extraction microfluidic chips, this technology has currently reached Technological Readiness Level Nothing declared. A.M. acknowledges financial support from the NTU Singapore CEA Alliance for Research on the Circular Economy (SCARCE) project, which is supported by the