Attraction between hydrophobic surfaces, known as the hydrophobic force, is critically important for attachment of particles to air bubbles in flotation. However, the origins and models for this attractive force between hydrophobic surfaces have been a source of debate since the first direct measurements of this force in the early 1980s. Using an atomic force microscope (AFM) we studied the attraction between an AFM hydrophobic probe and a flat hydrophobic surface in water, in water–ethanol mixtures, and in water saturated by gases with different solubility. The strong attractive force with long-range jump-in attachment positions decreases with an increase in the ethanol content and disappears in pure ethanol. The size of steps on the force curves depends on the gas solubility. However, the measured forces do not depend on the gas solubility significantly. The influence of surface roughness and heterogeneity appear to be significant. Experimental results indicate the role of surface stabilized submicron-sized bubbles in the hydrophobic attraction. This is in line with recent direct and indirect evidences for the presence of gaseous bubbles at hydrophobic surfaces as well as with the early insights of flotation scientists.In flotation, van der Waals Measurement of hydrophobic attractive force has been possible only during the last two decades. The first direct measurements of the hydrophobic attraction forces between macroscopic surfaces were reported in 1982 It should be noted that all of the above-described measurements were carried out with the Surface Force Apparatus of Israelachvili Since the first direct experimental evidence reported in 1982, there has been no consensus on the explanation of the hydrophobic attractive force despite a number of proposed mechanisms, which include: Entropic origin, arising from configurational rearrangement of the (vicinal) water molecules between the hydrophobic surfaces Separation-induced phase transition (cavitation) Hydrodynamic fluctuating correlation Charge-fluctuation correlation Electrostatic origin Anomalous polarization of vicinal water molecules Bridging submicron bubbles The detailed experiments Surface forces between a spherical particle and a flat surface were measured with a Digital Instruments (Santa Barbara, CA) AFM (Nanoscope II and Nanoscope IIIa) equipped with a silicone ring liquid cell. The AFM colloidal probe technique The surface interaction force is determined by multiplying the cantilever deflection by its spring constant. The cantilever deflection is determined from the voltage signal of the photodiode employing a scaling procedure, which uses the measured linear displacements of both the cantilever and the piezoelectric transducer at (physical) contact. The separation is then determined from the cantilever deflection and the displacement of the piezoelectric transducer. The initial measurements were carried out with a glass sphere (Polysciences) and a glass microscope slide (Assistent, Kühn und Bayer, Nidderau, Germany). Both the particle and surface were made hydrophobic by a silanation process with trimethylchlorosilane in the gas phase. After silanation, both the particle and surface were rinsed with distilled water to remove any residual surfactants and contaminants and gently exposed to a nitrogen stream for drying. The (macroscopic) contact angle measured with a sessile drop apparatus (Krüss, Germany) was about 62°. The contact angle on particles was not measured, but it could be larger than the contact angle of 62° measured with the glass microscope slide due to microscopic heterogeneities and the line tension effect Other measurements in degassed solutions were carried out with a hydrophobic polyethylene (PE) sphere and two different hydrophobic surfaces (PE and silanated silica). The PE particles were obtained using a procedure All the chemicals used were of analytical grade. The water was deionized with a Millipore facility. For the measurements with dissolved gases, water was outgassed by subsequent boiling/freezing under low pressure several times. About 100 ml of degassed water was placed into the gas-washing bottle and the required gas was introduced through a coarse porous glass frit at the bottom at a flow rate of 1 l/min for about half an hour. The gas-saturated water was withdrawn with a syringe and immediately used for AFM measurements. The prepared spherical particles were glued to the AFM cantilever using a small amount of epoxy resin following a procedure described by The particle on the cantilever was initially positioned, under microscope control, roughly a few hundred nanometers above the flat surface using the AFM step motor. The deflection of the cantilever versus the position of the piezoelectric translator was measured following the standard AFM force measurement procedure. The conversion of deflection curves to normalized force versus separation distance plots was carried out employing the AFM Analysis Program from the University of Melbourne, Australia, developed following the known procedure The results of the surface force measurements between silanated glass surfaces in water and in ethanol are shown in It is important to note that in place of the known power dependence derived for the bridging force of submicroscopic gas bubbles The force amplitude, The formation of bridging gas bubbles between hydrophobic surfaces can be observed and monitored by the step(s) in the force curves. Since the bridging gas bubbles cause the strong hydrophobic attractive force, the influence of solubility of gases on the hydrophobic force should be considered. Other results obtained for the attractive force between a PE sphere and a silanated silica plate in the water saturated by nitrogen and helium are shown in The results obtained for the attractive surface force in water–ethanol mixtures as well as water saturated by different gases clearly demonstrate the role of the submicroscopic gas bubbles at hydrophobic solid–liquid interfaces. The importance of the gas bubbles ‘precipitating’ at solid surfaces in enhancing mineral flotation, in particular in vacuum flotation, was well known to flotation chemists In flotation, solid particles generally are in contact with air before contact with water. Air and gases which are trapped at particle surfaces, especially at hydrophobic surfaces, are not easy to be displaced by the surrounding liquid water phase and these gas bubbles are the preexisting sites for the ‘bridging’ of gas bubbles during the particle–bubble interaction. Particle surface geometry and chemistry are important. Surface geometric defects can act as sites where gas can be trapped. Surface asperities can stimulate rupture of the intervening liquid film during the bubble–particle attachment and enhance flotation The measurements of attractive forces between a hydrophobic particle and a hydrophobic surface were carried out in water, in water–ethanol solution, and in water saturated by argon, nitrogen, and helium using the AFM colloidal probe technique. In the case of ethanol added to water, the strong, long-range attractive forces were measured with the presence of steps/discontinuities on the force curves at very large separation distances and decreased with an increase in the ethanol content. The strong, long-range attractive force disappeared in pure ethanol. These steps suggest that the mechanism of the hydrophobic attractive force is due to the bridging of the preexisting submicroscopic gas bubbles. In water saturated by argon, nitrogen, and helium, the appearance of steps on the force curves depends on the gas solubilities and surface roughness and heterogeneities. However, the strength and range of the measured forces do not strongly depend on the gas solubilities. It appears that the nature of the hydrophobic attractive forces is related to surface roughness and chemical heterogeneities, which act as sites where gas can be trapped. AVN gratefully acknowledges the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation for a Research Fellowship awarded in 1994 under which part of this research was carried out, and Hans Joachim Schulze for invaluable assistance. The authors also gratefully acknowledge the Australian Academy of Science, the Australian Research Council, the Department of Energy (DE-FG-03-93ER14315), and the National Science Foundation (INT-0096920 and INT-0111248) for financial support.