The results of this comparative study have shown that in 1 M acid solutions, the differences in reactivity of iron(II) for reduction of oxygen are within about an order of magnitude of each other for the systems studied at 40 °C. This applies to both the uncatalysed and copper(II) catalysed systems. The exception is the chloride system in which the rate can be significantly increased by increasing the chloride concentration. The other main conclusion is that although catalysis by copper(II) ions can be significant there exist conditions (iron(II) and (III) concentrations) for which the effect is not that important.
                  Rate equations for both the uncatalysed and catalysed reactions have been derived that apply equally to all the systems studied. Values for the various rate constants have been obtained by analysis of extensive kinetic data in 1 M acid solutions at 40 °C. A limited electrochemical study has been used to derive values for the equilibrium constant for the reaction involving the iron(III)/iron(II) and copper(II)/copper(I) couples. An attempt has been made to compare relevant constants with previously published data and to derive a mechanism that is consistent with the kinetic results.
                  This study has shown that the use of methanesulfonic acid as an oxidative leaching medium does not offer any advantages and is the least reactive of the systems studied.Atmospheric oxygen is the most abundant and inexpensive oxidant available for the processing of ores and concentrates by both pyro- and hydrometallurgical operations. However, in the case of hydrometallurgy, the poor low temperature reactivity and poor solubility in aqueous solutions has limited the number of applications such as the cyanidation of gold and silver that make direct use of atmospheric oxygen as an oxidant. As a result, redox-mediated systems have been successfully developed to at least partially overcome the poor reactivity and the use of high pressures (albeit with pure oxygen) to increase the solubility. Of the former, the use of the iron(II)/iron(III) couple in acid and copper(I)/copper(II) in alkaline ammoniacal solutions have become the most successful. The kinetics of the reaction between iron(II) and dissolved oxygen ( Readers are referred to the comprehensive review ( In the case of sulfate solutions, it is generally agreed that, except at low iron(II) concentrations and high temperatures, the rate is second-order in iron(II) and first order in dissolved oxygen (  In non-complexing perchlorate solutions ( In strongly complexing (for iron(III)) media under ambient conditions such as phosphate or pyrophosphate ( The rate of the oxidation of iron(II) by dissolved oxygen (DO) was measured using a YSI Model 5301 biological oxygen probe to measure the dissolved oxygen concentration as a function of time. 5 ml of solution of the required composition was placed into a cell which was stirred by a small magnetic bar. The dissolved oxygen probe holder was designed to act like a plunger that fitted the cylindrical glass cell. A small groove machined along the length of the probe allowed air to be expelled as the probe was lowered into the cell. This groove also permitted the insertion of a capillary for gas dispersion and the addition of small volumes of reagents. The cells were immersed in a temperature controlled water bath maintained at 40 °C. Two cells were operated in parallel to provide duplicate measurements for each experiment. The relative dissolved oxygen concentration (proportional to the probe current) was recorded as a function of time using a National Instruments data acquisition system controlled with Labview software. All solutions were made up with analytical grade chemicals (except methanesulfonic acid (MSA) that was Lutropur grade from BASF) and high purity water from a Millipore system. The various iron(II) solutions were made by dissolving high-purity iron powder in the corresponding acids and stored under nitrogen. The copper(II) solutions were prepared from cupric oxide and the corresponding acid while iron(III) solutions were prepared by reaction of stoichiometric amounts of iron(III) sulfate with the corresponding barium salt (prepared from barium hydroxide and the corresponding acid) and separating the precipitated barium sulfate by filtration. Electrochemical measurements were used to determine the formal potentials of the iron(II)/iron(III) and copper(II)/copper(I) couples in the various acids. The experiments were carried out using a thermostatted Metrohm cell at 40 °C with high purity platinum and copper wire electrodes. A silver/silver chloride (3 M/l potassium chloride) reference electrode (0.199 V versus SHE at 40 °C) was used in the cell and the potentials were measured relative to this electrode at 40 °C with a Kiethley high impedance digital voltmeter. In the case of the copper(II)/copper(I) potential, a solution of the relevant copper(II) salt was vigorously stirred under nitrogen in the presence of a copper wire spiral until equilibrium for the reaction In the case of the iron(III)/iron(II) couple, the potentials of a platinum electrode in dearated solutions containing 0.25 M iron(III) and 0.25 M iron(II) in 1 M solutions of the corresponding acid were measured.  The curves show that the rate is significantly faster in sulfate and chloride solutions than in perchlorate and methanesulfonic acid. Possible reasons will be discussed at a later stage. Plots of ln[O The pseudo-first order rate constants (k The values of k for each of the acids as obtained from the slopes of the lines in The effect of the product, iron(III) on the rate was found to be negligible in that successive experiments in the same solution by sparging with air to re-initiate the reaction gave very similar rate constants i.e. accumulation of iron(III) did not affect the rate. This observation also confirms that possible accumulation of peroxide did not affect the rate. A single experiment in which 0.25 M iron(III) was added initially gave a rate constant that was 15% lower than in the absence of added iron(III) i.e. probably within the experimental error given that the ionic strength and sulfate concentration had increased. A single experiment in which 0.25 M Na From published data ( It is considered beyond the scope of this comparative study to include the effects of other variables such as acidity, anion concentrations and temperature on the rates. In the case of chloride, a previous study ( As summarized in the introduction, catalysis of the oxidation of iron(II) by copper(II) ions probably proceeds by the overall mechanism. Thus, one can write, assuming that Note that the subscripts for the rate constants refer to corresponding reaction labels. On the basis of the above, the rate of the catalysed reaction should be first order in iron(II) and copper(II) and should be reduced in the presence of iron(III). Depending on the iron(III) and oxygen concentrations, the following limiting cases are possible. At high iron(III) and low oxygen concentrations, k On the other hand, at high oxygen and low iron(III) concentrations, k Under conditions that the rate of the catalysed reaction is not much greater than that of the uncatalysed reaction, the rate of the latter has to be included in the rate Eq. A limited number of experiments were conducted in sulfate, perchlorate and methansulfonate media to investigate the kinetics of the catalytic reaction. Previous studies ( Experiments under conditions of limiting case (A) above were conducted in aerated solutions of various iron(II), iron(III) and copper(II) concentrations. The iron(II) and iron(III) concentrations were much greater than that of dissolved oxygen to ensure that the reaction was pseudo-first order in oxygen. This value can be corrected for the contribution of the uncatalysed reaction for which k is given in The results of these experiments in which the initial iron(II) concentration was fixed at 0.25 M and the initial iron(III) and copper (II) concentrations varied are summarized in the plot of Eq. The reasonable linearity (with zero intercept) of the plot supports the above analysis of the kinetics and slope of the line is K In oxygenated solutions in the absence of or at low concentrations of added iron(III), the oxygen-time transient was linear during the initial stages and only became approximately exponential towards the end of the reaction. This zero order reaction at high oxygen and low iron(III) concentrations is predicted by the limiting case (B) i.e. rate Eq. Under these conditions, the full rate Eq. Eq. Some 10 experiments with varying initial concentrations of iron(II), iron(III) and copper(II) were conducted to give mean values of k Using the same procedure as described above for sulfate solutions, the results obtained for the corrected pseudo-first order rate constants under limiting conditions (A) in 1 M perchloric acid are shown in The data at high oxygen and low iron(III) concentrations (limiting condition (B)) was analysed as described above for sulfate solutions and the corresponding parameters k In the case of chloride solutions, the results obtained for the corrected pseudo-first order rate constants under limiting condition (A) in 1 M perchloric acid are shown in However, under conditions of high oxygen and low iron(III) concentrations, the limiting condition (B) was not observed in that no zero-order section was observed in the oxygen concentration-time plots and the first-order plots were concave down and approximately linear after about 50% of the oxygen had been consumed as shown in The formal potentials in 1 M solutions of the various acids were determined as described in the experimental section and the results summarized in In the case of the iron(III)/iron(II) couple, the formal potentials decrease as the stability of the iron(III) complexes with the various anions increases with sulfate being the most stable and perchlorate the least complexing. These data suggest that methanesulfonic acid is weakly complexing. For the copper(II)/copper(I) couple, the formal potentials in perchlorate and methanesufonate media are similiar to the standard value suggesting that both copper(II) and copper(I) are very weakly complexed. In the case of sulfate, the greater stability of the copper(II) sulfate ion-pair than that with copper(I) results in a reduced formal potential. The high stability of the copper(I) chloro-complexes and weak copper(II) chloro-complexes results in a significantly higher formal potential in the chloride system. This is reflected in the much higher equilibrium constant for  The constants in this Table are shown as two significant figures only given that the standard deviations are likely to be similar to that of 50% of the mean as obtained in the experiments for the catalysed sulfate system as described in Note that the rate constant k It is useful to compare the reactivity of the various systems in terms of the rates of oxidation of iron(II) under both uncatalysed and catalysed conditions. Thus, under uncatalysed conditions at 40 °C and 1 atm pressure of oxygen, As a result of the fact that the rate is second-order in iron(II), the half-life of iron(II) increases with decreasing concentration, and, even in sulfuric acid, is about 800 h at a concentration of 0.01 M (0.6 g/L). Under these conditions of 1 M acid solution, it is apparent that the rate is fastest in sulfuric acid being about 4 times faster than the slowest medium of perchloric acid. While the rates are reasonable at high iron(II) concentrations, oxidation of iron(II) from dilute solutions is very slow. In the case of chloride solutions, the rate increases rapidly with increasing chloride concentration with the rate in 4 M chloride being some five times that in 1 M chloride ( The rate equation for the catalysed reaction is more complex and integration of Eq. Using the constants in These data show that, unlike the uncatalysed reaction, the rate decreases with increasing iron(II) concentration due primarily to the inverse dependence on the accumulating iron(III) concentration. The rate also increases with increasing copper(II) concentration as expected. At low iron(II) concentrations, the rate is fastest in chloride solutions but a sulfate medium is best at high iron(II) concentrations. The data for sulfuric acid is also plotted in These data illustrate the important point that the catalysed reaction is, in fact, slower than the uncatalysed reaction at high iron(II) concentrations of 1 M. However, at low iron(II) concentrations, this observation is reversed with the catalysed reaction being considerably faster even at relatively low copper(II) concentrations. Again, in the case of chloride, the rate is a strong function of the chloride concentration being about ten times faster in 3 M chloride than in 1 M chloride ( The thermodynamics of the iron(III)/iron(II)/oxygen/peroxide system are relevant in any discussion of the mechanisms and rate-determining steps involved in the auto-oxidation of iron(II). Limited scale Eh/pH lines of the calculated potentials ( As the oxidation of iron(II) involves a one-electron processes, it is likely that reduction of oxygen will occur in a number of single electron steps. This follows from the theory for electron transfer that suggests that complimentary reactions involving single-electron steps are generally more rapid than those involving multiple electron transfers in the rate-determining step. The successive single electron transfer reactions can be summarized as follows (note that the numbering system for the equations has been changed from above in the interests of simplicity and also that copper(I) can be substituted for iron(II) and copper(II) for iron(III) in these equations). Thus, although the overall equilibrium involved in the oxidation of iron(II) by dissolved oxygen is very favourable (potential for the O Assuming that Both of these mechanisms result in a rate equation of the form observed (Eq. It is interesting to note that substitution of copper(II) for iron(III) and copper(I) for iron(II) in reactions (1.1 to As mentioned in the introduction, the rate of iron(II) oxidation is first-order in iron(II) in strongly complexing media such as phosphate, fluoride and chloride (in concentrated hydrochloric acid). It is possible in these cases, that the more favourable thermodynamics of the iron(III)/iron(II) system due to complexation of iron(III) shifts the line for this couple in Two possible applications for iron-mediated oxidative dissolution of sulfide or oxide minerals could be considered. In the first, the oxidation is conducted under heap leaching conditions at ambient temperatures and pressures. The half-lives shown in In an alternative case involving tank leaching of mineral concentrates, the temperature can be increased to 80-90 °C (or even higher under pressure leaching conditions), the iron(II) concentrations increased and even oxygen used as a reagent instead of air. Under these conditions the rate of re-oxidation of iron(II) becomes sufficient to complete oxidative leaching of finely ground minerals in reasonable times in the sulfate or chloride systems. Catalysis by copper ions could enhance the rates although the effect of temperature has not been investigated. The results of this comparative study have shown that in 1 M acid solutions, the differences in reactivity of iron(II) for reduction of oxygen are within about an order of magnitude of each other for the systems studied. This applies to both the catalysed and uncatalysed systems. The exception is the chloride system in which the rate can be significantly increased by increasing the chloride concentration. The other main conclusion is that although catalysis by copper(II) ions can be significant there exist conditions (iron(II) and (III) concentrations) for which the effect is not that important. Rate equations for both the uncatalysed and catalysed reactions have been derived that apply equally to all the systems studied. Values for the various rate constants have been obtained by analysis of extensive kinetic data in 1 M acid solutions at 40 °C. A limited electrochemical study has been used to derive values for the equilibrium constant for the reaction involving the iron(III)/iron(II) and copper(II)/copper(I) couples that is relevant to the catalysed reaction. An attempt has been made to compare relevant constants with previously published data and to derive a mechanism that is consistent with the kinetic results. This study has shown that the use of methanesulfonic acid as a leaching medium does not offer any advantages for the oxidation of iron(II) and, in fact, as Despite very favourable thermodynamics for its use as on oxidant in hydrometallurgical processes such as oxidative leaching, kinetic restrictions have and will continue to limit the direct use of oxygen or air. However, the use of redox mediated systems will continue to provide the best means for the utilization of air/oxygen in hydrometallurgical processes. Sole author. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.