This paper explores the role of expertise, the nature of criticality, and their relationship to securitisation as mineral raw materials are classified. It works with the construction of risk along the liberal logic of security to explore how “key materials” are turned into “critical materials” in the bureaucratic practice of classification: Experts construct material criticality in assessments as they allot information on the materials to the parameters of the assessment framework. In so doing, they ascribe a new set of connotations to the materials, namely supply risk, and their importance to clean energy, legitimizing a criticality discourse.
                  Specifically, the paper introduces a typology delineating the inferences made by the experts from their produced recommendations in the classification of rare earth element criticality. The paper argues that the classification is a specific process of constructing risk. It proposes that the expert bureaucratic practice of classification legitimizes (i) the valorisation that was made in the drafting of the assessment framework for the classification, and (ii) political operationalization when enacted that might have (non-)distributive implications for the allocation of public budget spending.Mineral raw materials are typically seen as essential components of all national economies ( The criticality discourse was revived in the 1970s and 1980s, and most recently by the Little is known about the role of the experts in these criticality assessments, their methods and impact on the outcome of the assessments. They work for institutions that serve the European Union [EU] and the United States [US] such as the European Commission [EC], or the US Department of Energy [US DoE]. Their assessments concern a dozen materials, and their significance for developing low-carbon, clean energy technologies such as in the EC-Joint Research Council [JRC] (2011) Report on Critical Metals in Strategic Technologies and the US Department of Energy [DoE] (2011) Critical Materials Strategy Report. Rare earth elements (REEs) have been assessed as critical in both of these reports. The REEs count 15 elements of the lanthanides series in the periodic table, and scandium and yttrium ( Resource nationalism observed in China that arguably serves to advance value-added industrial development, is exacerbated by domestic plans of REE industry consolidation, and changes in export policies which restrict REE-flows ( Experts play a particular role in this criticality discourse: By assessing minerals through allotting information to the parameters of supply risk and importance to clean energy in a framework that has been designed for the assessment of mineral criticality, they legitimize these, and construct criticality. In so doing, they translate a ‘key material’ into a ‘critical material’ by means of classification according to these parameters. They experts also cross the science-policy boundary, using their authority and knowledge, and engaging politically. Expert authority is crucial in this process, as it functions as legitimation (i) of the parameters of the assessment framework which valorises select aspects (supply risk and importance to clean energy), and (ii) of the recommendations on approaches to mitigating the supply risk, the principal objective of the assessments ( This paper is situated in political and resource geography through its focus on contributing to the discourse that   The paper is structured into five sections: The next section describes the theoretical framework. In section three the methodology and data are described. The analysis is presented in section four, jointly with the recommendations put forward in the criticality assessment, and the typology of inferences that I derive from it. The paper concludes with a discussion of the meaning of constructing a mineral as critical in section five. In the following subsections, I first describe the origins of the mineral criticality discourse, linking energy (supply) security with mineral criticality, and discussing how risk (of a disruption of supply) bridges these separate but intertwined discourses. The primary concern of energy security rests with hydrocarbons (i.e. oil), in contrast to the emphasis of the criticality discourse on non-energy minerals. This backdrop serves as foundation when I turn to the theoretical discussion of the expert role in securitizing in Section The literature on supply risk which originated in the late 1930s was augmented during the oil and cobalt crisis in the 1970s, and constitutes the backbone of the current criticality discourses. The 1973 Arab oil embargo triggered the establishment of an energy security system against the disruption of oil supply, historically tying energy security to oil supply.   The concerns that define energy security align with those that underpin mineral criticality. The term ‘criticality’, thus, signifies ‘importance’ or ‘risk’, as illustrated on the reasons used for classifying some minerals to be of higher criticality than others. These reasons include the technological demand for the minerals, from which the higher importance of some minerals and their availability is deduced. Put differently, the risk of not being able to access sufficient volumes in a timely manner at reasonable prices might put the production of particular technologies in certain geographical areas that without local mineral access and processing facilities at risk ( Importantly, in much the same way a resource is constructed through ‘continual discursive boundary work’ ( Experts are central to the construction of criticality through their assessments. They represent a type of authority that holds certain knowledge, and they are expected to come forward with recommendations to be accepted as credible and authoritative by the public ( To some extent limited by their institutions, experts exercise the power of authority according to their individual subjectivity which defines how they interact with policy-makers, security practitioners, and governed subjects (see In this paper, I draw on the notion of securitization, which offers a radically constructivist perspective on how security issues are constructed ( The In contrast, the Apart from the differences in understanding how (in)security is constructed, the Paris School pays more attention to the underlying logic of risk management in the governance of security. An important aspect highlighted e.g. by This paper argues that a specific model consisting of factors that represent a threat, risk profiling and risk management (see Here, the argument works with The paper moves on to the Then the paper turns to the Classification is a potent process of silencing and valorising ( As a mineral is rendered critical by experts, by means of construction ( The criticality construct has political operationalization, which is made visible by the funding of particular initiatives to ‘counteract’ mineral criticality. In a market-based system criticality concerns would have been perceived as essentially economic, thus, to be addressed by businesses. Thus, funding of supply risk mitigating initiatives would have been considered as interventionist, with opinions divided as to whether such would be useful in the case of rare earth elements ( Based on the elaboration above, the classification of minerals as critical matters for at least two reasons: (i) it valorises the importance of the supply of particular minerals for economic activity, and (ii) it allows for the economic parameters (i.e. supply risk and importance to clean energy ( In this section, I describe the methodology applied in this paper, and I discuss the data used which stems from the methodology and recommendation sections of the report on Critical Metals in Strategic Energy Technologies by the European Commission and the Joint Research Council [ The two reports are key sources in the extensive literature on criticality assessments ( The methodology section of the The methodology of this paper focuses solely on the parameter ‘supply risk’ of the methodologies of these reports, and neodymium, which represent a dimension and focus element, respectively, that cut across the In this analysis, I connect the mineral risk assessments and criticality classification to the materiality discourse that cuts across political and resource geography ( In the liberal logic of security, the The While the attributes and criteria of the reports broadly appear to match, significant differences can be mapped that affect the production of risk, specifically supply risk. Outnumbered by one additional attribute in the US DoE report, the EC-JRC report makes no reference to ‘basic availability’, thus, geological occurrence. The rhetoric chosen with the attributes of the US DoE report may be suggestive of an inward-looking strategy, i.e. a domestic focus with mineral self-sufficiency for supply. This is illustrated both with ‘basic availability’ and ‘co-dependence on other markets’ for supply, and contrasted by no such reference to availability and ‘cross-country concentration of supply’ in the EC-JRC report. The presence and absence of numerical weighing of the attributes and criteria in the US DoE and the EC-JRC reports, respectively, reflects this inward-looking, self-sufficiency strategy pursued by the US DoE report, along with the relative importance allotted to constructing the risk. For instance, ‘basic availability’ is weighed at 40% of the total supply risk in the US DoE report, while it is, as just described, absent from the EC-JRC report. Arguably, a 40% weighing in the correlation of factors to produce risk in the US DoE report suggests the relative importance attributed to domestic geological occurrences. The overarching classification of the EC-JRC report criteria of the low and top left shares of the pie chart into ‘political factors’, and from low and top right into ‘market factors’, is suggestive of risk being either politically- or market-constructed, even if correlated. A social science approach could emphasize markets and political institutions as socially constructed. It would be likely to focus on another level and unit of analysis, in which disciplinary discourses including within geography i.e. on actor-network analysis would have much to contribute. Yet, and importantly, the supply risk construction in the EC-JRC report addresses both the limitations to expanding supply, broadly termed to enable further exploration, and the political risks associated with key suppliers. Surprisingly, here the US DoE report centres solely on producer diversity. It is worth noting that rhetorically the choice of ‘producer diversity’ might be more conducive to the construction of security as it works with the pendant of ‘producer concentration’ to which monopoly production is easily linked. One might argue that the risk is almost inherently attached to this choice of terminology, and the processes leading to a producer concentration are thereby silenced. These processes include decision-making on material prices e.g. without consideration of wider environmental and economic effects, trade negotiations, and many more, which ultimately define market- and governance structures. Overall, whether the construction of supply risk benefits most from the EC-JRC or the US DoE approach is debatable and subjective to the perspective of the experts in authority. The The REE neodymium (Nd) has been chosen here for its criticality ranking among the critical elements in both the short and medium term (US DoE report) and among the five metals of the 14 metals assessed that demonstrate a high supply risk (EC-JRC report). Neodymium metal is used among other in alloys to make high-strength magnets, including for certain types of wind turbines, and for permanent magnet motors with a diverse range of applications including from the automotive industry to wireless-tools. The two reports reveal many commonalities, such as of different technology uptake and technology mix scenarios modelled, and of the types of indicators used for assessing supply risk (addressed in the ‘Bottleneck Screening of the The Through the entry point of metals, natural scientists are prompted as authorities in the mineral criticality discourse. Against their methodological predisposition in preference of measurable/quantifiable criteria such as elemental characteristics, volume supply and price, it is unsurprising that the risk profiling has focused on these aspects, as reflected in the information fed into Simultaneously, by emphasis of ‘non-Chinese mines’ in the information allotted in the US DoE report the focus is clearly geographical, and geo-political, and thus, on the scientific investigations of geographers and political scientists, among other social scientists. However, by methodological choice this mineral criticality discourse takes a natural science turn – and valorises materialized above non-materialized characteristics. Arguably, this is a surprising turn following the established understanding that mineral criticality is dynamic. To exemplify this natural science turn further, I draw on the supply risk criterion ‘basic availability’: The allotted information indicates that ‘ Risk profiling is inherently selective and filters from the perspective of the methodological choices of the authorized scientific experts of this discourse. To which extent this selectiveness has a bearing on the assessment will be discussed in the following sections where I will explore whether inferences have been made from the information (REE-data) that was fed into and allotted to the parameters of the framework (attributes of the supply risk criterion) during the expert assessment. I examine whether these inferences involved references to a perceived need for securitizing mineral criticality, according to the liberal logic of security and I respond to the proposition of The allotted REE-data which was subjected to classification ( The EC-JRC report (2011) describes a range of potential mitigation strategies, which span from expanding European output, increasing recycling and reuse to reducing waste and finding substitutes for these metals in their main applications. One of the broad recommendations refers specifically to REE as it advocates research and development, and demonstration projects on new lower cost separation processes, particularly those from by-product or tailings containing REE. The specific recommendations call for more data collection and better provision of information on the demand, supply and price trends for metals with i.e. feasibility studies, research and development including demonstration projects for separation processes, collaboration with other countries that share the risk agenda which is also to involve an exchange of information, as well as recommendations to fund before-mentioned activities. The information that experts have assigned to the supply risk criterion as shown in I exemplify this argument through a case: The experts assigned information (premise) ‘complex commercial and technical challenges are involved’ to the criterion of ‘Limitations to expanding production capacity’ ( The objective of the liberal logic of security is the An example for the management of the risk of production capacity could be the EC-funded EURARE project that aims to develop a Despite a lacking identifiable clear correlation between expert recommendations of the criticality assessments and the EURARE project design, it is here where bureaucratic practice of classification, put to work, and operationalized at the political level might have created momentum to fund this project. This operationalization might have redistributed public wealth to public and private interests with distributive benefits clearly more for those with (vested) interests in the participating firms and institutions as project beneficiaries. Especially the funding of research conducted by private firms might have led to new technologies, potentially to be patent-protected. Thus, a form of wealth might result from this project that arguably no longer directly benefits the public which supported this research, see Another example provided in the typology of inferences of Section An argument for calling for bi- or trilateral meetings of representatives from these countries has been provided. Indeed, in 2011, the EU, Japan and the US launched a trilateral dialogue to promote cooperation in the field of critical materials (EC, 2016; Yet another example is the expert recommendation of ‘ This paper explored the role of expertise, the nature of criticality, and their relationship to securitization by tracing the bureaucratic practice of classification in which experts assume a leading role as they are authorized by a technical discourse to conduct mineral criticality assessments. With the liberal logic of security traced through representation of risk (threat), measure and objective, I have outlined how experts construct criticality by risk profiling, a form of classification. In particular I have argued that the bureaucratic practice of classification is a means of valorisation. This comes to light at the point when experts commit to assessing minerals as they legitimize and valorise a given methodology, i.e. a pre-defined list of minerals which are to be assessed, and the given parameters in the assessment framework that serves as their basis for the assessment. The valorisation also emerges when experts allot information (from interviews with industry respondents and from secondary sources) to the parameters of the framework, and construct criticality, silencing some aspects and highlighting others, i.e. by weighing. The information allotted serves as premise for inferences (recommendations). I introduced a typology of inferences emerging from the criticality assessment of experts. These inference types serve as abstractions that enable political operationalization through the criticality classification. Specifically, when the bureaucratic practice of expert classification is put to work, the criticality construct enables political operationalization, as recommendations by the experts on how to address criticality are enacted. I claimed that such political operationalization may be reflected in some EC- and US-funded projects which have aims that closely align with the recommendations put forward by the experts. This suggests that classification of criticality is a tool of valorisation including for political operationalization with distributive effects, as recipients whose interests align with the recommendations, benefit, and other parts of society, including different scientific disciplines, are silenced when the objective of the risk profiling turns to the management of risk, namely the securing of free circulation of minerals, including of the element neodymium. Arguably, the objective is that of securing mineral supply to the US and the EU. Experts transgress the scientific boundary as they construct ‘criticality’, and they engage in a political discourse which begins as materials that have previously been discussed as ‘key materials’ are turned through classification into ‘critical materials’. This criticality classification, and thus, experts through their assessments, may be, as I propose here, complicit in justifying how public funding is to be allocated (e.g. to particular types of research foci) that are seen both as offering remedies against criticality and as securing access to the minerals (i.e. by identifying new occurrences and finding new processing routes). In addition, they have drawn attention by policy-makers to the minerals, encouraging a particular focus, such as material substitution, and creating a link between the governance of resources, technological advances (including for clean energy), and national security. In conclusion, classification enabled experts to construct the criticality of minerals, turning ‘key materials’ into ‘critical materials’ with a new set of connotations, as here examined on the case of supply risk. This bureaucratic practice of classification of criticality provides, as I argued, for a mode of securitization in line with the liberal logic of security as experts profile supply risk and recommend actions to manage this risk to secure the circulation of minerals. The meaning of criticality is therefore rooted in the potency of this label: It reflects a valorisation, opens an avenue for operationalization, including by a discourse that is technical and expert-driven which may lead to (non-)distributive effects. It is a construct that has potency for pervading government, society and industry. The idea for this paper emerged from the interdisciplinary workshop ‘