Background
                  Operative treatment of geriatric tibial plateau fractures is challenging and controversial. There are few studies focusing on the clinical features and operative outcomes of tibial plateau fractures in the elderly. Hence, this study aimed to investigate the clinical features and operative results of these fractures.
               
                  Methods
                  Thirty-three displaced tibial plateau fractures in patients >65 years old (mean age: 72.1 years, range: 65–94 years) were treated operatively. We investigated the mechanisms of injury, fracture types according to the Schatzker classification, incidences of soft tissue injury, and postoperative complications. Clinical and radiographic data were analyzed in 23 patients at the last follow-up. The mean follow-up period was 4.0 years (range: 1–13 years). Twenty-one patients were treated with open reduction and internal fixation and evaluated using the Rasmussen clinical and radiologic scores. Two patients with advanced osteoarthritis were treated primarily with total knee arthroplasty and assessed using the Japanese Orthopaedic Association score for the knee osteoarthritis.
               
                  Results
                  Twenty-four patients (72.7%) were injured by low-energy trauma such as a simple fall. Four patients had compartment syndrome and required fasciotomies. Rasmussen clinical and radiologic scores were satisfactory in 85.7% and 81.0% of patients, respectively. Two patients treated primarily with total knee arthroplasty showed no radiologic abnormality, and their Japanese Orthopaedic Association scores were both 70 points.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Geriatric tibial plateau fractures, although mostly due to low-energy trauma, were often accompanied with severe comminution and compartment syndrome. Postoperative results of open reduction and internal fixation for this population were relatively good. Therefore, primary total knee arthroplasty should only be considered for well-selected patients.