The flotation studies of non-coking coal fines containing 37.7% ash were carried out. The variables studied were pH, collector, frother, modifier (sodium silicate) and coal size. Experiments were carried out using 25 full factorial design. The main and interaction effects on recovery and grade were evaluated using Yates' analysis. The optimum flotation condition was found by the method of steepest ascent. A product with 72.62% combustibles (i.e. 25.38% ash) at 88.03% recovery was obtained at pH 7.5, diesel oil 0.42 g/kg, MIBC 0.09 g/kg, sodium silicate 0.02 g/kg and coal size −0.6 mm at optimum conditions.Indian coals in general have difficult washing characteristics and have high percentage of near gravity materials in association with their high ash contents due to drift origin. The yields of clean coal obtained by washing such coals are poor and the beneficiation involves high cost. Considerable percentages of co-products like middlings/rejects are also generated during washing. Another problem is that the mineral matter in the bulk of the coal is disseminated very finely. This necessitated the coals to be crushed to smaller sizes prior to washing to maximize recovery. Now with the progressive deterioration in the washability characteristic of the Run-of-Mine coal and due to depletion of reserve of better grade coal, crushing to finer sizes has become inevitable. The techniques of coal beneficiation based on static dense medium baths will not be effective at finer sizes. Washing should be carried out using improved techniques of jigging, heavy media cyclones, spirals and froth flotation. During the process of washing, plenty of fine coals (−0.5 mm) are being generated in conventional washery. But washeries adopting Jigging, fines below 1.0 mm are being generated, which are having high ash. These fines are to be beneficiated before mixing with the clean coal. Commercial viability of fine coal flotation, slurry jigs, oil agglomeration, oleoflotation and spiral concentration are to be established for Indian coals One of the most effective techniques to study process behavior is the factorial designed test with analysis of variance The objective of the work was to determine the effects of variables using statistical techniques on flotation of high ash non-coking coal used in thermal power plant and find out optimum condition for its flotation. The different steps of optimization strategy used in this study are: To design experimental tests (using factorial design). To perform an analysis of the experimental results by ANOVA to determine the significant factors influencing the flotation process. To find out optimum conditions for flotation of coal to reduce ash content. Non-coking coal forming feed to the existing thermal plants was collected from Talcher area for beneficiation studies. The fines (−1.0 mm) were generated during crushing of coal for preparation of feed (−13.0 to 1.0 mm) for jigging. The −13.0+1.0 fraction was treated by Jigging and the fines (−1.0 mm) were used in these studies. The size distribution and ash content of each fraction are given in Denver D12 sub-aeration flotation machine with 1-l capacity cell was used for flotation studies. A total of 100 g of coal was mixed with 300 ml of water and conditioned in flotation cell for 2 min. The pH of the slurry was adjusted using NaOH before it was conditioned with sodium silicate and diesel oil. Another 600-ml make up water was added and conditioned further with predetermined quantity of MIBC (frother). The conditioning time for all the reagents was 2 min in each stage, then flotation was carried out by releasing the air at 1500 rpm for 5 min. Both the froth and tailings were collected separately, dried and analysed for ash percentage. Recovery was calculated as The variables considered in the study are: pH, collector(diesel oil), frother (MIBC), modifier (sodium silicate) and feed particle size. The levels of variables studied are given in The statistical design of experiments is used when the effect of several factors are to be studied in order to determine the main and interaction effects. The effect of a variable is the change in response produced by varying the level of the factor. When the effect of a factor depends on the level of another factor, the two factors are said to interact. In the present work, five variables were taken into consideration to evaluate their main and interaction effects on the recovery of fine coal into float fraction and its grade in order to study the separation of ash forming material from coal. In other words, the main goal has been to establish best set of variables that could be used in flotation to obtain maximum recovery in float fraction with acceptable grade. A 2 The ANOVA was carried out to evaluate if the effect and the interaction among the investigated factors are significant The main effect of all the variables on recovery is significant at 95% confidence level. The order of influence is E>B>A>D>C. The effect of size (E) is highly significant and negative. This indicates higher particle size (>0.6 mm) is not suitable for flotation. The variables pH, collector, frother and sodium silicate (variables A, B, C and D, respectively) have positive effect. They also increase recovery interacting positively (BD, CD, BCD, ABCD), but they decrease recovery interacting negatively (AB, AC, BC, AD). The variable E, which has negative effect, interacts with the variables A, B, C and D, and increases recovery with positive interaction of BCE, ADE and ABCE, and decreases with negative interaction of AE, BE, CE, DE, BDE, CDE and ADCE. The main effect of all the variables on grade of coal produced by flotation is significant at 95% confidence level. The most important effect is C (frother). Its effect is negative. The effects of A and D are also negative, whereas that of C and E are positive. The order of their significance is C>A>E>D>B. The AB, AC, BC, AD, ABE, ACE, DE, BDE, CDE and ACDE interactions have positive effect, whereas that of ABC, BD, CD, ACD, BCE and ADE have negative effect on grade of float fraction. The main effects of variables on recovery and grade are shown in The interaction of sodium silicate with collector (BD) and frother (CD) has positive effect on recovery. This is due to dispersion of slimes from coal surfaces and effective interaction of collector and frother, which increases the flotability. The decrease in grade is due to flotation of less hydrophobic high ash particles. The interaction of pH with collector (AB) has negative effect on recovery an positive effect on grade. The industrial grade hydrocarbon oils are negatively charged with no observable isoelectric point Coal can be floated only with the frother. In the presence of both collector and frother, the effect of each other may be less than what it would have been in the absence of other. The decrease in recovery due to collector and frother interaction (BC) may be attributed to this reason. The increase in grade indicates that the effect of frother is much limited in the presence of collector. It is to be mentioned that collector (B) has positive effect on grade, whereas frother (C) has negative effect on grade. The decrease in recovery due to AE, BE, CE and DE interactions is due to increase in mass of particles. The AE, BE and CE interactions do not affect the grade significantly, whereas DE interaction has positive effect on grade. This increase in grade may be due to dispersion of slimes from coarse particles and flotation of only highly hydrophobic high-grade particles. Only the main effect of collector has positive effect on both recovery and grade. The BCD and ABCE interactions increase recovery without effecting grade significantly, whereas the ACE interaction increases the grade without effecting the recovery significantly. All the other significant effects increase the recovery with the decrease in grade or vice versa. Statistical models can be built up for prediction of grade and recovery using Yates' analysis data The coefficient of determination, One of the techniques of optimization is the method of steepest ascent, in which the base point is assumed and the next set of values is selected, which is proportional to product of the coefficient and step size. The selected values are incremented successively and objective function is evaluated each time till the optimum point is reached. In this work, our objective was to maximize recovery at desired level of grade of coal. The fifth order interaction was assumed due to error. Consequently, all the other effects less than that were considered due to error and the experimental error was estimated to carry out The authors are thankful to the Director, Regional Research Laboratory (CSIR), Bhubaneswar for giving permission to publish this paper.