In this paper, we introduce a novel computational approach that describes dual scale discontinuities where the fibres and fractures interfere and influence the overall behaviour of a structure. A mathematical formulation is proposed in alignment with the finite element method to take into account the contribution of each component as a discrete entity. The formulation is implemented numerically through the Fortran User Element subroutine UEL of the general purpose software Abaqus. This novel approach that we call “dual cohesive element” is suitable for synthetic macro fibre-reinforced concrete. It can represent the overall structural behaviour with a coarse discretisation which makes it particularly fast and efficient. Once a certain fibre distribution across the crack is postulated, single fibre pull-out test results can be used to simulate the load-displacement performance of the structure. This numerical method is validated experimentally and compared with single fibre pull-out tests and three point bending beam tests which proved its accuracy in predicting crack opening in Mode I. A mesh refinement study is also conducted and the structural response obtained from the numerical simulation show mesh independent results. There is good agreement between experimental and simulated results even with a coarse mesh representation. The results highlight the intimate relationship between single fibre pull-out test and the behaviour of fibre reinforced concrete with multiple fibres.intrinsic coordinates intrinsic coordinates corresponding to Cartesian coordinates defining the 3D Euclidean space, also called extrinsic coordinates 3D coordinates of a point where the fibre is intersecting the dual cohesive element and where the force matrix containing the “stiffness” terms that relate the crack displacement to the bridging force of the fibre Green’s strain tensor displacement vector containing the separation between the two faces of the dual cohesive element three-dimensional Euclidean space Delta Dirac function area of the domain in which area of the domain in which area of the domain in which total number of fibres intersecting the cohesive element matrix containing the shape functions constitutive matrix that relates the separation of the two faces of the cohesive element to the cohesive stresses matrix containing the terms of the transformation between extrinsic and intrinsic coordinates dual cohesive element’s stiffness matrix component of the dual cohesive element’s stiffness matrix due to the cohesive stresses component of the dual cohesive element’s stiffness matrix due to the bridging action of the fibre rotation matrix of the dual cohesive element second Piola-Kirchoff tensor of the internal stresses cohesive stress component acting on the dual cohesive element displacement vector at the nodal point of the dual cohesive element vector containing the virtual displacement at the nodal points vector containing the magnitude of the external forces acting at the nodal point of the dual cohesive element vector containing the magnitude of the external forces acting at the nodal point of the dual cohesive element due to the bridging action of the fibre vector containing the magnitude of the external forces acting at the nodal point of the dual cohesive element due to the cohesive stresses vector containing the magnitude of the bridging forces due to a fibre vector containing the magnitude of the reactions vector containing the magnitude of the cohesive forces acting on the discontinuity (crack) vector containing the magnitude of the external imposed forces virtual displacement between the two faces of the dual cohesive element 3D domain of the volume stress-crack opening relationship area element in the Euclidean space volume element in the Euclidean space vector containing the magnitude of the separation of the discontinuity vector of the virtual displacements within the domain vector of the virtual displacements within the domain domain of the dual cohesive element ultimate tensile stress fracture energy in Mode II and Mode III fracture energy in Mode I Jacobian of the transformation between extrinsic and intrinsic coordinates initial stiffness coefficient that populates the shape functions that populates the matrix external work as defined in the Principle of Virtual Work external work as defined in the Principle of Virtual Work limited to a dual cohesive element internal work as defined in the Principle of Virtual Work internal work as defined in the Principle of Virtual Work limited to a dual cohesive element crack mouth opening displacement fibre reinforced concrete user-defined Element subroutine in Abaqus Fibre reinforcement is a common way of enhancing the properties of a host material (often referred to as matrix) by means of embedded fibres hence forming a composite material. In concrete, which is well known to manifest a brittle behaviour, fibres have the ability to increase the post-peak performance by ensuring residual strength, thereby leading to higher safety. The superiority of fibre-reinforced concrete over conventional concrete in terms of ductility is well established, however the way fibres are dispersed into concrete, affects the overall performance of the composite materials and develops a higher scatter of results. Nevertheless, the influence of the orientation and position of fibres in bridging the cracks has been, in fact, the object of numerous studies and is a well known phenomenon Several attempts have been made to model the performance of fibre-reinforced concrete and there is a plethora of tools available to predict the responses of such material under various loading conditions. Most approaches are based on the cohesive crack model developed by Hillerborg In recent years, another approach based on discrete modelling of fibres has proven to be a valuable tool since the contribution of each single fibre can be taken into account directly without the need to use inverse techniques to extrapolate the Cunha et al. To overcome some of the issues related to modelling cracks with a smeared crack model used in Furthermore, efforts have been made to model fibre-reinforced composites without employing FEA (Finite Element Analysis). In The majority of studies that focus on modelling the contribution of fibres as a single entity require the user to input a stress-displacement or stress-deformation response of the fibre which often requires inverse analysis to gather this information. To the knowledge of the authors, at the moment there is no formulation of a numerical approach that features force-displacement at the fibre level without the assumptions on the stress distribution and, at the same time, can model the physical separation that happens during the onset of cracking. In this study, we present a methodology that can be implemented in an established framework like Finite Element analysis, models the fibres and crack as two distinct and discrete entities and can benefit from the fact that all the input parameters can be obtained from a simple test: the single fibre pull-out test. In order to achieve the objectives of this study, a dual cohesive model is proposed to simulate the crack initiation and propagation in fibre-reinforced concrete. The proposed approach combines two components that constitute the dual behaviour. The first component describes the concrete undergoing a damaging cracking failure. The second component includes the addition of fibres as a discrete entity and their effect is quantified through single fibre pull-out tests. In order to simulate the first component, the discontinuity is modelled by means of cohesive (or interface) elements, in which the stiffness value is updated to incorporate the effect of fibres. Cohesive elements have a long history in the FEA realm since their first implementations as interface formulations between layers of rocks The discrete implementation of the fibres is independent of the mesh The number of fibres does not increase the number nodes on the mesh representation hence preserving the degrees of freedom regardless of the dosage of fibres. The input parameters concerning the bridging action of fibres can be directly obtained from a single fibre pull-out test. It can be easily implemented in commercial software like Abaqus The behaviour at the structural level (force versus displacement) can be accurately represented with a coarse discretisation of the body which makes the model particularly efficient and easy to incorporate highly intensive calculations such as a Monte Carlo simulation on the fibre distribution that may be required to obtain statistical material performance. Consider a three-dimensional body occupying a domain Now consider a cohesive element inserted between two continuous (bulk) elements with a crossing fibre ( In a quadrilateral cohesive element, this definition of the Jacobian of Eq. It should be noted that the Jacobian in the second integral of Eq. The external forces acting at the nodal points are therefore the summation of a contribution from the traction stresses and the bridging load from a single fibre: The first contribution can be integrated by evaluating the function at the Gauss points, the second contribution which is due to the fibre becomes: In order to define The elements forming Finally, if more than one fibre are present in the domain of the cohesive element the vector of nodal forces and stiffness matrix Eqs. In the dual cohesive model, the first component represents the cracked section of concrete. As such, the dual cohesive elements need to be placed where the crack is expected to propagate and the resulting constitutive law of the cracked concrete depends upon the choice of the matrix The second component of the dual-cohesive model is due to the presence of fibres and the mechanical behaviour can be described through the matrix Assuming the crack propagates in Mode I (e.g. bending failures), the problem can be further simplified since the relative displacement vector Material inhomogeneities and loading conditions can in fact certainly lead to a crack that propagates as a combination of some or all possible mode of failures, namely Mode II (shear) and Mode III (out of plane) together with normal opening Mode I. However, in this study the validation of the model has been carried out only in Mode I, mainly because all the constitutive parameters (i.e. Although beyond the scope of the present work, it should be noted that the Future work will be undertaken to understand the influence of these parameters in order to be able to simulate the effects of fibres with various embedment lengths, mode of failures and orientations starting, for example, from a standard set of pull-out tests with straight fibres. Finally, an additional parameter that can affect the There are some limitations to this model, some of which are inherited from the use of standard cohesive elements. One of them is that cohesive elements are inserted where the crack is expected to open and therefore its location should be known Another issue that is inherent in cohesive elements is related to the so-called “penalty factor”. When a cohesive element is experiencing compression, interpenetration between solid elements occurs. In order to minimise interpenetration, it is common practise to set a very high (compared to neighbouring elements) value of stiffness to the cohesive elements Finally, in the dual cohesive model, the pull-out forces exerted by the fibres are lumped at the nodes closer to the location of the fibres. While it constitutes an easy and efficient implementation of the problem, a refinement of the mesh would cause increasing stresses. This happens because the bridging forces due to the fibres are only a function of the crack opening, not the element size. Consequently, smaller elements would result in higher stresses, thus stresses are mesh dependent. This can be overcome by spreading the fibres’ pull-out forces to the neighbouring continuous elements according to a predefined area of influence; a similar approach is presented in The mathematical formulation illustrated in this Section describes an element that, at least theoretically, is able to simulate the crack propagation of a solid with fibre reinforcement and could be potentially applied to any structure. However, at this present stage, it is recommended to use this model to simulate laboratory tests with known and predetermined crack patterns. In this way the dual cohesive element can be wisely inserted where the crack is expected to propagate. Furthermore, this model has been only validated with specimens with a crack propagating in Mode I. In fact it could be cumbersome to measure parameters concerning the bridging action of the fibre (that are resembled in the matrix Since the fibre distribution across the crack is one of the inputs of the model, this can be exploited to study the variability of test results due to the random distribution of fibres. This can be achieved, for example, with a Monte Carlo simulation changing the distribution of fibres at every step (the distribution of fibres across the crack should be generated following experimental results). In this way it would be possible to obtain a range of values that describe the mechanical properties of a FRC structure starting from a single fibre pull-out test. This approach is possible thanks to the fact that this model can output accurate results with a coarse mesh representation of the structure that is therefore fast to analyse. In this section, the performance of the dual cohesive model is assessed by comparing its outcomes to experimental results. More specifically, a single-fibre pull-out test and a three-points bending test are used for validation. In addition, a mesh sensitivity study is reported to show the model convergence. The numerical simulations have been carried out on Abaqus through the Fortran subroutine UEL. In both configurations, the crack propagates in Mode I (normal opening direction) such that the tangential terms of the displacement vector of Eq. The single fibre pull-out test represents a useful tool to understand how a certain type of fibre performs in the surrounding matrix. Later in this article it is also shown that the single-fibre response can be used to simulate the behaviour of a structure with multiple fibres. The test in this study differs from that of a standard pull-out test where the fibre is usually embedded in concrete for a certain length (called embedment length) and the other end of the fibre is free; the free-end is then clamped to the testing apparatus to exert the pull-out force. In the process undertaken to produce the results for this section, care was taken to ensure that the fibre is fully embedded into the concrete matrix, which was necessary to avoid any clamping that would produce a stress concentration given the rough surface of the fibres used in this test. Often synthetic fibres have a rough surface to improve the bond between the fibre and the matrix. This stress concentration can in turn cause damage to the fibre, premature rupturing and producing unreliable results. Besides, this experimental set-up is more representative of the behaviour of real fibre-reinforced concrete since fibres are indeed fully embedded in concrete. A detailed sample preparation can be found in The simulation is repeated with three different mesh refinements to account for mesh dependency. The mesh sizes vary from very coarse (10 dual-cohesive elements In this example, the dual cohesive model has been used to simulate the three point bending notched beams with aligned fibres as described in The beams have a cross section of 150 mm by 150 mm with a 25 mm notch at midspan, a length of 600 mm and are simply supported at a distance of 500 mm between supports. In the simulations, the beams have been discretised with 13 500 brick ( In each beam there are 14 fibres in total and have been arranged such that they are all parallel to each other. The location and orientation of fibres is controlled thanks to specifically designed grid-like objects that hold the ends of the fibres at a pre-defined location which are embedded into the formwork before casting (see for further details on the sample preparation see The only difference between specimens is the location of these fibres that changes with respect to the neutral axis (see It should be also noted that the numerical results for each series are obtained starting from the same pull-out response, different results from the simulations are a consequence of the location of the fibres, which is passed into the UEL subroutine. Apart from validating this dual cohesive model, the results obtained from this test justify the discrete approach where the effects of fibres are a superimposed effect such that each single fibre participates in bridging the crack. It is also highlighted that the fibre locations play an important role on the overall structural performance of the composite material. Finally the influence of the mesh size on the proposed model is studied in detail. The results obtained from four different mesh refinements with 9, 20, 195 and 750 dual-cohesive elements are plotted in In this study, a novel formulation called the dual cohesive model is presented to simulate the crack opening and the bridging effects of fibres in fibre-reinforced concrete with particular emphasis on synthetic macro fibres working in Mode I. The fibres are treated as a discrete entity and their position within the crack is an input of the model. This allows to account for a specific fibre distribution resulting in very high accuracy. In this particular model the effect of the fibres is treated as a point load and their influence is spread to the nodes of the pertaining elements. The advantage of this approach is that the total number of degrees of freedom remains unchanged–regardless of the number of fibres bridging the crack–and the structural behaviour of fibre-reinforced concrete can be effectively simulated with a coarse mesh representation. Finally, the model is compared against two different test setups, the single fibre pull-out test and the three point bending test. The results are promising and show good agreement for both test configurations. Furthermore, the model does not present mesh dependency issues. Dual cohesive elements are found to correctly simulate the pre-peak and post-peak response of FRC beams. One of the implications is that the results obtained from single fibre pull-out test (which is one of the input of the model) can be used to describe the behaviour of multiple fibres in fibre reinforced concrete structures. This work can be extended including the simulation of more realistic scenario such as randomly distributed fibres to account for different orientations and fibre locations. The first author would like to thank