A medium-scale system was designed and fabricated for the processing of bitter leaf (Vernonia spp.) and similar vegetables. Processed bitter leaf is a widely consumed vegetable in the tropics. The machine powered by a 3kW electric motor is made of three compartments: the chopping section, the washing section and the spinning section. Tests were carried out to evaluate the capacity and the efficiency of each section of the machine. The chopping section has a capacity of 300kg of leaves per hour, reducing vernonia leaves to 2路64mm mean size. The washing section has a capacity of 60kg of leaves per hour. In the spinning section, 20kg of processed leaves are processed in 8min giving a capacity of 150kg/h. At the spinning section, the moisture content of chopped and washed leaves decreased from 74路32% to 67路56%. Investigations on the nutritive quality of the processed vegetable indicated that there was a slight decrease and a slight increase in some nutritional parameters after mechanical processing. Compared with the manual method of processing vernonia, the machine reduced processing time by a factor of about 60.mass of particles on the moisture content, % the number of sieves standard deviation maceration time, min spinning time, min diagonal of the screen opening of the geometric mean length of the whole sample, mm initial geometric mean length of the sample, mm geometric mean length of particle after time geometric mean length of particles on the diagonal of screen openings in the next larger than maceration rate of the leaves mm/min Bitter leaf ( Although there is very little documentation on the marketing of bitter leaf, the economic activities related to this vegetable bring in considerable income to some farmers in Africa ( The economic importance of The harvested leaves are washed and then macerated with a mortar and pestle. After that, the leaves are washed until the bitterness reduces to an acceptable level. In some countries, the leaves are washed without maceration; however, poor maceration leads to difficulties in juice extraction from the leaves of green plants ( Owing to all these problems, this research exercise was carried out in order to design, fabricate and test a machinery system that would cut, wash and spin the bitter leaf in one batch. The machinery was designed and developed as shown in The system is made of three compartments. The cutting section ( The leaves are fed into the hopper and the discharge port closed with a slider before the machine is switched on. After maceration, the discharge port is opened and the centrifugal force of the cutter expels the product into the washing chamber. As the washing starts, the discharge port of the cutting section is closed and a new charge is placed inside the cutting section. When the washing is complete, the discharge port is opened and the centrifugal force of the washing paddles sends the material into the spinning section. A new charge is allowed into the washing section from the hopper. In the dewatering section, the perforated cylinder spins the material at 1450 The three portions of the machine were evaluated separately. The cutting section was tested by putting in 20 The size of the feed after each time interval of chopping was determined using the following equations. The geometric mean length The standard deviation The maceration rate The performance of the washing section was evaluated by carrying out a tongue taste on the sample as the machine washed the bitter leaf. After every 1 Performance evaluation of the spinning section was done by taking out samples from the washing section after every 1 Quality control of the processed vegetable was done by determining some of its nutritional parameters during and after processing. After every 5   The performance tests of the machine gave the following results: at the cutting section, leaves are reduced to 2路64 As would be expected, the moisture content of the washed It can also be noted that moisture loss is relatively slower during the first 4 As already been mentioned, at the washing section the capacity of 20 Results of nutritional analysis are shown in A simple machine for the processing of