Grade and tonnage are the most important technical uncertainties in mining ventures because of the use of estimations/simulations, which are mostly generated from drill data. Open pit mines are planned and designed on the basis of the blocks representing the entire orebody. Each block has different estimation/simulation variance reflecting uncertainty to some extent. The estimation/simulation realizations are submitted to mine production scheduling process. However, the use of a block model with varying estimation/simulation variances will lead to serious risk in the scheduling. In the medium of multiple simulations, the dispersion variances of blocks can be thought to regard technical uncertainties. However, the dispersion variance cannot handle uncertainty associated with varying estimation/simulation variances of blocks. This paper proposes an approach that generates the configuration of the best additional drilling campaign to generate more homogenous estimation/simulation variances of blocks. In other words, the objective is to find the best drilling configuration in such a way as to minimize grade uncertainty under budget constraint. Uncertainty measure of the optimization process in this paper is interpolation variance, which considers data locations and grades. The problem is expressed as a minmax problem, which focuses on finding the best worst-case performance i.e., minimizing interpolation variance of the block generating maximum interpolation variance. Since the optimization model requires computing the interpolation variances of blocks being simulated/estimated in each iteration, the problem cannot be solved by standard optimization tools. This motivates to use two-space genetic algorithm (GA) approach to solve the problem. The technique has two spaces: feasible drill hole configuration with minimization of interpolation variance and drill hole simulations with maximization of interpolation variance. Two-space interacts to find a minmax solution iteratively. A case study was conducted to demonstrate the performance of approach. The findings showed that the approach could be used to plan a new drilling campaign.A survey conducted by World Bank indicated that 73% of mining projects in Canada and the USA in 1990s failed or cancelled in short time after the operations started ( Drill data are the most important information source in mine feasibility. Therefore, from resource estimation and mine planning point of view, various aspects of drilling campaign attracted the researchers (e.g., optimal drilling space on a regular grid, vertical drills versus the inclined drills and additional sampling campaign). These all are closely related to data reliability. Mine plans and designs based on sparse data can lead to serious problems in operation stage due to two types of uncertainties: Uncertainty arising from variation among simulation values of each block in medium of multiple realizations. Various stochastic optimization techniques have been proposed to deal with uncertainty associated with block grades and ore-waste quantities in mine production scheduling ( Uncertainty arising from estimation/simulation variance. The simulation of each block has different uncertainty level arising from data configuration and values. The scheduling optimization does not put an emphasis on using varying estimation/simulation variances. As has been known, if simulated values were to be estimates, the corresponding estimation variance would be twice that of the kriged value at the same location ( Furthermore, sparse data may mask understanding real uncertainty. On the contrary to common intuition, additional data may also cause an increase in uncertainty ( In this research, a series of candidate drill holes are first generated. These holes are selected within the boundary of all drill holes. Candidate holes are then simulated by conditional simulation. Finally, a drill hole configuration corresponding to location and length is sought in such a way as to minimize uncertainty associated with block grade and positions. This requires using appropriate uncertainty measure. At first glance, minimization of estimation (kriging) variance may be seen as a reasonable objective. Even though some researches focused on minimization of ordinary kriging variance (    In this research, the interpolation variance is used as a criterion to be minimized. To use this variance, kriging weighs have to be positive. However, this technique increases computations. Since the block interpolation variances cannot be summed, the problem is expressed as a minmax optimization problem instead of typical maximization or minimization problem. Thus, each variance can be assessed one by one. The objective is to find drill hole locations with lengths in a manner that the maximum interpolation variance is minimized using a combination of grades of real data and simulation grades of candidate drill holes. The solution will provide the best of the worst variance. This approach is based on minmax theorem, which is a decision rule used in decision theory, game theory and optimization for minimizing the maximum possible loss. It has originally formulated for two – player zero – sum game theory, covering the cases where players both take alternate and make simultaneous moves. It can be also seen as a means to general decision making in the presence of uncertainty. The minmax theorem states that player A can win no less than a minimum by choosing a strategy that maximizes the minimum possible outcome. Since player A wants to maximize profit, this strategy is the one best worst-case performance. Similarly, player B can lose no more than a maximum by choosing the strategy that minimizes the maximum possible outcome. From viewpoint of player A, this strategy is the worst optimal outcome ( The problem is to determine drill hole locations and their lengths in such a way as to minimize maximum interpolation variance within block model under maximum and minimum drill lengths and some procedural constraints using hard data and simulations of candidate drill holes. Using sequential Gaussian simulation, multiple probable realizations of each unit length within candidate drill holes are generated. Therefore, the problem has a stochastic nature. For each realization, different interpolation variance is calculated. In optimization model, the following nomenclature is used: the number of blocks being simulated; the number of candidate drill holes; total number of unit length in each drill holes; the number of simulations; interpolation variance of block implementation cost of unit length maximum budget for drilling campaign length of each unit length minimum allowable length in candidate drill maximum allowable length in candidate drill Optimization model is given as: Subject to Minmax problem can be transformed into classic optimization problem by adding a new variable. The problem cannot be solved by exact optimization method because it is required to compute interpolation variances of blocks in each iteration of procedure. The problem is also a non-linear optimization problem because kriging systems are essentially quadratic programming models. These motivate to use meta-heuristics to solve the problem. Furthermore, multiple realizations of unit length grades of candidate drills are generated by sequential Gaussian simulation. Therefore, the problem also has stochastic nature. To calculate simulation outputs and variances, the source codes provided in the GSLIB (Geostatistical Software Library) have been modified. A sub-routine has been written to calculate interpolation variances given in Eq. The GA is an intelligent search technique that mimics the mechanism of natural genetics and selection ( Binary or integer, floating vector can be used as the representation structure in the GA. In this paper, an integer vector represents a value of a decision variable as a chromosome. The chromosome First, a reproduction operator is used. The operator used herein is an imitation of a biased roulette wheel, which is spun When This population is then updated by the crossover and mutation operators. The crossover probability, The feasibility of each child is checked. If so, the child is accepted. To sum up, depending upon random number drawn, the chromosomes being exposed to the operation are determined and matched. Each couple matched is changed slightly such that the children are generated. The mutation operator is implemented on new version of population. Similar to the crossover operation, a mutation probability, 9+ 2+ and same procedure is implemented for drill lengths. Thus, a child is generated from the chromosome by the mutation. All procedure is implemented up to the pre-determined number of iterations. There are two-population in two-space GA ( In two-space GA, the optimization procedure based on first space will generate best of worst-case solution. Likewise, for a simulation The optimization procedure based on second space will generate worst-case solution. Since each individual in each space is solved according to the individual generated randomly in the other space, as two-space GA progress, the chromosome The approach is demonstrated on a low grade iron deposit in Turkey. 67 drill holes were initially cut on the deposit. Multiple realizations were generated by sequential Gaussian simulation and the corresponding interpolation variances were calculated. It was observed that there were wild fluctuations of block interpolation variances. A block model with fluctuating in estimation/simulation variances leads serious robustness problem in mine production scheduling. Therefore, the company decided to implement a new drilling campaign prior to mine production scheduling. 12 candidate locations were determined. Minimum and maximum allowable drill lengths would be between 150 and 300 In The procedure steps can be summarized as follows: Determine candidate drill hole locations. Simulate Determine the blocks (nodes) affected by candidate drill simulations to reduce problem size. Develop optimization model of problem, which is expressed as minmax problem. Go to two-space genetic algorithms. Generate an initial population of strings. In other words, generate a sub-set of feasible solutions of candidate drill holes (Space 1). Using hard data and simulation values of unit lengths of this sub-set of candidate drill holes, simulate orebody (Space 2). Krige all the blocks within orebody model and calculate interpolation variances of blocks within orebody. Evaluate the string according to the fitness function. In Space 1, the objective is to find best drill hole configuration in such a way as to minimize of maximum interpolation variance. The required arrangements are made in terms of drill hole configuration. In Space 2, the objective is to maximize interpolation variance. The required arrangements are made in terms of simulations. Apply a set of genetic operators to generate a new population of strings. Given that the objective function is minmax (minimization of the interpolation variance of drill hole configuration of the simulation, which maximizes the interpolation variance), two spaces attempts to reach the optimality. Go Step b until a solution converges. An initial population of drill configurations is randomly generated in the first space. The objective function is to minimize the interpolation variances of blocks. To solve this problem, each drill configuration in the population is randomly matched with a simulation in the second space. Likewise, initial population of simulations is generated in the second space. The objective function in Space 2 is to maximize the interpolation variances of blocks. Each simulation in the population is randomly matched with a drill configuration in Space 1. Given that Space 2 maximizes the interpolation variance, which use the simulation in the population, the first space will generate the best of worst interpolation variance at the end of optimization procedure. In this section, first iteration of the procedure is demonstrated. First, a population of feasible solutions and simulations were generated randomly ( First, kriging weights were computed such that positive weights are generated. The corresponding interpolation variances affected by the selected drill configuration were then calculated. In Space 1, drill hole configurations corresponding from the lowest interpolation variance to the highest interpolation variance were arranged in ascending order. Likewise, in Space 2, the simulations corresponding from the highest interpolation variance to the lowest interpolation variance were arranged in descending order ( 6+ 7+ 2+ 11+ 3+ This process was then repeated for other chromosomes selected. A similar mutation operation was also implemented for the second space. Final population list of first iteration is given in Maximum block interpolation variance obtained by using only hard data was 5480. In this stage, range of block interpolation variances was between 3360 and 5480. After 2500 iterations of two-space GA, 5 drill holes with varying lengths were selected by solution approach. Minmax interpolation variance was 1554. Range of the variance was 1435 and 2107. In As can be seen from Figure, the gap between minimum and maximum interpolation variances of blocks using only initial data was much higher than the gap between minimum and maximum interpolation variances of blocks using initial data and the proposed drill holes. Given that the objective is minimization of maximum interpolation variance, this accomplishment can be seen from the Figure. For mine production scheduling, a block model having similar estimation/simulation variances is required. This imposes a new drilling campaign if initial feasibility generates the fluctuated variances. This papers describes a technique to find drill hole locations and the corresponding lengths. The problem is formulated as a minmax optimization problem using two - space GA in such a way as to generate a narrow range of interpolation variances in block model. In the technique, each individual is assessed according to other individual selected randomly in other population. The objective is to minimize maximum interpolation variance under budget constraint. Thus, the simulation values having similar uncertainty can be submitted to mine production scheduling procedure. Candidate drill holes are selected in relation to previous drill holes. The success of technique, to a certain extent, depends upon the performance of simulation. In future, the research can be extended to the co-simulations based on multiple point geostatistics. Since interpolation variance considers data values, a comparison of interpolation variances for different variables will be meaningless. Therefore, different uncertainty measures rather than the interpolation variance can be also researched. A significant issue in the paper is to use same spatial characteristics as the data from the existing drill holes are used. To deal with this problem is to check how spatial relation changes after new drill holes are implemented. If there is a significant difference, the reliability of the proposed method will be lowered.