Stirred mill power has been modelled empirically, adimensionally and computational intensively through the use of the discrete element method and computational fluid dynamics. To this range of power modelling efforts, one more is added through the development of a shear based power for stirred milling. The resulting shear based power model incorporates dimensions of stirrer and chamber geometry as well as operating conditions. In this paper, adimensional analysis, namely Newton and Reynolds numbers, will be used in this paper to explore how this shear based model behaves over a few data sets. A discussion is included on how this model could be improved and used for characterising industrial applications.Apparently, 1928 saw the first use of a stirred mill defined as “an agitator and spherical grinding media” ( Parallel to this stirred mill development, a large body of literature was produced over this same period of time. These studies address the stirred mill characterization ( Focusing on power, stirred mills have been modelled empirically, adimensionally and computational intensively through the use of the discrete element method and computational fluid dynamics ( The goal of this paper, following a description of the proposed model along with its validation through the use of published data, is to use adimensional analysis as a means of exploring how this shear based model behaves over a few data sets. Specifically, Newton and Reynolds numbers will be used to compare results and observations with what is found in the literature. A discussion is included on how this model could be improved and used for characterising industrial applications. An alternative stirred mill power modelling method has been recently introduced in the literature ( The use of this assumption is somewhat supported by the discrete element method (DEM) simulations ( As described in The parameter “shear volume” is a construct using the physical dimensions describing the entire parallel shear surface pairs found in a given stirred mill. For illustrative purposes, It should be noted that viscosity, The model was initially calibrated using data set for a horizontal disk mill ( This fitted fluid–particle–ball (or slurry–ball) mixture viscosity function indicates that viscosity is non-Newtonian shear thinning as well as a function of ball size, density, slurry density and dispersant present. Using the fitted viscosity model along with the shear volume calculation for a lab scale vertical screw mill and a lab scale Sala mill, it was possible to predict power consumption for these two mills (see The model was then applied to the VERTIMILL® data base ( The use of adminensional analysis in stirred mill power modeling dates back to the work of Since this time, the relationship between Newton’s and Reynold’s numbers has been used to not only predict how power changes in a given mill but also for mill scale-up. The main benefit of this model is that it is quite practical and provides a good engineering calculated prediction of mill power consumption. The adimensional power model requires the use of the medium (fluid, media, ore mix) viscosity which is not easily determined in the industrial context and not readily reported in the literature as can be attested to by the data sets used previously. On the other hand, the underlying assumption to the shear based stirred mill power model is the analogy of a viscometer which would mean that solving Eq. Using the data sets to produce the previous Having determined the Ne/Re relationship for these three mills from the published data, the next step is to determine if these same relationships can be determined from the shear based model. Recall that in the development of the model that produced the power results found in Using this function along with the fitted coefficients ( Based on these results, one could postulate that “viscosity of a particular water/ore/media mix would be the same for any stirred mill and the differences would only be found in the operating speed and the impellor/chamber design” ( There are a number of dimensions to this work that need to be addressed. The first is the validity of comparing ball mill and stirred mill impact and shear energy spectra as a means to support the development of a shear based stirred mill power model. To this end, both of these types of mills are confronted to one another especially in re-grind circuit applications. Although ball mills have been documented as being some 30% to 40% less efficient that some stirred mills ( Secondly, the use of the shear based model to determine medium viscosity allowed the calculation of Ne and Re numbers for published and industrial data. This led to the results presented in This observation tends to contradict the accepted understanding that for stirred systems the minimum slope for laminar flow the slopes of the three curves in The shear based power model is based on Newton’s law of viscosity. This law for a Newtonian fluid indicates that shear stress is a linear function shearing rate. The proportionality constant for a Newtonian fluid is a constant known as viscosity. However, for a non-Newtonian fluid, viscosity is no longer a constant but rather a function. As a result, how non-Newtonian fluid viscosity will affect an adimensional number such as Reynolds, Newton or the relationship between these two in addition to where the transition between “laminar” and “turbulent” flow regimes occur becomes the subject of on-going research such as the one related to defining a generalised Reynolds number formulation for non-Newtonian fluids ( Thirdly in terms of scale-up, there was little work completed on mill scale-up. However and despite the need to define a generalised Reynolds number formulation for a stirred mill’s fluid-particle-ball (or slurry-ball) mixture, the use of the shear based model with the Ne/Re approach provides the possibility that knowledge of the real mill Ne/Re relationship would not necessarily be needed in predicting mill scale-up. As a result, the Ne/Re approach to mill scale-up could be complemented with the use of the shear based stirred mill power model. On the other hand, it is important to understand that only power is being currently addressed in this model. Ore breakage is not included as is not wear or slurry transport. Ore breakage affects the size distribution which in turn affects the slurry properties and therefore the medium viscosity. Wear affects the mill geometry which can affect how the medium behaves and in turn potentially affect how viscosity will vary. How slurry flows through the medium undoubtedly will affect how viscosity changes and affect power consumption. All of these phenomena affect power and therefore will need to be included eventually in the model development. In order to underline this, consider Eq. These two observations indicate a possible conclusion. Essentially that there is a definite limit as to how precise the shear based power model can actually be. As this model is based on the assumption that viscosity of the medium (water, ore, media) is isotropic, the knowledge that the medium is actually anisotropic means that only more advanced mathematics and physics will overcome whatever limit there maybe with the shear based power model. There are therefore at least two challenges that need to be addressed in future work. The first is finding the limit to the shear based stirred mill power model while the second is to continue pushing the boundaries through research and validation of DEM/CFD models of stirred mills. The goal of this paper was to use adimensional analysis as a means of exploring how a recently developed shear based stirred mill power model behaves over a few data sets and discuss how this model could be improved and used for characterising industrial applications. In meeting the stated goal, a few conclusions can be made: the shear based power model can be used to calculate the medium (water, ore, media) viscosity, the calculated medium viscosity can be used to complete published or industrial stirred mill data needed to completed an adimensional analysis using Newton’s and Reynold’s number, this same Ne/Re analysis can be complemented with the shear base power model, although the shear based power model results have been validated with published and industrial data, the Ne/Re analysis indicate that medium viscosity is actually anisotropic which suggests that there will be a real limit to the applicability of the shear based power model. This last conclusion suggests two possible research directions: continue the development and validation of the shear based power model to its inevitable limit, continue the development of numerically intensive DEM/CFD models of stirred milling to overcome any limits in a mechanistic stirred mill power models such as the shear based power model. The author would like to thank Metso for granting permission to publish this paper. Further, the author would like to thank an undisclosed client for also granting permission to publish and present this work and associated results.