A coal preparation plant typically operates with multiple cleaning circuits to clean individual size fractions of run-of-mine coal. Coal preparation plants are traditionally optimized using the equalization of incremental product quality approach. Individual cleaning circuits are operated at the same specific incremental product quality so that the targeted overall plant product quality is achieved. Over the years, it has been well established that equal incremental product quality approach maximizes plant-yield for a given product quality constraint.
                  However, while dealing with multiple quality constraints, the incremental quality approach may not provide a complete solution to the optimization problem. It may be intuitive to realize that the dirtiest particle(s) in a coal product, with respect to ash content, may not be the same particle(s) with respect to sulfur content. Therefore, with increasing number of product quality constraints, which may include (but not limited to) limiting ash, sulfur and trace element contents, the plant has to be optimized based on each incremental product quality. Understandably, the operating points selected for each circuit to maximize plant-yield based on incremental ash content, may not be suitable for obtaining maximum plant yield based on incremental sulfur content. These limitations of the equalization of incremental product quality approach to satisfy multiple product quality constraints have been reviewed in detail in this publication with an example of ash and sulfur data collected from an operating coal preparation plant.Based on the size consist of the Run-of-mine (ROM) coal, a preparation plant utilizes three or four individual circuits to clean the entire ROM coal. For example, coal coarser than 12.5 mm may be cleaned in a heavy medium vessel circuit, 12.5 Incremental product quality concept is commonly used to maximize plant yield for a given quality constraint. By definition, incremental product quality refers to the quality of the dirtiest particle(s) present in any coal product, whereas the average product quality refers to the overall quality of the composite coal product. Numerous studies have been conducted in the past to develop suitable procedures for maximizing overall plant yield while satisfying a desired average product quality. Almost all of the past investigators discussed plant optimization with single product quality constraint with the exception of The present study investigates the limitations of dealing with multiple product quality constraints during plant optimization in greater details. Actual ash and sulfur data obtained from the tests conducted for each unit operations of a four-circuit coal preparation plant have been utilized as example to illustrate the limitations of the incremental product quality approach. Consequently, the study recommends the necessity of a better optimization method to maximize plant yield especially to satisfy multiple product quality constraints. A four-circuit plant investigated in this study uses heavy-medium to clean all of the coal coarser than 1 mm. A heavy medium vessel (HMV) is utilized to clean the plus 16 mm size fraction along with a heavy medium cyclone (HMC) cleaning the 16 Characteristic partition curves were fitted to the performance data obtained from at least five actual tests conducted in each cleaning circuit by varying the key operating condition. Medium density was varied in case of HMV and HMC, whereas splitter position and froth height were varied for the spirals and flotation cells, respectively. However, apparently due to fluctuations in the plant feed along with possible sampling errors, the flotation tests did not produce any meaningful data. Hence, it was decided to simulate the flotation performance based on laboratory flotation kinetic analysis of the sample of actual feed slurry reporting to the flotation cells in the plant. The modified normalized specific gravity (mean specific gravity fitting constant. Although the nature of the model equation remained the same, the fitting constant “ yield and grade at yield and grade at the next higher, i.e., ( incremental grade at ( Pursuing the traditional optimization approach, the incremental product quality was equalized from all four cleaning circuits to maximize the plant yield. A simple illustration of the approach is provided in The incremental product quality approach has been proved to be an excellent plant optimization approach to maximize clean coal yield, while dealing with only one quality constraint, i.e., product ash. However, this approach becomes increasingly complex and also may lead to erroneous conclusions if more than one product quality constraints have to be satisfied simultaneously. Incremental product ash, which is also referred to as the instantaneous ash content that cannot be directly measured, since it is the ash content of a material with a single precise density ( The product ash versus maximum plant yield relationship generated for an overall plant will be a better curve when it is generated by equalizing the incremental ash content than by equalizing the incremental sulfur content of each cleaning circuit. This phenomenon is illustrated by the plots shown in If multiple quality constraints can somehow be combined to form one constraint, it appears that the equalization of incremental product quality approach may be useful in maximizing clean coal yield from a plant. For example, ash and sulfur contents can be combined to form a new constraint, known as sulfur dioxide emission potential, represented by lb/Million Btu or kg/Billion Joule. The numerator of this new constraint is a function of the sulfur content, whereas the denominator is directly correlated to the ash content. Thus, based on the desired ash and sulfur contents in the product, the target SO In addition, incremental quality approach of plant optimization becomes increasingly complex and may result in erroneous conclusion when the yield–grade relationship from individual circuit does not follow a regular increasing or decreasing trend. Although, yield–ash relationship for many North American coals typically shows an increasing trend, the yield–sulfur relationship in many cases shows a complete reversal of the initial increasing trend and turns into a decreasing trend after certain point. This type of yield–sulfur trend, which is similar to that of the example plant, will show two different yield values corresponding to one sulfur content. This phenomenon will add significant complexities to the iterative approach used in determining the yield–sulfur and yield–ash relationships for the entire plant by combining the respective values from individual circuits. Furthermore, to optimize the plant for a variety of product ash contents or sulfur contents, a wide range of incremental quality values have to be common to each cleaning circuit product. However, at times for sulfur assays, this range is narrow to almost none, as shown in In light of the above discussion on the limitations of the incremental product quality approach, the authors strongly believe that there is a definite need for other optimization algorithms that could determine the optimal yield of the plant while satisfying the multiple product quality constraints simultaneously. The authors will report one such approach in a future publication. Equalization of incremental product quality has been a well accepted method for achieving maximum plant yield since in many cases product ash is the only important product constraint to be satisfied. However, this approach has limitations while trying to satisfy more than one important quality constraint. These limitations have been discussed in detail by using example plant data sets in this study. Since the dirtiest particle(s) with respect to ash assay is most likely different from that with respect to another assay (for example, sulfur), it is understandable to obtain different maximum yield values while trying to maximize plant yield values using equalization of incremental product ash and sulfur contents independently. It may be intuitive to expect the yield–ash relationship to be better when obtained by equalizing incremental ash content, whereas the yield–sulfur relationship to be better when obtained by equalizing incremental sulfur content. If in case the maximum plant yields obtained for both approaches are equal, it may result due to completely different combinations of individual circuit yields. In other words, the operating conditions selected for each cleaning circuit to maximize plant yield on the basis of incremental ash and sulfur will be different from each other. Thus, with increasing number of product quality constraints, the yield maximization process becomes increasingly complex and hence there is a need for a better plant optimization approach to deal with multiple product quality constraints. The authors express their sincere thanks to Illinois Clean Coal Institute and Department of Commerce and Economic Opportunity for funding the project without which the work could not have been conducted. The authors also express their thanks to the personnel of the Galatia Coal Preparation Plant of American Coal Company for providing significant support with the plant testing exercise and subsequent sample analyses. The authors are also highly indebted to the colleagues who directly or indirectly contributed for the successful completion of this study.