This study investigates the performance of a new vacuum spray flash desalinator, a core component of the open water cycle in a discharge thermal energy combined desalination (DTECD) technology using theoretical and experimental techniques. The feedwater contains 3.5wt% of NaCl while the inlet temperature range can vary over a range of 55°C to 75°C based on the low temperature utilised in the DTECD system. In order to design an efficient desalinator, physical aspects of the proposed vacuum spray flash evaporation (VSFE) should be studied. Thus, an experimental study was undertaken to verify the theoretical evaporation rate and centreline temperature data. The proposed desalinator was modelled using a CFD model implemented in the available package ANSYS FLUENT 16.2 and some results are compared with a thermodynamic model embedded in ASPEN/HYSY 8.0. It was observed that the defined thermodynamic models based on vapor-liquid equilibrium in the Aspen and Fluent can predict the evaporation rate with the average errors of 5% and 17%, respectively. Moreover, discrete phase model (DPM) approach can analyse the thermo-fluid field in the desalinator with acceptable accuracy about 9%. Droplets size, velocity, temperature and concentration profiles are predicted and the underlying physics are discussed regarding the VSFE geometry.Desalination is an important technology to provide potable water for many areas around the world. Due to the high amount of energy consumption required for water treatment, development of the new desalination technologies depend on alternative energy sources such as renewable and waste energies Discharge thermal energy combined desalination (DTECD) is a new combined desalinator, which recovers waste heat from an energy intensive industry and cogenerates freshwater and power The key component in the new LTTD process is a single-stage VSFE drum and it has already reported that how its performance affects significantly the overall performance of the DTECD system On the other hand, there are some articles about optimizing the spray flashing processes using a CFD approach: spray dryer with a downward flow The equations describing the conservation of mass, energy and momentum to predict the flow field and can be solved numerically. Behaviour of droplets as a dispersed phase in a continuous phase is simulated by a discrete phase model. Firstly, the compatibility of the standard Navier-Stokes equations in the FLUENT under vacuum conditions should be checked by calculating the Kundson number. The Kundson number can be used to determine the flow regime in a specific vacuum device by defining the degree of gas rarefaction For Kn ≤ One of the issues with spray flash evaporation simulation is the coupling of conservation equations between the droplets and the continuous phase. The mass conservation equation for the continuous phase is: The conservation equation of component “i” is obtained by: Source term in the mass conservation equation is defined using the droplet evaporation rate as The momentum equation is represented by: Besides, the interphase momentum transfer is based on interfacial forces exerted on the two phases and presented as: In this research only the interfacial drag force is considered according to Ropelato et al. assumption for modelling a distillation column The energy conservation equation is represented by: The following Eqs. A force balance equation is solved to obtain the droplet trajectories as: The embedded DPM concentration in the FLUENT is shown in Eq. Based on the classical D The defined equation of the superheated droplet is coupled to the solver only when the superheat pressure is less than the saturation pressure The Rosin-Rammler correlation The conceptual application for the proposed vacuum spray flash evaporation of water shown in Apart from the ideal gas law for vapor phase, the vapor-liquid thermodynamic equilibrium in the FLUENT package is modelled with Raoult's law There are different vapor-liquid thermodynamic equilibrium equations available in the ASPEN package, but an ENRTL equation is used for covering the electrolyte properties of the saline water and water in the proposed process The ENRTL thermodynamic model of ASPEN is applied to describe the evaporation rate in the vacuum desalinator. The experimental uncertainties were calculated using NIST Technical Note 1297 Here   The monitoring system used in this experiment recorded flow rates, temperatures and pressures of the streams. The uncertainties of experimental results were analysed according to the methodology described by Eq.  A 3D model for geometry of the vacuum chamber was generated and meshed in the ANSYSY 16.2 using unstructured cells. The embedded solver was used to solve the set of governing equations listed above. To simplify the complex geometry in The Realizable k–ε model and standard wall function was adopted as the turbulence model. It offers a good compromise in terms of accuracy and robustness for predicting the spreading rate of different jets boundary layers under strong adverse pressure gradients, separation, and recirculation Thermodynamic properties of the multicomponent saline water (3.5wt% of NaCl) were obtained by using ASPEN/HYSYS simulation. Subsequently, it was defined as an injected flow with a cone shape and 50 droplet trajectories in the FLUENT injection tab. The evaporation equations of the condensed droplets were defined by the user defined function (UDF) and coupled to the solver to cover the evaporation conditions at a pressure lower than that of saturation. Steady state CFD simulation was run at and the vacuum pressure was set to an absolute operating pressure of 0 The heated saline water was injected at a flow rate of 120 As shown in Based on the operating conditions, the overall evaporation rate of the system was varied from 3.6% to 6.7%. The ASPEN model cannot be used for simulating the temperature profile inside the chamber. Thus, the temperatures T At low vacuum range (between 0.1 and 30 The droplet trajectories of 100 particle streams are used to estimate flow pattern. Based on the operating conditions of base case and current spray angle (90°), the spray flash temperature and velocity reduction in each stream line are plotted as shown in The saline water concentration in the vapor as a continuous phase to is shown in  The single-stage vacuum spray flash desalinator is the core component of the water cycle in the new DTECD heat recovery system. The thermo-fluid behaviour and the evaporation efficiency of this proposed desalinator, which utilised low grade energy, were investigated. After validation of the model for evaporation rate, several predictions, considering the thermo-fluid behaviours of the vacuum spray flash desalinator were studied. The following conclusions can be summarized from the present study. The simulation results based on different thermodynamic models, which were embedded in ASPEN and FLUENT, are in agreement with experimental data for evaporation rate with average deviation of 5% and 17%, respectively. It can be concluded that ENRTL model shows better accuracy compared to the other equations of state. The CFD model has good accuracy (about 9%) for predicting the temperature profile of the proposed desalinator. This investigation shows how design parameters of the vacuum chamber, such as nozzle type, length and diameter, affect the evaporation rate. Nevertheless, further research is needed to investigate the optimum design for achieving a higher evaporation rate. The CFD analysis based on DPM approach predicts that the percentage of evaporation rate inside vacuum chamber increased with a decrease in the DPM concentration value and the maximum turbulent intensity occurs near the nozzle tip. The numerical analysis reveals that the positive pressure regarding injection has not significant effect on vacuum condition inside the chamber. It is expected that the accuracy of the simulation will increase if the film and pool evaporation equations are coupled to the Eulerian-Lagrangian model.  energy parameter energy parameter concentration [kmole/m constant constant specific heat capacity [kJ/kg drag coefficient [kg/m diffusivity coefficient [m force (N) gravity (m/s Gibbs free energy [kJ/kg] sensible enthalpy [kJ/kg] heat transfer coefficient [kJ/m latent heat of vaporization [kJ/kg] Jacob number mass transfer coefficient [m/s] equilibrium constant thermal conductivity [kJ/m Kundson number Mean free path [m] mass [kg] mass flux [kg/s] Molar flux [kmole/m Nusselt number pressure [kPa] Prandtel number heat transfer [kJ] radius [m] gas constant [kJ/kmole Reynolds number Schmidth number Sherwood number time [s] temperature [°C] velocity [m/s] Weber number, mole fraction of liquid phase mole fraction of vapor phase  binary nonrandomness constant dimensionless interaction parameter activity coefficient source term size distribution kinematic viscosity [kg/m Pi number density [kg/m turbulent stress tensor [kg/m diameter [m] uncertainty associated uncertainty  boiling point continuous or gas phase continuous to discrete phase droplet or discrete phase energy component “i” injection component “j” mass momentum reference saturation superheat vapor infinitely far from the droplet  components droplet number The authors would like to thank the head of School of Engineering, Edith Cowan University (ECU) who prepared all required facilities for performing this project. Also, support from technical staff of the mechanical workshop at the School of Engineering for manufacturing the experimental skid, is gratefully acknowledged.