PbS nanocrystals using surfactant assisted mechanochemical synthesis have been prepared by co-milling of lead acetate (CH3COO)2Pb3H2O and sodium sulfide Na2S9H2O. The methods of XRD, FE-SEM, TEM (HRTEM), UV–vis, specific surface area measurements as well as reactivity in acidic FeCl3 media were used for the nanocrystals characterization. The XRD patterns confirmed the presence of galena PbS (JCPDS 5-592) whatever treatment conditions were applied. The strong observable peaks indicate the highly crystalline nature in formation of PbS nanostructures where preferential crystal growth in the (200) direction after addition of ethylenediamine (EDA), sodiumdodecylsulphate (SDS) and ethylendiaminetetraacetic disodium salt dihydrate (EDH) surfactants has been observed. The surface weighted crystallite sizes 3, 8, 11 and 19nm have been calculated from XRD data using the Warren–Averbach method for surfactant-free and/or EDA, SDS and EDH surfactants assisted mechanochemical synthesis. The leaching rate of galena PbS in acidic FeCl3 solution has been studied. The dependence of PbS nanocrystals reactivity on preferential growth parameter is documented. The highest value of the specific rate constant of leaching, k
                     0/S
                     
                        A
                      has been obtained for the mechanochemically synthesized PbS in presence of EDH surfactant.Semiconductors with reduced dimensions have shown to exhibit electronic and optical properties which vary with size of particles, thus making them potential candidates for applications involving tunability of optical and/or electronic properties Lead sulphide, PbS, as representative of IV–VI semiconductors has a narrow band gap of 0.41 Many synthesis methods have been reported in recent years for the preparation of PbS nanoparticles under different synthesis conditions There are only few papers where mechanochemistry has been applied to synthesize nanocrystalline PbS PbS nanocrystals were synthesized from lead acetate (CH Mechanochemical solid-state synthesis of nanocrystalline PbS was performed in a laboratory planetary mill Pulverisette 6 (Fritsch, Germany). The following milling conditions were used: loading of the mill with 50 balls from tungsten carbide of 10 The mechanochemical synthesis of PbS nanocrystals from the corresponding lead acetate and sodium sulphide proceeds according to the overall equation At the beginning of the synthesis lead acetate was milled for 5 The flowchart of the synthesis process is given in The XRD measurements were performed by employing the X-ray diffractometer Siemens, D5000 bearing Bragg–Brentano geometrical configuration. The CuK The synthesized samples were analyzed using FE-SEM LEO 1550 scanning microscope. The samples were sufficiently conductive, thus they were not coated with any conductive material in order to avoid artefacts. TEM (HRTEM) examination was performed in a FE-TEM JEM-2100 F microscope (Jeol, Japan). The specific surface, The reactivity of PbS nanocrystals by FeCl The kinetics of Pb dissolution can be described by 2nd order polynomial Eq.  When milling is performed in the presence of a surfactant ( Moreover, the differences in (2 The crystallite size and strain of the PbS nanocrystals were estimated by using Warren–Averbach analysis The results depict the nature of progressive microstructure evolution of the mechanochemically synthesized PbS. The sample prepared without surfactant contains the smallest nanocrystallites and a higher value of microstrain. In FE-SEM microphotographs of mechanochemically synthesized PbS nanocrystals are given in The morphology of nanoparticles in case of surfactant application resembles plate-like particles instead of expected cube-like ones. The formation of plates instead of cubes roughly corresponds to values of parameter Δ TEM (HRTEM) images in HRTEM image in  From the leaching curves in The presented paper describes the structural, surface and morphology changes as well as reactivity of PbS nanocrystals prepared by mechanochemical synthesis. Several surfactants have been applied into milling during synthesis. The XRD patterns confirmed the presence of galena PbS (JCPDS 5-592) whatever treatment conditions were applied. The strong observable peaks in XRD patterns indicate the highly crystalline nature in formation of PbS nanostructures. The surface weighted crystallite sizes 3, 8, 11 and 19 The support through the