Alkyl phosphorus esters, alkyl amines, amine oxides and their mixtures with amines (Hydrometallurgy 46 (1997) 363; Solv. Extr. Ion Exch. 16 (6), (1998) 1407) were used to extract gold from thiosulfate solution but the re-adjustment of pH was required and extraction efficiency was poor in the alkaline pH range. In this study, trioctylmethylammonium chloride (TOMAC) was used as an extractant to extract gold from thiosulfate leaching solution without pH and other adjustments. The effects of gold concentration, pH, ammonia, thiosulfate and cupric ion concentrations, extractant concentration, diluent and retention time on gold extraction were investigated. It was found that 0.18 mol/L extractant diluted with n-octane+1-hexanol at O/A ratio of 1:1 could extract more than 99% of gold from the thiosulfate solution at the standard leaching condition (1.0 mol/L S2O3
                     2−, 0.03 mol/L Cu2+ and 3.0 mol/L NH3/NH4
                     + at pH 10.2) in 0.6 ks (1 ks=1000 s). The loading capacity and selectivity of the gold extractant, trioctylmethylammonium chloride, were also studied.In recent years, the comprehensive utilization of natural resources has become more and more popular. Solvent extraction, a hydrometallurgical process, is an essential process in the flow sheet of comprehensive natural resource utilization, especially in the recovery of precious metals. Solvent extraction has made great progress in recent years. Several investigators In recent years, as the environmental problems become more and more serious, a lot of countries, such as the states of California, Colorado and Wisconsin in the U.S.A., Japan, Turkey and the Czech Republic In practical operation, the direct gold extraction from the final thiosulfate pregnant solution without pH adjustment would be advantageous. Several investigations The reagents used in this investigation, trioctylmethylammonium chloride (80% pure), copper sulfate (99.5% pure), ammonium hydroxide (28% pure), The aqueous gold pregnant solution was produced by leaching sponge gold with a solution containing 1.0 mol/L (NH In the extraction test, 10 ml of gold pregnant solution (aqueous phase), 9 ml extractant–diluent mixture and 1 ml 1-hexanol (organic phase) were put into a 100-ml separation flask (O/A=ratio of organic/aqueous solution volume=1 was used hereafter) and was shaken on a mechanical vibrator at a frequency of 4.1 H. The experimental temperature was around 298 K (ambient temperature). After a certain period of shaking, the solution in the flask was allowed to settle for 1.2 ks. The gold concentration in both the organic and aqueous layers was assayed with an ICP, SPS3000ICP spectrophotometer and the gold extraction percentage was calculated. The extraction percentage of gold was calculated by the following equation: Effects of TOMAC and thiosulfate concentrations on the shaking time (for both organic and aqueous solutions) required to reach an equilibrium for the gold extraction were established in the initial stage of this investigation.  Extraction test were conducted from a 1.0×10 Effect of TOMAC concentration on the gold extraction was investigated in both 1.0×10 The ionic species such as S The pregnant solution contained 1.0×10 Cu In order to investigate the effect of NH The gold concentration in the pregnant solution will be different when different ores are treated. It could vary from 3×10 In liquid–liquid extraction systems, the diluents usually have two functions: one is to increase the solubility of the extractants in order to increase their extraction capacity; the second function is to reduce the loss of extractants into the aqueous phase. Different diluents could have different effects on the extraction process. Therefore, the effects of three of the most commonly used diluents Tests were conducted to investigate the extraction capacity of TOMAC and its maximum saturated loading capacity (the ratio of Au/TOMAC when TOMAC was saturated with Au). In order to allow the extraction reaction to reach complete equilibrium, the extraction time used in this investigation was 0.9 ks. The saturation test was first conducted with a pregnant solution of low gold concentration, containing 1.0×10 The saturation tests were then conducted in a pregnant solution of high gold concentration containing 5.84×10 These findings confirmed the result of Because many metallic ions such as those of Fe, Pd and Pt do not dissolve in (NH Trioctylmethylammonium chloride has been used in this investigation to extract gold from thiosulfate leach solution. The results can be summarized as follows. The experimental results indicated that TOMAC could successfully extract gold from thiosulfate solution under the standard leaching conditions (1.0 mol/L S A 0.18 mol/L TOMAC solution based on any of the three tested diluents could achieve over 99% gold extraction in the pH range of 5.5–10.5. If benzene is used as diluent, the extraction time should be as short as possible. As the extraction time went beyond 0.9 ks, the [Au(S High concentrations of (NH There is a loading capacity limit for TOMAC. The higher the gold concentration in the pregnant solution, the greater the concentration of TOMAC required to extract the gold. To extract gold from a solution containing 1.0×10 The extractant TOMAC has selectivity towards gold extraction. The selective extraction covers a wide pH range. At low pH, both gold and silver extraction was over 99%. The silver extraction decreased as the pH increased, while there was no effect on gold extraction. As pH exceeded 8.5, there was no silver extraction but gold extraction was maintained at over 99%. The selective extraction of gold was also achieved from a solution containing Cu but the selectivity from Pb was lowered. At pH 10.2, the metal extraction by TOMAC was 99.9% gold, 3.6% copper, 0% silver and 72.6% lead.     