For production of cyanobacterial gas vesicles, polyethyleneimine (PEI) was used as flocculent to enhance the collection of buoyant Anabaena flos-aquae cells by flotation. During the flocculation-flotation process, PEI was found to cause the cells to release blue pigment(s) (presumably phycocyanin) and probably other cytoplasmic materials. The kinetic profile of the pigment release was followed and compared with that of the culture flotation. The effects of PEI on the cyanobacterial cells were also examined using transmission electron microscopy. Unlike the previous reports for the effects of PEI on Gram-negative bacteria, our observations did not reveal significant morphological changes of the PEI-exposed cells of A. flos-aquae. There were no apparent negative effects on the desired product, gas vesicles, during the PEI-induced flocculation-flotation process for cell collection.Gas vesicles are found in many planktonic microorganisms. Shaped as hollow cylindrical tubes closed at each end by conical caps, their sizes vary widely with the species Gas vesicle production is, however, rather challenging In the current work, for investigation of the above effects, the release profile of the blue pigment(s) was followed and compared with the flotation profile of the PEI-flocculated culture. In addition, PEI had been reported to increase the permeability of the outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria, possibly by interacting with the membrane components such as lipopolysaccharides and proteins The samples examined in this study were taken from the continuous culture of For the transmission electron microscopy (TEM) study, the culture sample was divided into eight test tubes (in four duplicate groups). One group of samples was kept as the PEI-free control. The other three groups were added with 35 After discarding the supernatant, the cells were prepared for sectioning using the method of Ott and Brown The release profile of blue pigments from PEI-exposed cells, followed by measurements of optical density at 625 For comparison, the flotation profile of the flocculated culture, indicated as the clearance height below the floating biomass, is also shown in The TEM experiment was designed to observe the effect of different lengths of PEI exposure (0–90 On the other hand, one important difference was noticed in this TEM study: while no cells observed in the control sample had gas vesicles, many in the PEI-treated samples had gas vesicles inside, especially those treated for 60 and 90 This work was supported by the Ohio Board of Regents for Ohio Bioprocessing Research Consortium.