Carburization and creep are the main causes of failure in the heat resistant tubes of ethylene cracking furnaces leading to a decrease in ductility and embrittlement of the cracking tubes. The aim of present study was to develop a semi-robot for inspection and classification of the carburized zones in heat resistant tubes. Regarding the magnetic characteristics of the formed matrix in carburized zones, the carburization sensors were successfully employed for examination of the carburized layers. The comparison between data acquired via this sensor-based method and those obtained from chemical etching implied a high enough compatibility and appropriate accuracy of the sensor-based measurements. This feasible analyzing method was effectively utilized in a semi-robot that moves on surface of the tubes and establishes a carburization profile. Finally, these carburization profiles together with ovalness graphs were employed for assessment of the points susceptible to embrittlement and failure in petrochemical industries.The tubes used in thermal cracking furnaces in an ethylene manufacturing process are usually made of HP and HK grades of heat resistant stainless steel; these parts significantly influence the economical/technical features of these plants. Each group of heat resistant steel tubes is called a coil and a furnace includes several coils. Typically, these coils work at temperatures 800–1100 Carburization and creep are the main phenomena that cause failure in these tubes and decrease their life time A conventional method for the evaluation of carburization is the measurement of fractional volumetric ratio of chromium carbides in the micro-structure of tube walls The magnetic flux measurement can be applicably used to correlate the magnetic response of carburized austenitic steel tubes (ferromagnetic behavior) with the volumetric fraction of chromium carbides (Cr A literature survey shows that there are some attempts to develop an appropriate technique for the detection of magnetic carburized layers inside thermal cracking tubes. Kasai et al. Another sign that shows the risk of rupture in thermal cracking tubes is the ovalness of tube. Carbides formation in internal layers of the tubes leads to volume expansion of these areas. Generally, there is a proximate relation between the carburization ratio and the creep remaining life with outer diameter (OD) of the tubes In present study, the magnet tests together with ovalness measurements have been conducted for detection and evaluation the high risk places in thermal cracking tubes in Jam petrochemical complex (Asalooyeh, Iran). From the industrial point of view, the maximum allowance of carburization in tube wall is 50% (according to manufacturer recommendations) to keep the process conditions suitable and safe and to decrease risk of carburization. Accordingly, a group of carburization and ovalness sensors have been utilized to develop a semi-robot that can move on the cracking tubes and make the profiles of carburization and ovalness along the tubes.  The carburization sensor consisted of two main parts; a small suspended permanent magnet (for producing a stable magnetic field) and a fix linear analogue electronic magnetic field sensor (for monitoring and recording the magnetic field variations). All the tests were carried out with four replicates and conducted in a randomized order to avoid systematic bias. In order to evaluate the accuracy of data obtained from the sensors, they were compared and verified by the data obtained from chemical etching of 72 samples using NH As a matter of experience, detrimental physical/chemical processes occurred in some zones of heat resistant stainless steel tubes, are unpredictable. Furthermore, thermal distribution in these furnaces is non-uniform; i.e. carburization of the tubes is an unexpected process in the inner side of tubes. Thus, random inspection of the tubes is not a reliable approach for monitoring and controlling these tubes. A semi-robot was established that is able to vertically move over the external surface of a thermal cracking tube (∼5 For evaluating the reproducibility of the data obtained by a certain sensor at different runs, two replicates that obtained from a given carburized tube by each sensor were compared with each other. The results of this comparison are presented in In order to examine that whether the different carburization sensors result in a unique response or not, the data corresponding to a given sensor (second and third) were compared to that related to other sensors (fifth and sixth) under same conditions ( The measurements via ovalness sensors were conducted for the samples prepared from carburized tubes (5 In order to collate the actual carburization amount that occurred in the tubes with the data acquired by carburization sensors, etching test was employed. Also, In this study the carburized layers inside thermal cracking tubes was effectively identified and quantified by the use of a magnetic sensor-based semi-robot under industrial conditions. Besides, the ovalness intensified during carburization process was evaluated. The reproducibility and comparability of the carburization sensors showed the appropriate applicability of the developed semi-robot. Moreover, the accuracy (tolerance) of ovalness sensors revealed that these sensors could estimate the value of diameter with an error less than 1%. A linear correlation could be also established between the sensor voltage and the carburization percent that fitted 94% of the variation in the data. The authors would like to acknowledge the Jam Petrochemical Complex Inspection Department and turning unit for their cooperation.