In this experiment, copper-base composites reinforced with 30nm and 5μm SiC particles are fabricated on the surface of a purecopper sheetvia friction stir processing (FSP). Microstructure, mechanical properties and wear resistance of friction stir processed (FSPed) materials are investigated as a function of volume fraction of SiC particles. Results show that, applying FSP, without SiC particles, increases the percent elongation significantly (more than 2.5 times) and decreases copper's strength. Adding micro- and nano-sized SiC particles decreases the tensile strength and percent elongation. Increasing the volume fraction or decreasing the reinforcing particle size enhances the tensile strength and wear resistance and lowers the percent elongation.Recently, there has been a great demand for high-strength, high-wear-resistance and high-conductivity connector materials with rapid advancement in the electronic industries A considerable number of reports have been published on the unconventional mechanical behavior of ultrafine grained materials as a result of extremely high density of grain boundary area Metal matrix composites (MMCs) are a new class of materials that exhibit good wear resistance and high hardness Owing to excellent electrical and thermal conductivity, high hardness values, and good wear and frictional properties, Cu/SiC MMCs have been widely studied Friction stir processing (FSP) based on friction stir welding is a solid-state technique used for material processing in order to modify microstructural and mechanical properties. Also, it is possible to produce a surface composite layer by this process In spite of several investigations done on the FSP of other metals, there is no document about friction stir processing of pure copper. In the present work, FSP has been employed to modify the surface properties of pure copper and Cu/SiC surface composite layer was fabricated using micro- and nano-sized SiC particles. Effects of size and volume fraction of SiC particles on mechanical properties of the composite have been investigated. The material used in this work was a pure copper plate, 130 FSPed surfaces were prepared by standard metallographic techniques and etched for 8 Tensile tests of the pure copper and the specimens FSPed with and without SiC particles were carried out at ambient temperature by an instron electronic tensile machine at the strain rate of 10 Friction and wear performance of specimens were evaluated with a pin-on-disc test machine. Specimens were prepared by wire cut in 5  Microstructure of the base metal is shown in The phenomenon which forces thermo-mechanically processed materials to have very small grains is called dynamic recrystallization. During the process, material undergoes severe plastic deformation. During plastic deformation, the grains are broken and a large number of low-angle misorientated grain boundaries are created; furthermore highly favored places for nucleating recrystallization are produced Fine-grain microstructures have a large area of grain boundary and therefore a large stored energy, and are inherently susceptible to grain growth during the high-temperature deformation Additionally, presence of SiC particles restricts the grain growth. Pinning effect of SiC particles during the grain growth impedes the migration of grain boundaries. Decreasing the particle size intensifies the pinning of the grain boundary as a result of larger particle number in the same volume fraction. Besides, it is worth mentioning that SiC particles cause inhomogeneous local deformation which assists the break-up of the grains increases the nucleation sites, intensifies the pinning effect of particles, increases the break-up of pre-existing grains, and thus, decreases the grain size severely.  increasing the nucleation sites, intensifying the pinning effect, increasing the break-up of pre-existing grains. The microhardness profiles of the specimens FSPed without powder and with micro- and nano-sized SiC particles in different volume fractions are shown in The hardness value in the FSPed specimens with powder is higher than that of the base metal. This is because of (1) dispersion of the SiC particles as a harder phase in the pure copper matrix, (2) severe grain refinement with respect to the base metal, and (3) quench hardening resulted from different thermal contractions between the SiC particles and the matrix According to the well-known Hall–Petch relationship, the smaller grain size results in a higher hardness value. However, the average hardness of FSPed specimen with 18% micro-sized SiC particles is higher than that of the FSPed specimen with 6% nano-sized SiC particles in spite of having larger grain size. As highly reported in literature  Reduction of the tensile strength in FSPed specimen without powder as compared to the as-received copper is mainly because of the release of residual compressive stresses (created during rolling in production processes) and softening of the copper matrix On the other hand, the plastic deformation occurred in thermo-mechanical affected zone (TMAZ) has increased the dislocation density in this zone. Regions with high dislocation density (dislocation pile-ups) are susceptible to crack nucleating Compared to the specimen FSPed without powder, the tensile strength and percent elongation of all FSPed specimens with SiC particles (either micro- or nano-sized ones) are lower. In the specimens with powder, fracture takes place in the SZ where the crack nucleates in the interface between the SiC particles and the copper matrix. Thanks to the smaller grain size, the tensile strength of the specimens FSPed with nano-sized SiC particles is a bit higher than that of the specimens with micro-sized particles; the smaller the grain size, the higher the required crack nucleating stress Additionally, as can be seen in It is worth mentioning that contrary to the tensile strength, the yield strength in the specimens FSPed with powder is higher than that of the specimen FSPed without powder. The main reasons for improving of yield strength of microcomposites are higher hardness values and smaller grain size  Enhanced hardness of the micro and nanocomposite layers compared to the base metal. The good dispersion of SiC particles and fine grain structure are the main reasons of this phenomenon. It is well-established that the wear resistance of materials increases by enhancing their hardness Great reduction of direct load contact between the Cu/SiC micro and nanocomposite surface and disk in comparison with pure copper due to the load bearing component action of the hard SiC particles It is also found that the nanocomposite layer shows superior wear resistance compared to the composite with micro-sized particles. This may be due to the higher microhardness values, stronger bonding between copper matrix and nano-sized SiC particles and more reduction of direct load contact between nanocomposite and disk resulted from existence of higher number of SiC particles on this surface. In addition, increasing the volume fraction of both micro- and nano-sized SiC particles enhances the wear resistance of the composite layers.  It can be seen that the average friction coefficient of the FSPed specimens with powder is slightly higher than the pure copper. It is due to the obstacle action of hard SiC particles in composite which results in higher resistance against surface sliding SEM images of worn surfaces of the base metal and micro and nanocomposite layers are shown in Additionally, the loose debris particles are clearly seen on the worn surfaces of composite layers ( In this work, we presented a detailed study on microstructural, mechanical and wear properties of Cu/SiC composites produced by dispersing 5 The grain size of fabricated composite layers with both micro- and nano-particles was considerably less than that of the FSPed specimen with no particles. In constant volume fraction, decreasing the size of SiC particles from 5 In the absence of reinforcing particles, in comparison to the base metal, the average hardness of FSPed specimen decreased. On the contrary, the hardness values of all composites with different SiC particle sizes and volume fractions were more than that of the base metal. The hardness of composites increased by increasing the volume fraction and decreasing the size of reinforcing particles. FSP of pure copper sheets without powder significantly increased the percent elongation and decreased the tensile strength. Regardless of the size and volume fraction of SiC particles, the tensile strength and percent elongation of the composites were lower than those of the FSPed specimen without powder. However, the yield strength of FSPed specimens Increasing the volume fraction of both micro- and nano-sized SiC particles enhanced the wear resistance of the composite layer. Also, a higher enhancement in wear resistance of composites was observed when nano-sized particles were used. Iranian Nanotechnology Initiative is gratefully appreciated for partial financial support.