The aim of this experimental study was to investigate the neuroprotective effect of Royal jelly (RJ) on traumatic spinal cord injury (SCI). Twenty-one New Zealand male rabbits, weighing between 2.5 and 3.0kg were divided into three groups: Sham (no drug or operation, n
                     =7), Control (laminectomy+single dose of 1ml/kg saline orally, after trauma; n
                     =7) and RJ (laminectomy+100mg/kg RJ, orally, after trauma, n
                     =7). Laminectomy was performed at T10 and balloon catheter was applied extradurally for traumatic SCI. Four and 24h after surgery, rabbits were evaluated according to the Tarlov scoring system. Blood, cerebrospinal fluid and tissue sample from spinal cord were taken for measurements of antioxidant status or detection of apoptosis. Four hours after SCI, all animals in control or RJ treated groups became paraparesic. Significant improvement was observed in RJ treated group, 24h after SCI, with respect to control. Traumatic SCI led to increase in the lipid peroxidation and decrease enzymic or non-enzymic endogenous antioxidative defense systems, and increase in apoptotic cell numbers. RJ treatment mostly prevented lipid peroxidation and also augmented endogenous enzymic or non-enzymic antioxidative defense systems. Again, RJ treatment significantly decreased the apoptotic cell number induced by SCI.Traumatic spinal cord injury (SCI) leads to serious biochemical and pathological events and functional deficit. The pathophysiology of spinal cord injury is extremely complex and not fully understood. The initial mechanical trauma (contusion and compression) causing immediate cell death in the spinal cord is known as primary injury. After primary injury, further pathophysiological processes such as hypoxia, edema and inflammation, altered blood flow and changes in microvascular permeability are triggered; thus, lesions greatly enlarge and worsen by secondary injury ( Recently, studies have been focused on the prevention of secondary injury in spinal cord trauma. Previous clinical trials showed that minocycline or early intravenous administration of methylprednisolone significantly improves motor and sensory functions after SCI ( In recent years, the physiological functionality of foods has received much attention, due to the increasing interest in human health, and it has been studied  The neuroprotective effect of RJ in SCI has not yet been studied. Related to neuroprotective effect of RJ is the first study done in SCI. Thus, the aim of current study was to investigate the potential neuroprotective effect of RJ against secondary injury after experimental SCI in rabbit. The investigation was conducted in accordance with the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals published by the US National Institutes of Health (NIH Publication No. 85-23, revised 1996) and approval has been received from our institutional Animal Ethics Committee. Twenty-one New Zealand male rabbits, weighing between 2.5 and 3.0 Fresh RJ was produced in the same year and was provided by same beekeepers (Mersin, Turkey). Samples of RJ were collected when larvae of queen honey bees were 3 All rabbits, in control and RJ groups, were anesthetized via intramuscular injection of xylazine (Bayer, İstanbul, Turkey) 5 The main reason for the use of balloon compression model was to form a partial spinal cord lesion. For this model, rabbits were ideal choice since they have a wider spine channel. ( Four and 24 Hydrogen peroxide, GSH, thiobarbituric acid, phosphate buffer, butylated hydroxytoluene, trichloroacetic acid, EDTA, [5,5-dithiobis-(2-nitrobenzoic acid)], disodium hydrogen phosphate, phenylendiamine, sodium azide, 2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazine, ethanol, hexane, sodium nitrite, sodium nitrate, sulfanilamide, Whole blood was collected into heparinized tubes, and MDA and GSH levels were studied on the same day of admission. Blood was also collected into a polystyrene microtube, and after clotting, centrifuged at 1000× MDA (as an important indicator of lipid peroxidation) levels were measured according to a method of Estimation of the reduced glutathione was measured by the method of Beutler et al. by a spectrophotometric method ( Serum vitamin C (ascorbic acid) level was determined after derivatization with 2.4-dinitrophenylhydrazine ( The concentrations of nitrate and nitrite were detected by the methods of Miranda et al. ( CAT activity was measured according to the method of Aebi ( A TUNEL (terminal deoxynucleotidyl-transferase-mediated dUTP nick-end labeling) assay was used to identify double stranded DNA fragmentation, characteristic of DNA degradation by apoptosis. An ApopTag On each slide, six fields were randomly selected and positive cells were counted at the healthy tissue which is situated at the peripheries of damaged areas. To quantitate extents of apoptosis, we recorded numbers of TUNEL-positive cells in each group. Finally, the overall mean counts for each set of specimens in each group were calculated, and mean group values were compared ( Statistical analysis was performed with the Statistical Package for the Social Sciences for Windows (SPSS version 10.0, Chicago, IL, USA). All values were expressed as mean Animals in sham group had normal neurological outcome (mean Tarlov score was 4). After 4 The levels of MDA and GSH in whole blood of experimental groups were presented in Comparison of nitrite, retinol and    The results of this study showed that the number of apoptotic cell significantly increases after SCI. Furthermore, RJ treatment could attenuate the SCI-induced apoptosis ( Secondary damage in spinal cord trauma is believed to be a result of a several destructive process such as increase in some excitotoxic neuromediators, excessive calcium release, ROS and lipid peroxidation, edema, hemorrhage and ischemia, all of them can cause dysfunction and death in neuronal cells. Thus, after spinal cord trauma, permanent neurological deficits due to the loss of neuronal cells and axons may arise. Although some therapeutic agents are used in SCI, there is still no effective treatment for prevention of secondary injury. Thus, a number of studies have been focused on the treatment of secondary damage. ROS-induced lipid peroxidation is well known that one of the most important component precipitating posttraumatic neuronal degeneration in the spinal cord injury. ROS react with lipids and cause peroxidative changes that result in elevated lipid peroxidation. The increase in lipid peroxidation may be related to decrease in enzymatic and nonenzymatic antioxidants of defense mechanisms. Due to large lipid content and high oxygenation, lipid peroxidation related cellular damage in central nervous system might be easily formed by ROS. Moreover, antioxidative defense system of neurons, unlike many other cells, is believed to be insufficient. Thus, susceptibility of the neurons from oxidative stress and permanent tissue damage caused by ROS are more than that of other cells. RJ, a food produced by the hypo-pharyngeal and mandibular glands of the worker honey bees (Apis mallifera Linne’) contains many important compounds with biological activity, such as free amino acids, proteins, sugars, fatty acids(mainly 10-hydroxy-2-decenoic acid; 10-HDA), minerals (mainly iron and calcium) and vitamins (mainly thiamine, niacine, riboflavin) ( In the present study, we tested whether the treatment of RJ immediately after experimental spinal cord injury has protective effect on biochemical, histopathological and behavioral recovery. Various methods are used to show the level of lipid peroxidation in the organisms. MDA is an important and the most commonly used indicator of lipid peroxidation and its level increases in tissues when they are exposed to oxidative stress. Numerous studies have postulated that MDA is significantly increased in animals exposed to traumatic SCI ( GSH, a ubiquitous thiol-containing tripeptide and an important cellular antioxidant, has various biological functions, one of which is scavenging of reactive oxygen species, free radicals, and reactive metabolites. Its level is often increased in the blood and tissues as an adaptive response against oxidative stress. It also acts as a substrate for antioxidant and detoxifying enzyme GPx ( Antioxidant vitamins ascorbic acid, retinol and β-carotene play an important acute and chronic role in reducing or eliminating the oxidative damage produced by ROS ( As for enzymatic antioxidants, SOD, CAT and GPx play an important role in preventing the cells from oxidative damage. SOD catalyzes the conversion of superoxide radical to hydrogen peroxide and molecular oxygen. While CAT, it catalyzes the reduction of hydrogen peroxides and protects the tissues against to reactive hydroxyl radicals. GPx, is selenoprotein and it oxidizes GSH to glutathione disulfide (GSSG) which is then reduced to GSH by glutathione reductase, and reduces the hydroperoxides. Decreased activities of enzymatic antioxidants SOD and GPx have been well demonstrated in SCI. The decreased activity of SOD and GPx in SCI, which could be due to increased consumption for free radicals’ detoxification ( It is well known that nitric oxide (NO) possesses both antioxidant and pro-oxidant properties ( Used method in the present study for SCI led to significant neurological deficit in rabbits. Some neurological deficits after traumatic SCI may arise from the first hours on, up to the first week and neurological recovery is seen after a long time. Tarlov’s scoring is simple and appropriate behavioral test for the evaluation of neurological deficite, and it demonstrates functional recovery after SCI in animals ( Apoptosis or programmed cell death occurs physiologically during development and aging, and it is necessary for maintain the normal cell populations in tissues. At the same time, it occurs pathologically as a defense mechanism when cells are damaged by noxious stimuli and conditions. Thus, organism gets rid of unwanted cells. In previous study, apoptosis following SCI has been determined in neurons and glial cells in the zone of the lesion 1 Traumatic SCI was found to lead an increase in the lipid peroxidation and a decrease in enzymatic or nonenzymatic endogenous antioxidative defense systems. Furthermore, it was observed that SCI led to apoptosis in spinal cord tissue. A preliminary study was performed to investigate the neuroprotective effect of The authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest. This work was presented as poster in 14th European Congress of Neurosurgery (EANS 2011) in Rome, Italy.