The effect of the addition of inulin (5 and 10%) on the phenolic content and in vitro gastrointestinal digestion of tomato sauces has been investigated. Results have shown that the addition of inulin to tomato sauce significantly decreased the total phenolic content (57–68%), total flavonoid content (48–60%), and total antioxidant capacity (49–61%). Similarly, all assays of the sauce containing both 5% and 10% inulin, showed a slight decrease during in vitro gastrointestinal digestion of tomato sauces. Higher levels of inulin added to tomato sauce resulted in the greatest decrease in phenolic content, probably because of the interaction between inulin and phenolic compounds. To address the effects of inulin on the global metabolite profile of tomato sauce, an untargeted metabolomics approach was followed. Changes related to the presence of inulin suggest that inulin quenches a subset of unidentified compounds which are present in sauce but not in fruit, suggesting that inulin can contribute to the conservation of fruit properties in tomato sauce.Tomato and tomato-based products are important sources of bioactive compounds such as vitamin C, carotenoids, flavonoids, and hydroxycinnamic acids which are all standard components in the Mediterranean diet. Epidemiological studies revealed an association between the consumption of tomatoes and tomato products, including their phytochemicals, and a reduced risk of various chronic diseases such as cardiovascular disease and certain types of cancer and especially, prostate cancer ( In summary, the first aim of this study was to examine how the addition of dietary fiber (5% and 10%) affected the detectable phenolic composition of tomato sauces. The second aim was to examine whether the release of the tomato phenolics in an Fresh tomato samples (TF) ( Moisture contents of the samples were analysed according to the Turkish Standard 1129-ISO 1026 method (Turkish For each tomato sample, 3 independent extractions were performed as described previously by Total phenolic content (TPC) was determined using Folin-Ciocalteu reagent as described previously by Total flavonoid content (TFC) was measured using the method detailed by Total antioxidant capacity (TAC) was determined by two different An LC-FTMS platform was used for the analysis of fruit, sauce and sauce LC-FTMS data were acquired and visualized using Xcalibur software. For baseline correction, noise estimation and spectral alignment, the MetAlign software package (  All analyses were performed using three biological and three technical replicates. The results are expressed as means The moisture content of the tomato samples ranged from 93.3% to 75.1% and is given in Total phenolic (TPC) and total flavonoid (TFC) contents of the fresh tomato and tomato sauce processing samples are presented in The TAC values of fresh tomato were found to be 1636.8 The major phenolic compounds rutin, rutin-apioside, naringenin chalcone and naringenin, and the major glycoalkaloid α-tomatin were monitored in fruit, sauce and inulin-containing sauces, using LC-PDA-FTMS. In In addition to targeted detection of specific compounds, also an untargeted analysis of LC-FTMS data was performed. After background subtraction and peak alignment, 2199 masses were detected in 2 or more of the samples. These could be clustered into 216 mass-clusters, representing 216 compounds. Intensities of representative masses from each of the clusters were used to perform a principal components analysis, the results of which are shown in The PCA shows that samples can be grouped easily into Fruit, Sauce, Sauce with 5% inulin and Sauce with 10% inulin ( To obtain an understanding of the background of the separation between Sauce and Inulin-containing Sauces, we investigated firstly which compounds are higher in Inulin-containing Sauce. Only three compounds were found, which were only detectable in Inulin-containing Sauce samples and not Sauce only samples (Supplemental Table S1). Comparison with a pure inulin preparation without tomato sauce revealed that these compounds were already present in the added inulin. The masses of all three compounds ([M-H A group of 14 compounds was found to be higher in Sauce than in Inulin-supplemented Sauces (Supplemental Table S2). Interestingly, the levels of many of these compounds were similarly low in inulin-containing sauces and in fruit samples. These were also statistically significant for some compounds (p  A diet rich in dietary fiber and polyphenols provides unmatched benefits because of their positive effects on human health. However, their bioactivities can be affected by molecular interactions between each other. These interactions could either prove beneficial or detrimental for the bioactivities associated with phenolic compounds ( Digestion is a complex physiological event that has evolved to ensure the most efficient absorption of nutrients from food ( One clear observation that can be made in the untargeted analysis is that compounds other than polysaccharaides are added when an inulin preparation is used to supplement food products. Inulin-derived compounds that correspond to chicory sesquiterpene lactones (Supplemental Table S1) were observed here in the tomato sauce samples. Although several studies have been devoted to the potential bioactivity of inulin ( It was already known that the food matrix plays a key role in the bioactivities, bioaccessibility, and bioavailability of phenolics, and that interactions may take place between phenolic compounds and the food components including proteins, lipids, and dietary fiber. To the best of our knowledge, this study was the first investigating the effect of inulin addition on the content and The authors would like to thank  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at