This research deals with a hybrid hydrocyclone process, involving micro-bubbles injection generated by the dissolved air flotation technique; the micro-bubbles allow the aerated flocs formed by coagulation and flocculation to be separated inside the hydrocyclone. The floc separation is induced by centrifugal force. The lighter phase moves toward the center of the hydrocyclone and the heavier one to the wall. This hybrid process is intended for natural water or industrial raw water and would be performed as an industrial water treatment process. For this study, the hybrid hydrocyclone process was performed under steady state conditions with natural water coming from the river Marne. Efficiencies of 61±4% for turbidity decrease and 77±20% for suspended solids removal were obtained. The separation efficiency between the clarified water and the flocs reached 95±10%. This process achieved continuous operation with 1000L/h inlet flow. In industrial wastewater treatment, which requires a reliable, compact and efficient process, this hybrid technology shows strong potential, with a significant reduction of the plant footprint.Removing suspended solids is a common goal of most water treatment processes. Although filtration has commonly been used for this purpose, alternative processes, such as hydrocycloning, have been proposed. Menezes et al. This work was achieved as a continuation of a thesis by Puprasert Following Puprasert's work, Siangsanun From the reliable results obtained in the previous studies, a hydrocyclone reactor ( The first part of this paper presents the experimental devices, the operating conditions tested and the different methods used to perform the work. The second part deals with the results obtained on natural water with the jar test and the hybrid hydrocyclone process, in terms of turbidity and suspended solids removal efficiency. The pilot plant presented in The coagulation process used aluminum sulfate WAC HB in liquid form and a Fluidcontrol The flocculant solution was prepared with anionic polymer AN905, which was injected directly into the bottom of the hydrocyclone at a flow rate calculated to give the required concentration (0.1–0.5 The air-saturated water or bubble generation system used the dissolved air flotation (DAF) technique. It is accomplished in a saturation tank with the air at 4–5 The hydrocyclone reactor used in this study was 1000 The study worked with natural water from the river Marne. The experiments were performed during two summer months at the Veolia research center of Annet in France. The Marne water quality during the entire period was quite good with very low turbidity ranging between 5 and 15 This jar test approach was a preliminary study for the hybrid process to predict the coagulation and flocculation that could occur in the hybrid process. However, in a jar test, the micro-bubbles are not taken into account. The phenomenon would not be exactly the same, but it is hypothesized that the jar test study is efficient for determining suitable coagulant and flocculant concentrations for the hybrid hydrocyclone process. The jar test was performed in order to study the conditions that could be expected to exist in the hydrocyclone, to find the optimum coagulation and flocculation concentration, and to test the effect of coagulation and flocculation time. The tests were conducted using a flocculator (FLOCUMATIC P, SELECTA, maximum mixing speed 210  It was important to observe the vortex flow needed for efficient separation within the hydrocyclone process. Each operating condition was tested with tap water to visually control the vortex presence and intensity at the top of the hydrocyclone. Moreover, the injection of micro-bubbles from the DAF system was tested to find the optimum air-saturated water flow, required in the hybrid hydrocyclone to obtain aerated flocs without generation of coalescence phenomena. Then, the air-saturated water flow was varied: 50, 100, 150 and 200 The anionic flocculant polymer AN905 was injected directly at the hydrocyclone inlet. The retention time inside the reactor was 30 Turbidity, suspended solids and absorbance were analyzed on inlet and outlet water samples in order to evaluate the performance of the hybrid hydrocyclone process. The turbidity was measured with a turbidity meter (HACH 2100N IS TURBIDIMETER). The suspended solid concentration was analyzed by the method of drying at 103–105 The UV-254-nm absorbance was used to indicate the reduction in dissolved organic matter provided by the coagulation process in the hybrid process. The samples were filtered on the 0.45 The performance of the hybrid hydrocyclone process with respect to water quality was assessed by calculating the reductions (as %) in UVA, turbidity and suspended solids observed between the raw waters and the effluent collected at the wall zone. The performance of the hybrid hydrocyclone with respect to its ability to reduce suspended solids was evaluated by calculating the reduction (as %) in turbidity and suspended solids between the wall and aerated zones (central zone). This was done in order to account for the addition of coagulant/flocculation within the treatment process. To calculate the suspended solids reductions, the flow rate partition ratio (30:70) was considered. The jar test experiment was carried out setting the coagulation and flocculation times equal to the conditions that occur in a hydrocyclone reactor. The coagulation process was followed by the UV 254 In any case, this part of the study indicated that 1 The optimum flow rate of the air-saturated water was 100 Before working with the hybrid process, the throughput ratio between the center zone and the wall zone has to be considered. From the water treatment point of view, it is important to maximize the throughput ratio between the wall zone (clear water) and the center one (flocs sludge). In the hybrid process, there are two parameters that can affect the throughput ratio. The first one is the level difference existing between the outflow wall zone and the outflow center zone. The higher the upper central weir, the greater will be the ratio. The second parameter is the outlet tube internal diameter; however in our experiments we used a constant 50    This result for separation is very satisfactory in continuous operation. The hybrid process succeeded in creating aerated flocs that were transported to the hydrocyclone axis where velocity gradients are weaker. The clarified water from the 70   As observed from the results for the previous conditions (70 This part of the study tested the effect of the air-saturated water (air fraction) variation on the hybrid process efficiency. The pressurized air/water flow rate was chosen at three values, 50, 100 and 200 As reported in The 100 Varying the pressurized air flow rate affected the separation efficiency in the hybrid process as shown in The 50 In contrast, the 200 The 100 Additionally, the flow rate ratio of 1000 Overall, in experiments performed with natural water from the river Marne, the application of the hybrid process with coagulation, flocculation and flotation performed in a single hydrocyclone contactor, was successful. The aerated flocs occurring in the process had a low mass density and could improve separation by the hydrocyclone mechanism. The minimum outlet water turbidity obtained from continuous operation of the hybrid process reached 3.30 The difficulty of this process was to find the optimum coagulant and flocculant concentrations, the optimum air fraction and also the best hydrodynamics inside the system. The optimum floc size is necessary to produce aerated flocs. Then, the aerated floc should be able to rise and be separated by the vortex flow inside the hydrocyclone. This cannot happen if flocs are large or heavy. The flocculant polymer concentration used in this study was high (0.1–0.5 It is also important to note that the raw water tested in this study (river Marne water) contained a low concentration of suspended solids and its turbidity was very low. If raw water containing more suspended solids with higher turbidity were considered, the obtained percentage reduction and removal efficiencies in suspended solids and turbidity could be higher. Moreover, pollutants that are more hydrophobic and less heavy (oil pollution for example) could show improved separation, with special flocs dense in micro-bubbles and thus lighter. The experiments performed with natural water from the river Marne successfully demonstrated the idea of the hybrid process: coagulation, flocculation and flotation performed in a single hydrocyclone contactor. The hybrid process was successfully developed in terms of creating and separating aerated flocs. The minimum outlet water turbidity obtained in continuous operation of the hybrid process was 3.30 The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support given by the French Ministry of Higher Education and the Thai Ministry of Higher Education, via the Franco-Thai Cooperation Program in Higher Education and Research. They gratefully acknowledge financial and technical support from the Veolia research center of Annet, France.