Although most of the parameters affecting spiral jet milling have already been studied, there are no investigations of several parameters and their effects on the flow conditions over the entire cross-section inside the spiral jet mill via non-invasive methods. In order to vary several geometrical and operative parameters and to determine the flow conditions inside the jet mill, a new type of experimental spiral jet mill apparatus was designed and constructed. It has an almost entire optical accessibility and its highly modular construction enables a very convenient variation of the geometric parameters. This paper describes the new type of mill apparatus and preliminary experimental results concerning the flow conditions inside the spiral jet mill as well as grinding effects under different conditions on particle size distributions of barium sulphate micro particles.Despite of their relatively high energy consumption, spiral jet mills are often used in the industry when particles with diameters below 10 In this study, in order to acquire entire velocity fields over the cross-section inside the mill via non-invasive optical methods, a new type of spiral jet mill apparatus with an almost entire optical accessibility was designed and constructed. In addition, the apparatus was designed in a highly modular way so that the geometrical and operative parameters can be varied conveniently and their effects on the flow conditions can be investigated. One focus was on investigations via Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV). The working group Schultz already gained great experience with this optical method and in several studies The aim of the first stage of the research project was to develop a new type of experimental spiral jet mill apparatus that offers the possibility to determine velocity fields over the entire cross-section inside the spiral jet mill with non-invasive methods. In case that some of the used materials cause too much abrasion on the bottom cover and therefore restrict the optical accessibility, a very thin float glass plate (1 After designing and constructing the new type of experimental spiral jet mill apparatus, first feasibility studies have been realised. It is possible to place the horizontal LASER light cut at any vertical position of the cylindrical core; under, above or at the height of the milling nozzles. First PIV measurements were undertaken in the spiral jet mill apparatus with a height of 19 According to appropriate literature Furthermore, first grinding experiments were realised in order to determine the milling efficiency of the new type of experimental spiral jet mill apparatus. Therefore, barium sulphate with a median particle diameter x In terms of measurement accuracy and experimental repeatability, specific measuring devices were implemented and used: The pressure of the milling and injector gas was measured via digital pressure gauge Baroli 05 (BD Sensors GmbH) with a nominal pressure of 0 to 10 A new type of experimental spiral jet mill apparatus was designed, constructed and tested. The apparatus has an almost entire optical accessibility and is therefore suitable for non-invasive investigations of the entire cross-section inside the spiral jet mill. Furthermore the experimental apparatus is constructed in a highly modular way in order to achieve a convenient and fast variation of the geometrical and operative parameters. A decoupled milling gas manifold with a modular loop as well as a convenient bolted-seal technique enables the good handling of the apparatus. First PIV-measurements confirm the possibility of determining plausible particle trajectories and particle velocities over the entire cross-section inside the spiral jet mill. Experiments with barium sulphate with a Mohs hardness of about 3.3 with a median particle diameter x This work was supported by the