The use of zero-waste processes to integrate food-waste valorisation into the circular economy equation is currently one of the hottest topics in sustainability research. This goal is still far from being fully achieved despite the release of a number of patents and papers that deal with the topic.
                  The present work aims to valorise cocoa shells, one of the main by-product of the roasting process, in order to enhance the effective extraction of high added value compounds by means of green protocols. The high potential added value of the residual waste has been demonstrated via a direct analytical comparison of extracts and bean composition.
                  A range of raw matrix extraction procedures have been investigated in order to define the best solvent and technology; ultrasound (US) and hydrodynamic cavitation (HC) were compared with conventional methods. The high-energy microenvironments generated by cavitation substantially promote fast biomass deconstruction with low energy consumption. The optimized protocol couples a HC reactor with a ternary water/ethanol/hexane mixture, simultaneously providing a hydrophilic product, which is rich in methylxanthines and polyphenols, and a lipid layer.
                  Sequential milling and sieving pretreatment provided an enriched shell fraction via the partial removal of husk fibres (54.45 vs. 81.36 w/w % total fibres). The disposal of the latter reduces mass balance, but is rerouted into animal feedstock components and crop mulching.
                  The protocols herein reported produce valuable extracts, which are rich in antioxidant flavanols (catechins and epicatechins), theobromine (32.7 ± 0.12 mg/g shells), caffeine (1.76 ± 0.08 mg/g shells) and cocoa butter, in a simple and easy manner. This new valorisation process afforded 20.5 w/w % and 15.8 w/w % hydrophilic and lipophilic fractions, respectively, when scaled up to function in a pilot flow reactor. The fatty acids, obtained in remarkable yield (forming the 96.4 w/w % of the total light part) well match the commercial cocoa butter profile. The antioxidant extract shows an impressive total phenolic content of 197.4 mg/g extract (gallic acid eq.), with a radical scavenging activity of 62.0 ± 3.1 μg/mL (expressed in DPPH EC50). This work should facilitate industrial design for the convenient recovery of cocoa by-products as part of a zero-waste strategy.Minimizing waste is one of the principles of the circular economy, which aims to transform products that are at the end of their production chain into resources for other purposes and thus close loops in industrial ecosystems ( Food processing activities can generate by-products that contain bioactive substances with important nutritional value, benefits for human health and a market value ( Shells, peels, husks and skins are part of the residual materials that are being considered for agro-food industry recycling, leading to the subsequent recovery of valuable primary and secondary metabolites as well as dietary fibres to be used as supplements for food products ( Cocoa shells, also known as hulls or husks, are the outer portions of beans that encase the nibs, and are a waste product of the roasting process during chocolate production. This by-product is rich in fibres and antioxidants and is a potential source of food and beverage ingredients ( Non-conventional techniques and integrated protocols are well suited to providing a sustainable approach to biomass extraction processes. Conventional methods, such as maceration, percolation, Soxhlet extraction and hydrodistillation, are still the most common methods to obtain natural products, despite often being laborious, time-consuming, requiring large amounts of solvent and potentially causing phytochemical degradation and the partial loss of volatile compounds. The potential for sonochemical reactors to perform green processing and provide the economic benefits of process intensification has already been established ( HC reactors have recently seen successful use in plant extraction ( The present work aims to valorise cocoa shells by means of green protocols in order to promote the effective extraction of high-added value compounds. The potential exploitation of the waste material has been evaluated by comparing composition and physico-chemical properties, with cocoa beans as a benchmark. We have made use of our experience to optimise UAE parameters (power, extraction times) and solvents (ethanol, hexane and ternary water/ethanol/hexane mixtures) to enhance the extraction yields. The physical pretreatment of shell samples provided a fraction that was enriched in polyphenols, sugars, proteins and cocoa butter. Moreover, the extraction process has been transposed to a HC pilot reactor for pre-industrial scale-up. The efficiency of the green protocols has been evaluated by compound characterization and quantification, together with the determination of total phenolic content (Folin-Ciocalteau assay), and antioxidant activity (DPPH analysis). Cocoa bean shells from Ecuador were kindly provided by Gobino S.r.l. (Turin, Italy). Hexane, acetone and ethanol (ACS grade, ≥99%) (Sigma-Aldrich, Milan, Italy) were used in extractions. Methanol CHROMASOLV® (gradient grade, for HPLC, ≥99.9%) and acetonitrile CHROMASOLV® (gradient grade, for HPLC, ≥99.9%) for HPLC analysis were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich, while Milli-Q H The cocoa bean shells showed heterogeneous granulometry. The matrix was milled in a professional blender (Waring Blender, HGBTWTS360) at room temperature and material was subjected to physical separation using a professional sieve (Giuliani) with a mash of 1000 μm, giving two fractions according to their granulometry ( All the extractions (conventional, UAE and HC samples) of raw unmilled material, FP and TP have been performed with 1:10 solid/solvent ratio. Obtained samples were filtered on a paper filter placed in a Buchner funnel, and solvent phases were either separated in a separating funnel, in the case of biphasic systems (liquid/liquid), or directly evaporated to dryness to give The resulting hydro-alcoholic phase was considered a hydrophilic fraction for analytical purposes. Similarly, the lipophilic fraction was obtained from the hexane phase. UAE was performed using a probe system equipped with a titanium US horn (Danacamerini sas, Turin) for 15 min (150 W, 19.9 kHz) at around 40 °C. In the initial investigation, the raw material was treated with three different extraction media: hexane, hydro-alcoholic solution (70:30 EtOH/H Conventional procedures were carried out with the double purpose of technique correlation and exhaustive extraction yield definition. The temperature and extraction time conditions that were used for the UAE were then transposed for raw material treatment in a conventional magnetic stirred system. Hexane and hydro-alcoholic solvents were used. Although the ternary mixture was not ideally suited for use with magnetic stirring, the medium's efficiency was compared with those of the UAE and conventional extraction systems. The maximum yields, which correlated with matrix depletion, were defined as A rotor/stator cavitational reactor that can process up to 25 L was used for scale up tests. The operating parameters at full-load were 3000 rpm for 11 min at room temperature, cycle number 47.1, cycle time 5 s, residence time 5 s, total residence time 3.93 min, absorbed energy 6.82 kW. Extractions were performed using the hydro-alcoholic and ternary mixtures. For the sake of comparison, the best performing ternary mixture was also used on the TP and FP fractions. All analyses were performed in triplicate at least (three different analyses on different batch samples). Measured values are shown as an average with a confidence interval at a significance level of 0.05. All results, excluding ash content, are expressed on a dry-weight and ash-free basis. The fibre content of the two physically pre-treated shell fractions (FP and CP) was extracted enzymatically using the AOAC method, from fat-extracted samples, and Soxlet's method ( The C, H, N, contents in cocoa beans and shells (raw material) were measured according to the EN 15104:2011 standard using a Vario MACRO elemental analyser (ELEMENTAR Analysensysteme). Ash content in the samples was measured as a residue after thermogravimetric analysis (20–650 °C, heating rate: 10 °C/min) in an oxygen atmosphere. Obtained data were in good correlation with ash content results measured by ignition at 550 ± 10 °C in a Carbolite ELF 11/6B furnace, according to the EN 14775:2010 standard (Solid biofuels – Determination of ash content). The carbohydrate composition of the cocoa beans and shells (raw material) was determined using an alditol acetate procedure ( The FTIR spectra of the cocoa beans and shells (raw material) samples were recorded in KBr pellets on a Spectrum One FTIR spectrometer (PerkinElmer) in the 4000–450 cm The Py-GC/MS/FID analyses of cocoa beans and shells (raw material) were performed using a Frontier Lab Micro Double-shot Pyrolyser Py-3030D (pyrolysis temperature 500 °C, heating rate 600 °C/s) that was directly coupled to a Shimadzu 2D FID/MS gas chromatography system MS-GC/GC–MS-2010 with a RTX-1701 capillary column (Restek, 60 m × 0.25 mm × 0.25 μm film). The injector temperature was 250 °C, the ion source 250 °C (EI 70 eV), the MS scan range TPC in cocoa beans and shells (raw material) was determined via a Folin–Ciocalteu analysis of the hydrophilic extracts obtained from the sequential extraction with hexane (for lipophilic removal), 70% The OPC in the hydrophilic extracts of cocoa beans and shells (raw material), obtained according to the procedure described above, were quantified using the butanol-HCl method with procyanidin B2 as the reference compound ( The radical scavenging ability of all the hydrophilic phases from ternary mixture extracts was evaluated using the stable free radical DPPH•, according to the method described by Caffeine and theobromine contents were determined for the hydro-alcoholic phases of the raw, TP, FP and CP samples that were extracted with the ternary mixture under US irradiation and for the raw material under optimized HC treatment. HPLC analyses were performed on a Waters binary pump 1525 linked to a 2998 PDA (Waters Corp., Milford, USA), using a Synergi Hydro RP C18 column (250 mm, 4.6 mm, 5 μm; Phenomenex, Torrance, California, USA) and 2% acetic acid (A) and acetonitrile (B) as mobile phases. The monitored wavelength was 280 (PDA range 200–600 nm). The gradient program started from 0% B, which was maintained for 6.5 min, up to 50% B over the 6.5–30 min period, from 50% to 100% B over 30–36 min, followed by a 100% B step over 36–42 min. Caffeine and theobromine standard solutions (from 0.02 to 2 mg/mL) were analysed by HPLC (20 μL injection) to give linear regressions with R The fatty acid composition of the lipophilic (hexane) phase, from the ternary mixture extracts of the raw, TP, FP and CP samples, was determined according to the procedure described by Bermúdez Menéndez et al. in 2014. GC–MS qualitative analyses were performed in an Agilent Technologies 6850 Network GC System, using a 5973 Network Mass Selective Detector, a 7683B Automatic Sampler (Santa Clara, California, USA), and a capillary column (HP-5MS 5% Phenyl Methyl Siloxane, length 30 m, i.d. 0.25 mm, film thickness 0.25 μm). GC-FID quantitative analyses were performed in an Agilent Technologies 7820A Network GC System equipped with a FID detector, using a capillary column (Mega WAX, length 30 m, i.d. 0.25 mm, film thickness 0.25 μm, Mega S.r.l., Legnano, MI, Italy), according to the internal standard amount (methyl heptadecanoate, Me C17). All the lipophilic extracts (~10 mg) were derivatised before analysis (see 3 mg of the hydrophilic fraction, which was obtained from the extraction of the FP sample with the ternary mixture under US irradiation, were dissolved in a 1:1 acetonitrile/water mixture, filtered over a nylon filter (0.45 μm pore size) and analysed by UHPLC-ESI-MS/MS. An Acquity UPLC system (Waters Corp., Singapore) that was coupled with a quadrupole-time of flight (Q-TOF) MS instrument (UPLC/Synapt Q-TOF MS, Waters, Milford, MA, USA) and had an electrospray ionisation (ESI) source was used. A U-HPLC column (2.1 mm × 50 mm i.d., 1.7 μm, BEHC18, Waters Acquity) was used at a flow rate of 0.30 mL∙min A recent review reported that cocoa shell composition varied considerably by origin and processing protocol ( The approximate compositions of the cocoa shells and a cocoa bean sample were defined and compared in this work, using FTIR ( The FTIR spectrum of the cocoa shells showed lower absorption intensity in the aliphatic and protein regions (range 2918–2851 cm Moreover, cocoa shells showed significantly lower absorption intensity at 1152 cm Polysaccharides and alkaloids were found to be the major components of the cocoa materials under study (see Literature data on the total polyphenolic contents of cocoa products reported values in the 0.3–6.5% range for the powder and 1.3–1.8% for the shells ( To date, few papers have studied the extraction of fibres, pectins, polyphenols, fats and theobromine from cocoa shells as a means to produce low-calorie, fibre-rich substances and antioxidant additives to be included in foods, dietary supplements, pharmaceuticals and cosmetics ( The first part of this work was focused on a general screening of solvent systems and cavitation technologies in order to define an optimized extraction protocol for cocoa shell material in the raw form, as obtained by the production plant. The first step was to discover the best solvent system with which to recover fats and obtain a polyphenol-enriched fraction from cocoa shells in synergy with US cavitation, developing a rapid and efficient extraction process. Pure hexane and a 70:30 EtOH/H For the sake of comparison, UAE parameters, in terms of time, temperature and S/L ratio, were reproduced in silent conditions. As The encouraging results obtained with UAE and the ternary solvent mixture can be enhanced further using a new source of cavitation. HC is able to simultaneously grant intimate mixing between solvent and shells and easy scale-up. A screening was performed to demonstrate the feasibility of extraction scale-up while increasing yield. The optimized ternary mixture was transposed into a pilot scale protocol under HC; the raw matrix was processed in a rotor/stator reactor (Rotocav®) ( An evaluation of the technologies, using extraction yields, confirms the effectiveness of the ternary solution, which actually improved on UAE results when coupled with the rotor-stator reactor. Additional analysis and deeper characterization of the extracts were performed to support process validation. Antioxidant activity and methylxantine content (namely caffeine and theobromine) were determined for the hydrophilic fraction, whilst the lipophilic extract underwent FAME quali-quantification. The theobromine and caffeine content of the hydro-alcoholic phases obtained from the extraction of raw cocoa shells with the 30:49:21 Hex/EtOH/H The role of the matrix has been evaluated starting from the optimized protocols on raw cocoa shells, achieved with US and HC. A physical pre-treatment/separation step was considered in order to define larger application possibilities and better understand shell valorisation. The removal of fibre-rich components, which are not valuable from the extraction point of view, from the starting biomass allowed a “noble fraction” to be isolated. This procedure leads to increased yields as the extraction is focused on an enriched matrix and thus avoids recalcitrant material that will burden separation/purification steps and increase the final disposal mass. The pre-treatment can also enhance mass-transfer, increasing particle surface area, which is a desirable side effect. Besides these considerations, it is crucial to state that the “poor fraction”, which results from physical separation, does not represent a material loss or residue generation. Conversely, it can be exploited as a fibre source for fodder, flour or for mulching. The waste/product ratio of the cycle can be reduced and thus optimise energy consumtion at the same time. Raw cocoa bean shells were roughly milled in a professional blender, while room temperature was maintained, and then divided into two quantified fractions, according to their granulometry. FP is the finest part and mostly lacks the resilient components (lignin and fibres) contained in CP. The effectiveness of the separation was investigated using a dietary fibre and ash content comparison. In the reported comparison between the two fractions in The fractions obtained (TP, FP) were subjected to UAE and HC under the optimized conditions with the 30:49:21 Hex/EtOH/H The results confirm that the effects of fractionation are not simply reducible to matrix comminution ( The above-mentioned extraction data were complemented by the same characterization method as above (Paragraph. 3.2.2.), the results of both will be discussed in parallel later in the text. A comparison of the characterization data from the raw material and TP fraction extracts ( Methylxanthine analyses gave the top results for the FP fraction with a general increase in caffeine and theobromine content, with the latter showing the highest growth. An evaluation of the ratio between Data from the Folin-Ciocalteau evaluation were almost comparable with those reported in the literature ( The hexane phases obtained from the extraction of FP and TP with the 30:49:21 Hex/EtOH/H According to all previous analyses and considerations, the optimized extraction protocol can be defined as a combination of a milled fine fraction of cocoa shells, with the coarse residues removed, a 30:49:21 Hex/EtOH/H In order to better investigate phenolic composition, UHPLC-ESI-MS/MS analyses were performed on the best hydrophilic extract (FP fraction under HC with the ternary mixture) and were compared with the two conventional extracts (obtained with 70% Information on polyphenolic composition in cocoa shells is scarce in the literature. In cocoa beans, however, the main polyphenols are reported to be flavan-3-ols (epicatechin, catechin and proanthocyanidins) with small amounts of anthocyanins and flavonols (quercetin glycosides) also being present ( Conventional extracts (see This work has focused on the core of the valorisation process, while maintaining an awareness of sustainability principles. It has worked not only on the lab-scale, but also paves the way for effective industrial application. A fast procedure that can feasibly and efficiently be up-scaled has been designed. Furthermore, the impact of possible pre-treatment steps has been evaluated. The final extracts, both hydrophilic and lipophilic, have been thoroughly characterized, while their high added value and the fact that they approach matrix depletion (98% of extraction efficiency, if compared to conventional quantification) have been highlighted. This cascade protocol, which includes physical separation followed by green extraction, demonstrates that cocoa shells are a valuable source of antioxidant flavanols (catechin and epicatechin), methylxanthines (theobromine, 160.2 mg/g extract and caffeine, 8.9 mg/g extract), fatty acids (964 mg/g extract) and fibres. Lab-scale results have been confirmed and enhanced in a pilot reactor, giving yields of around 15.8% Finally, the fibre-rich fraction, removed via physical treatment, can be used as feed or mulch, while the exhaust lignocellulosic material from extraction can be further converted without purification into sugars or fine chemicals using a microwave-assisted depolymerisation processes ( With the aim of developing a zero-waste cacao industry in mind, a new cocoa shell valorisation process has been designed that is benign by construction and attempts to follow a circular economy approach. Exploiting a vegetal residual biomass fulfils several sustainability criteria; using a renewable feedstock and preventing the accumulation of waste at the same time, while also providing process “input-pushing, via the use of an abundant and cost-effective matrix. The cavitational reactor used in this work can generate high-energy microenvironments, as well as significantly promote biomass deconstruction in short times and with low energy consumption. The key role played by enabling technologies, such as US and HC, is an easy way to satisfy the significant and simultaneous demands of minimizing energy and maximizing efficiency. Furthermore, merging defatting pre-treatment (necessary to increase total yields) with the extraction step, allows the whole process to be halved in size, focusing energy use and completely avoiding dedicated work-up. Moving from a multistage to a single-step process means unifying work-ups, removing dedicated equipment and solvents, and providing energy savings. In addition, producing extracts from a food source grants traceability and an absence of contaminants in the matrix. This prerequisite in essential for a suitable nutraceutical product to provide active compounds without synthetic steps. These results should facilitate the valorisation of cocoa shells and help create a zero-waste strategy for the cocoa industry. This work was supported by the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at