Although microorganisms are degrading the contaminants in bioremediation processes, soil animals can also have important—while usually an indirect—role in these processes. Soil animals are useful indicators of soil contamination, both before and after the bioremediation. Many toxicity and bioavailability assessment methods utilizing soil animals have been developed for hazard and risk-assessment procedures. Not only the survival of the animals, but also more sensitive parameters like growth, reproduction and community structure have often been taken into account in the assessment. The use of bioassays together with chemical analyses gives the most reliable results for risk analyses. This is because physical, chemical and biological properties of the remediated soil may be changed during the process, and it is possible that transformation rather than mineralization of the contaminants has taken place. In addition, the soil may contain other harmful substances than those searched in chemical analyses. Finally, because the ultimate goal of the bioremediation should be—together with mineralization of the harmful substances—the ecological recovery of the soil, development of diverse decomposer community as a basis of the functioning ecosystem should be ensured. Soil animals, especially the large ones, can also actively take part in the ecological recovery processes through their own activity. The potential risk of transfer of contaminants accumulated in soil animals to the above-ground food webs should be borne in mind.There are to two general approaches in remediating or reclaiming severely degraded soils: (1) an engineering approach; and (2) an ecological approach ( Bioremediation is usually recognized as an inexpensive, effective, and environmentally safe technology to clean up hazardous wastes or chemicals. The soil is considered remediated when concentrations of the contaminants have diminished to the recommended, directed or appropriate levels. The ultimate goal of the process is Bioremediation techniques use biostimulation and/or bioaugmentation in the degradation of various harmful contaminants. Bioaugmentation involves the addition of a microbial inoculum to a contaminated soil, whereas biostimulation involves amendment, addition and/or mechanical manipulation to stimulate indigenous bacterial populations. Abiotic conditions are optimized for biodegradation, that is, the functioning of desired microbes. At the moment, the incomplete understanding of biodegradation processes and the absence of diverse engineering techniques required for applications are regarded as major problems in the development of bioremediation ( There are both biological and environmental reasons to extend the concept of bioremediation to ecological remediation. This approach requires Usually, abiotic conditions in the soil under bioremediation process are hostile for soil decomposer animals. The physical and chemical soil conditions may be outside the tolerance limits of most species, or animals may have been unable to colonize the soil due to limited dispersal. In addition, because animals do not harbour significant metabolic ability to degrade the chemicals to be treated, one may argue that decomposer animals are not important in remediation processes. It should be noticed, however, that when different kinds of organic wastes are composted, many soil animals, like earthworms, enchytraeids and mites, do have positive effects on the process by utilizing organic compounds in their own metabolism, and more importantly, by increasing metabolic activity of soil microbes ( Soil animals can also be exploited in remediation and reclamation processes, principally in two ways. First, they can take part in the process, increasing overall, and especially microbial, metabolic activity of the soil. Second, soil animals can be used as indicators of soil contamination, either to assess the toxicity and risk of the contaminated soil or to evaluate the efficacy of the remediation process, that is, to evaluate the toxicity and risk of the end product. Indeed, a number of methodologies with respect to pre-application testing, post-application bioassays, monitoring, waste management and risk assessment have been proposed and also already utilized in environmental management ( Contaminated soils are usually characterized by complex chemical mixtures rather than single chemicals. Moreover, soils may contain compounds that have not been expected and not looked for in chemical analyses. Transformation of the original harmful substances may further complicate the situation. To determine the environmental impact associated with complex contaminations, a toxicity-based approach rather than a chemically-based approach should be adopted in risk assessment ( Soil animals can for good reasons be used as indicators of soil contamination both before and after a bioremediation process. Different kinds of bioassays have been developed to determine bio-availability and biological effects of harmful chemicals and contaminated soils. Together with chemical analyses, soil animal studies will help in finding out the linkage between actual contamination levels and adverse effects on biota. Being important and large soil decomposer animals, earthworms have gained acceptance for use in tests to assess the effects of chemicals on soil organisms. The survival test has been standardized ( Relevant information about the ecological consequences of chemicals in the soil is urgently needed. It has been suggested that certain earthworm species could be used in testing the toxicity of contaminated soils. The test procedure has already been modified from the standardized artificial soil earthworm bioassay (  Some biomarkers measured in earthworms (like enzyme and immune functions, hemoglobin content, sperm production and fertility) have been developed and proposed for the use in reliable toxicity testing (see In addition, community and system-level ecotoxicological studies have proved to be valuable methods to support ecological risk assessment procedures ( There are some complicating factors that make interpretation of the results from studies with soil animals difficult. Resistance against the contaminant may increase, at least in long lasting exposure. Resistance may be physiologically and energetically expensive, leading to a trade-off situation in animals. When ecological rehabilitation of the soil is the reasonable final goal, soil fauna can be very important for biological activity of the soil after the more or less technically driven bioremediation processes. Activity of decomposer animals in the soil can result in faster recovery of the site and finally in properly functioning ecosystem. Especially larger soil animals, such as earthworms, are able to enhance soil physical properties through their comminution and burrowing activity (review by The success of reclamation of poor mineral soils, polder soils, open-cast mining sites and areas of cutover peats are often limited by poor soil structure, low inherent soil fertility or high soil metal content. Also here, large decomposer animals, especially earthworms, have successfully been used in improving soils ( In many cases the faunal restoration processes should have been supported by deliberate introductions of earthworms ( More important than certain faunal structure with particular species of the decomposers is the proper functioning of the community and decomposition processes. However, all species do not have an equal impact on ecosystem processes. Opportunistic colonizers and keystone species may be a prerequisite for the successful development of the remediated soil ( While activity of earthworms has lead to enhanced productivity at many reclaimed sites, amounts of metals or other harmful substances have not been affected by the animals. In some cases soil animals may transfer contaminants accumulated in them to the above-ground food webs. Especially the earthworms, having considerable ability to accumulate contaminants from soil into their bodies, and having relatively low sensitivity to many of these compounds, can be an important transfer route from soil to the above ground ecosystems ( In central Finland, earthworms have been found in high numbers in several compost piles built for degradation of PCPs. Surprisingly, even the compost-living species As already pointed out earlier, the burrowing and casting activity of earthworms can bring hazardous chemicals from deeper soil layers back to the surface. This has been observed in Seveso, Italy, in the case of TCDD (