The quality of plasma sprayed coatings is governed by both bond and wear properties during the service period, associated with a number of factors including substrate surface conditions, materials composition, phase transformation, and etc. In the present study, three different Fe-based powder materials including gray cast iron, high chrome steel and high chrome and nickle contained self-fluxing powders were plasma sprayed onto the Al-Si alloy substrate. The microstructure, hardness, phase composition, bonding strength and wear properties of the deposited coatings were investigated. The XRD results revealed that severe oxidation of gray cast iron coatings occurred during the deposition, while no obvious oxidation and phase transformation were detected for chrome steel coatings after spraying. However, the transition of γ-(Fe, Ni) phase into α-(Fe,Cr) phase was confirmed in the self-fluxing coatings. In addition, the Cr and Ni alloying elements enhanced the diffusion between Fe and Al across the coating-substrate interface. Three types of Fe-based coatings showed improved wear resistance in comparison to Al-Si alloy substrate, in terms of coefficient of friction, mass and volume loss. The chrome steel coatings have better integrated performance of bond strength and wear properties. Distinct wear mechanisms were revealed for three types of coatings, i.e. a mixture of adhesive and abrasive wear for gray cast iron coatings, an oxidation dominant wear for chrome steel coatings, and a mixture of oxidation and fatigue wear for self-fluxing coatings.The application of lightweight materials has grown rapidly in the area of transportation including aircrafts, motors and high-speed trains, in order to save energy and achieve high performance [ Several thermal spraying techniques have been used to produce wear resistant coatings on the aluminum engine block materials, including plasma spraying, wire arc spraying and high velocity oxygen fuel spraying [ During the service period, coatings are only functional when the interfacial bonding strength fulfills the requirement. Therefore, the successful application of wear-resistant coatings is governed by a sufficient bonding strength. The bonding of spraying formed coatings includes the adhesion between coatings and substrates and the cohesion between deposited splats within the coatings [ The present study aims to investigate the effect of materials composition on the bonding and wear behaviors of plasma sprayed Fe-based coatings on Al-Si substrate. Three types of powder materials with distinct chemical compositions were used as the source powders, including high chrome steel powder which can improve the oxidation, wear and corrosion resistance of the coatings [ The compositions of original powder materials measured by X Ray Fluorescence (XRF, Pioneer-S4) are listed in The coatings were subsequently labelled as C1, C2 and C3 to donate the sequence of powders. The cross-sectional microstructure of the deposited coatings was examined by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, JSM-6390A), and the phase composition was examined using X-ray diffraction (XRD, D8 ADVANCE A25). The porosity and oxide proportion of as-sprayed coatings were measured by image analysis based on 20 backscatter SEM images captured across the whole section of each coating, and the values were averaged [ According to ASTM C633 standard, the tensile test was carried out by the Instron M8801 electro-hydraulic servo machine, and three measurements were done for each coating. The morphology of fractured surface and chemical element changes were analyzed by SEM equipped with energy dispersive X-ray (Oxford Instrument SEM X-Max Extreme analytical system). Prior to the wear test, the coating was grinded with 600–2000 mesh sandpaper and polished, followed by ultrasonic cleaning for 15 min in an ethanol bath. The wear tests were performed at room temperature using a ball-on-disk type sliding wear apparatus (HT-1000). According to previous studies [  The values of porosity, oxide content and microhardness of three deposited coatings are given in  These two types of wustite and magnetite oxides can play the role of solid lubricant during wear conditions rather than the trivalent oxide Fe The hardness of spraying formed coating materials can reflect the integrated properties of deposited splats, which rely on the microstructure, chemical and phase compositions [  To further interpret the correlation between bonding behavior and fracture mechanism, EDX line scanning analysis across the interface between residual coating and substrate materials was conducted, and the results are given in The results of coefficient of friction (COF) and wear rate of coatings and substrate materials are shown in Although it is known that hardness of commercially pure metals influences its wear resistance that higher hardness implies a higher wear resistance, the increase of wear resistance depends on the way how the material is being hardened (alloying, heat treatment or work-hardening) [ To further reveal the wear mechanism of sprayed coatings and substrate, the surface morphology and chemical compositional changes after wear tests were examined. The worn morphology and elemental analysis results of the substrate surface are presented in  In case of C2 coating, there are no obvious grooves on worn surfaces as shown in a secondary SEM image ( The secondary SEM image of typical worn surface of C3 coating is shown in The surface morphologies of the counter-body (steel ball) in contact with the substrate and the coatings after wear tests are also shown in According to the above observation and compositional analysis of the worn surface of three Fe-based coatings, the wear mechanism depends both on the phase composition of as-sprayed coatings and the compositional changes during the wear process. For instance, the formation of wear surface oxides was significantly different. The gray cast iron coating (C1) contained certain amount of graphite, which detached from the coating during sliding and covered the worn surface, resulting in less generation of oxides [ In the present work, the bonding and wear behaviors of plasma sprayed iron-based coatings on Al-Si alloy substrate was investigated by analyzing the microstructure, phase transformation and mechanical properties of the coating. The following main conclusions can be drawn from this work: The three iron-based coatings prepared by plasma spraying exhibited typical lamellar structures, and the coatings were well bonded to the substrate. The coatings presented a similar level of porosity, but the oxide content of gray cast iron coatings was significantly higher than the other two coatings. The XRD results revealed that after spraying two types of oxides, FeO and Fe The gray cast iron coating has lower bond strength compared to the other two coatings, due to the higher oxide content. EDX line scanning analysis confirmed the element diffusion across the coating-substrate interface, and the Cr and Ni alloying elements enhanced the diffusion between Fe and Al which was beneficial to improve the bonding strength of chrome steel and self-fluxing coatings. Three types of Fe-based coatings showed improved wear resistance in comparison to Al-Si alloy substrate, in terms of coefficient of friction, mass and volume loss. Among them, chrome steel coatings have better integrated performance with moderate coefficient of friction and much lower mass and volume loss. Distinct wear mechanisms were revealed for these coatings, i.e. a mixture of adhesive and abrasive wear for gray cast iron coatings, an oxidation dominant wear for chrome steel coatings, and a mixture of oxidation and fatigue wear for self-fluxing coatings. The authors are grateful to financial support from