The intrinsic viscosities of six carboxymethyl celluloses (CMC) of different degrees of substitution, molecular weights, and molecular weight distributions (MWDs) were measured as a function of pH, ionic strength, and temperature. The molecular weights and MWDs were determined by analytical ultracentrifugation. It was demonstrated that the raw viscosity data could be represented by the Fedors equation allowing for accurate determination of the intrinsic viscosity. Ionic strength, rather than pH or temperature had the strongest effect on the conformation of CMC. An estimate of the Mark–Houwink–Kuhn–Sakurada exponent (α
                     =0.83) and calculations of chain flexibility and expansion factors indicated that CMC has semi-flexible, randomly coiling chains in solution with persistence lengths on the order of 8.8–24.5nm in distilled water and 11.3–14.8nm in 0.01mol/L sodium chloride. It was also found that the lowest molecular weight CMC was most flexible among the tested samples.Carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC) is an anionic polysaccharide obtained from cellulose. The non-toxicity, biodegradability and biocompatibility of CMC make it one of the most important cellulose derivatives. CMC readily dissolves in water to form viscous solutions with a range of thickening, stabilizing and film-forming properties. These properties make CMCs attractive polymers for industrial and consumer applications, including textile ( The majority of studies on the use of CMC in mineral processing have focused on the adsorption of CMC on gangue minerals ( In this study, the molecular conformation, chain flexibility, and molecular weight distribution of a series of CMCs of different DS and molecular weights were determined as a function of pH and ionic strength. Three carboxymethyl cellulose samples with different degrees of substitution (DS Solutions for viscosity measurements were prepared by mixing an appropriate amount of CMC in de-ionized water or in 0.01 Reagent grade sodium chloride (NaCl) was used to adjust the ionic strength while small amounts of analytical grade sodium hydroxide and hydrochloric acid were used to adjust the pH. The kinematic viscosities of the CMC solutions were measured using two Cannon–Fenske capillary viscometers (Shott-Geräte, GmbH, Germany). The viscometers were calibrated by carrying out carefully controlled viscosity measurements with de-ionized water at 25 After dilution of the stock solution to the desired polymer concentration, 7-mL aliquots were transferred to the capillary viscometer, the viscometer was placed in a water bath at 25 For high temperature measurements, with the capillary and sample still in the bath, the temperature of the bath was increased to 50 From the kinematic viscosities, the relative, specific and reduced viscosities of the CMC solutions were calculated at each concentration, pH value (approximately 3, 4.5, 7), and temperature (25 In order to test the stability of CMC solutions, the viscosity of a 150 Sedimentation velocity (SV) experiments were conducted using a Beckman Coulter ProteomeLab XL-I analytical ultracentrifuge equipped with absorbance and interference optics. Stock solutions of 1 The diluted CMC solutions (460 The sedimentation coefficient distributions, The Extended Fujita method is built into the sedimentation velocity analysis program SEDFIT ( The sedimentation coefficient distributions ( The molecular weight distributions for the tested CMCs are plotted in It is evident in The poor solubility of native cellulose arises from strong hydrogen bonding within the cellulose crystalline structure. Partial derivatization, as is often the case for most cellulose derivatives including CMC, leaves unsubstituted OH groups that can interact by The reduced viscosity of a polymer solution can generally be represented by a power series in concentration,  The reduced viscosity increases with decreasing polymer concentration as typically seen for polyelectrolytes. Since the degree of dissociation of the weakly acidic carboxylic groups increases at lower polymer concentrations, the increase in   At all degrees of substitution, the effect of pH in distilled water is apparently quite strong. Increasing the pH from 3 to 4.5 results in a large increase in [ In  The same trends can be observed for the DS0.7 sample. Very interestingly, the strong effect of pH observed in distilled water completely disappears in dilute NaCl as seen by comparing Along the same lines, On the other hand, at pH 7 CMC is fully dissociated and there are few counterions in solution to shield negatively charged carboxylic groups. As a result, expansion of CMC due to increasing molecular weight is much more pronounced. Overall, especially at higher pH values, increasing the molecular weight affects the conformation of the polymers more than increasing the degree of substitution at a given molecular weight.  The polyelectrolyte expansion can be expressed in terms of the expansion factor  The effect of DS on the chain expansion is not so pronounced as that of the molecular weight. The CMC with the lowest molecular weight has the highest ability to expand while the highest molecular weight polymer generally exhibits lower expansion factors. The expansion factor can also be looked at as the ability of the polymer chains to coil or stretch in solution upon transition from low to high ionic strength solutions. Thus, the low expansion factors of HM-CMC are probably due to the increased stiffness within the polymer chain resulting from intrachain hydrogen bonding. The increased rigidity limits the ability of the higher molecular weight polymer (and to some extent the higher DS polymer) to coil or stretch compared to the more flexible lower molecular weight and lower DS polymers. The conformation of CMC was further analyzed through the Mark–Houwink–Kuhn–Sakurada scaling relationship between intrinsic viscosity and molecular weight (Eq. It is difficult to directly compare published For example, The CMC chain flexibility was quantitatively estimated by determining the persistence lengths In its simplest form, Bohdanecky's relationship is shown in Eq. It should be noted that excluded volume effects are not accounted for in Bohdanecky's method, thus it is worth recalling that the data presented above were obtained using very dilute solutions in which excluded volume effects were negligible. Moreover, the relative stiffness of the CMC chain (as indicated by the persistence length results) should diminish excluded volume effects. It can be seen that the slopes, and therefore the persistence lengths In distilled water, The results presented above indicate that CMC is a semi-flexible, weakly stiff chain rather than a flexible chain extended by intramolecular excluded volume effects. Admittedly, the number of samples used for the analysis is low, and the method could be sensitive to the molecular weight distribution of the samples. However, the agreement with some of the data obtained using more involved methods, and the presentation of data as a function of pH, which is often lacking in many published works, should further enhance our understanding of the dilute solution behavior of CMC. Analytical ultracentrifugation revealed that the tested CMCs were polydisperse in nature with polydispersity indices ranging from 2.27 to 4.52 and weight average molecular weights ranging from 123,000 The intrinsic viscosity of CMC solutions was a strong function of the polymer molecular weight while the dependence of the intrinsic viscosity on the degree of substitution was weak. An increase in the molecular weight from 123,000 The intrinsic viscosity and molecular weight data analysis using the Mark–Houwink–Kuhn–Sakurada relationship showed that CMC, in a dilute background electrolyte, assumed a randomly coiling, semi-flexible conformation. Further analysis of the data using Bohdanecky's method for determining the persistence length showed that CMC has semi-flexible, weakly stiff chains that are slightly more extended than random coil chains. The flexibilities of individual CMC samples were quantified from the expansion factors. It was determined that the flexibility depended on molecular weight with the lowest molecular weight sample being the most flexible while the samples of different DS were of comparable flexibilities. Financial support for this study from