Abrasion resistant steels in combination with a good formability and a desirable balance of strength and ductility are in high demand for industrial applications. Current developments of high end abrasion resistant steels are mostly oriented on the high hardness martensitic concept following the hypothesis that the abrasion resistance holds a monotonous relationship with hardness. However, various experimental observations have suggested that the high hardness of martensite does not guarantee a high abrasion resistance comparing to multiple phase steels with a relative lower hardness but better ductility/toughness, and the brittle nature of martensite often leads to undesirable machinability and other inferior in-use properties. The present paper reviews the effects of various microstructural aspects on the abrasion resistance and attempts to define a desirable microstructure for low hardness abrasion resistant steels: a dual phase matrix strengthened by retained austenite via the TRIP effect. Given a detailed description of the desirable microstructure, its characteristics can be converted to quantifiable criteria and be implemented in a computational genetic alloy design approach to design alloy compositions and heat treatments for new families of ductile yet abrasion resistant steels.Abrasive wear is the commonly occurring wear mechanism invariable observed when a hard rough surface of an object slides over the softer surface of another, and a very costly problem in the automotive, transportation, mining, mineral processing, agricultural and earth moving industries Notwithstanding the significant progress in understanding of wear mechanism and influential factors, in the steel industry the material hardness is still taken as the prime indicator for abrasion resistance and hence engineering steels are classified accordingly. As a consequence, the development of high abrasion resistant steels also orients toward a high hardness as the first goal. However, recent studies suggested that multiple phase steels with a relative lower hardness may possess significantly improved abrasion resistance compared to martensitic grades In light the spirit of the ‘material GENOME initiative’, (aiming to accelerate the development of new materials via a priori predictions of properties) a computational alloy design approach based on physical models, empirical databases or mixtures thereof should be employed, other than the costly experimental ‘trial and error’ approach. The genetic alloy design approach The current work aims to present a literature review on effects of various microstructural features on the abrasion resistance, e.g. volume fractions of phases, grain size, morphology, retained austenite, etc. Based on the review, a rather qualitative description of the ideal microstructure of a low hardness abrasion resistant steel will be proposed. The qualitative description will help to design the further experiment setup in order to quantity effects of all relevant microstructure parameters for the given tribosystem (ASTM G65). The creator module can then be built according to the quantitative description of ideal microstructure and to be implemented in the genetic alloy design framework for optimizing the alloy composition and heat treatment parameters. The design of low hardness abrasion resistant steels follows the methodology which employs physical metallurgy principles to translate the target microstructure to multiple quantifiable criteria representing the metallurgical essence of each microstructural consideration. Subsequently, the alloy composition and heat treatment parameters can be optimized, implementing genetic algorithms as the optimization scheme. As shown in Depending on the system to be designed, the translator and creator units are of different complexity. In the design of UHS stainless steels Over the past decades, a large number of investigations have been conducted to study effects of various microstructural features on the wear behavior, aiming at improving the abrasion resistance via the microstructure control, and hence increasing the durability of wear components. For single phase ferritic steels, as reported by Kuzucu Generally, the martensitic microstructure exhibits a better abrasion resistance compared to ferrite, pearlite, and bainite Based on discussions above, it can be proposed that an attractive target microstructure of low hardness wear resistant steels is a dual phase mixture of soft phase (F) and hard constituent (M or B). However, the exact volume fractions of each phase, the grain size and their morphology are of also of importance. The following sections intend to discuss their effects on the abrasion resistance. In dual phase microstructures, the volume fractions of two phases are the critical parameter in determining the final mechanical properties, including abrasion resistance. Some investigations The wear resistance of a material can be correlated to both strength and ductility. Grain refinement is an effective way to increase the yield strength without impairing ductility Morphology is another important parameter in controlling the wear resistance. For DP steels Extensive investigations have reported positive effects of retained austenite on mechanical properties if strain induced martensitic transformation takes place. This also enhances the abrasion resistance  A comprehensive literature review has been conducted to determine the effects of microstructural features on wear behavior. Some conclusions can be made: Compared to single phase (ferrite, pearlite, bainite and martensite) microstructures, a dual phase (ferrite+bainite/martensite) microstructure may offer a high abrasion resistance in combination with a low hardness. The dual phase configurations, F+M or F+B, warrants further investigation and the optimal volume fraction is yet to be determined. Grain refinement appears an effective way to increase abrasion resistance. Morphology of dual phases also plays important role in determining the abrasion resistance. A continuous ferrite matrix encapsulating isolated martensite island as obtained via intercritical annealing displays an improved wear resistance. Literature data show a beneficial effect of local martensite formation on the abrasion resistance of TRIP steels.