The problem of forced convection heat transfer in porous media using the non-thermal equilibrium two-equation model is revisited analytically. Darcy-extended Brinkman momentum equation is used to describe the velocity profile inside the porous medium. The solution steps for the volume-averaged equations are outlined concisely to allow easy comparison to existing solutions in the literature. Using a case of air flow in open-cell metal foam, the fluid temperature is obtained by the current solution and by a solution existing in the literature. The pre-existing solution produced a physically-unexplained behavior. What seemed to be an error in the pre-existing solution was identified and described in detail. Robust solutions are useful in parametric studies, initial engineering design and for calibration of numerical solutions of more complex cases.constant, Eq. cylindrical porous media specific heat of fluid (J constant, Eq. constant, Eq. constant, Eq.  convection heat transfer coefficient (W effective thermal conductivity (W permeability (m heat flux (W temperature (K) volume-averaged pore velocity (m non-dimensional temperature radial coordinate (m) non-dimensional radial coordinate radius of porous medium (m) axial coordinate along the flow direction (m) non-dimensional axial coordinate thermal diffusivity porosity (dimensionless) ratio of effective viscosity to actual fluid viscosity ratio of effective thermal conductivities dimensionless temperature density of fluid (kg surface area per unit volume of porous medium (m   fluid mean value solid wall free stream Convection heat transfer inside the open pores of porous media has a wide range of applications such heat exchange and chemical reactors. Advances in materials science and engineering have given rise to man-made porous materials such as metal and graphite foams. Among the important characteristics of these foams, from a heat transfer point of view, are the relatively high conductivities of the solid phase and the large surface area per unit volume. This is in addition to the vigorous mixing of the flowing fluid due to the internal structure of these materials, which enhances convection between the solid and the fluid. Mother metals of the widely-produced foam include aluminum, nickel, steel and copper. Some of the applications of metal foams are found in aerospace and thermal management of power electronics. The internal architecture of porous media in general is complex and random. Exact solutions of the complete transport equations inside porous media are virtually impossible Calmidi and Mahajan Lee and Vafai Haji-Sheikh and Vafai In order to investigate metal foam heat exchanger, Lu et al. The present work examines two sets of published analyses for forced convection heat transfer in a cylindrical porous medium due to Brinkman-extended Darcy flow. The current paper shows that there is an error in the general solution of the temperature field in the first case A confined, cylindrical and isotropic porous medium of radius In the heat transfer analysis, the temperature field inside the porous medium is fully developed, and the Péclet number is high such that the longitudinal conduction for both the solid and the fluid are negligible. For inclusion of these terms, see Minkowycz and Haji-Sheikh The two energy Eqs. The particular solution to Eq. The solid temperature can readily be obtained by substituting for Aluminum foam is characterized be a high thermal conductivity and a substantial surface area per unit volume. The internal structure of the foam is web-like. These characteristics make aluminum foam an excellent heat transfer medium. Analytical solutions can be used to investigate the heat transfer in the foam. To illustrate the behavior of the fluid temperature, consider a case where the tube of  The two temperature curves are identical at the wall and close to it. However, as the distance increases away from the wall, the two solutions diverge, with Lu et al. Scrutiny of a published solution of the thermal-non-equilibrium two-equation model for convection heat transfer in a heated cylindrical tube filled with a porous medium and heated at wall, reveals that the wrong kind of Bessel functions were used. The solution employed the Brinkman-extended Darcy flow model. The solution steps were presented and the correct Bessel functions were used to obtain the correct solution. The findings were confirmed via an example which showed a physically un-explained behavior of the fluid temperature according to the solution with the wrong kind of Bessel functions. The solution can be of utility for initial heat transfer designs, and for more complex numerical modeling of the heat transfer phenomenon in porous media.