This study examines the production of MgCl2 from raw chrysotile tailings. The tailings were exposed to a dry carbochlorination reaction in a non-rotating oven. The effects of temperature, gas flow rate and time on the recovery of various cations were examined. Our results show that temperature is the determining factor for both the recovery of Mg (85%) and for limiting impurities. Reaction time can also be reduced to 30 min without affecting MgCl2 recovery. Filtration trials during the carbochlorination reaction allow us to conclude that the main product is MgCl2.The carbochlorination reaction is a process through which metallic chlorides are obtained in dry conditions and in the presence of a carbonaceous material ( Magnesium oxide is present in high concentration in naturally occurring silicate minerals such as serpentine. Chrysotile fibers have been extracted from serpentinite in the Province of Quebec (Canada) since 1878. Chrysotile tailings, with almost 1.2 billion tons in open air tailing mounds ( The carbochlorination of natural silicate minerals is an interesting alternative for the production of magnesium chloride ( The comparison of Gibbs standard free energies (ΔG It shows that only the chlorination of brucite (Eq. Different processes exist for the production of magnesium chloride (MgCl The present study is aimed at producing MgCl Samples of chrysotile tailings were taken from a non-homogeneous tailings mound at the Nationale Mine (Thetford Mines, Qc, Canada), combined and passed through multiple steps of grinding to achieve a grain size inferior to 40 The experimental setup is shown in The rate of magnesium extraction had been determined by the ratio between the extracted magnesium (solubilization of chloride salts) and the magnesium present in the original sample. Temperatures tested were 600 Studies under optimal conditions were performed to give an indication of the reaction kinetics and to determine a minimum time for maximal magnesium recovery. Periods of time tested were 15 The influence of temperature and gas flow rates on cation recovery was examined using a multiple analysis of variance (MANOVA) with Once removed from the oven, the chloride salts were separate from the rest of the samples by solubilization/filtration. The saline solution is then sent to ICP-AES analysis, after proper acidification (HNO Separate filtration trials were performed to determine the type of chloride produce. The reaction conditions were: 1 The XRD pattern of the chrysotile tailings revealed that they contained Mg ICP-AES analyses of the soluble phase are presented in The formation of magnesium chloride being an exothermal reaction, this allowed some chlorides to become volatile ( According to these results, it was decided that the optimal temperature to work with would be between 725 The results for various reaction times are shown in Different hypotheses could explain the rate of recovery and the speed of the reaction: existence of a molten bath, catalytic effect of the dehydroxylation of the serpentine or of the presence of iron. These hypotheses will be studied in a future paper on the mechanism of the reaction. After determining the rate of extraction of magnesium and the levels of impurities in the soluble phase, we wanted to verify which form the Mg product had taken and its purity. X-ray diffraction spectrum of the sample after the reaction, but before solubilization, is shown in the Phases identified by the SEM/EDS system on the Results of the filtration during the carbochlorination reaction are shown in the  In this study a carbochlorination of raw chrysotile ore tailings, with the same composition as a serpentinite, was performed in order to extract magnesium in the form of MgCl We thank the INRS-ETE and its technical staff, in particular to Myriam Chartier for her help in the lab, Marc Greendale for his answers and to Jean Frenette from Université Laval. The authors would also like to thank