Trimethylgallium is adopted as a metal organic precursor to develop GaN, which is a basis for power source, and LED with regard to metal organic chemical vapor deposition. After use, however, about 10% of the total usage of TMGa remains within the canister, and thus this study aims to develop the collection and refinement process through which the remaining amount can be reused. The TMGa storage canister used in the TMGa LED process is collected and transferred to the storage canister for refinement, and it turns out that the amount of recovery is more than 98%. In addition, the result of analyzing the impurity content of TMGa after the refinement process shows that the content of the entire impurities is 0.1ppm, which is lower than 10–100ppm, the figure of existing impurities that commercial TMGa may contain. In the NMR analysis of defective chemical bonding of TMGa or (CH3)3Ga, clear (CH3)3Ga peak is observed with no defective structure of bonding.Trimethlygallium (TMGa, (CH The method to produce TMGa has been widely known, and foreign companies such as Chemtura and Rohm and Haas are exclusively manufacturing and supplying it. Due to the risk of explosion in manufacturing, there is no domestic entity that attempts to manufacture it currently. TMGa chemical properties are shown that formula is (CH In general, about 17 The reuse process of TMGa is as follows: First of all, the TMGa storage canister is collected after use and the remaining amount is collected to the sealed collecting canister. Since TMGa is combustible and explosive in the air because of its chemical nature, TMGa canister is upset in the atmosphere of N As for the collection of remaining TMGa within the canister, the weight is measured every time when it is collected to get the average, and the amount of recovery is compared before and after the refinement. To analyze the purity of refined TMGa and the content of impurities, the inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometer (ICP-MS) and atomic emission spectroscopy or AES (Elan 6100/Perkin Elmer, USA) are used. The pretreatment process for ICP-MS analysis, and the process is conducted in an N In addition, TMGa is inserted to the MOCVD device as a precursor for the LED GaN development test after refinement and the undoped GaN is developed. The resulting GaN is analyzed with regard to its structural, optical, and electric characteristics. As for the structural characteristics, FWHM of the XRD (Bruker-AXS D8) rocking curve is calculated to measure the extent of crystallization, and the XRD phi scan is measured to check if it develops into the hexagonal GaN; that is, an LED GaN. As for the optical characteristics, the photoluminescence is measured to calculate the FWHM of the band edge emission. Lastly, for the electric characteristics, the HALL effect is measured to calculate the carrier concentration. The carrier concentration is calculated by means of Expression 1 below.  For the structural analysis after TMGa (chemical formula, (CH This study shows that after refinement, TMGa has better characteristics than those of existing commercial TMGa in the analysis of impurities and structure. Based on this result, the refinement process is suitable for the development of GaN for commercial LED production. Thus, the undoped GaN is developed by means of the MOCVD method, and the structural characteristics are shown through X-ray diffraction (XRD) as in   The result of the Hall effect measurement, the value of carrier concentration is −4.05×10 This study aims to develop a technology to collect the remaining amount of TMGa used in GaN manufacturing for LED, and to reuse it after refinement. Accordingly, the system to collect and refine TMGa after use is established, and the collecting and refining process is developed as well. In addition, to verify whether the process could be applied to actual LED industry, analyses on the impurities within TMGa and the structure after refinement are conducted, and the results show that the quality of TMGa is better than those of commonly used TMGa. GaN is developed by means of the MOCVD method with the precursor after refinement, and then the physical property is analyzed. The FWHM of the XRD rocking curve is calculated to determine the extent of crystallization, and the resulting value is 300.6. As 6 peaks are observed with an interval of 60° in the XRD phi scan, the development of GaN in the hexagonal structure is verified. Further, the band edge peak is observed in the optical analysis by means of PL, and the calculation of FWHM of the peak produced the value of 29.05 This work was supported by