To investigate the recovery of rare earth elements (REE) as a by-product from iron-oxide silicate rich tailings generated from the extraction of other primary commodities, bench scale flotation tests, in rougher-scavenger-cleaner configuration were studied. Preliminary mineralogical characterisation identified bastnäsite, monazite, stetindite, brannerite, florencite, and stillwellite as the REE minerals, with hematite and quartz being the major gangue minerals in the tailings material. The flotation response of the rare earth oxides (REO) and major gangue phases was investigated using sodium oleate and hydroxamic acid as collectors; and sodium silicate and starch as depressants. Generally, sodium oleate displayed relatively better selectivity for REO than hydroxamic acid in the presence of the depressants. The rougher-scavenger-cleaner flotation configuration using sodium oleate and the depressants produced a final concentrate recovering 63% REO at a grade of 2.25%. This investigation shows that both collectors may be used for REO recovery but the use of depressants is key, in tandem with cleaning of the rougher and scavenger concentrates. The pulp pH also had a strong impact on the flotation recovery of REO, with the selectivity deteriorating with increasing collector dosage. Furthermore, the high proportion of gangue minerals reporting to the concentrates, even with the use of depressants, affected the quality of concentrates grade. This study has shown that particle size distribution and mineralogical characteristics of feed significantly affect the upgrade and recovery of REO.According to data published by U.S.G.S There are many copper, gold, uranium, silver, and other primary commodities ores in Australia, for which iron-oxides and silicates form the major gangue phases The conventional techniques used for REE ores beneficiation include gravity separation, magnetic separation, electrostatic separation, and froth flotation Previous studies conducted on flotation recovery of REO from different ores reported numerous advantages, including high recovery and enhanced selectivity, hence flotation has been considered as a potential beneficiation method for REO upgrade and recovery in this investigation. Preliminary mineralogical characterisation of a selected IST from an Australian plant, indicated the REE were mineralised as bastnäsite, monazite, stetindite, brannerite, florencite, and stillwellite. The IST was shown to consist of mainly iron(Fe)-oxides including hematite/magnetite associations and goethite/limonite associations; and silicate minerals (quartz, illite, muscovite, annite, and feldspar) as the major gangue phases. The IST and other low grade deposits in Australia may be regarded to be within a potentially economic range for exploitation, if a feasible and economic processing route for further upgrade and value adding can be developed. Typically, REE deposits around the world are notably different, both chemically and mineralogically, and thus require distinct metallurgical development and ore-specific approach to design an overall viable REE extraction route. This paper focuses specifically on the use of flotation for REO upgrade and recovery from the selected IST. In a previous investigation, Abaka-Wood et al. IST samples from an Australian plant were used in the flotation studies. Sodium oleate (Sun Ace, Australia), and AEROFLOAT 6494 [34.56% alcohol solution of hydroxamic acid (Cytec, U.S.A)] were used as collectors, whilst sodium silicate (Coogee Chemicals, Australia) and starch (Grain Processing Corporation, U.S.A) were employed as depressants. The reagents were prepared in distilled water right before commencement of the experiments to avoid possible alteration of reagents over time. Both sodium oleate and hydroxamic acid were solubilised with 10 wt% NaOH solution under magnetic stirring for about 20 min followed by distilled water addition to yield a 10 wt% solution (of each collector). Dilute analytical grade HCl and NaOH were used as pH modifiers, when required. The chemical and mineralogical composition, respectively of the flotation feed (IST sample) are presented in Flotation tests were conducted using a 1.2 L Denver laboratory scale flotation cell (Model D-12). The impeller speed (800 rpm) and air flow rate (3.5 dm The chemical analysis ( The TREO grade and recovery, respectively in the flotation products (feed, concentrates, and tailings) reported in this work were calculated using the equations; In order to investigate the influence of pulp pH on the upgrade and recovery of REO and determine the optimum pH value for REO flotation, a series of flotation tests was conducted using either 1000 g/t sodium oleate or hydroxamic acid as a collector in the absence of depressants. A summary of the experimental results obtained are shown in An increase in pulp pH from 3 to 7 produced a statistically identical TREO recovery (39%), with an increase in enrichment ratio from 1.27 to 1.52 ( From The effects of change in collector dosage on the recovery of REO, Fe, and Si was investigated by increasing sodium oleate or hydroxamic acid dosage from 0 to 10,000 g/t whilst maintaining the pulp pH at 9, in the absence of depressants ( It is not the purpose of this paper to report on the contribution of entrainment and true flotation in details, however, collectorless flotation was conducted to confirm the occurrence of entrainment recovery since the flotation feed was dominated by fine particles Considering the results obtained from the preliminary batch flotation tests, a rougher-scavenger-cleaner flowsheet was tested with each collector in the presence of sodium silicate and starch, to enhance REO selectivity. The rougher and scavenger flotation tests were carried out in a 1.2 L cell whereas a 0.5 L cell was used for the cleaner tests. The air flow rate was set to 3.5 dm During the roughing stage the feed was first conditioned with 1500 g/t each of sodium silicate and starch; then 3000 g/t sodium oleate or hydroxamic acid and floated for 5 min. The tailings from the roughing stage were then floated after adding further 1500 g/t each of the depressants and 1000 g/t of either collector. The flotation concentrates from the roughing and scavenging stages were combined and re-floated in a cleaning stage, with 3000 g/t each of the depressants without the addition of the collectors, for a total time of 5 min.  The results obtained from test conducted with hydroxamic acid in the presence of the depressants have been presented in The final concentrate obtained from Flowsheet 11A was analysed for its mineralogical composition to provide detailed knowledge on the minerals recovered, REE minerals association, and liberation characteristics. This concentrate was selected as it had a higher REO content. As indicated by Tranvik et al. Comparing the two metallurgical balance data presented in As both collectors used in the present work have almost identical interactions with REE minerals, the differences in flotation performance may be attributed to collector-selectivity for the gangue minerals. For instance, it can be seen from The primary aim for the use of the depressants was to inhibit the recovery of gangue minerals. However, significant amount of both Fe-oxides and silicates remained in the flotation concentrates ( Secondly, the high content of gangue minerals in the flotation concentrates can also be attributed to incomplete REE minerals liberation from gangue minerals. QEMSCAN data presented in Preliminary flotation tests conducted on the iron oxide silicate rich tailings sample suggest the feasibility of recovering REO using both sodium oleate and hydroxamic acid as collectors. It is clear that increasing collector dosage leads to an improvement in the recovery of REO at the expense of upgrade, as a result of increased recovery of gangue minerals. The experimental results also revealed that the flotation recovery of REO from the IST is pulp pH dependent, with pH 9 identified as suitable for REO recovery. A combination of rougher, scavenger, and cleaner flotation stages, using sodium oleate in the presence of sodium silicate and starch, produced a TREO recovery of 63% at 2.25% grade. A TREO recovery of 60% at a grade of 1.99% was obtained when hydroxamic acid was used in the presence of the depressants during the rougher-scavenger-cleaner flotation test. The manipulation of flowsheet configurations and depressants dosage were key in achieving improved REO upgrade. The particle size distribution and mineralogical characteristics of the sample significantly affect the upgrade and recovery of REO by flotation. The results from this investigation are key in future decisions to upgrade and recover REO from IST and other potential mining tailings that are currently being prospected for REE beneficiation. Furthermore, physical separation methods may be investigated in tandem with flotation to enhance REO upgrade and recovery. For example, magnetic separation may be considered in future works to aid in rejecting some magnetic Fe-oxides such as hematite and goethite as they pose significant challenge to selectivity even when depressants are used. Gravity concentration may be also exploited to reject liberated low specific gravity silicate minerals such quartz, prior to flotation.