The removal of iron from leaching circuits is a common problem in the hydrometallurgical processing of non ferrous metals. Among the currently available processes, hematite precipitation is the most recommendable from an environmental point of view.This paper is concerned with the batch precipitation of hematite from ferrous sulfate solutions. One of the main objectives of the study was to determine the effect of the experimental conditions on the extent of iron precipitation as well as the purity and the particle size distribution of the precipitates. The main variables studied were temperature (180 to 220 °C), concentration of sulfuric acid (1 to 10 g/l), initial iron concentration (1 to 15 g/l), and partial pressure of oxygen (304 to 709 kPa).
                  The results showed that an increase in the temperature produced precipitates with smaller particle sizes and lower sulfur contents. On the other hand, an increase in sulfuric acid concentration and initial iron concentration produced precipitates with larger particle sizes and higher sulfur contents. Increasing the oxygen partial pressure from 304 to 709 kPa produced a very small increase on the rate of hematite precipitation indicating that a large partial pressure of oxygen is not needed for an effective ferrous to ferric oxidation.In the processing of ores or concentrates of non-ferrous metals by acid leaching a certain amount of iron dissolution always occurs. Three main processes are currently available for the removal of excess iron from leaching circuits: the jarosite process, the goethite process and the hematite process ( Although the process for hematite precipitation has a higher associated cost, it has some advantages over jarosite and goethite precipitation processes from an environmental point of view. The products from hematite process are iron rich and stable precipitates, which can be safely impounded. In addition, hematite precipitates have a potential commercial value since they can be used in the cement and ceramic industries. The hematite process as practiced in the zinc industry involves, firstly, a step of reduction of the ferric ions in the leach solution to ferrous followed by a neutralization step. The resulting soluble ferrous solution is then heated at high temperature, in the range 180–200 °C, with injection of oxygen to produce the oxidation of the ferrous to ferric ions and simultaneous hydrolysis to hematite, α-Fe Oxidation of the ferrous to ferric ions by gaseous oxygen: Hydrolysis of the ferric ions: The overall reaction is as follows: It can be noted that the iron oxidation reaction The oxidation of ferrous to ferric ions by gaseous oxygen in an autoclave (reaction It should be pointed out that reaction Oxygen absorption: Homogeneous oxidation of the ferrous to ferric ions by dissolved oxygen: For the gas–liquid equilibrium of oxygen represented by reaction Hematite precipitation by hydrolysis of ferric ions (reaction where the values of the parameters These investigators also found that for solutions of high acidity the hydrolysis of the ferric ions will produce the precipitation of FeOHSO The maximum concentration of the free sulfuric acid above which FeOHSO In contrast to the detailed knowledge available on the equilibrium of hematite precipitation, very little information has been published on the precipitation rate, or how the operating conditions affect the composition and particle size of the produced hematite. Considering the above, this work discusses the results of an investigation on hematite precipitation which was focused on the effects of the operating conditions (temperature, partial pressure of oxygen, initial acidity, initial iron content and time) on the extent of iron precipitation, and on the composition and particle size distribution of the precipitates. In the experiments, analytical grade FeSO To start an experiment, the autoclave was carefully cleaned and charged with one liter of solution containing the desired amounts of ferrous sulfate and sulfuric acid. The autoclave was sealed, heated to the set temperature and the oxygen partial pressure was then fixed to the desired level and maintained constant throughout the experiment. At the end of the test, the autoclave was rapidly cooled by circulating cold water through the cooling coil. The product slurry was filtered in a Buchner vacuum filter using a fine pore (2.5 μm) filter paper. The collected solids were washed with acidified water and dried overnight at 100 °C. The solution was then re-filtered using a glass microfiber filter (pore size 0.7 μm) to remove any fine hematite particle that may have remained in the solution. The iron concentration in the solutions was analyzed by atomic absorption spectroscopy and the fraction of iron precipitated was calculated by mass balance. It was found that a significant amount of iron oxide precipitated on the walls of the reactor, and on the surfaces of the agitation and cooling systems. For this reason, the weight of the collected solids was always lower than the theoretical amount of precipitates estimated from the iron mass balance. The solids were also analyzed chemically to determine their iron and sulfur content. Some of the precipitates were also analyzed by X-ray diffraction to identify the phases present. Additionally, the size distribution of the precipitates was determined by using a laser diffraction size analyzer Helos Rodos of Sympatec. For hematite precipitation from acid solutions, the temperature should be over 180 °C according to the industrial practice. Thus experiments were conducted in the range 180 to 220 °C to study the nature of the precipitates in this investigation. The results of XRD analysis of the precipitates showed that hematite was the main iron compound formed in the temperature range studied. This is illustrated in The morphology of the iron precipitates was also studied by using scanning electron microscopy. It was found that the precipitates consisted of irregularly shaped particles, which appeared to be aggregates of small crystals. This is illustrated in  It can be seen in this figure that an increase in the temperature from 180 to 220 °C produced a large increase in the rate of iron precipitation. Additionally, in this temperature range, the amount of iron precipitated as a function of time appears to level off at all temperatures after about 15 min and at about 60 min a substantial difference in the amount of iron precipitated can be seen between the temperatures. By using the equilibrium Eq. The effect of temperature on the chemical composition of the precipitates was also determined. The precipitates obtained at the different temperatures were analyzed for iron and sulfur. The analysis is shown in Temperature has also a significant influence on the particle size of hematite precipitates. The particle size analysis showed that the higher the temperature the smaller the particle size. This result can be seen in The effect of the initial concentration of acid on the hematite precipitation was studied in the range 1 to 10 g/l at a temperature of 200 °C and partial pressure of oxygen of 304 kPa. The results are shown in The obtained precipitates were also analyzed for Fe and S and the results are shown in The initial concentration of sulfuric acid has also a large influence in the particle size of the precipitate. The size distribution of the precipitates obtained with 1 g/l and 10 g/l initial sulfuric acid concentrations are shown in The effect of the initial iron concentration on the extent of iron precipitation was studied in the range 1 to 15 g/l and reactions times of 15 and 60 min. The results, as seen in The chemical composition of the precipitates obtained in experiments carried out with 15 g/l of initial ferrous ions concentration was 59.8% Fe and 2.3% S as compared to 62.6% Fe and 2.2% S obtained with 5 g/l of initial ferrous concentration. Thus an increase in the initial ferrous concentration decreases the iron content of the precipitate. The particle size dependency on the initial iron concentration is shown in An interesting finding from the experimental data is that there is a correlation between the particle size and sulfur content of the precipitates. The smaller the particle sizes the lower the sulfur content. This result implies that a significant fraction of the sulfur contamination in the precipitates is due to occlusion of solution in the pores of the particles that results from the agglomeration growth mechanism. The effect of the oxygen partial pressure on the percentage of iron precipitated at 180 °C and 200 °C is shown in From the experimental results on the hematite precipitation the following can be concluded. The iron compound precipitated in the temperature range 180 to 220 °C is hematite. An increase in the temperature in this range enhanced significantly the rate of hematite precipitation. Additionally, the temperature has a significant effect on the quality of the precipitates. High temperature produced precipitates with fine particle sizes and low sulfur contents. Sulfuric acid concentration and initial iron concentration from 1–10 g/l and 1–15 g/l, respectively, decreased the fraction of iron precipitated and produced precipitates with higher sulfur contents and larger particle sizes. The partial pressure of oxygen has little influence on the rate of hematite precipitation indicating that a large partial pressure of oxygen is not needed for an effective ferrous to ferric oxidation. The authors express their gratitude to The National Fund for Scientific and Technological Development (FONDECYT) of Chile for the financial support of this study through Project No. 1040421.