As a metallic orthopedic implant, 316 L stainless steel (316 L SS) is used extensively for its good resistance to corrosion and mechanical properties. However, it takes a long time to achieve osseointegration between 316 L SS and adjacent tissues due to its bio-inert characteristic. Hence, the aim is to improve the bio-adaption of 316 L SS. A good approach is to add elements to materials to improve their osteogenic capabilities by the appropriate release of ions. Hence copper-containing 316 L stainless steel (316L-Cu SS) was investigated in this work, where Cu is an essential trace element that can stimulates osteogenesis. It was found that 316L-Cu SS was bio-safe and did not affect the proliferation of co-cultured osteoblasts in comparison with 316 L SS. It increased cell apoptosis on day 1 but inhibited it on day 3, which cooperates with new bone formation processes. Osteoblasts extend themselves more quickly and in a better manner on the surface of 316L-Cu SS, wheneven more pseudopodia are present. Furthermore, the gene expression of alkaline phosphatase, collagen I and runt-related transcription factor 2 (Runx2) in osteoblasts cultured with 316L-Cu SS was significantly enhanced. Runx2 protein expression increased, and osteogenesis was stimulated by 316L-Cu SS via an Akt cell signaling pathway. In conclusion, 316L-Cu SS stimulates osteogenesis through activation of the Akt cell signaling pathway and the upregulation of Runx2. Thus, 316L-Cu SS is a promising material that may be used in surgical implants to stimulate osteogenesis.Metallic biomaterials are widely used as surgical implants for their good mechanical properties, corrosion resistance and biocompatibility. They mainly include stainless steel, cobalt-based alloys, pure titanium and titanium alloys, with stainless steel having the longest history of clinical applications. 316 L stainless steel (316 L SS) is the most extensively used stainless steel among surgical implants, and is recommended to be a priority for manufacturing implants by the American Society for Testing and Materials [ An effective approach to bone implants is to add beneficial elements such as Ca, Ni, Si, Zn and Sr to improve their osteogenic capabilities [ Cu is not only a widely used alloying element in metals, but also essential in bone growth and development. Although the effect of Cu in bone metabolism is well known, skeletal deformity is always accompanied by a serious Cu deficiency [ As an important factor, Cu activated the MAPK pathway in melanoma cells [ In this work, the osteogenic properties of a 316L-Cu SS was investigated. Relevant mechanisms were analyzed by evaluating and analyzing cell proliferation, apoptosis and attachment, as well as bone-related gene and protein expression by culturing osteoblasts with the steel. It is noted that this study is further deeply focus on the mechanism of promoting osteogenesis of 316L-Cu SS from Akt cell signaling pathway. These results add to an evidence for the clinical application of this novel and promising bone implant material. Based on the composition of 316L SS, 316L-Cu SS was designed, and both were melted using a 25-kg vacuum induction melting furnace, with chemical compositions listed in Human fetal osteoblasts (hFOB 1.19) purchased from the American Type Culture Collection were used in this study. Cells were cultured in high glucose Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle medium (DMEM; Hyclone, Logan UT, USA) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Gibco/Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), 80 U/mL penicillin (Hyclone), and 0.08 mg/mL streptomycin (Hyclone).The medium was changed every 2 days. When cells reached 80% conﬂuence, they were sub-cultured at a ratio of 1:2 and incubated at 37 °C in a humid atmosphere containing 5% CO A Cell Counting Kit (CCK)-8 assay was performed to evaluate the effect of 316L-Cu SS on cell proliferation. Metal samples with a size of 5 mm × 1 mm were put into 96-well plates and 100 μL of medium containing 5 × 10 Cell apoptosis was evaluated using annexin V-FITC/propidium iodide (PI) double staining apoptosis detection kit (Vazyme Biotech, Nanjing, China) and flow cytometry. Cells (3 × 10 Cell morphologies on the surfaces of samples were observed by detecting filamentous actin (F-actin) of the cytoskeleton using immunofluorescence. Medium (100 μL/well) containing 2.5 × 10 Osteogenesis related gene expression in cells cultured on the surface of metal samples was studied by reverse transcriptase quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR). Cells (3 × 10 Western blotting was performed for the direct detection of Runx2, pAkt and total Akt proteins. Cells (3 × 10 All experiments were performed in triplicate and data were expressed as mean ± standard deviation. An independent-sample It is well known that excess Cu ions are toxic due to the generation of reactive oxygen species via Fenton or Haber–Weiss reactions [ Cell apoptosis is a programmed death that keeps a dynamic balance of cell numbers within the body. It becomes activated on the initiation of an immune response or when toxic substances invade the body [ The cytoskeleton plays an important role in many cellular activities, such as attachment, migration, and mitosis, to name a few. At the onset of mitosis, F-actin relocates from the edge of cell to form an equatorial ring, and then actin and myosin slide to pull the plasma membrane inward to divide the cell and complete mitosis [ Taken together, the biocompatibility of 316L-Cu SS, including cytotoxicity, cell apoptosis and cell morphology, was examined. The CCK-8 assay showed that 316L-Cu SS had non-cytotoxic effect when co-cultured hFOB within 7 days. However, this material promoted cell apoptosis at an early stage while inhibiting it at a later stage. The Cu-containing surface of the steel was found to be more suitable for hFOB to attach and spread. Cultured hFOB on a Cu-containing steel surface showed better attachment and growth. The extracellular matrix is an important part of bone and cartilage, which is mainly composed of collagen and proteoglycans. Its metabolism is bound up with the fracture-healing process. The gene expression of collagen induces bone-like tissues and forms a bone matrix through mineralization to recover the normal structure and function of bone. Cu ions are known to stimulate collagen deposition [ The bone-related gene expression ( In various cell culture systems, PI3K-Akt signaling has been implicated as a critical pathway for the differentiation of skeletal component cells including chondrocytes, osteoblasts, myoblasts, and adipocytes. In addition, there is substantial evidence that the Akt signaling pathway is essential for osteogenesis After the co-culture of cells on surfaces of stainless steel, with or without 10 μM of a Akt inhibitor, GSK2141795, for 3 days, pAkt, Akt and Runx2 protein expression was detected by western blotting. As shown in Taken together, the bone-related gene expression including 316L-Cu SS is a novel metallic material that has potential to be used in orthopedic implants to improve osteogenesis by Cu ion release. The present study demonstrated that 316L-Cu SS was bio-safe and behaved no cytotoxicity in comparison with 316L SS. 316L-Cu SS increased cell apoptosis on day 1 and decreased it on day 3, which may cooperate with the procedure of bone remodeling. Human FOB attached more quickly and showed better spread on the surface of 316L-Cu SS than 316L SS. 316L-Cu SS also significantly enhanced the gene expression of This work was financially supported by the