Several factors contribute to an often bleak outlook for mining and mineral processing projects in the current market: rising energy costs, falling ore body head grades, and lower profit margins on added value products have all made it more difficult to operate economically. Ore sorting is a class of technologies that offers potential solutions to these problems by identifying the metal values in a run-of-mine stream and separating the stones containing valuable mineralization from barren stones. This separation reduces the amount of material that must be processed to produce a given amount of value added metal, which has significant impact on the total mine and plant economics. To date, ore sorting has been studied extensively and several technologies have been identified as suitable for industrial application; however, very little quantitative discussion has been made about the impact of these technologies. Dual-energy X-ray transmission has been used to sort ore from different mines, and an analysis identifying the economic impact of these results is presented. Significant energy savings in milling have been realized, and capital and operating cost advantages to using ore sorting have been identified.The energy costs required to refine metal values contained in ore to concentrates constitute the majority of the cost to produce metals. On average across the mining industry, 44% of the total electricity consumption is dedicated to crushing and milling activities ( It was outlined in U.S. Department of Energy and U.S. Energy Information Administration reports that current size reduction practices are highly inefficient ( Ore sorting as a class of technologies addresses these issues by reducing the amount of material fed to the milling circuits, eliminating much of the waste before any further capital or operating expenses are invested into its processing. In the simplest sense, ore sorting constitutes a sensor, a processor, and a sorter ( In addition to the reduction in energy used during milling by implementing ore sorting, capital savings in equipment sizing, tailings impoundment and extended mine life can be realized. Furthermore, reagent consumption is reduced and the feed to unit operations downstream of milling is smoothed by eliminating variations in the feed head grade. The impact of ore sorting is wide reaching ( Ore sorting has been extensively used in the mining industry, with some of the earliest applications finding use in high value products like diamond and gem mining ( Ore sorting technologies take advantage of nearly the entire electromagnetic spectrum ( In this work ROM samples from two different operating primary molybdenum mines owned by Souzmetallresource (SMR) of Russia were studied. Individual stones ranged from 1–3 Dual-energy X-ray transmission (DE-XRT) was used during this study to perform automated ore sorting. X-ray transmission is a technology familiar to many through its many applications: diagnostic tests in the doctor’s office, luggage scanners at airport security checkpoints, and extensive use in scientific research. X-ray transmission is applicable in ore sorting due to the differences in atomic absorption displayed by different elements. In effect, denser elements are able to absorb more energy when bombarded by X-rays, and as such fewer X-rays transmit through the sample to the detector array ( The inherent advantage of DE-XRT over other sensing technologies like X-ray fluorescence (XRF) is the ability of DE-XRT to sample the entire mass of a stone ( The results of the hand sorting effort are presented in In developing the DE-XRT ore sorter, it was established that different thresholds should be set during the sorting. Thresholds constitute varying degrees of aggressiveness with which the processor identifies a given stone as containing molybdenum and selects it for inclusion in the accepted pile of stones. There are several ways to consider the issue of how best to threshold. From one perspective, the most aggressive threshold will seek to maximize the molybdenum recovery. During increased molybdenum recovery stones that appear to contain small amounts of molybdenum under the DE-XRT will be identified for sorting into the accepted pile of ROM stones. In this sense, the most aggressive threshold might permit that stones have very low relative amounts of molybdenum. However, because the sensor does not require a large amount of heavy metal (presumably molybdenum) in a given stone to be considered for acceptance, the likelihood of false positive identification increases. Additionally, imagine a stone that comprises only 5% of the target mineral according to the DE-XRT sorter. Under an aggressive threshold this stone might be accepted, bringing with it the 95% by mass weight of the gangue associated with the metal in that stone. Multiplying this effect by hundreds and thousands of stones rapidly decreases the selectivity of the sort, without any real impact on false positive identification. Therefore, aggressive thresholds maximize molybdenum recovery at the expense of selectivity. On the contrary, relaxed thresholds establish a more rigorous standard for positive identification; the relaxed threshold will require relatively more heavy metal (again, presumably molybdenum) in a given stone to be accepted. With the hypothetical stone containing 5% target metal, the stone does not contain a high enough proportion of metal to gangue to constitute a positive identification; therefore the selectivity is maintained. The relaxed threshold maximizes selectivity at the expense of molybdenum recovery. One might argue that crushing stones to smaller fractions would eliminate the need to threshold at different levels because the likelihood of stones containing relatively small amount of target metal (e.g The results of the automated DE-XRT ore sorting for Mine A and Mine B are illustrated diagrammatically in Considering Mine A first, automated DE-XRT sorting allows for significant recovery of molybdenum metal value from the ROM ore while greatly reducing the mass of material to be processed in the mills and further downstream. It is important to note that the upgrade factor illustrates the increased concentration of molybdenum in the feed to the mills (and eventually the flotation and/or separation stages). In comparing the different thresholds that have been evaluated, several factors must be considered. Primarily, the question becomes what is the cut-off grade for the given mine. If one assumes a cut-off grade of 0.01% Mo, it is clear that all thresholds bring the mill feed well above this range. However, it must also be stated that the molybdenum content in the stones added or removed in going from one threshold to another factor into the decision of which threshold to use. In increasing the aggressiveness of the threshold from relaxed to moderate, the molybdenum content in the stones added (1.6% of the total ROM feed) is 0.0091% Mo. Therefore, the argument may be made that the benefit to going from the most relaxed threshold to a slightly more aggressive one does not offer significant savings. However, as will be shown below, the impact on the milling circuit, which constitutes the majority of the energy investment in the process, can be significant at different thresholds. In considering the different thresholds investigated at Mine A, it cannot be determined which threshold is optimal based solely on the molybdenum recovery versus mass rejection performance. Mine B presents similar results from automated DE-XRT sorting. The impact that ore mineralogy has on the sorting results is apparent here. Significant work can be done to tune the algorithms used to specify the sorting parameters at a given threshold. However, these limitations notwithstanding, the data in The ore sorting results presented for Mines A and B are from primary molybdenum mines. Dual-energy X-ray transmission, though, is not limited to identifying molybdenum, and it is not even limited to identifying particularly heavy elements. Because DE-XRT relies on comparing the atomic density of one mineral component to the density of another, its utility extends well beyond the refractory metals group. Specific work must be carried out to apply DE-XRT to other metal and mineral operations and further study in developing more powerful thresholds is important. The development of better – more sensitive, more powerful, smaller, and faster – sensors has led to the rapid deployment of new ore sorting technologies ( A mass balance model was developed to assess the impact of DE-XRT ore sorting on plant operations and economics. This model focused particularly on the crushing and grinding circuits; comminution is often the aspect most limiting the capacity of a mineral processing plant and offers enormous potential economic impact. The model is intended to represent a “typical” primary molybdenum processing plant treating ore with a head grade of 0.050% Mo and a ROM tonnage of 30 The ore sorter weight rejection and molybdenum recovery parameters correspond to the “relaxed” settings for Mine A described in Section Crusher and ball mill power draw were calculated from the Bond equation ( An initial base-case model of the crushing and grinding circuits was developed with no ore sorting taking place. The flow sheet and mass balance are shown in The ore is assumed to undergo three stages of crushing, with the crushed material ball milled in two stages to attain a Ore sorters were then added to the model. It is assumed that the ore sorters are placed between secondary and tertiary crushing in the flow sheet. Multideck screens are also installed after secondary crushing in order to sort the ore into different size fractions. Each size fraction can then be sent to the appropriate set of ore sorters, which have been tuned to handle the size fraction; the smallest fraction (−0.5 In this scenario, the ROM feed is kept the same as in the Base Case (3455 TPH). Due to the mass rejection from the ore sorters, much less material is sent to the tertiary crusher and ball mills, which results in a reduction in power requirement. Total crusher power is reduced from 5.9 In practice, it is expected that most operations would use the ore sorters to increase the amount of ROM material processed, maintaining the same tonnage sent to ball milling and flotation. This would enable a plant to maximize use of its milling, flotation, and other downstream equipment. The increase in ROM would, of course, require that more crushing lines be installed. A scenario was developed in which the amount of material sent to ball milling and flotation was kept the same as for the Base Case, at 3455 TPH. The flow sheet and mass balance for this scenario, again based on Mine A at a relaxed threshold, are shown in In this scenario, the tonnage sent to flotation remains approximately the same as in the Base Case at 3455 TPH, and ball mill power required also remains the same at approximately 51 Mass balances were calculated for Case 3 using the different ore sorter settings for Mines A and B. This was intended to determine whether more aggressive ore sorter settings could improve circuit performance. The results are given in As would be expected, as molybdenum recovery decreases and mass rejection increases, the molybdenum grade of the material sent to flotation increases. Interestingly, the amount of molybdenum sent to flotation also increases as the ore sorter setting becomes more relaxed. Even though the ore sorters are sending more molybdenum to the tailings in the relaxed setting, the increase in tonnage allows a net increase in molybdenum tonnage to flotation (and hence a net increase in revenue). In the test work for Mine B, this trend only appears to level off when the ore sorter is set to the outlier setting, rejecting almost 99% of the feed. The analysis performed in Case 3, and substantiated with the outlier stones found in Mine B, suggests that the practical limits of ore sorting thresholds should be determined to find how relaxed the sorting can be. The optimal degree of selectivity will likely lay somewhere between the relaxed threshold and the outlier threshold cases. In examining the potential impact of operating ore sorters according to Cases 2 and 3 ( Cases 2 and 3 for both mines represent two extremes in operation and design that are made possible by the use of ore sorters. In Case 2, the ore sorters are used to reduce the operating cost of the mill, with a minimum of capital expenditure. In Case 3, on the other hand, the ore sorters are used to increase molybdenum throughput and revenue. This, however, requires considerable expansion of crushing and mining capacity, with a corresponding capital investment. In practice, it is expected that operations will choose a course somewhere between these extremes. One of the major drivers in deciding between fashioning a comminution circuit after Case 2 versus Case 3 (or somewhere in between) will be the current state of the processing plant. Green- or brownfield installations have the ability to choose either configuration; several other mitigating factors (e.g. metal prices, energy costs, available capital, expected mine life, payback expectations, etc.) will guide the decision to focus on minimizing energy consumption or maximizing productivity. In current operations, Case 3 is likely more attractive since the desire to maximize the use of installed capital will be omnipresent. In the scenarios outlined in 4.2 and 4.3, the changes in major equipment needs are given in As the ore sorting step upgrades the ore grade, it may make it possible to mine low-grade zones that may otherwise have been considered uneconomical. In other words, the use of ore sorting may make it possible for mines to increase their economic reserves and mine life. During the start-up phases of a mine, a significant amount of overburden must typically be removed in order to begin mining the ore body. This overburden can be processed through ore sorters to recover any amounts of metal value at a fraction of the typical cost. This is very important during start-up when a mine is looking to rapidly pay back the investment in capital equipment. On the other hand, once a mine’s capital has been completely paid off, any further material processed is revenue less the operating expenses. Ore sorting affects this cash flow by (1) reducing the operating costs per tonne of material and (2) extending the life of the mine by upgrading usually uneconomic zones of the mine to profitable head grades. As the flow sheet modeling shows, comminution energy after installation of ore sorters can vary between a net decrease (as in Case 2) and a net increase (as in Case 3). However, the increased productivity results in a net decrease in the amount of energy required to produce Mo in all cases. Costs for liners, balls and other crushing and grinding consumables are expected to remain the same, on a per kilowatt-hour basis, as in the Base Case; note that in all three cases the material consists of more than 99% gangue. Because the energy consumed during comminution represents the single largest input of energy during metal processing, the economic impacts realized here are significant. Energy and reagent consumption downstream of the comminution circuit will be affected in several ways. Ore sorting upgrades the ROM stream and, in so doing, reduces the amount of gangue that must be processed per tonne of metal produced during stages like leaching, physical separations, and roasting. In general, gangue consumes reagents and becomes an energy sink during processing. The tonnage sent to flotation may or may not decrease, depending on the priorities of the mining operation. In general, however, ore sorting will send a higher-grade feed to the flotation circuit. Furthermore, the feed to the flotation circuit will be more consistent with fewer fluctuations in metal content because ore sorting will help smooth the ROM stream of any perturbations in feed concentration. Due to much lower gangue content in the flotation feed, reagent consumption is expected to decrease and the circuit may be simplified by the removal of some cleaner and/or scavenger stages. These specific changes will be dependent on the mineralogy of a particular operation. Implementing ore sorting will have important implications for tailings management. In the flow sheet scenarios modeled above, 67% of the feed is rejected as +0.5 The greatest operating cost for a typical ore sorter is the compressed air used to separate stones after they have passed through the sensor ( Ore sorting has been identified as a technology with potentially broad reaching impacts on the mining industry. With the implementation of ore sorting significant energy savings or throughput increases are realized during comminution. These effects are then felt throughput the plant and their impact has been discussed. In determining how best to apply ore sorting at a particular operation, a decision scheme similar to that outlined in First, the applicability of ore sorting to the ROM stream is evaluated; this is the first decision point and establishes a “fail early” criterion. This study identifies the relationship between recovery/rejection and energy savings. It is suggested that at least 30% energy reduction be possible before deciding to pursue the technology further. Because comminution is the single largest energy consumer during processing, examination of ore sorting impacts on this area of operation is next. Here, the effort to minimize energy consumption versus maximizing throughput is weighed with consideration given to the factors outlined. Four major areas have been identified in this work, and several more should be considered on an individual basis. However, at this point in the decision tree, the factors must be weighted by their economic impact after the implementation of ore sorting. Based on this ordering, each area can be studied to determine how ore sorting effects the total plant operation. In the end, the impact ore sorting has on plant economics, and the payback implications for its use, must be considered carefully for each potential site. The authors would like to acknowledge the work done by Souzmetallresource (SMR) of Russia in preparing and providing ROM material from their Sorsk and Zhireken properties.