Thermochemical modification for the surface of smithsonite with sulfur and its flotation response were investigated by micro-flotation tests, X-ray powder diffractometer (XRD) combining with thermodynamic calculations, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and electron probe microanalysis (EPMA). Micro-flotation tests results showed that the addition of the sulfur at a small S/ZnCO3 mole ratio (0.05) during the thermochemical modification process facilitated flotation of the smithsonite and improved the flotation recovery by approximately 65%. The results of XRD analyses and thermodynamic calculations verified that the smithsonite was decomposed into zincite and then interacted with sulfur, forming sphalerite at the surface, after the thermochemical modification in the presence of sulfur. XPS analyses results revealed that both ZnS and ZnS2 were formed at the surface of the obtained zincite. EPMA analyses confirmed that the sulfides were unevenly distributed at the out layer of the zincite. The average concentration of S at the surface of the obtained zincite increased with the increase in the sulfur dosage. This study gave a deep insight into the interaction between the smithsonite and sulfur at high temperatures and further enriched the surface sulfidation mechanism of the smithsonite.Zinc is an important metal supporting modern society owing to its wide application in galvanization, alloy and battery industries ( Smithsonite (ZnCO  In view of the sulfidation kinetics and the generation of stable sulfide film, the thermochemical modification in the presence of sulfur, as a potential candidate for enhancing sulfidation of the smithsonite or zincite, has received considerable attentions ( In the available literature, most studies have already confirmed that the zinc oxide was well sulfurized by the sulfur and the treated zinc oxide materials exhibited a good flotation response ( In the present paper, micro-flotation tests for the smithsonite before and after the thermochemical modification with the sulfur were firstly performed to confirm that the treated smithsonite exhibited perfect flotation performance in a conventional flotation system. Then, phase conversation at the surface of the smithsonite before and after the thermochemical treatment was investigated by XRD and thermodynamic calculations. Surface composition transformation was further identified by XPS to interpret the microscopic sulfidation mechanism. Finally, EPMA was performed to illustrate the changes of morphology and constituents of the pure sample. This study aims for clarifying the surface modification mechanism of the smithsonite at high temperatures and its flotation response. It is believed that the investigation will provide an excellent theory reference for further improving the thermochemical modification process. The ore sample was obtained from Jinding Pb-Zn deposit, locating at the Lanping basin in Yunnan province, China. The sample was manually cracked and then ground in an agate torsion mortar to a size range of −74~+37 μm. The result of XRD analysis is presented in Sulfur, containing 99.50% S, was used as the sulfidation reagent in the modification processes. Copper sulfate, butyl xanthate and terpineol were used as activator, collector and frother, respectively, in the micro-flotation experiments. The thermochemical modification experiments were performed under a vacuum tubular furnace (SK4-6-138), which was produced in Wuhan Yahua Electric Furnace Co., Ltd.. The sulfur and smithsonite were firstly mixed in a desired mole ratio and then was put into a 50 mL quartz tube. The tube was placed in the furnace, followed by the introduction of N Micro-flotation tests were conducted in a cell with a volume of 40 cm The smithsonite before and after the modification was detected by XRD to determine the formed phases. The analyses were carried out on a Germany Bruker-axs D8 Advance X-ray powder diffractometer with Kα radiation (λ = 1.5406 Å). The XPS analyses were carried out using a Thermo Fisher Scientific and monochromatic Al Kα X-ray source in Yunnan University Analytical Testing Center. The operating parameters were as follows: operating voltage of 12 kV, power of 180 W, chamber vacuum of 2 × 10 EPMA line scanning was performed to investigate the surface differences of the smithsonite before and after the thermochemical modification. Probe current was set to 20 nm using a focused electron beam and acceleration voltage was set to 20 kV. The flotation recovery of the smithsonite after the thermochemical modification at different S/ZnCO According to  The Equilibrium Composition module of Out-okumpu HSC 6.0 (  XPS spectra of the samples modified at different S/ZnCO    EPMA analyses were performed to further reveal the sulfides generated at the surface of the zincite and the results are shown in According to Flotation performance of the smithsonite after the surface modification in the absence and presence of sulfur was fundamentally investigated for the first time. The zinc sulfide species were well generated at the surface of the decomposed smithsonite, which was characterized by XRD, XPS and EPMA analyses. Based on the above results and discussions, the following conclusions were drawn: Flotation recovery of the smithsonite after the thermochemical modification in the presence of sulfur increased by approximately 65% in contrast to the modification in the absence of sulfur. Zincite was formed after the thermochemical modification and was further sulfurized by the sulfur. Thermodynamic calculation results further agreed with the results obtained by XRD analyses. Atomic concentration of O and S at the surface of the smithsonite after the thermochemical modification decreased and increased, respectively, with the increase in the S/ZnCO Average concentration of S at the zincite surface increased with the increase in the S/ZnCO None. The authors would like to acknowledge the