In this work, a detailed model of a real NPK fertilizer plant has been developed to optimize operation strategies, in order to reduce sensibly the thermal and electrical consumptions, as well as the recycle ratio. Granulation is a very complex process that involves changes in the particle properties and depends on several factors as drum speed and design, binder conditions and material properties. Furthermore, simultaneously to granulation process, a drying process takes place. In consequence, due to its complexity, a novel comprehensive semi-empirical population balance model of an industrial co-current rotary drum reactor has been developed to model the PSD evolution, including granular dynamics and the particle growth by granulation and the size reduction due to the effect of particle-particle and particles-bed attrition. The granulation model is coupled with a drying model, taking into consideration mass and energy balances, including combustion and the bed and reactor heat and mass transfer mechanisms. Granulator model (developed in Matlab) has been coupled to auxiliary equipment modelled in AspenPlus by means of MSExcel intermediate files. Global and local models have been validated with plant data. Additionally, a robust Taguchi Design of Experiments (DoE) has been applied to evaluate the effect of each process parameter in the Key Performance Indicators. From the results of the analysis, it is possible to discriminate what process parameters are critical in the quality of the product and in the use of the resources.  The aim of this work is the modeling and simulation of an industrial fertilizer plant which produces 0.5 ton/h of NPK fertilizer. AspenPlus (with SolidSIM embedded code) present a very powerful tool to simulate solid handling processes. However, due to the particularities of the granulator-dryer rotary drum presented in this plant, an ad hoc model for co-current reactor must be developed. Usually, in the granular NPK fertilizers there is two separated granulator and dryer reactors, with different fluid dynamic regimes and residences times, thus dominant mechanism can be disaggregated. These models have been coupled to analyse the influence of process parameter in the quality of the products. A comprehensive model of the plant has been simulated in steady-state with AspenPlus in order to check the reliability of reactor models ( The double-shaft paddle mixer has been assimilated to an ideal mixer where dry-recycled and fresh-slurry fertilizer are mixed. The slurry with a moisture content between 15 and 25% is sent to the granulator/dryer where the correct size and moisture are achieved. A double-deck screen with Rogers’ model has been adopted with two different meshes (0.1 and 0.4 After the vibrating screen separator, the oversized particles are sent to a hammer mill in order to reduce its mean particle diameter. The milled fertilizer is recycled to the screen and subsequently separated. The mill is a key equipment and its correct operation impacts Recirculated fines are pneumatically transported by means of a vacuum blower. Solids pass through a bag filter and they are gravity conveyed to the main mixer. The simulated pipeline presents three 20 The granulator have been modeled by means of a pseudo steady-state approach, introducing the residence time of the particles in along the reactor. It is divided in three big blocks: 1) Initialization and discretization; 2) Drying model – Heat and mass balance; and 3) Agglomeration / Breakage model – PSD balance. In the first step the main parameters that define the process are calculated: residence time, shear stress, and critical moisture. These parameters depend on the operational conditions, the material properties and reactor geometry and operation. Moreover, these parameters fix the critical values on the subsequent calculation loop, including time/length step, agglomeration or breakage regime and kinetics, and calculation time. After the definition of critical parameters, reactor is discretized in n elements, where residence time in each is homogenous for each section. In accordance with plant data, the inlet to the reactor (and to first element of the discretized volume) is set, inizializating the simulation. The calculation loop is repeated for i times, until the accumulated time is the residence time. In the calculation loop the first sub-model applied is for drying ( Where agglomeration is the dominant mechanism, the regime of agglomeration must be included. At the very beginning (for the first 2 The programming in Matlab code is designed to operate primarily on whole matrices and arrays. Thus is very useful for the implementation of the population balance models (PBM).  K and m in  Evaporation rate (V_evap) can be extrapolated (by means of correlations) from laboratory to industrial scale being Xi  The simulation procedure starts reading the process parameter list for each simulation. The process parameters are divided in two blocks: Matlab Granulator Model inputs and AspenPlus Plant Model inputs. A recirculation ratio is estimated (usually 1.65 initially) and the Matlab model is run. Results are translated to plant model and this model is run. If the new plant recirculation ratio is 1% different from the granulator one, the recirculation ratio is changed and all the system is recalculated until convergence. When convergence is achieved, the plant model results are used to obtain the Key Performance Attributes and Key Resources Indicators according with the definition on TOP-REF project ( A total number of 27 simulations has been carried out. The main outputs presents good agreement with plant measurements. Recirculation ratio is between 1.25 and 2.5, oversized/product ratio spreads from 0.65 to 2.25, flue gas temperature and volumetric flow rate vary from 72°C to 202°C and 15000 to 22000  A NPK fertilizer plant has been simulated with a combination of This work has been partially supported by EU-FP7 (TOP-REF GA No 604140) and by the Spanish MICINN (GA No PTQ-13