This paper outlines research on the processes taking place within the coal mineral matter at high temperatures and development of the relationship between ash fusion temperatures (AFT) and phase equilibria of the coal ash slags. A new thermodynamic database for the Al–Ca–Fe–O–Si system developed by the author was used in conjunction with the thermodynamic computer package F∗A∗C∗T for these purposes. In addition, high temperature experimental studies were undertaken that involved heat treatment and quenching of the ash cones followed by the analyses using different techniques. The study provided new information on the processes taking place during AFT test and demonstrated the validity of the AFTs predictions with F∗A∗C∗T. Examples of practical applications of the AFT prediction method are given in the paper. The results of this study are important not only for the AFT predictions, but also in general for the application of phase equilibrium science to the characterisation of the coal mineral matter interactions at high temperature.Research of the processes taking place during the ash fusion temperature (AFT) test from the perspective of the phase equilibrium of the ash slag system is described in this paper. AFT of coals and coal blends is one of the parameters currently widely used in coal marketing and utilisation to assess coal quality, coal ash fusibility and melting characteristics, and to predict the melting behaviour of the coal ash in power generation reactors. It is therefore important to be able to predict AFTs to assist in a number of technical issues including coal blending and fluxing, optimisation and maximisation of the use of coal resources, optimisation of the operation parameters in the power generation utilities, etc. Research on AFTs provides a better understanding of the meaning of this test and the correlations between the AFT values and actual behaviour of the coal ash in industrial processes. There have been a number of studies on the prediction of AFTs from the coal ash compositions. For example, a number of studies reported empirical and statistical correlations between coal ash compositions and AFTs derived using regression analysis Studies on prediction of AFTs were recently undertaken with the aid of computer thermodynamic modelling of phase equilibria The strength of the application of the computer-aided thermodynamic modelling to the prediction of AFTs is that this approach Thermodynamic computer package F The AFT tests were performed following the Australian Standard procedures (A.S.1038.15-1995) in a registered independent laboratory. This test involves the heating of a coal ash cone of specified geometry at a rate of 5 Coal ash was prepared following the standard procedure (A.S.1038.15-1995) by heating to 800 Microstructural analysis was performed using optical and scanning electron microscopy (SEM), the latter coupled with the energy dispersive spectra analyzer (EDS). Phase compositions were measured with an electron probe X-ray microanalyser (EPMA) with wavelength dispersive detectors (WDD). An accelerating voltage of 15 A set of 33 coal samples from a particular seam was selected for this study. The concentrations of minor components in these coals (MgO, TiO Only 23 coals were selected for further study (coals with MgO over 3 The AFT of all coals in the set were measured in reducing (50% CO  Liquidus temperatures for individual coal ash compositions simplified to the five-component system Al–Ca–Fe–O–Si were predicted using F Bryers and Taylor  The AFT temperatures were expressed as linear functions of the liquidus temperatures. For example, the flow temperature (FT) in reducing atmosphere (R) is: AFTs predicted using these parameters are shown in A simple compositional correlation has also been developed and tested for comparison. The AFTs were expressed as linear functions of compositions in wt%: Comparison of the two methods of the AFT predictions ( The blending of coals to maximise resource utilisation, and optimise coal properties and cost is a common practice. Coal blending may have various targets, for example, blending to achieve a particular AFT, blending to meet slagging gasifier (IGCC) requirements, etc. The marketing specifications require that coals have particular AFTs. For example, the set of coals described in this section was required to have IDT over 1200 This approach to blending was tested using coals from the present set. Two blends {‘OS’+‘high-Ca US’} and {‘OS’+‘high-Fe US’} were tested. Coal blends were prepared using proportions recommended by the AFT predictions based on F Further detailed analysis of the trends in differences between predicted and measured AFTs indicated slightly different behaviour between the high-Ca and the high-Fe coals. An explanation for the tendency of the high-Ca ashes to have higher AFTs compared to the general trend was sought from the differences in sub-liquidus phase equilibria between high-Ca and high-Fe ashes. The coal ash in the AFT test is a heterogeneous material and consists of particles with various compositions ranging from alumina–silica-rich particles to Ca-rich and Fe-rich particles. As the temperature is increased during the AFT test, the ash particles react with each other and form stable phases with intermediate compositions. Diffusion processes between the phases take place during the AFT test in ash cones. This is schematically shown in To further investigate the reasons of these systematic trends, the whole set of coals was subdivided on the two groups—coals with high-Ca and high-Fe ashes ( Three representative ashes were selected for experimental studies: high-Al–Si (low Ca and Fe oxide contents), high-Ca, and high-Fe. The ashes prepared using a standard procedure (A.S.1038.15-1995) were first mounted in epoxy resin and compositions of ash particles were measured with EPMA. The proportions of main particles were approximately determined by visual observation of the SEM images. The bulk compositions were then back calculated from the particle compositions and proportions of the particle types present. The calculated bulk compositions were then compared to the bulk compositions measured in a certified analytical laboratory. These results are summarised in Heating and quenching experiments were performed with the Al–Si-rich, high-Ca and high-Fe coal ashes in both oxidising and reducing atmospheres (details of the experimental procedure are given earlier). Analysis of the microstructures with optical microscopy and SEM, and measurements of the phase compositions with EPMA revealed that at IDT some particles had melted and dissolved forming a siliceous liquid slag phase. Mullite (for Al–Si-rich and high-Fe ashes) and anorthite (for high-Ca) crystallised out of the melt. The Al–Si-rich particles (mostly metakaolinite and silica), however, have only partially reacted at IDT. The differences in the melting behaviour between high-Ca and high-Fe ashes are important. In the high-Ca ash cones the Al–Si-rich particles were always surrounded by the anorthite rim ( This finding is also related to the recommendation by Juniper et al. Further studies clearly are possible and indeed are necessary to improve predictive capability of the approach. For example, it is well known that minor components (e.g. Na, K, Mg, etc.), have a significant influence on sub-liquidus phase relations in these systems. In addition, AFT is a dynamic test with a number of processes occurring during the rise of the temperature; ash particles sinter; chemical species diffuse; low-melting particles form liquid slag phase; some compounds decompose with the release of gas. As temperature increases, more liquid is formed. As a result of the liquid formation the ash cone changes the shape to spherical, hemispherical before it finally flows. Mineralogy and particles size can also affect kinetics of the ash dissolution. A number of other factors influence AFTs  Note that most of the coals in this set have the SiO The IDT in this set of coals vary from 1100 to over 1550  From the ash bulk analysis and AFT measurements of two coals and their 50:50 blend the following problem has been stated by a mining company: IDT of the 50:50 blend were much lower than of their original coal ashes. In an attempt to resolve this issue, phase equilibrium predictions have been performed using F Since liquidus predictions did not resolve the issue, further calculations were performed—weight proportions of the liquid at fixed temperatures below liquidus (1200, 1300, 1400, 1500, and 1600 Phase equilibrium approach has been successfully applied to the characterisation of the coal mineral matter behaviour. A new recently developed F F Author would like to thank BHP Coal Ltd for support and necessary information, and in particular S. McGuire and R. Buzacott for important discussions during the course of the study. Author would also like to thank Coal and Allied Ltd for permission to publish the information on the coals. The author also wish to acknowledge the financial support provided for some of the research described in the paper by the Cooperative Research Centre for Black Coal Utilisation (currently Centre for Coal in Sustainable Development), which is funded through the Cooperative Research Centres Program of the Commonwealth Government of Australia. The author would also like to express gratitude to other members of the PYROSEARCH who also contributed and helped in this research program, including Ms R. Zhang, Ms Y. Yu, and Dr B. Zhao. Special thanks to Assoc. Prof. Peter Hayes for support, valuable discussions and review of this paper.