Flotation is a process of cell separation based on the affinity of cells to air bubbles. In the present work, flotability and hydrophobicity were determined using cells from different yeasts (Hansenulla polymorpha, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Candida albicans), which were propagated in different media and at different temperatures. Alterations to the supernatant of the cells were also carried out before the flotation assays. The results described here indicate that supernatants of the yeast cells can play a more important role on flotation than cell-wall hydrophobicity. For example, wall-hydrophobicity of strain FLT-01 of S. cerevisiae was high but flotation did not occur when their washed cells were resuspended in water. Additions of neopeptone to cultures of S. cerevisiae and H. polymorpha repressed flotation and increased the volume of foam. An additional task of the present work was to show that the relationship between cell-wall hydrophobicity and flotation performance was dependent on the method used for the measurement of hydrophobicity. Based on the assay procedure, two types of hydrophobicity were distinguished: (a) the apparent hydrophobicity for cells suspended in the medium and expressed by the degree of cell affinity to the organic solvent in the two-phase system supernatant/hexane; (b) the standard hydrophobicity, which was determined for cells suspended in a standard solution (acetate buffer, in the present work) within the acetate buffer/hexane system. Flotation of cells of S. cerevisiae and C. albicans were best related to the degree of apparent hydrophobicity (varying with the supernatant composition at the cell/medium interface) rather than to the degree of standard hydrophobicity (varying with the alterations in the wall components, since the liquid phase was constant in the assay). However, depending on the yeast unpredictable results can be obtained. For example, cells of H. polymorpha exhibited good flotation associated to a high degree of standard hydrophobicity while having a lower degree of apparent hydrophobicity. Concerning growth temperature, flotation of cells of C. albicans was strongly repressed when the temperature was raised from 30 to 38°C while a similar effect was not observed in cultures of S. cerevisiae and H. polymorpha. It is difficult to understand and predict flotation of yeast cells but simple modifications made to the supernatant of cultures can activate or repress flotation.Flotation is a very promising tool for the separation of cells and/or products in biotechnological processes The methods based the on degree of cell adhesion to hydrocarbons, are ordinarily used for the determination of the cell surface hydrophobicity. However, the role of cell-wall hydrophobicity on flotation phenomenon and the choice of the best method for the measurement of the cell-wall hydrophobicity are controversial In order to obtain more general conclusions regarding yeast flotation, yeasts from different strains and genera ( The following yeast strains were used: strain FLT-01 of The defined medium A flotation column (17 cm high×2 cm i.d.) was used for the flotation assays The cell biomass concentration (expressed as mg/ml) was determined in duplicate assays, by drying the cells of each sample (previously washed in water by filtration using a 0.22 μm Millipore membrane) to a constant weight in an oven at 106 Cells (washed twice in water by centrifuging at 4000× Before extraction, cells were washed twice in 0.1 M Tris–HCl buffer solution (containing 10% glycerol and 0.15 M NaCl at pH 7.5) by centrifugation for 5 min at 4000× Samples of supernatant (50 ml) were dialyzed for 24 h at 4 Samples were prepared for electrophoresis as follows: a 10 μl sample containing protease inhibitors (1 mM EDTA, 1 mM phenylmethylsufonyl fluoride, 1 mM EGTA, 1 mM benzamidine, 5 μg/ml pepstatin A, 5 μg/ml leupeptin, 5 μg/ml aprotinin, 20 μg/ml soybean trypsin inhibitor) as described in literature The total protein was assayed following the procedure based on the reaction of proteins with Coomassie brilliant blue R-250 The degrees of flotation and hydrophobicity (apparent and standard hydrophobicity) were determined for cells of three different yeast genera grown on three different media (YPD, defined, and Sabouraud media) at 30 and 38 In the present work, the flotation capacity of the hydrophobic strain FLT-01 of The effects of both media composition and the growth temperatures on flotation and hydrophobicity (apparent or standard values) of the cells of strain FLT-01 of  In order to establish correlation between the supernatants of cells and both the flotation capacity and apparent hydrophobicity, exchanges between pairs of supernatants from two different cultures were carried out before flotation ( Cells of baker's yeast, strain LTU, showed very low degrees of both flotation and hydrophobicity after growth on defined medium ( Flotation was carried out with cells of strain FLT-01/4b of Cells of Cells of Flotation and formation of cell aggregates (cell–cell interactions) can be independent phenomena as shown by strains FLT-01 It seemed that the lower the values of apparent hydrophobicity of strain FLT-01 of Ethanol reduced flotation (including the flotation efficiency) but not the apparent hydrophobicity of cells of strain FLT-01, when added to the cultures resulting from growth in defined medium at concentrations ≥10% (v/v) before flotation. However, the degrees of standard hydrophobicity were kept at a high value. It is known that alcohol acts as a frother at low concentrations but induces foam collapse at high concentrations Simple experiments based on the exchange of supernatant between pairs of the two different cultures of strains of In the present work, the highest values of both flotation and hydrophobicity occurred for yeast cells of Regarding apparent hydrophobicity, cells of Although controversial results are described in literature Yeast flotation depends on foam formation and increasing affinity of hydrophobic cells to air bubbles at the cell/air interfaces. This is then followed by a decreasing affinity of cells to the medium at the medium/cell interface. In addition, cell surface heterogeneity and complexity of the surface forces are greater in the microbial cells than in mineral particles. As shown here, a simple dilution of the culture with water can affect flotation. Trials for improving flotation based on simple modifications to the supernatant of the cultures can be carried out using a simple device such as that described by deSousa and Laluce This research was supported by a grant from FAPESP (Proc. no. 1998/4299-9), and the authors also wish to thank FAPESP for the fellowship awarded to Sandro R. de Sousa (Proc. no.98/16224-3). The authors are also grateful to Fernando Delfino for his valuable collaboration in coordinating all the technical procedures under way in our laboratory during the present research.