Introduction
                  Vitamin D is essential for bone mineralization and for the subsequent maintenance of bone quality. Mineralization is part of hard callus formation and bone remodelling, processes, which are part of fracture healing. We provide a comprehensive review of the literature to summarize and clarify if possible, the cellular effects of vitamin D and its clinical involvement in the process of fracture healing in human.
               
                  Material and methods
                  We conducted a literature search in PubMed, Embase (OVID version), and Web of Science.
               
                  Results
                  A total of 75 in vitro and 30 in vivo studies were found with inconsistent results about the cellular effect of vitamin D on fracture involved inflammatory cells, cytokines, growth factors, osteoblasts, osteoclasts and on the process of mineralization. With only five in vitro studies performed on material derived from a fracture site and one in vivo study in fracture patients, the exact cellular role remains unclear.
                  Seven studies investigated the circulating vitamin D metabolites in fracture healing. Although it appears that 25(OH)D and 24,25(OH)2D3 are not affected by the occurrence of a fracture, this might not be the case with serum concentrations of 1,25(OH)2D3. The potential clinical effect of vitamin D deficiency is only described in one case series and three case controlled studies, where the results tend to show no effect of a vitamin D deficiency.
                  No clinical studies were found investigating solely vitamin D supplementation. Two clinical studies found a positive effect of vitamin D supplementation and calcium, of increased bone mineral density or respectively increased fracture callus area at the fracture site. One study found indirect evidence that vitamin D and calcium promoted fracture healing.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Despite these results, and the presumed beneficial effect of vitamin D supplementation in deficient patients, clinical studies that address the effects of vitamin D deficiency or supplementation on fracture healing are scarce and remain inconclusive. We conclude that vitamin D has a role in fracture healing, but the available data are too inconsistent to elucidate how and in what manner.Fracture healing is a complex biological process that starts directly after a fracture has occurred. Fracture healing processes can be divided into four overlapping stages: the inflammation stage, the soft callus formation stage, the hard callus formation stage and the bone remodelling stage Vitamin D is essential for bone mineralization and for the subsequent maintenance of bone quality through its vital role in the regulation of calcium and skeletal homeostasis. Bone mineralization is part of hard callus formation and bone remodeling. Vitamin D is thus likely to play a key role in fracture healing in at least these stages. The classical endocrine function of vitamin D is the maintenance of calcium homeostasis through binding of 1,25(OH) Whereas the classical calcium regulating actions of vitamin D are well documented, much less is known about the role of vitamin D in fracture healing in humans. The aim of this systematic review of the literature on the role of vitamin D in fracture healing is to evaluate and summarize what is known about the cellular effects of vitamin D during fracture healing and of its clinical involvement in the process of fracture healing in human. We conducted a literature search in PubMed, Embase (OVID version), and Web of Science. A systematic review was performed according to the PRISMA checklist. The search consisted of two subject queries taking into account the terminological and technical differences between databases ( The first query, For both queries the results were limited to English language articles and conference abstracts were excluded. For the first query, both The query on The fracture healing process can be divided into four overlapping stages: the inflammation stage, the soft callus formation stage, the hard callus formation stage and the bone remodeling stage ( Local disruption of bone and soft tissue leads to a fracture hematoma and to an associated inflammatory response. This results in the formation of a well vascularized precursor granulation tissue as a result of the infiltration of the hematoma by degranulated platelets, macrophages, granulocytes, lymphocytes, and monocytes, in the presence of a wide range of cytokines and growth factors. The assumed effects of vitamin D on the  In osteoblastic cell cultures vitamin D has shown to enhance the expression of VEGF The secretion of platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), which stimulates the proliferation and migration of mesenchymal stem cells and osteoblasts, was shown to be enhanced by vitamin D in osteoblastic cell cultures In this second stage of fracture healing chondrocytes produce a cartilaginous matrix until all the granulation tissue is replaced by cartilage. Where cartilage production is deficient, fibroblasts fill the area with fibrous tissue, forming a semi rigid fibrous cartilaginous matrix called soft callus. The proliferation and differentiation of chondrocytes and fibroblasts are stimulated by growth factors including TGF-β, PDGF and IGF Various in vitro studies (human bone marrow or osteoblastic cells) have addressed the effect of vitamin D on IGF-I (promotes bone matrix formation This third stage of fracture healing is also known as the stage of primary bone formation, where a high level of osteoblast activity results in the formation of a mineralized bone matrix. Osteogenic differentiation has found to be promoted by 1,25(OH) Vitamin D is essential for the maintenance of mineralization of the skeleton The fourth stage of fracture healing, the callus remodeling process, starts with the resorption of the hard callus. Kogawa et al. Alkalay et al. Results from a number of studies on serum levels of vitamin D metabolites after a recent fracture are not concordant ( In a case series, Brinker et al. In contrast, a retrospective case-controlled study of 35 patients with non-union of a diaphyseal fracture showed no difference in terms of prevalence of vitamin D deficiency compared to controls with normal healing of a similar fracture ( In a placebo controlled randomized study supplementation of vitamin D in combination with calcium was found to significantly enhance callus formation in women with an osteoporotic or osteopenic proximal humerus fractures compared to placebo users ( The aim of this systematic review of the literature on the role of vitamin D in fracture healing is to evaluate and summarize what is known about the cellular effects of vitamin D during fracture healing and of its clinical involvement in the process of fracture healing in human. At a cellular level, vitamin D is involved in every stage of the complex process of fracture healing through its effects on inflammatory cells, cytokines, growth factors, osteoblasts, osteoclasts and through its effect on the process of mineralization ( Four case controlled studies and three case series studied the vitamin D metabolites in fracture healing. Although it appears that circulating serum concentrations of 25(OH)D and 24,25(OH) A possible influence of vitamin D deficiency on fracture healing in humans remains controversial as only based on retrospective indirect evidence and causality remains elusive. One case series Only two of the three human studies quantified the impact of supplementation of vitamin D on the process of fracture healing. Both found a positive effect in the form of increased bone mineral density or increased fracture callus area at the fracture site. Notwithstanding data on the effect of vitamin D supplementation on fracture healing in humans are scarce, with mostly data available based on combination treatment with calcium in patients with osteoporosis. In contrast, data from animal studies do suggest that vitamin D supplementation improved callus structure In conclusion, published results of studies in humans or studies using human tissue provide evidence that vitamin D affects the cellular process of fracture healing, although the exact cellular role of vitamin D in human fracture healing remains unclear. Despite these intriguing results and the presumed beneficial effect of vitamin D supplementation in deficient patients, clinical studies that address the clinical effects of vitamin D deficiency or supplementation on fracture healing are scarce and remain inconclusive. We conclude that vitamin D has a role in fracture healing, but the available data are too inconsistent to elucidate how and in what manner. Future research should focus on the clinical effects of vitamin D deficiency and vitamin D supplementation on fracture healing. We gratefully acknowledge the assistance of Jan Schoones, librarian at the Walaeus Library (Leiden University Medical Center), with the literature search.