Strontium barium niobate (SBN) ceramics, synthesized through partial co-precipitation, was sintered at—6, 12 and 24h, respectively, at 1250, 1300 and 1350°C. Structural developments, developments in porosity, grain size, residual stress and crystallographic texture and its effect on dielectric constants were studied at different sintering conditions. The bulk crystallographic texture was largely unaffected by the sintering conditions used, though all other structural parameters evolved through sintering schedule. An effort was made to relate the changes in dielectric constant with the changes in structural parameters. Normal grain growth or changes in residual stress pattern either had relatively insignificant effects on dielectric constant or decoupling the relative effects was difficult from the present set of data. On the other hand, the strongest increase in dielectric constant was achieved through reduced porosity/defects, while abnormal growth caused the largest drop.Strontium barium niobate (SBN), a tetragonal tungsten bronze (TTB) structured ferroelectric material, has received considerable attention as a lead-free electroceramic with wide applicability—electro-optic, photo-refractive, SAW, piezoelectric and pyroelectric. SBN can typically be synthesized in polycrystalline form by solid-state reaction synthesis, In a polycrystalline ferroelectric material, the dielectric property is affected by number of factors—porosity/defect, grain size, crystallographic texture and residual stress. Elimination of porosity/defects (and an increase in density) is expected to improve dielectric constant, SBN50 used in the present case was synthesized by partial coprecipitation method and was sintered at different temperature–time combinations. The synthesis and developments in dielectric constant with sintering was described in a previous study. The synthesis of SBN50 by partial coprecipitation, microstructural studies by SEM, measurements of density and dielectric property are described in a previous study. The microstructural studies of the sintered pellets were carried out using a CAMECA SU30 scanning electron microscope in the SE mode. Here, the effect of these uniaxial elongated grains on the dielectric properties is of our interest and wish to correlate with texture/microtexture and observation of residual stress in the material. The variation of dielectric constant with temperature for SBN50 sintered at different time–temperature combinations is summarized in The variation of experimentally measured density with temperature for different sintering combinations is given in As discussed in Section As the sintering process can be considered as an axi-symmetric process, inverse pole figures (IPFs) were used to represent developments in bulk crystallographic texture with respect to sintering conditions (see Orientation imaging microscopy (OIM) is finding increasing applications in electro-ceramics, As shown in It is clear from the micrographs and OIM images (see It is well known that the dielectric constant depends on structural parameters—crystallographic texture, Changes in dielectric constant at three sintering temperatures can be related to the changes in structural parameter and a comparison is summarized below (also given in details in 1250 1300 1350 To summarize, the present set of results do highlight clearly the role of two structural parameters on the dielectric constant. Elimination of porosity and defects led to substantial increase in dielectric constant (1250 Based on the results and discussion above, following conclusions have been drawn: The crystallographic texture did not change noticeably with sintering conditions. Effects of normal grain growth and residual stress pattern on the dielectric constant could not be established convincingly from the present set of experimental data. In the range of sintering conditions used, elimination of porosity/defects seems to have the strongest effect on the increase in dielectric constant. Significant abnormal grain growth (and associated shift in grain size distributions) decreased the dielectric constant significantly. The authors acknowledge DST ‘National Facility for OIM and Texture’, Dept. of Met. Engg. and Materials Sc. IIT-Bombay and Electron Microscopy Facility of SAIF, IIT-Bombay. One of the authors (P.K. Patro), acknowledge Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, India for Senior Research Fellowship grant.