The printed circuit boards are the fundamental components of waste electrical and electronic equipment (WEEE). The PCBs stand out due to the amount of metals in their composition as well for their complex and heterogeneous constitution that make their recycling difficult. In this context, the aims of the study was to evaluate the application of supercritical CO2 modified with ethanol in order to remove the polymers contained in PCBs from discarded mobile phones. The PCBs were characterized and an evaluation of the supercritical extraction was performed through experimental design. The characterization showed that PCBs contained 64.02wt% of metals, 20.51wt% of ceramics and 15.47wt% of polymers. The fractional factorial experimental design showed that 69.53wt% of the polymers present in the PCBs were extracted, at 170°C and 7.5MPa. As the remaining polymers are no longer covering the metals, they could be more easily leached and therefore more effectively recovered.Mobile phones are among the main items found in electrical and electronic equipment wastes (WEEEs) The main three basic parts that composes the PCBs are: the non-conductive or laminate substrate; the printed circuit conductor (printed on the surface or within a substrate) typically made of copper; and the mounted components (capacitors, connectors, chips, etc). Among the various types of substrates used in the PCBs, the Flame Retardant 4 (FR4) is the most used. This substrate is produced using an epoxy resin reinforced by fiberglass, with a brominated flame retardant dispersed in the epoxy matrix The proper treatment of PCBs is needed because the great number of toxic substances in its composition, such as brominated flame retardants, plastics and heavy metals that can cause serious environmental problems and even harm to human health if not correctly disposed However, recycling of PCBs is limited due to the heterogeneity of the materials and complexity of their production Supercritical fluids have been considered as an alternative to conventional methods, due to their advantageous mass transfer properties, compared to others solvents The use of supercritical CO As known, the main drawback of supercritical CO The aim of this study was to evaluate the removal of the polymeric fraction from PCBs, using supercritical CO Waste PCBs used in this work were obtained by manual disassembly of discarded mobile phones. Twenty-nine PCBs of the same model were selected by sampling. The selected PCBs presented an average weight of 14.32 Samples of the material obtained in the comminution process (380.5 The loss-on-ignition (LOI) method was employed for determination of the polymeric fraction. Initially, three ceramic crucibles containing the 3 samples previously weighed were placed in a muffle furnace under a heating ramp of 10 The samples resulting from the LOI were leached with aqua regia (HNO The quantification of the polymeric fraction and evaluation of the PCBs thermal behavior was done by thermogravimetric analysis (DTG-60H, Shimadzu) using a sample of 33.14 The system used in supercritical extraction is composed of a 304 stainless steel reactor with an internal volume of 98 Samples of approximately 2 The oily-liquid samples resulting from the supercritical extractions performed with the fractional factorial design were diluted with ethyl acetate and analyzed by gas chromatography coupled mass spectrometry (GCMS-QP2010 Plus, Shimadzu) with a capillary column (HP-5MS) under the following conditions: 30 The oily-liquid samples extracted from both experimental designs (fractionated factorial and central composite) were evaluated in a comparative way by attenuated total reflectance Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (ATR-FTIR) (Prestige 21, Shimadzu). The solid material obtained from the test that resulted in the highest extraction of the polymers from fractionated factorial experimental design (2 The solid material was characterized before and after supercritical extraction, using scanning electron microscopy coupled with energy dispersive X-ray analysis (Vega 3, Tescan). This analysis was performed in order to evaluate the removal of the polymers that covered the surface of metals. Based on the literature it is known that variables such as pressure, extraction time, solvent/co-solvent type and solid:liquid ratio, influence in the percentage of polymer extraction from PCBs  Through the first experimental design (fractionated factorial 2 The weight percentage of extracted polymers is a function of the independent variables in accordance with the quadratic polynomial equation, Eq. The results were analyzed using Statistic Version 7 software (StatSoft Inc., USA). The second order model Eq. From aqua regia leaching and LOI tests, the percentage by weight corresponding to the polymers, metals and ceramics fraction constituting the PCBs was obtained. The obtained average composition for mobile phones PCBs was 64.02 The obtained weight fractions are similar to those found in the literature. The PCBs from mobile phones studied by Yamane et al.  The temperature range in which the mass loss occurred is in accordance with the study conducted by Zhu et al. In addition it can be seen that the weight loss occurred from the thermogravimetric analysis (12.64%) was similar to that determined by loss-on-ignition method (15.47%). The difference between the weight losses is possibly due to the heterogeneity of PCBs composition, which can lead to unrepresentative samples especially when it has a very small weight, as is the case of the sample analyzed by TGA (33.14  The Pareto Diagram ( The absence of statistically significant effect of the extraction time in the range from 30 to 240 Although the increase in the volume of co-solvent (ethanol) in relation to the mass of PCBs, in the solid:liquid ratios of 1:10 to 1:30, did not produce a significant effect for extraction, it can be concluded that the action of ethanol as CO Furthermore, Xing and Zhang The first experimental design showed significant statistical effect for the variables temperature and pressure. Then these variables were evaluate in the optimization of the design ( The optimization of the design matrix used and weight percentage of the polymer extracted in each test are shown in The statistical model (Eq. The F- test of Fischer showed that the calculated F value (F Through the response surface (   The compound bisphenol A was also identified ( In tests carried out at a temperature of 170 The organic compounds present in the extracted samples need to be submitted to further purification processes before it be reused in other processes. The brominated compounds were not found in the oily-liquid phase, probably because they passed into the gas phase. This way, to recovery the brominated compounds the gas should be condensed and separated during the extraction, in order to obtain commercial brominated products The highest percentage of polymer extraction from fractionated factorial experimental design (2 In a similar study, supercritical water and H The infrared spectrum corresponding to the extracted oily-liquid samples from the fractional factorial design and from the optimization design are shown in However, the infrared spectrum for the samples 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 8 of  The particle surface analyzed before the extraction was irregular and still had part of the polymeric layer covering the metals. The EDS analysis at point 1 presented in The micrographs of the particles analyzed after supercritical extraction ( Thus, it was evidenced that the polymers were removed from the surface of the particles after processing with supercritical CO The results obtained in the characterization steps indicate the PCBs from mobile phones are composed by 64.02 Therefore, the application of supercritical CO The authors are grateful for the financial support provided by