Nanosized structural ceramics SiC and Al2O3–SiC composites were produced and studied in order to define relationships among microstructures (in the micro- and nano-size range) and mechanical properties. In both the systems, no evident improvement in strength and toughness was associated to nano-structures in comparison to micro-structures. However, nano-indentation tests on liquid-phase sintered SiC reveal peculiar and distinctive properties of nanostructured ceramics that imply unexpected repercussions for application performances involving the contact between two materials. Al2O3–SiC nano-composites have lower friction coefficient and higher wear resistance than the pure alumina. The advantages of nano-ceramics are attributed either to the higher grain boundary strength, as in the case of the nano-composites or to surface-dependent deformation mechanisms, like grain boundary sliding, in nanosized monolithic ceramics.During the last few years, the design of engineering ceramic materials, as many other high-tech materials, has been focused on the transition from micro-structure to nano-structure. The manufacturing of nano-structured ceramics implies a complete revision of the processing procedures concerning either powder treatments or sintering in order to maintain the grain size characteristic of the initial powder. The main technological problems are related to the high specific surface area of nanosized powders that favours surface contamination and oxidation, low packing density, easy particle agglomeration. This last feature causes consequent different grain growth during sintering and therefore the powder treatment is one of the key stages to be controlled during manufacturing. Conventional sintering and pressure-assisted sintering are often not acceptable due to intensive recrystallization process, unless a careful control of the processing parameters is attempted to increase the ratio densification/grain growth. In fact, the potential benefits in term of properties and performance can be exploited provided that microstructure optimization is carefully pursued. Innovative properties of nanostructured ceramics regard: high temperature super-plasticity; peculiar thermal and mechanical properties, improved wear resistance, tailored functional properties, etc. Some of the properties depend on bulk characteristics, other properties depend mainly on surface properties and/or on the relationships among composition and morphology of the phases constituting the materials. Actually, for structural applications, mechanical properties generally are related to several microstructural features, and so far many contradictory results are reported in literature concerning the relationships between grain size and strength, toughness, hardness, etc. The present work highlights some relationships between microstructure and properties of two ceramic systems for structural applications: nanostructured monolithic silicon carbide Fully dense SiC ceramics were produced through liquid phase sintering, The SEM micrographs of plasma etched surfaces of the hot pressed samples ( Different grain boundary phases were observed in the hot pressed materials (  Nanoindentation is one of the few techniques which allow to mechanically test nano-sized materials on dimensions comparable to their microstructural scale. nanoceramics do not appear to exhibit indentation size effect (ISE); a load dependent inverse Hall–Petch exists. The main features of these phenomenologies are reassumed as follows: (1) One of the most striking features of the nano-structured SiC is that they do not seem to exhibit the well-known indentation size effect, ISE, (2) This different plastic deformation mechanism is also the explanation of another impressive phenomenon which was revealed by the nanindentation tests on these nano-ceramics: i.e. the Inverse Hall–Petch relationship. While in micro-structured ceramics hardness increase with the decrease of the grain size, in nano-structured ceramics, like previously observed also in metals, hardness decreases with the decrease of the grain size at low peak loads The trend of the Young's modulus value, in function of the applied load, ( Al SEM micrographs in TEM picture in  The toughness data do not sustain any toughening mechanisms previously suggested for sub-micron sized composites, where SiC particles ranged from 100 to 300 nm and with alumina grains of 1–2 μm. The most interesting aspect of nano-structured alumina/silicon carbide nanocomposite is related to the wear resistance and depends on the particle size of the SiC phase. Al Al “Mild regime” (applied load: 20 N sliding speed: 0.05 m/s ) and “severe regime” (applied load: 40 N sliding speed: 0.5 m/s) experimental conditions were adopted, The friction coefficients measured on the three materials were not different under mild regime, while under severe regime the friction coefficients of the composites were about 40% lower than that of pure alumina. Under mild conditions, the wear rate was rather similar in the two composites and in monolithic alumina. On the contrary, under severe conditions, On the basis of these data and of the microstructures of the worn areas, Two laboratory-produced nano-sized SiC powders and a commercial SiC powder were characterized and processed to obtain nearly fully dense SiC materials by hot-pressing through liquid-phase sintering. The final microstructures of the nano-structured SiC materials were both very fine with a mean grain size dimension, in the best case, of about 78 nm. Besides the mean grain size, the two nano-structured SiC materials also differed in the total amount and composition of the intergranular phase. Most of the mechanical properties of the two nano-structured SiC materials were comparable to those of the material produced with a commercial SiC powder. Nanoindentation tests were proved to be a useful tool for the characterization of these materials down to microstructural level. The salient results can be summarized as follows. Nano-structured SiC materials do not exhibit the indentation size effect in the investigated peak loads range. At very low peak loads, the contribution of the grain boundary phase can be appreciated in nano-structured materials. This result can have profound influence in applications where just a very thin surface layer is mechanically stressed, as with contact or wear problems. Dense Al The advantages of nano-composites are attributed either to the higher grain boundary strength. Besides, the debris layer which formed during the wear test in the nano-composites seems to be more protective. The main wear mechanisms identified were microcracking, grain fracture and grain comminution. This work was carried out in the frame of the EU project BETCT97-0592-Thematic Network Nanomat. The authors thank Dr. N. Herlain (CEA-Saclay, France) and Dr.J. Grabis (Riga Technical University, Institute of Inorganic Chemistry, Latvia) for the preparation of SiC nanopowders and Dr. J. Vicens (LERMAT-ISMRA, Caen, France ) for the TEM analyses.