Three new oxodiperoxomolybdenum complexes with nicotinic acid have been synthesized and characterized with the use of single-crystal analysis, XRPD versus temperature, TG/DSC, SEM and IR spectroscopy. The investigated compounds are: 1 – (NH4)2·[MoO(O2)2.N-nicO]2, 2 – (nicH)2·[MoO(O2)2.N-nicO]2·2(H2O), 3 – MoO(O2)2(H2O)nicH; (N-nicO, nicH − denote nicotinic acid N-oxide and protonated nicotinic acid, respectively). Compounds 1, 2 are salts of the same acid with cyclic dinuclear anions, whereas compound 3 can be regarded as an inner salt. Compounds 1–3 are stable in ambient conditions, the respective percentages of oxygen in peroxo groups are 19.21%, 14.06% and 20.19%, respectively. Above 125°C peroxo compounds 1–3 decompose, forming nanometric MoO2 and MoO3. TG/DSC curves reveal clear effects connected with the release of oxygen and strong exothermic effects connected with final loss of organic components. All the investigated complexes were found to be active in the oxidation of cyclooctane to cyclooctanone and cyclooctanol with molecular oxygen.Peroxo complexes with transition metals are an interesting group of compounds, important in the processes of catalytic oxidation of alcohols and sulfides, epoxidation, effluent treatment, pyrotechnics, hydrometallurgy, medicine, etc. Peroxo compounds containing organic ligands exhibit different activity in the processes of oxidation, as well as variable thermal stability. Proper selection of organic ligand enables the deposition of molecules containing peroxo groups on different carriers such as polymers. When looking for new promising ligands, our attention was drawn to pyridine derivatives with a carboxyl side chain, due to well known chelating properties of such compounds. What is more, peroxo compounds with picolinic acid (2-carboxypyridine acid) are known and were found to be active in reaction of catalytic oxidation of alcohols The molecular structures of pyridine and carboxypyridine peroxomolybdenum compounds known so far are presented and discussed below. In Crystal Structural Database CSD Among compounds presented above, all but one (OXPCXM) are oxodiperoxocomplexes. There are mononuclear as well as dinuclear compounds (PYPOMO10, PYPOAM10, MOHFUL), ionic salts or materials composed of molecules with no charge (LEHZIN, ICIVUL, OXPCXM). There are compounds containing “purely inorganic peroxomolybdate” anions (PYPOMO10, MOHFUL) and compounds composed of: pyridine N-oxides (LEHZIN, ICIVUL), pyridine-carboxylic acid (PXCPYM, OXPCXM) or pyridine carboxylic acid N-oxide molecules (FOXZOH). Picolinic acid (pyridine-2-carboxylic), an isomer of nicotinic acid, can act as a co-creator of “picolinic acid peroxomolybdate complex” and its molecules can undergo protonation acting as cations (PXCPYM). Study of peroxomolybdenum nicotinic acid compounds can supplement the existing knowledge of peroxomolybdates with pyridine-carboxylic acids. Due to the different position of the carboxyl group (3-carboxopyridine acid), we can expect a new type of compounds, including multimeric (dimers, trimers, etc.) or polymeric anions (see All chemicals were purchased from POCH Gliwice and Aldrich, were used as received. Yellow crystals of    Crystals of Single-crystal X-ray diffraction studies were performed for all For IR measurements the samples were pressed into pellets with KBr and investigated at room temperature with the use of Fourier and the vacuum spectrometer Bruker VERTEX 70 X-ray thermal decomposition studies were carried out using a powder diffractometer Philips X’Pert Pro MPD, equipped with an Anton Paar high-temperature chamber. X-ray data were collected at the following temperatures: 25, 50, 75, 100, 125, 150, 175, 200, 225, 250, 275, 300, 350, 400, 500, 600 and 25 SEM images were performed for each sample after thermal decomposition (600 TG/DSC measurements were performed using a NETZSCH STA 409 Luxx instrument, at a heating rate of 25°/min in an air atmosphere. The temperature range was from 30 to 1000 The oxidation of cyclooctane was performed in a stainless steel batch reactor system at 393 Crystal data are summarized in Compounds As in most oxodiperoxomolybdenum complexes, in In both compounds nicotinic acid N-oxide fragments from adjacent anions, form a system of molecules interacting by π−π face-to-face stacking (distances between interacting atoms ∼3.5 A similar system created by picolinic acid N-oxide (N-picO) has already been studied Compound Our results indicate that 3 can be considered as an intermediate obtained initially in the process of formation of compounds Compounds investigated by us show a great similarity to the group of mono- and dinuclear compounds formed with the participation of organo-phosphorus and arsenic ligands In conclusion, we have found that using nicotinic acid some similarities with pyridine-based compounds were preserved. In particular, pyridine fragment can be oxidized or protonated and nicotinic acid N-oxide, protonated nicotinic acid, or both of them, could be present in obtained salts We were not able to obtain compounds with a direct Mo–N bond, although by analogy with picolinic acid (PXCPYM) they might exist. However, we have synthesized compounds with molecular architecture as complex and intriguing as compounds with picolinic acid or pyridine. In particular, we have obtained not reported yet dinuclear, cyclic, centrosymmetric oxodiperoxomolybdate anions The aim of IR studies was to verify the purity of investigated samples and their identification. An additional objective was to compare our results with those from previous spectroscopic studies The lack of complete IR spectra prevents a full comparison and reliable matching of our compounds with complexes described by Djordjevic et al. Thermal decomposition studies were performed to correlate thermal stability with molecular structure. XRPD versus temperature demonstrated the stability of Before heat treatment, investigated compounds form characteristic crystalline blocks with smooth surfaces and sharp edges. Their SEM images are typical for crystalline materials. SEM images of materials after thermal decomposition ( TG/DSC curves should indicate obvious correlations with X-ray thermal decomposition studies. However, differences in heating rate and time of the measurements result in a shift towards lower temperatures in the case of thermal XRPD investigations. Compound Compound Compound The authors of recently published work We have examined the catalytic activity of oxodiperoxomolybdenum complexes in the oxidation of cyclooctane to cyclooctanone and cyclooctanol with molecular oxygen ( Results of the catalytic investigations are summarized in For comparison, oxidation of cyclooctane in the presence of industrial catalyst cobalt isooctanate, used in Cyclopol process Three new oxodiperoxomolybdates with nicotinic acid were synthesized. Characteristic common feature of compounds Investigated compounds were found to be active in reaction of the cyclooctane oxidation. The highest activity was observed in the case of compounds The research has been partly supported by the EU Human Capital Operation Program, Polish Project No. POKL.04.0101-00-434/08-00. The X-ray research was carried out with equipment purchased thanks to the financial support of the European Regional Development Fund within the framework of the Polish Innovation Economy Operational Program (contract no. POIG.02.01.00-12-023/08). CCDC 848660, 866614, 848773 contains the supplementary crystallographic data for 