The utilization of high-phosphorus tungsten ores has attracted extensive attention with the mining and utilization of rich tungsten ores. To extract and separate tungsten from acidic high-phosphorus solution effectively, a novel process was developed. Firstly, tungsten was extracted directly in acid medium by solvent extraction. 99.8% tungsten in acidic high-phosphorus solution was extracted with Aliquat 336 in kerosene by one extraction stage under the conditions of O:A=1, pH=2, 25°C, t
                     =10min, 5% v/v 2-Octanol and 10% v/v Aliquat 336. And then, tungsten and phosphorus were preliminary separated through stripping process. Over 95% tungsten were recovered after five stripping stages under the optimum stripping conditions of 2.5M ammonium bicarbonate, 8min stripping time, O:A=1:1, pH=9, and 60°C, but only about 1.2% phosphorus was recovered from feed liquor. Finally, a small amount of phosphorus left in strip liquor was deeply removed by magnesium salt precipitation method on the optimum conditions of pH=10.0, 25°C, reaction time 1h and Mg/P molar ratio of 1:2 and the ammonium tungstate solution meeting the requirements of producing high-quality ATP can be obtained successfully. Compared to traditional phosphorus removal route, the process in this paper can help extract tungsten directly in acidic medium and decrease the quantity of phosphorus through extraction-stripping process, significantly reducing the consumption of alkali and magnesium salt and improving the separation efficiency of tungsten from acidic high-phosphorus solution.Tungsten is one of the most important high-tech metals, and its high-purity products are vital for developing advanced materials ( Although many methods can be used to remove phosphorus from aqueous solution, magnesium salt precipitation has been considered the most effective method for phosphorus removal in tungsten metallurgy ( The traditional phosphorus removal — ammonium paratungstate crystallization route has become a classic process for tungsten hydrometallurgy, but the utilization of scheelite with high content of phosphorus brings new problems for separation of tungsten and phosphorus. Taking the scheelite deposit in Luanchuan of China for example, it contains about 38% calcium and 9% phosphorus impurities ( In this study, the tungsten has been separated from phosphorus through solvent extraction and followed stripping process with ammonium bicarbonate solution. The last phosphorus in stripping liquor was removed by the salt precipitation magnesium method. Aliquat 336 (methyl trioctyl ammonium chloride) and 2-Octanol were purchased from Aladdin Reagent Co., Ltd. For Aliquat 336 is hard to dissolve into kerosene, a certain amount of 2-Octanol was used as co-solvent. Therefore, the organic phases were composed of different volume contents of Aliquat 336, 2-Octanol and kerosene. The sodium tungstate (Na The solvent extraction experiments were performed by shaking the required volume of organic and aqueous phase in a separatory funnel at room temperature (25 Experimental conditions, including equilibrium pH, extraction time, volume ratio of the organic and aqueous phase (O:A), and volume content of extractant, were investigated to determine the optimal extraction conditions. The extraction efficiency can be calculated according to Eq. Where E represents the metal extraction efficiency, C The extracted organic phase was first washed by deionized water to remove the remaining water phase, and then stripped by ammonium bicarbonate solution. The stripping conditions, such as ammonium bicarbonate concentration, stripping time, volume ratio of the organic and aqueous phase (O:A), temperature and stripping stages, effecting the stripping rate of tungsten has been investigated. The calculation method of stripping rate is similar to that of extraction efficiency. The phosphorus contained in strip liquor was removed deeply by magnesium salt precipitation. A certain amount of magnesium chloride was added into a 500 The pH values of the solution mentioned above were measured by pH meter model 545 with CHN060 pH electrode. The extraction efficiency and stripping rate of tungsten and the residues of magnesium and phosphorus were measured by concentrations of tungsten, phosphorus and magnesium in the aqueous solution. The concentrations of tungsten, phosphorus and magnesium in the aqueous solutions were measured by inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometry (VARIAN, VISTA-MAPX CCD, ICP-AES). Those in the organic phase were calculated from the mass balance. Solvent extraction experiments were carried out to optimize the conditions for the extraction of tungsten from high-phosphorus solution using Aliquat 336 and 2-Octanol in kerosene as the organics at 25 For H To obtain optimal conditions for the extraction of tungsten, the effect of Aliquat 336 and 2-Octanol volume contents and extraction time were investigated by maintaining O:A To make the tungsten loaded on the organic phase return to aqueous phase, stripping experiments were carried out. As the tungsten loaded on the organic phase cannot be stripped by one single striping stage, multistage stripping experiments are investigated under the optimum stripping conditions (2.5 Although the concentration of phosphorus impurity in final stripping liquor is very low, the phosphorus impurity still needs to be further removed from aqueous phase to prepare qualified APT product. In this study, the phosphorus impurity remained in aqueous phase after stripping was deeply removed with magnesium salt precipitation method according to the chemical Eqs.  Results presented in this paper show that the tungsten is successfully extracted and separated from acidic high-phosphorus solution and pure ammonium tungstate solution was obtained through extraction, stripping and deep phosphorus removal process. 99.8% tungsten contained in acidic high-phosphorus solution was extracted with Aliquat 336 in kerosene by one stage extraction under the conditions of O:A Based on the results of this research, a flowchart of recovering tungsten from acidic high-phosphorus solution has been presented. Compared to traditional phosphorus removal — ammonium paratungstate crystallization route, the proposed process in this paper can extract tungsten directly in acidic medium and decrease the quantity of phosphorus through extraction-stripping process, significantly reducing the consumption of alkali and magnesium salt and improving the separation efficiency of tungsten from acidic high-phosphorus solution. This work was supported by the