The upstream method is a popular method for raising tailings dams. Currently in China there are more than 12,000 tailings impoundments and almost 95% of them use the upstream method for the construction of the dam. Statistical data has shown that the tailings impoundment is one of the main sources of risk in the mining industry. Failures of tailings impoundments have resulted in the loss of many lives, considerable property damage, and irreversible pollution in downstream areas. Therefore, the safety of tailings management facilities has been of increasing concern to governments and local communities. The management of a conventional tailings storage facility requires the maintenance of a high level of structural stability. Therefore, according to the relevant mine Acts, the mine operators are required to conduct stability analyses for all types of tailings facilities, whether they are new, active, or decommissioned. For the stability analysis of tailings dams, the accurate profile of the tailings dam is very important. The profiles are easily obtained for both active and decommissioned tailings facilities because their data can be collected through field investigations. However, collecting basic data from newly constructed tailings facilities is difficult. In this paper, a laboratory physical model test has been performed. The construction process for new tailings impoundment has been physically simulated in the laboratory, where the tailings particle composition and distribution below a beach, the change of phreatic surface of the dam, and the engineering properties of the tailings of the dam profiles have been measured. A new tailings facility, Yangtianqin tailings impoundment, owned by Tongchang copper mine of Yuxi Mine Co., was used as a case study to illustrate the physical modeling of the tailings dam. In the model test, the geometrical model of pond area was constructed according to the scale factor, 
                        
                           
                              
                                 λ
                              
                              
                                 L
                              
                           
                        
                     , of 1:200 (model:prototype), and the tailings discharge system was also established, the tailings slurry then being discharged based on the design data. Finally, on the basis of the model test results on profiles, the stability analysis of the tailings dam at different heights was conducted under different conditions. The model test results and stability analysis show that the height of the tailings dam should be less than that originally planned. The original design of Yangtianqing tailings impoundment should therefore be revised for the safety of the tailings impoundment.New mining and mineral processing technologies allow mining of lower-grade ores. However, with these technologies, much larger volume of tailings are produced. Since 1990, tighter legislation and regulations on tailings disposal in China have forced all mine operators to play a more prominent role in controlling the vast quantity of highly visible wastes. Generally, among the three methods of tailings dam construction in current practice, the upstream method has the lowest initial cost and is the most economical method for constructing embankments for tailings storage facilities. This is because the tailings are usually discharged from the top of the dam crest, and owing to gravity flow, a beach is created. This beach will become the foundation for the developing tailings dam. The tailings dam is constructed by tailings material and founded on the tailings beach. For this reason, the upstream method is the main method in mine tailings disposal in China ( Unfortunately, these dams constructed by the upstream method are inherently less stable than the dams constructed using other methods ( In the upstream method of construction, the crest of the dam progressively moves in the upstream direction from the starter dike and sandy material from the beach is excavated for construction. The height of the embankment is raised to the design height throughout the mine life. In practice, the tailings storage facility is a complicated geotechnical structure ( The model test is a useful method for project study ( As shown in According to mine planning, mining is by two methods. Above level 1970 After investigating the mine zone, Yangtianqing, a large valley, was chosen as the tailings pond site. To take advantage of the natural topography, a cross valley tailings impoundment will be constructed and the upstream method will be used (as shown in The starter dike, constructed with locally available rockfill material, is 40.0 Due to the topography between the process plant and the tailings pond, pumping and piping will be used to transport the tailings slurry to the tailings pond. Firstly, the tailings slurry from the mill will be thickened to a pulp density of 50%, and the water recovered will be reused by the mill; secondly the thickened tailings slurry will be pumped and hydraulically transported to the tailings pond, which is over 4.0 According to the national design code, the Yangtianqing tailings pond belongs to grade II, so before constructing the tailings dam a stability analysis must be conducted to ensure that the tailings pond is safe. Similarity theory provides a basis for the physical model tests. A physical model is a copy of an original object scaled down by a certain percentage, which is usually much smaller than the actual size of the structure. Based on similarity rules, similar flows exhibit physically similar behaviour under geometrically similar conditions. Other conditions should be compared with the same value at corresponding points in the flows between the model and prototype, such as dynamic similarity and kinematic similarity ( Firstly, the model and prototype have geometrical similarity, that is: Then Secondly, the model test should satisfy kinematic similarity. Langhaar’s definition of this being stated as: the motions of two systems are similar if homologous particles lie at homologous points at homologous times ( Thirdly, dynamic similarity exists between geometrically and kinematically similar systems if the ratios of all forces between the model and the prototype are the same. Therefore, the scale factor for dynamic similarity is easily derived as: As discussed previously, with the upstream method of construction tailings dams, the tailings are usually spigotted from the top of the dam crest, and a beach is created by gravity. According to Fluid Mechanics theory ( According to the ground topography and the tailings pond design, a reduced valley model scaled by 1:200 (model: prototype) was constructed in the laboratory (as shown in Tailings produced in the test work at Tongchang copper mine were sampled and sent to the laboratory for the model test. The particle size of the tailings was determined by using a S3500 light scattering particle size analyzer (made in USA). The tailings particle composition is shown in After construction of the pond model, tailings slurry mixing and transportation system apparatus was installed. The test procedures were as follows: According to the design density (about 50% concentration by weight), dry tailings were first put into the tailings slurry mixing machine, then water was added to produce a tailings slurry. After the tailings slurry was uniformly mixed, a window in the bottom of the machine was opened and the tailings slurry was transported through a pipe to the tailings pond for discharge (as shown in Tailings were discharged from the crest of the tailings dam. The tailings dam was raised when the tailings surface approached the dam crest. At a certain height discharging of tailings was stopped. The phreatic surface of the tailings dam and the width of the beach were measured, and the results recorded. At a certain distance from the crest of the dam, sampling was carried out along the upstream direction and a series of tailings samples on the beach were used for particle size analyses. Water was then discharged into the pond to achieve a minimum beach width of 50 Sandy material was excavated from the beach to construct a small dike, dependent on design size, and then the discharge apparatus was prepared for tailings discharge in the next lift. The above steps were repeated until the crest of tailings dam reached the design level (as shown in The test results and some discussions are as follows: Based on our experience, the slope of the spigotted tailings beach is a very important factor which affects the stability of the dam. Because the flood control capacity of a tailings pond has a very close relationship with the slope of the spigotted tailings beach, the flood control capacity of the pond is also a major factor which controls the safety of the pond when the water is close to the beach slope. As some literatures states, water has been the underlying source of virtually all failures of tailings storage facilities between 1980 and 1996. In accordance with Chinese technical codes, the beach slope must be more than 1:100 (vertical:horizontal) in practice. The beach slopes at different dam heights during this model test work are shown in The results indicate that the beach slope ranges from 0.1% to 0.8% and the slope angle gradually decreases towards the pond direction. The variation of the beach slope agrees with the real situation. However, the beach slope achieved in the laboratory is less than that required by the national code. Many factors can affect the beach slope, such as tailings particle size, velocity of tailings slurry flowing on the beach and concentration of tailings slurry. In the model tests, two main factors produced a flat beach slope. The first was that the tailings particles used in the model test, as mentioned in Section As discussed above, in the upstream method of construction, the tailings slurry is discharged by spigotting in an upstream direction from the top of the dike. Separation of the sand tailings and the slimes occurs as the tailings flow into the pond, with the coarser particles settling first, forming a sand beach. In the testwork, when raising the tailings dam, a large number of tailings samples were taken from different locations of the beach and particle analyses were conducted on selected samples. The tailings particle-size distributions are shown in The stability of a tailings embankment under static and seismic loads is influenced by the position of the phreatic surface. The phreatic surface can be related to different mechanisms of tailings dam failures, e.g., flooding, piping, overtopping, liquefaction. As stated in Section  The depth of the phreatic surface below the dam crest is about 3.0–6.0 During the model test process, while the dam was raised to a specific height, stability analysis of the dam was carried out by using an ordinary method of slices and Bishop’s simplified method, in accordance with the national technical code. This analysis was to determine the design height of the tailings dam with a sufficient safety margin. On the basis of the results of the model tests, two types of tailings materials, i.e. coarse sandy tailings and fine particles and slimes, as mentioned in Section Two types of materials were sampled and their properties were measured by laboratory testing during the model test and the results are summarized in To conform to the technical code, seismic load and pore pressures were taken into account in calculating the safety factor of the tailings dam. An earthquake ground acceleration of 0.15 For this stability analysis, Slide (v 5.0) software was used, and a grid search method was chosen. On the basis of the model test results, a calculation model was built (as shown in With the rapidly increasing number of tailings ponds, the safety issue has drawn more and more attention by governments and local communities in China. Construction of a tailings pond is a more complex operation than the construction of a conventional water storage pond. The design and construction of each tailings pond must meet the specific requirements of a particular mining project and the changing conditions with time. This paper demonstrates that physical modeling can simulate the process of tailings dam construction in the laboratory under conditions similar to those in the field. During physical model tests in the laboratory, the effect of change in the tailings dam structure can be investigated. The laboratory results can provide valuable information for stability analysis of actual tailings dams in the field. A case study of the Yangtianqing tailings pond was conducted and a model test procedure was developed. Based on the results obtained the following conclusions have been drawn: The variation of the beach slope is in accordance with the real situation. The beach slope achieved in the laboratory is less than that required by the China national code. For this reason, in practice, some measures should be taken to increase the beach slope to meet this code. The phreatic surface locations within the tailings dam at different dam heights, under normal conditions and flood situations, have been obtained, which is very beneficial to the practical safety management of this tailings pond in the future. The relative detailed profiles of the tailings dam at different dam heights have been obtained, which provide reliable data for stability analysis of this dam. Based on the model testing results, the stability analyses of this tailings dam under different dam heights and different conditions have been obtained. The results show that the limiting safe height of the dam is 100.0 Based on our knowledge, this large scale test is the first effort that has been carried out to simulate the construction of a tailings dam in China. Consequently, relevant information is not available in the literature. Through this study, it is concluded that the model test is valuable, but further development and investigation is necessary. For future study, improvements of different aspects, such as flow rate control and velocity adjustment, should be considered. More research is needed in order to apply this method to improve the design of tailings dams under different field conditions. The authors are very grateful to Dr. J.G. Wang (School of Mechanical Engineering, The University of Western Australia) and Dr. Allen L. Li (Golder associates Ltd., Canada) for the critical review of the original manuscript, and for their very useful comments and suggestions. And they are also indebted to Dr. Shijin Zhang for a careful revision of the English. This research has been funded by the