The porphyry copper deposit (PCD) at Sungun is located in East Azarbaidjan, NW of Iran. The magmatic suites in the Sungun area are a part of the NW–SE trending Cenozoic magmatic belt of Iran. The Sungun porphyries occur as stocks and dikes. The stocks are divided into two groups, I and II. Porphyry Stock II, ranging in composition from quartz monzonite through granodiorite to granite, hosts the Sungun PCD. Four distinct types of hypogene alterations were recognized at Sungun: (1) potassic; (2) potassic–phyllic; (3) phyllic; and (4) propylitic. Stable isotope (S, O, H, and C) studies were restricted to within the phyllic and potassic–phyllic alteration zones, where numerous cross-cutting quartz, sulfides, carbonates, and sulfate veinlets are present. The objective of these studies was to determine the origin of the ore-forming solutions, and their important components (e.g. sulfur and carbon). Twenty sulfide and four sulfate samples were taken from sulfide and gypsum veinlets within Porphyry Stock II and the associated skarn zone for sulfur isotopic analyses. The δ
                     34S values of sulfides (pyrite, chalcopyrite, molybdenite, galena, sphalerite) and sulfate (gypsum) range from −4.6 to −0.2‰ (mean of −1.5‰) and from 10.9 to 14.4‰ (mean of 12.9‰), respectively. These values are almost analogous to those from El Salvador (Chile) and Ajo (Arizona), and Twin Buttes (Arizona), and strongly suggest a magmatic source for the sulfur at Sungun. Twenty-eight fluid inclusion-rich quartz samples from quartz veinlets beneath the supergene zones of the Porphyry Stock II were chosen for O and H isotopic analyses. The δ
                     18O (of quartz) and δD (of fluid inclusions in quartz) values range from 8.3 to 10.2‰ (mean of 9.2‰) and −58 to −75‰ (mean of −66‰) relative to Standard Mean Ocean Water (SMOW), respectively. The calculated δ
                     18O values of the fluids range from 4.4‰ (T=375°C) to 7.6‰ (T=570°C) with a mean of 6.4‰. The δ
                     18O and δD values of the fluids lie within the typical range of magmatic waters. Based upon the lowest obtained δD values, the calculated maximum exchangeable meteoric water that might be involved in the phyllic and potassic–phyllic alteration processes was ∼20%. Fourteen calcite samples from carbonate veinlets in the Porphyry Stock II and two samples from associated marble aureole were collected for carbon and oxygen isotopic analyses. The δ
                     13C(calcite) from Porphyry Stock II and associated marble aureole varies from −0.4 to 2.9‰ and 0.06 to 2‰ relative to the PDB Standard of the University of Chicago, respectively. The corresponding δ
                     18O(calcite) values range from 6 to 13.2‰ relative to SMOW. The δ
                     13C values lie within the sedimentary range, suggesting that there was little or almost no magmatic carbon in the hydrothermal system. In contrast, The δ
                     18O(calcite) values are far lower than that of Cretaceous sedimentary carbonates which suggest that the values were influenced by those of magmatic fluids through isotopic re-equilibration. These isotopic investigations demonstrated that: (1) in contrast to some well-known PCDs, about 80% of the fluids involved in the phyllic and potassic–phyllic alterations at Sungun had a magmatic O and H isotopic signature; (2) the Upper Cretaceous limestone was the potential source of C; and (3) the sulfur had a magmatic origin.Non-radiogenic stable isotopes (S, O, H, C) have long proven to be extremely useful in furnishing invaluable information concerning the genesis and some physico-chemical aspects of ore-forming hydrothermal solutions, and the origin and evolution of some ore-forming components (e.g. S and C). Previous stable isotopic work from many porphyry copper deposits (PCD) show that the early stage alteration (e.g. potassic) is caused by fluids of magmatic origin, whereas the later stage alteration (e.g. phyllic), superimposed on earlier alteration zones, is caused principally by meteoric fluids which were convectively circulating around the porphyry stock ( No previous stable isotope data were available at Sungun when this investigation was begun. The availability of an enormous quantity of diamond drill cores from over 100 diamond drill holes in the Sungun PCD provided access to the hypogene alteration zones and furnished suitable grounds for isotopic investigations. The prime objective of this investigation was to constrain the origin of the fluids involved in the processes of phyllic and potassic–phyllic alteration and the related sulfide mineralization, and also to determine the potential sources of sulfur and carbon. Both (C and S) play important roles in ore localization. The present study results from the PhD studies of The Sungun PCD is located ∼100 The remains of ancient tunnels, smelting furnaces and piles of slag dumped along the Sungun-Chay valley (east and northeast of the main ore body indicate that mining activity has been carried out periodically for over at least 100 years in the Sungun area by both Russian and Iranian miners. The copper ores in the skarn zones were the main focus of attention before 1977, in that year the Iranian geologist, Dr Etminan, realized the potential in the porphyry-type copper and molybdenum ores in the adjacent Porphyry Stock II. Since then Porphyry Stock II has been the center of investigations. In 1990 drilling operations were carried out throughout the area. In 1994 the Iranian National Copper Industries Company launched an extensive program of preparation of the mining area using heavy machinery. Since then the greater part of the overburden (Fe-bearing caprocks) has been removed. These operations will shortly proceed to the extraction of ores. The alteration and mineralization processes at Sungun were investigated along B–B′ and C–C′ profiles ( Hypogene alteration is intimately associated with numerous cross-cutting quartz, sulfides, carbonates, and sulfate veinlets and micro-veinlets. Four types of hypogene alteration are present at Sungun: (1) potassic; (2) potassic–phyllic; (3) phyllic; and (4) propylitic ( Mineralization occurs as dissemination and fracture and micro-fracture fillings. Pyrite is the most abundant sulfide, and chalcopyrite is the dominant copper ore and is accompanied by minor amounts of molybdenite and trace amounts of bornite, tetrahedrite, and hypogene chalcocite. Contact metasomatic alteration and mineralization (skarn) occurs in places along the contact of Porphyry Stock II with Upper Cretaceous carbonates. Three stages of metasomatic alteration were also recognized at Sungun: (1) early; (2) middle; and (3) late. The anhydrous calc-silicates (garnets and pyroxenes) are believed to have formed during the early stage, probably shortly after the emplacement of the pluton. During the middle-stage, the early-formed anhydrous calc-silicates were altered to hydrous silicates (epidote, actinolite, chlorite), quartz, carbonates (calcite and ankerite), sulfides (pyrite, chalcopyrite, galena, and sphalerite), and oxides (magnetite and hematite). The anhydrous and hydrous silicates formed during the earlier stages were altered to calcite, hematite, quartz, ±chlorite, and ±clay minerals during the late stage. Two distinct supergene alteration zones were recognized at Sungun: (1) oxidized and leached zone; and (2) a supergene sulfide zone ( Quartz crystals within almost all types of quartz veinlets (late-type, quartz-sulfide, quartz-molybdenite, and early-type; The homogenization temperature ( Field work and sampling were carried out during the summer of 1994. About 500 diamond drill core samples from different parts of Porphyry Stock II and the associated skarn were examined, and representative samples containing veinlets of sulfides, quartz, carbonates, and sulfates were selected for stable isotope analysis. No suitable quartz veinlet was found in the propylitic alteration zone, and the early quartz veinlets in the potassic alteration zone were thin, crenulated, and mixed with other mineral phases, hence they were found to be unsuitable for isotopic analysis. The late quartz veinlets contain almost no sulfide phases, which suggests that the fluids from which the late quartz crystals formed were not involved in sulfide mineralization. The quartz veinlets developed in the middle stage alteration (e.g. phyllic and potassic–phyllic) processes are rich in fluid inclusions and intimately co-deposited with sulfides and carbonates, and hence were recognized to be suitable for isotopic analyses. Therefore, paragenically co-existing quartz, sulfides, and carbonate mineral phases were the main target for isotopic analyses. Separates of sulfides (pyrite, chalcopyrite, molybdenite, galena, and sphalerite), carbonate (calcite), and quartz were prepared through crushing, sieving, and hand-picking. S, O, H, and C isotope analyses were carried out in laboratories at SURRC (Scottish Universities Research and Reactor Center) in East Kilbride (Glasgow) in 1996. Twenty sulfide and four sulfate (gypsum) samples were chosen for sulfur isotopic analyses. Pure SO Twenty-eight samples from various types of quartz veinlets (e.g. quartz-molybdenite and quartz-sulfide veinlets) in Porphyry Stock II below the supergene zones ( For H Fourteen calcite veinlets (containing sulfides) from Porphyry Stock II and two samples from associated marble aureole were chosen for carbon isotopic analyses. About 10–20 The collected The average of Geothermometry based upon sulfur isotopes was limited at Sungun for the following reasons: Petrographic evidence indicated that the co-existing sulfide phases are neither in textural equilibrium nor contemporaneously formed, for example, chalcopyrite replaced pyrite, indicating that they were not precipitated in the same physico-chemical conditions. No sulfide mineral is present in sulfate (gypsum) veinlets and vice versa, that is, the sulfide–sulfate pairs are not temporally and texturally associated. However, geothermometry, based upon the isotopic composition of sulfide pairs, was cautiously carried out for galena–sphalerite pair in the skarn zone The lack of sulfate minerals in almost all veinlets where the sulfides are present, and the negative The The The Meteoric water might have equilibrated at relatively high temperatures with host igneous rocks through isotopic exchange reactions with silicates containing about 50 and 0.07 Calcite veinlets in Porphyry Stock II are neither abundant nor ubiquitous. The intrusive-related calcite occurs as veinlets, some of which cut through quartz and sulfide veinlets, as small patches in the matrix, and as intergrown crystals within the quartz veinlets. Some of the calcite veinlets contain sulfides with which they are intimately associated. Pyrite is the principal sulfide phase associated with most calcite veinlets, though they occasionally contain relatively small amounts of chalcopyrite and molybdenite. The The  The The average The calculated The The bivariate plot of Hydrogen and oxygen stable isotope analyses, along with petrographic evidence, showed that the ore-bearing fluids during the development of the quartz, sulfides, and carbonate veinlets which are thought to be contemporaneous with phyllic alteration process, had predominantly magmatic isotopic signatures. In contrast to some well-known PCDs, it was calculated that the maximum amount of meteoric water that might be involved during phyllic alteration at Sungun was ∼20%. I wish to acknowledge the financial support furnished by the scholarship department of the Ministry of Culture and Higher Education of Iran, Tabriz University, and the University of Manchester. I would like to thank the staff of Ahar Copper Mines Company for giving permission to access and sample the diamond drill cores. Many thanks to Dr Richard A. Pattrick and Dr Dave A. Polya for their advice and valuable suggestions. I am especially obliged to many people (particularly Dr Adrian J. Boyce and Prof. Tony E. Fallick) for providing generous assistance and access to the stable isotope laboratories at Scottish Universities Research and Reactor Center in East Kilbride (Glasgow). My grateful appreciation is extended to Dr John Dilles and to Dr David Alderton (London) for their suggestions and critical comments on this paper.