Flotation and single bubble tests were performed to compare the kinetics of flotation and time of a bubble attachment to naturally hydrophobic solids with different degree of hydrophobicity that is highly hydrophobic polytetrafluoroethylene, moderate hydrophobic fluorite and slightly hydrophobic quartz. The paper identifies an important relationship between the flotation kinetics, expressed as the inversed first order rate constant (1/k), and time of three-phase contact formation (t
                     TPC) determined from the single bubble tests. It was shown that flotation kinetics is mainly determined by the time of three-phase contact formation, that is the time from the first bubble collision to its attachment to the solid surface. Despite the complexity of flotation process, which includes vast number of sub-processes, the kinetics of drainage of liquid film separating the bubble and solid surfaces seems to be a factor of crucial importance for the final flotation outcome.Interaction between a particulate matter and bubble, both immersed in a liquid medium, is a fundamental process in flotation. Mechanisms of particle-bubble interaction control the flotation efficiencies and probabilities of collision, attachment and stability Roughened, using the grid number 220 sand paper, discs and plates of polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE, Teflon Hexylamine (HexNH The flotation tests of quartz and fluorite were performed in a mono-bubble Hallimond tube with volume 200 An experimental set-up used for monitoring dynamic phenomena occurring during the bubble collision with liquid/gas interfaces was described in details elsewhere The single bubble and flotation tests were carried out at ambient temperature (22 Flotation and single bubble tests were carried out for solids with different degree of hydrophobicity that is (i) highly hydrophobic polytetrafluoroethylene (water contact angle Polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE, Teflon The second investigated solid was fluorite. It is a semi-soluble salt and it has been of great interest in many applications. According to many investigations pure fluorite can be considered as either hydrophilic or hydrophobic mineral with the water contact angle either equal or greater than zero, respectively. It was reported that the water contact angle of fluorite ranged from 0 to 55°, or even 90°. Hydrophobicity of fluorite depends on the measurement technique, sample preparation procedure, roughness, color, origin and crystal structure of a sample The natural hydrophobicity of fluorite indicates that it exhibits native floatability and can be easily floated without any surfactant in small flotation devices such as Hallimond tube and Schott funnel As seen in The surface charge of fluorite originates from dissolution of F Flotation and wetting characteristic of quartz and other oxide minerals have been extensively investigated by numerous authors. Quartz is generally considered to be hydrophilic and completely wetted by water. The water films at quartz surface are stabilized by hydrogen bonding of interfacial water molecules Although quartz exhibits native hydrophobicity, it does not float in pure water. A lack of quartz flotation and TPC formation in pure water does not result from its hydrophilicity but from stability of the interfacial water film separating the bubble and quartz surfaces. In pure water, both surfaces of quartz and bubble are negatively charged and the repulsive electrostatic interactions prevent the film rupture, and therefore formation of a stable particle-bubble aggregate. As presented in In order to describe the relationship between the time of three-phase contact formation and flotation time, a first order kinetics model was used. In this paper, the single bubble and flotation tests were used to relate the kinetics of flotation and bubble attachment to naturally hydrophobic solids with different degree of hydrophobicity that is highly hydrophobic polytetrafluoroethylene, moderate hydrophobic fluorite and slightly hydrophobic quartz. The results clearly demonstrate, that irrespective of the solid type and hydrophobicity as well as aqueous phase chemistry and flotation device, there is a strong correlation between the time of three-phase contact formation Authors would like to thank Alicja Swebodzinska for her help in conducting flotation tests of fluorite. This work was partially financed by the