The effects of proximate and ultimate analysis, maceral content, and coal rank (R
                     max) for a wide range of Kentucky coal samples from calorific value of 4320 to 14960 (BTU/lb) (10.05 to 34.80 MJ/kg) on Hardgrove Grindability Index (HGI) have been investigated by multivariable regression and artificial neural network methods (ANN). The stepwise least square mathematical method shows that the relationship between (a) Moisture, ash, volatile matter, and total sulfur; (b) ln (total sulfur), hydrogen, ash, ln ((oxygen+nitrogen)/carbon) and moisture; (c) ln (exinite), semifusinite, micrinite, macrinite, resinite, and R
                     max input sets with HGI in linear condition can achieve the correlation coefficients (R
                     2) of 0.77, 0.75, and 0.81, respectively. The ANN, which adequately recognized the characteristics of the coal samples, can predict HGI with correlation coefficients of 0.89, 0.89 and 0.95 respectively in testing process. It was determined that ln (exinite), semifusinite, micrinite, macrinite, resinite, and R
                     max can be used as the best predictor for the estimation of HGI on multivariable regression (R
                     2
                     =0.81) and also artificial neural network methods (R
                     2
                     =0.95). The ANN based prediction method, as used in this paper, can be further employed as a reliable and accurate method, in the hardgrove grindability index prediction.Grindability of coal is an important technological parameter in assessing the relative hardness of coals of varying ranks and grades during comminution Although the HGI testing device is not costly, the measuring procedure to get a HGI value is time consuming. Therefore, some researchers have investigated the prediction of HGI based on proximate analysis, petrography, and vitrinite maximum reflectance with using regression Artificial neural network (ANN) is an empirical modeling tool, which is analogous to the behavior of biological neural structures Li et al. The aim of the present work is the assessment of properties of more than 600 Kentucky coals with reference to the HGI and possible variations with respect to vitrinite maximum reflection, proximate and ultimate analysis, and petrography of coal using the multivariable regression, SPSS software package, also improvement of results by artificial neural network, MATLAB software package. This work is an attempt to solve the following important questions: (a) Is there a suitable multivariable relationship between vitrinite maximum reflection, petrography, proximate and ultimate analysis with HGI for a wide range of Kentucky coals? (b) Can we improve the correlation of predicted HGI with actual measured HGI by using of artificial neural network? A mathematical model requires a comprehensive database to cover a wide variety of coal types. Such a model will be capable for predicting of HGI with a high degree of accuracy. Data used to test the proposed approaches are from studies conducted at the University of Kentucky Center for Applied Energy Research. A total of more than 600 sets of data were used. Sengupta In the current study, it was found that use of moisture, ash, volatile matter, and total sulfur can achieve the best results to predict the HGI. The ranges of input variables to HGI prediction for the 633 Kentucky samples are shown in The following equations resulted between HGI and proximate analysis: The distribution of difference between HGI predicted from Eq. Vuthaluru et al. In the current study, the best correlation was found between ln The following equation resulted between HGI and ultimate analysis: The distribution of difference between HGI predicted from Eq. Hardgrove grindability index is primarily a function of the maceral composition, more precisely the mix of macerals. The greater amount of Liptinite macerals such as sporinite, cutinite, resinite, and alginite, from spores, leaf cuticles, resins, and algae, respectively, particularly in combination with finely-dispersed inertinite macerals, can result in a lower grindability index HGI is not simply a function of the maceral content though. Through the rank range present through most of the Central Appalachians, HGI will increase with an increase in rank. The influence of mineral matter on HGI is also complex The relationship between HGI and coal petrography was studied by Hsieh Hower and Wild examined 656 Kentucky coal samples to determine the relationship between proximate and ultimate analysis, petrography, and vitrinite maximum reflectance with HGI for both eastern and western Kentucky. For eastern Kentucky, the subject of the investigations in this paper, they found that HGI could be predicted as following equation In the present work, macerals and By a least square mathematical method, the correlation coefficients of ln (exinite), semi fusinite, micrinite, macrinite, resinite and An equation between mentioned parameters and HGI can be shown as follows: The distribution of difference between HGI predicted from Eq. Neural networks can be seen as a legitimate part of statistics that fits snugly in the niche between parametric and non-parametric methods Artificial neural networks (ANN) are simplified systems simulating the intelligent behavior exhibited by animals via mimicking the types of physical connections occurring in their brains The main advantage of ANN is the ability to model a problem by the use of examples (i.e. data driven), rather than describing it analytically. ANN's are also very powerful to effectively represent complex nonlinear systems. It is also considered as a nonlinear statistical identification technique For developing a nonlinear ANN model of a system, feed-forward architecture namely MLP is most commonly used. This network usually consists of a hierarchical structure of three layers described as input, hidden, and output layers, comprising The first layer has weights coming from the input. Each subsequent layer has a weight coming from the previous layer. All layers have biases. The last layer is the network output Back propagation can train multilayer feed-forward networks with differentiable transfer functions to perform function approximation, pattern association, and pattern classification. The term back propagation refers to the process by which derivatives of network error, with respect to network weights and biases, can be computed. This process can be used with a number of different optimization strategies However, the number of nodes ( In this study, two ANN models (models I and II) have been developed by considering one hidden layers and the third one (Model III) by considering two hidden layer in MLP architecture and with training using the EBP algorithm ( Neural network training can be made more efficient by certain pre-processing steps. In the present work all inputs (before feeding to the network) and output data (in models I and III) in training phase, were scaled so that they changed in the range of 0 and 1, using the mean and standard deviation: Where, Ap is actual parameter, meanAps is mean of actual parameters, stdAp is standard deviation of actual parameter and pn is normalized parameter (input) While the training set was used in the EBP algorithm-based iterative minimization of error, the test set was used after each training iteration for assessing the generalization ability of MLP model. Prediction and generalization performances of ANN models I, II and III were compared with results of Eqs. According to Eq. In Eq. In Eq. As a related work to this one, Hower and Wild  According to the above significant results, it can be concluded that the proposed multiple regression formulas (Eqs.  Three data sets of: (a) Moisture, ash, volatile matter, and total sulfur; (b) ln (total sulfur), hydrogen, ash, ln ((oxygen Higher moisture content in coal can result in higher HGI and higher volatile matter content in coal results in lower HGI. No other (a) set parameters were significant. The increase of hydrogen content in coal can result in lower HGI and higher ln ( Higher ln (exinite), semi fusinite and resinite contents in coal decrease HGI. An increase in micrinite results in higher HGI. No other macerals were significant. The proposed multivariable equations: Eq. Eq. Eq. The FANN procedures used to improve of correlation coefficients between predicted HGIs and actual determined HGIs, with a good resulting ln (exinite), semifusinite, micrinite, macrinite, resinite and