SBA-15 of high specific surface area (507 m2/g) and pore volume (1.05 cm3/g) [due to the presence of hexagonally arranged 8.26 nm pore diameter], was synthesized by sol-gel method and impregnated with different mole ratios of Sn to Ti, in order to prepare TiO2-SBA-15, Sn0.05Ti0.95O2-SBA-15, Sn0.08Ti0.92O2-SBA-15 and SnO2-SBA-15 photocatalysts. The average SBA-15 particle diameter was 740 nm. Impregnation of photocatalyst inside the SBA-15 pores were confirmed by electron microscopy and pore-size measurement. The anatase phase of TiO2-SBA-15 shifted to an anatase-rutile phase, after Sn-doping. A decrease of impregnated catalyst size (amongst the four catalysts), from 6.7 to 6.1 nm, due to lattice strain was confirmed by X-ray diffraction. From X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, the oxidation states for TiO2-SBA-15 and SnO2-SBA-15 were found to be Ti4+ and Sn4+, respectively. It remained unchanged after Sn-doping of catalyst too. Subsequent UV-light based photocatalytic degradation of Rhodamine B, an organic pollutant, was conducted under various pH conditions. At pH 4.5, amongst these catalysts, Sn0.05Ti0.95O2-SBA-15 shows the highest activity (pseudo-first order kinetic rate constant of 1.36 h−1). The intermediate products during degradation were identified by HR-LC/MS and GC/MS. The temporal changes in Rhodamine B concentration both from UV-Vis absorbance and HR-LC/MS measurements were consistent too.Photocatalytic degradation of harmful effluents from industrial wastes, by oxide materials, has received much attention for decades. Organic pollutants from different effluent streams such as dyes from the textile [ Dyes are most polluting effluents, compared to any other organic pollutant, due to its use in multiple industries and also difficulty in easy removal [ Waste-water effluent from textile industries contains multiple dyes, mostly azo and synthetic dyes [ To address these issues, the present study involves synthesis of Sn The chemicals, tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS > 99%, Fluka), Pluronic P123 (average Mn∼ 5800), titanium isopropoxide (C The SBA-15 synthesis process is a well-known sol-gel method, using Pluronic P123 surfactant as a pore forming template, with a large surface area and pore volume [ The catalyst impregnation was carried out by mole ratio basis of Sn and Ti wherein, ‘x’ denotes Sn and ‘1-x’ denotes Ti moles [ The photocatalytic reaction was conducted under a batch condition, with suspended catalyst throughout the mixture. 100 ml (50 μM) of RhB solution was prepared in milli-Q water by maintaining the pH of the solution, on using 0.1 mM of HCl or NaOH. The catalytic reaction was carried out at different pH conditions, such as 2.7, 4.5, 6.1 and 8.5. Typically, 100 mg of Sn Morphological observation of synthesized SBA-15 nanoparticles and pore with impregnated catalyst was carried out by Zeiss Ultra 55 FE-SEM (specification of 0.1–30 kV accelerating voltage) and via TEM CM 200, respectively. Chemical state of synthesized photocatalyst was analyzed by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, ESCA, AXIS Supra, Kratos Analytical, UK Shimadzu). Nitrogen adsorption-desorption isotherm and surface area analysis was done by using BET analysis (Quantachrome Autosorb AS-1Version-1.55). The size of the impregnated photocatalyst was calculated from X-ray diffraction analysis (XRD) using Scherrer’s equation (X’Pert Pro, PANalytical software). The diffuse reflectance spectroscopy of catalyst was measured by UV-Vis powder spectroscopy (UV-NIR-3600). Degradation of RhB dye and intermediate products was analyzed by UV-Vis spectroscopy (Perkin Elmer Lambda 35) and HR-LC/MS respectively (HR-LC/MS model: 1290 Infinity UHPLC System, Agilent Technologies, USA, PDA Detector Mass spectrometer, Ionization method: Electrospray ionization positive mode, HPLC column: Purospher®STAR Sorbent Lot no. TA1749918 Hibar RT 150-4.6). A small fraction of RhB dye was analyzed by GC/MS (Agilent Technologies 5975C) using HP-5 ms phenyl methyl siloxane column (1660.65796, 30mX250 μm X 0.25 μm), injecting 1 μl of sample; by maintaining the oven temperature at 70 ℃ for 1 min. Then temperature was increased to 250 ℃ with a heating rate of 30 ℃/minutes. Overall time of separation of molecules takes about 21 min. SBA-15 is a well-known supporting material for various applications, which has different shapes, sizes and pore volume [ XRD of the photocatalyst was carried out to calculate the crystal property of the impregnated catalyst. In addition, doping of an element in TiO The band gap value for Sn  Elemental characterization and chemical state of Sn The photocatalytic activity of Sn The photocatalytic degradation reaction was carried out under four different pH conditions to examine the rate of reaction of the photocatalyst. In textile and paper printing industries, waste-water effluent has different pH, which also varies due to the usage of different types of dyes and chemicals. Dyes dissociate and interact with the surface of the catalyst, due to electrostatic interaction, where the optimum adsorption of the dye is important for degradation. The normalized concentration of RhB dye plotted with respect to time ( The catalytic reaction strongly depends on the surface charge of the catalyst and its interaction with reacting molecules. The overall surface charge of the SBA-15 and catalyst is negative at pH 4.5, 7, 6.1, and 8.5, due to the presence of the silanol group (−OH) of SBA-15 ( Analysis of RhB dye and its intermediate products at different time intervals were analyzed by HR-LC/MS and GC/MS. It was observed that the intermediate products differ by exactly 28 mass units, called as N-de-ethylated product. One molecule of ethyl group is removed sequentially from RhB molecule during the reaction, and this mass of the intermediate product of RhB was observed by mass spectroscopy, which shows the reaction pathway of RhB degradation to their intermediates [ Intermediate products other than the de-ethylated product analyzed by GC/MS analysis. The small molecules were observed from the de-ethylated product after ring opening. In GC/MS chromatograph (supplementary materials Fig. S5) the peak shows the formation of small molecules and their respective mass spectroscopy peak shows the presence of the degradation product. It is difficult to track the small molecule intermediate products, in GC/MS after every time of interval, due to low concentration. Therefore, for GC/MS analysis, the sample was prepared by taking a final reaction mixture and extraction was done using dichloromethane as an extractant, mixed with the same volume in separating funnel. Extracted solution dehydrated with anhydrous sodium sulfate to make water free solution, 1 ml concentrate solution were taken for GC/MS analysis. For the first time, we have compared the normalized peak area of RhB dye by HR-LC/MS analysis, with a normalized concentration of RhB dye by UV-Vis absorbance analysis. RhB dye concentration versus time shows a similar trend by both the analysis method ( The reaction pathway of photodegraded RhB was proposed based on intermediate product formation, which was investigated by HR-LC/MS and GC/MS analysis ( Catalyst stability for long-term usage is very important, with catalyst activity under any light irradiation. For determining stability, Sn Nanometer-sized photocatalyst of different molar ratios of Sn and Ti were synthesized inside mesoporous silica SBA-15, displaying photocatalytic activity at various pH conditions. The highest degradation rate constant of a catalyst was achieved for Sn No conflict of interest. Authors acknowledge the Center for Research in Nanotechnology and Science for TEM CM 200, FE-SEM, HR-LC/MS, department of Physics for XPS, department of Metallurgical Engineering and Material Science for XRD and department of Chemistry for GC/MS, BET and DRS, Indian institute of technology Bombay. Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following is Supplementary data to this article: