Filtration of slimes is difficult due to the cake build up of fine solids. This cake has a high resistance to flow and slows the dewatering process. In the 1970’s and 80’s work on the crossflow filtration process offered improvements in the filtration of these fine solids by keeping the cake to a limited thickness. This was achieved by using a shearing force on the cake generated by a slurry flow tangential to the filter medium. Working on this principle, the Kalgoorlie Filter Pipe uses a flexible hose of a woven medium to provide dewatering of slurries under pressure. The pressure required for this dewatering can be found in any line where a slurry is being pumped from one location to another, such as a tailings discharge line. Laboratory and plant trials have shown that for some gold tailings, an increase of up to 9% can be obtained in slurry % solids over a 100 m pipe length.The concept of crossflow filtration (CFF) has been known for almost a century, although it has attracted growing attention in recent years. The main difference between CFF and conventional, dead-end filtration, is the direction of flow of the fluid to be filtered relative to the filtrate. Conventional filtration employs dead-end flow into the filter resulting in the accumulation of particles at the filter membrane and therefore a reduction in the filtration rate with time. In CFF the fluid to be filtered flows parallel to the filter membrane. The filtrate permeates through the membrane due to a pressure difference across the membrane. The tangential or crossflow of the suspension exerts a shear force on the particulate layer at the membrane surface. This reduces the accumulation of particles thus minimizing the cake resistance and maintaining a constant filtration rate. Although CFF has found application in a wide variety of industries such as the purification, concentration or regeneration of process liquids containing very fine suspensions, there has been little work done on the application of the process to streams containing larger particulate material. CFF is essentially a pressure-driven membrane process. The pressure required for dewatering is present in any line where slurry is transported under pressure. One application therefore is the partial dewatering of tailings slurry as it is pumped to a tailings dam. This has various benefits. The filtrate can be returned to the processing plant for immediate reuse. The slurry produced will have a lower water content, resulting in quicker drying and consolidation. Also the size of the tailings dam required may be reduced due to a reduction in the volume of material entering the dam and the increased competency of the tailings material. The advantages associated with CFF make it a very promising method of dewatering in the mineral processing industry. Through the use of hollow woven-fibre membranes, CFF can be used as an in-line filtration method wherever slurry is transported under pressure. The membranes can be made in essentially any length and can be constructed to withstand very high pressures. The relatively low cost of woven-fibre membranes and the simplicity of design of industrial scale apparatus are also considerations. CFF is influenced by many factors. These include the crossflow velocity, pressure difference across the membrane, filter cake resistance, membrane resistance, particle size distribution of the suspension, pulp density of the suspension, temperature etc. There have been numerous models developed with differing degrees of success. The effect of the transmembrane pressure on filtrate flux for small particle sizes has been well documented ( It was observed that for particle sizes ⩽0.1 μm, an increase in pressure above the plateau pressure results in no change in the flux. However for 1 μm particles, the flux appears to increase linearly with pressure. Filtrate flux has been shown to increase with increasing temperature, which is the same for all membrane processes ( The fluid shear rate is related to the membrane geometry and fluid velocity. Therefore either increasing crossflow velocity or reducing the equivalent hydraulic diameter of the membrane results in an increased shear rate. The effect of shear rate is not as significant for the intermediate size particles, 0.1 mm, as it is for the large or small particles. For intermediate particles however, the back-transport mechanism, whereby the deposited particles return to the flowing slurry, is at a minimum and therefore an increase in shear rate has a limited effect. Increasing the membrane radius results in a decrease in filtrate flux, due to a decrease in the associated shear rate. It is expected that the flux should remain constant for the same shear rate, regardless of the values of the crossflow velocity and membrane radius. Although this is observed for the small particles, increases in membrane radius for the larger particles even at the same shear rate results in an increased flux. This may be caused by the fact that large particles form thick cakes that may constrict the channel and reduce the surface area available for filtration, therefore increasing the membrane radius increases the filtration area. Increased shear rate results in greater back-transport of particles away from the filter cake and therefore less deposition and a reduced cake resistance ( Studies have shown a strong relationship between particle radius and filtrate flux ( The geometry of the CFF apparatus has a large impact on the hydrodynamic forces created. In these experiments however, the size of the membrane relative to the particle size was small. Particles ranged from 0.001 to 10 μm and the fibre radius from 250 to 1000 μm. In other studies, the membrane radius is made sufficiently large so that the total cake height in relation to the membrane radius is very small. Therefore curvature effects can be neglected and an increase in membrane diameter will have negligible influence on the flux ( A series of filtration tests were carried out on a new filtration system, known as the Kalgoorlie Filter Pipe The pump was a Warman 2/1.5 slurry pump with variable speed drive. The woven hose had a nominal diameter of 48 mm and a length of 4.3 m. Magnetic flowmeters, FE1 and FE3, were used to measure the flow rate of the slurry delivered by the pump (STRM1) and the flow rate of the filtrate (STRM3) respectively. Pressure gauges and sample taps were located as indicated in The slurry used in the initial trial was a gold mine tailings. A sizing on the sample indicated a p80 of 35 μm, and a solid density of 2730 kg/m  These results show that the filtrate flowrate decreases with run time for constant total flow or pressure drop. This drop off in filtrate flow rate would appear to continue beyond the 30–60 min of each test. At the low pressures, there is an indication that the flow rate is dropping with time, although there is very little flow of filtrate overall. At 130 kPa pressure, there is a clear decrease in filtrate flow rate with time ( The cause of the decrease in flow may be due to a build up of a solid cake on the inside of the filter hose or the infiltration of solids into the woven fabric, both of which will increase the resistance to flow. Increasing the pressure in the pipe increases the filtrate flow but this decreases again with time due to more solids building up or a greater degree of hose weave blockage. It is expected that there would be a limiting thickness of solids built up on the wall of the hose as a result of the pressure depositing solid on the medium with the radial flow of filtrate through the medium and the shearing force of the passing slurry moving longitudinal to the tube wall. The Reynolds numbers indicate that turbulent flow is occurring at all velocities experienced during the tests. The decrease in filtrate flow at constant pressure drop appears to be limited at the higher pressures (170–180 kPa), probably as a result of the higher shear forces at the higher velocities preventing excessive build up on the tube wall.   The effect of the feed density increase on STRM2 density can be illustrated by plotting the feed density versus the density in the effluent (STRM2) as shown in  From the results of the first filtration trial, a second series of tests were carried out. The aim of this series of tests was to determine the long term flow characteristics from the 4 m length test rig. The test carried out was a 24 h extended time trial at a set pump pressure of 150 kPa. Sampling intervals were every half hour for the first 8 h then every hour. These samples were weighed while wet, filtered, dried and reweighed to determine the % solids. In this test, the feed density was found to increase with time as was experienced in the first test. If the layer of solids on the wall of the hose reaches a steady thickness and hence mass, then the increase in percent solids must result from a loss of water from the system. Each hour approximately 500 ml of slurry were removed from each of the three streams as a sample and the solids content measured. A calculation of the effect of this solid and water loss on the sump slurry density indicates that an increase in slurry % solids will result. This is shown in Curve 2 in  The third series of tests were carried out on an extended filter hose length of nominally 100 m. This test was to confirm the prediction of previous tests of a significant increase in percent solids over an extended length of filter. The test conditions were to duplicate the conditions of the previous tests except for the filter length. These conditions were 150 kPa pressure using a fine tailing solid feed at 30% solids. The 100 m hose length was divided into two halves to be able to return the slurry to the sump of the closed circuit test rig. A sample tap was incorporated into the junction at the half way point to be able to check the performance along the filter length. The filter available had an actually length of 96 m. Flowrates of the feed and filtrate streams were monitored and samples of the feed, discharge, filtrate and intermediate slurry at 48 m were collected for percent solids determination. The flowrate of streams STRM1 and STRM3 were also measured frequently to provide a check on the flow meters. The test conditions slightly exceeded the nominal conditions with the feed pressure at 160 kPa and the feed density at 43–45% solids. The flow of STRM1 and STRM3 reached steady values of approximately 130 and 50 l/min respectively. This compares with 250 and 3 l/min for the 4.3 m pipe. The slurry flow has been reduced due to the extra frictional loss of the longer pipe. The filtrate flow/m The test was to run for 13 h. The results indicated that the flow rates were steady over the last 5 h of the test. The most important data from these results is the % solids of the discharge after the 48 and 96 m length of filter. These values are plotted in The effect of an increase in feed density in a conventional filter, is to increase the cake deposition rate as there is less water to extract to produce a given cake thickness. As the cake thickness builds up, the filtrate flow will decrease due to the increased resistance. However, in the filter system being considered here, the cake thickness should remain constant due to the high shear forces running perpendicular to the cake build up. Hence the filtrate flow should also be approximately constant with increasing slurry density. If the rate of filtrate discharge is the same in the two halves of the filter, then a higher proportion of the slurry water will be extracted if the feed density is higher, resulting in a higher increase in discharge % solids. A trial of the KFP on a tailing stream from a gold processing plant was implemented to test the 96 m pipe on an industrial slurry under continuous conditions. Setup difficulties however restricted the filter length to 24 m. At the plant tailing dam, a tapping was taken off the main tailing line, using 63 mm poly pipe, to supply the nominal 50 mm filter pipe. The piping arrangement is shown in Measurements were taken of the feed and discharge pressures and the pressure in the filtrate line and the flow rate of the discharge and filtrate lines. Samples of the slurry were also taken for sizing and % solids determination. The feed stream had the following characteristics: The filtration trial ran for 4 days. On the fourth day a plant shutdown caused the filter pipe to sand up. When the plant restarted, the flow was not able to be re-established and without a source of flush water at the dam site, the pipe could not be cleared. At this point, sufficient data had been collected and the test was terminated. The pressure and flow rate measurements are given in The feed pressure fluctuated between 270 and 350 kPa with corresponding flow rates from 115 to 185 l/min. The line pressure was, on average, higher than obtained during laboratory tests on the KFP. The filtrate flow was around 5 l/min over the 24 m pipe length compared with 50 l/min over 96 m of pipe length for the laboratory trial. This is a lower flow rate/m of pipe length despite a feed pressure that was double the laboratory pressure. This could arise from a finer particle size in the solids treated. The solids had a p80 of 120 μm but the %––38 μm was over 50%. A finer particle size of solid would give a higher cake resistance and hence a lower filtration rate. Of more significance than the feed pressure is the pressure in the filtrate line. This line has to lift the filtrate over the dam wall before discharging into the tailing dam and with a 20 m head on the filtrate line, this corresponds to a pressure of around 196 kPa. This would decrease the effective pressure across the filter membrane and hence reduce the flow rate. Thus a combination of pressure head and particle size may explain the reduced filtration rate. A mass balance calculation on the solids in and out based on the volume flows gives an expected increase in % solids of about 1% in the discharge line. This is consistent with the measured density increase of 1–2% solids and is also consistent with the 2–3% increase in % solids observed over the first 48 m of pipe in the laboratory tests. The results indicate that the prediction of an approximate 10% increase in percents solids over 100 m of filter pipe is achievable in the laboratory closed circuit treating a tailing sample. The actual average increase in percent solids was found to be around 9%. Flow and percent solids is stable over extended periods of up to 13.5 h. The KFP has been tested under plant conditions on a similar gold tailing stream. A relatively small filtrate flow is observed considering the higher feed pressures compared with previous laboratory tests. This is due in part to the high head of water on the filtrate line resulting from the height of the filter discharge point relative to the KFP. Nevertheless, a clarified filtrate was produced with a 1.2% increase in % solids in the slurry over a 24 m pipe length.