Under specific controlled conditions, the addition of SO2 to oxygen or air produces the peroxy-monosulphate free radical in solution, which is a stronger oxidant than oxygen alone. In this study, the practical strategies required to optimise the oxidation of Fe(II) with SO2/air was investigated at 75°C as part of a process to remove iron as Fe(III) oxides from a synthetic nickel laterite high pressure acid leach solution containing 5g/L Fe(II), 1g/L Fe(III), 8g/L Ni, 30g/L Mg in sea water at pH about 2. The rate of Fe(II) oxidation was optimised in the pH range of 1.2–2.0 with respect to SO2/air ratio and gas flow rates for minimum production of H2SO4 and maximum utilisation of SO2. In order to minimise the air flow rates into the reactor vessel, the maximum rate of SO2 addition that could be employed with air was established whilst maintaining oxidising conditions. The results provide strategies for commercial applications of the SO2/air oxidising system and indicate important factors for reactor design.Iron(II) is concurrently leached into solution together with nickel and cobalt from nickel laterite ores in high pressure acid leaching (HPAL) processes. It has to be oxidised and precipitated out before further processes, such as mixed hydroxide precipitation (MHP) and solvent extraction of nickel and cobalt. Typically, the HPAL process produces a hot slurry at 70–90 The SO However, not much information is available in the literature on some important parameters for practical application, including the mode of SO In the present work, investigations into the oxidation of Fe(II) with SO The basic chemical reactions during the oxidation of Fe(II) by SO Catalysed oxidation reaction (high O Reduction reaction (low O Side reaction: A synthetic solution was prepared by dissolving technical grade metal salts in sea water based on a practical composition of laterite leach liquors containing 5 The SO An Activion pH probe, Model AEP321 and AEP123 was placed in the reactor, staying immersed in the solution throughout the experiment. The starting solution pH was set at pH 2 and left to vary without control and neutralisation to test its feasibility. In practical application, it would be simple to operate the oxidation process without pH control if the oxidation rate is not significantly affected by a slight decrease in pH. An Activion Eh probe, Model AEP531, coupled with a TPS digital meter was used to monitor the Eh throughout the experiment. The completion of Fe(II) oxidation was determined by plotting the secondary derivative of Eh against time for easy determination of the end point ( Fe(II) in solution was determined by standard dichromate titration method ( As SO At standard state, the specific molar volume was calculated to be 23.92 L/mole. Iron(II) oxidation at different SO When doubling the gas flow rate to 1 L/min/L, the concentration of SO For comparison, the oxidation rates (taken from the slopes of the best fitting kinetic plots in With excess air in the gas mixture, the rates of Fe(II) oxidation is a function of the rate of input of SO In the range of SO In the range of O Utilisation of SO The effect of SO As an examination of the reliability of the measured data, a mass balance of SO Solution Eh and pH were not controlled, but monitored throughout the experiments. Typical curves for the variation of Eh and pH during the oxidation for the test with 1.9% SO The linear decrease in pH around pH 2 can be attributed to the Based on the results in this study, the following factors should be considered in the reactor design for achieving maximum rates of Fe(II) oxidation and minimum generation of free acid. Sufficient mixing of SO Good distribution of the gas mixture through a gas sparger. Optimum dispersion of gas and gas–liquid mass transfer by intensive agitation. A practical issue is the rate constraint imposed by gas dispersion equipment in an industrial application due to the requirement for high gas flow. Thus a highly efficient dispersion agitator is needed as discussed by A useful strategy would be to control SO Whilst Fe(II) is being oxidised, there is minimal free H Oxidation of Fe(II) in a typical synthetic nickel laterite leach liquor with SO In the laboratory reactor, the optimum SO In practical applications, the maximum rate of Fe(II) oxidation is limited by the rate of mass transfer of O Authors would like to acknowledge the support from industrial clients and Murdoch University (Australia) for using the laboratory facilities.