An assessment is offered regarding the progress made, and the remaining challenges, in the field of carbocatalysis. The fundamental principles that govern the preparation and performance of sp2-hybridized carbon materials in heterogeneous catalysis have been known for decades, and the level of understanding of key issues – especially the importance of textural and ion-exchange properties (i.e., surface area, pore size distribution, and proton transfer) – remains quite satisfactory. The opportunities for novel catalytic materials – especially graphene nanosheets and carbon nanotubes – are tremendous, especially when it comes to taking advantage of their structural order, such that electron transfer can be both better understood and controlled to enhance catalytic activity and selectivity.There exists much renewed interest in the catalytic applications of sp An example, randomly selected from a recent issue of the It is somewhat disappointing that too many reports such as the one analyzed above, and even recent reviews dealing with carbon catalysis – and there have been quite a few, mostly devoted to the virtues of ‘nanocarbons’ – have not been more comprehensive. Because the properties that are well known to be responsible for the “unparalleled flexibility in tailoring carbon's properties to specific needs…” [ In a review of ‘carbocatalysis’, among the virtues of graphene-based materials as catalysts in their own right, Dreyer et al. [ The potentially genuine importance of textural properties has been invoked, for example, by suggesting [ In the above-cited review of Antolini [ It has recently been recalled [ Progress on this front seems to be most difficult, even though it has been more than half a century since a theory that competes with the ubiquitous oxygen transfer mechanism was proposed by Long and Sykes [ The direction of electron transfer, and the related Fermi-level alteration, is thus the key issue. For example, the electron-donating potassium lowers the work function of graphite and is indeed expected to catalyze O Su and coworkers [ Over the past decades, computational quantum chemistry has come of age and it is ideally suited to shed additional light on these complex issues. Thus, for example, the study by Boukhvalov and coworkers [ Over the past few decades we have witnessed a tremendous explosion of interest in, and research activity on, the fascinating properties of novel graphene-based materials, including their potential utilization in (electro)catalytic applications. In this excitement about undeniably expanding opportunities, however, there is too much evidence of monologue-like attempts to ‘(re)invent’ even the basic scientific principles that are expected to determine their physico-chemical surface properties and thus govern their catalytic behavior. This applies especially to the roles of textural properties and proton transfer, which should be very well understood based on knowledge of ‘conventional’ graphene-based materials such as activated carbons and carbon blacks. When it comes to electron transfer – where the structurally much better defined graphene and carbon nanotubes offer greater opportunities for research progress than, say, the more disordered activated carbons or carbon blacks – there is some evidence of new insights. Both the “unique graphitized basal plane structure” [ Financial support for this study was provided by CONICYT-Chile (Projects FONDECYT 1120609 and PFB-27 CCTE-UDT). Encouragement from Prof. Dangsheng Su is greatly appreciated.