Single-particle breakage is the most efficient size reduction method, as energy losses by friction and unsuccessful impact events are minimized or avoided altogether and losses due to particle–particle interactions do not exist. A simulation procedure for calculating the energy spent in comminution by impact using a sequence of ideal breakage stages on individual particles is analyzed. It is capable of accounting explicitly for the breakage probability, the breakage distribution, the weakening that particles undergo by repeated loading and the stiffness of the media. The procedure has been used to compare different routes for size reduction of selected materials and to assess the energy efficiency in ball milling. It was observed that the lowest energy consumption was achieved with the application of impact energies that follow a power-law relationship with particle size. It was also found that the influence of the stiffness of the tools was only significant for comminution of materials that presented high stiffness. It was also found that the energy efficiency of the Bond ball mill grindability experiment for cement clinker was about 30%.Fundamental particle breakage studies have attracted a great deal of attention of researchers over the last few decades and remains to do so in recent years Industrial comminution processes are typically inefficient in their use of energy in the sense that considerably more energy is consumed by the operating equipment than is actually required to break the particles. Single-particle breakage is the most effective method for comminution because energy losses due to interparticle friction and unsuccessful stressing events are absent. Given the notably low efficiency of most industrial size reduction processes, one subject that naturally has been of great interest is the study of the optimum method of comminuting materials. One factor that has been traditionally identified as significant in particle breakage is the level of stressing energy applied in each loading event The optimum level of stressing energy in a single event of particle breakage has been the subject of a number of investigations. A very good review of the subject is found in the recent work by Fuerstenau and Abouzeid In most cases of practical interest in industry, however, product specification is established on the basis of particle size rather than specific surface area of the product. Therefore, energy utilization in a single event becomes of limited interest in optimizing mill performance. Further, there is no guarantee that the application of an optimum stressing level in each individual event will lead to an optimum route for reducing the size of particles from a particular feed size to a required product size. Based on the hypothesis that single-particle breakage is the most effective method of comminution, Carey and Stairmand Although powerful, the branching-cascading procedure has been only seldom used in practice. The main reason is that it requires considerable input of experimental data. In fact, until recently such data could only be obtained directly from experiments in sophisticated compression testing machines In order to overcome these limitations, Fuerstenau and Kapur Important advances have been made in recent years in the measurement and modeling of important material characteristics of particles subject to impact, which is the dominant breakage mode in several comminution equipment. A device, called Impact Load Cell (or Ultrafast Load Cell—UFLC), has been developed as a hybrid between the simple drop-weight tester and the Hopkinson pressure bar. It conveniently allows the determination of the size-dependent particle fracture energies and the particle stiffness The present paper analyses the application of the branching-cascading procedure to calculate the energy requirement for a prescribed size reduction using a variety of energy application policies. Functional forms describing the most important material characteristics are either proposed in the present study or gathered from previous investigations. The model also differs from previous ones described in the literature since it considers explicitly the influence of repeated loading at low impact energies and the rigidity of the impacting media. It allows evaluating the efficiency of comminution equipment and comparing alternative routes for size reduction so as to determine the minimum energy required to achieve a given product size. The size distribution resulting from impacting particles one by one after For the case where particles contained in each narrow size fraction are stressed sequentially, beginning with the top size fraction ( Depending on the stressing (impact) energy and the particle fracture energy, a certain fraction of the particles may not break at the first impact. Even if they do break, a fraction of the fragments may remain in the top size class as, by definition, a particle is considered broken when it looses at least 10% of its original weight  This simulation procedure is illustrated in In order to apply the procedure the energy-specific breakage function must be known. This is influenced by impact energy and particle characteristics and can usually be normalized in respect to initial particle size. A model that describes the normalized breakage function fairly well is the upper-truncated Rosin-Rammler distribution  Further, the mean specific energy required to fracture particles, given by The particle stiffness ( The total number of steps  The average number of impacts required to break all particles in the size fraction ( For the particular case where the ratio between the impact energy and the median particle fracture energy ( In the model described above, all particles in each size interval are considered to have the same mass. The model also assumes that the strength of a particle is independent of the way in which it was produced, that is, when a particle of a given size class is broken, the energy required to break its fragments of a given size will be the same whether it is a first, second, or higher impact-breakage step. Narrow size fractions of selected materials have been prepared by sieving. Particles contained in selected size fractions ranging from 20 mm to 200 μm were subject, one by one, to impact at controlled impact energies using the Impact Load Cell, which is basically a modified drop-weight apparatus. Data from these experiments were used to fit the mathematical models used in the simulation procedure Ball milling experiments were conducted with the cement clinker sample using Bond's standard procedure As discussed previously, the application of the simulation procedure described requires the knowledge of a variety of constants that describe all aspects of material behavior. These can be determined by fitting parameters of the model equations to data carefully obtained using the Impact Load Cell. Breakage characteristics of the materials studied were determined from single-particle fracture experiments and results are shown elsewhere A comparison of measured particle fracture energies to values calculated using  A comparison between model and experimental results is also shown in An important part of the simulation procedure is the estimation of the average number of impacts (  In order to compute the energy consumed in the hypothetical size-reduction process depicted in The effect of the magnitude of the impacts on the energy required to achieve a given product size, considering a hypothetical feed size distribution given by  It is worth noting that the optimum value of the constant The relationship between the energy consumption and the product size is illustrated in Alternative sequences of impacts to the one that corresponds to constant Two cases are of particular interest in The optimum sequence is determined by varying the parameter Optimum energy consumptions are given in The use of impacts at a constant specific energy level leads to significantly lower energy consumption and more limited production of fines. The most efficient policy, however, was obtained by varying both A more careful analysis of It is important to note that the application of a constant specific impact energy in each individual stressing event does not lead to very inefficient breakage. Along with the sequence of impacts, the simulation results also depend on some other factors, such as the ratio of sieves ( In the simulations described so far, the ratio of sieves ( The effect of the rigidity of the drop weight and the anvil is analyzed in Estimates from Considering that single-particle breakage is the most efficient size reduction method, as energy losses by friction and unsuccessful impact events are minimized or avoided and losses due to particle–particle interactions do not exist, the simulation procedure described can be used to calculate the efficiency of industrial comminution operations, establishing a baseline for comparison of industrial size reduction processes. In this case, it may be calculated from A comparison of single-particle breakage and comminution in a ball mill has been undertaken for the cement clinker studied. Considering that the simulation procedure includes an ideal classification stage, a comparison would only be valid between the simulation and a mill with a classifier. The standard Bond ball mill test was used to estimate the energy consumption in comminution. A feed with an 80% passing size of 2.0 mm was fed to the mill and the product was classified by dry screening using a 0.075-mm sieve. From the average number of grams produced in each revolution and using Bond's grindability equation Although it may be fortuitous, the higher efficiency found for grinding in the present work in comparison to other studies  Presuming that particles contained in each size class presented the same mass, it was possible to estimate the magnitude and frequency of impacts required to reach the prescribed product specification. This spectrum of impact energies, shown in Therefore, the inefficiency of grinding mills, when compared to single-particle breakage is associated with the fact that in industrial mills it is not possible to control accurately the impact energy that each particle is subject to. It is also associated to the non-deterministic application of energy, as no guarantee exists that all collisions in the mill will result in breakage of particles. Further, it also associated with the fact that no industrial classifier is ever perfect, given that it invariably recycles some undersize material back to the mill, which leads to further deterioration in the performance of the circuit. This can be, evidently, minimized by the use of higher circulating loads in the circuit. Finally, it is important to note that a certain degree of extrapolation was required to compare simulation and comminution results, as the finest particles tested were in the interval from 0.212 to 0.425 mm and simulation results were carried on down to breakage of particles of sizes as fine as 0.08 mm. The application of the proposed simulation procedure in the comparison of different routes for size reduction of selected materials allowed to conclude that the application of a constant impact energy lead to high energy consumption and significant overbreakage while the application of a constant specific impact energy lead to limited overbreakage, but still higher energy consumption than the one obtained with a constant relative impact energy. The lowest energy consumption was observed with the application of impact energies that follow a power-law relationship with particle size. These show that the minimum energy consumption in comminution is typically associated with the application of impacts that produce little breakage in each event. These are typically associated with fairly low overbreakage. Simulation results showed that the influence of the stiffness of the tools is only significant in the comminution of materials that presented high stiffness. A comparison between the simulation procedure and the Bond ball mill grindability experiment for cement clinker allowed estimating the energy efficiency of the latter at about 30%. breakage function (fraction of particles smaller than fractional breakage function (fraction of particles in size class parameter of parameter of sieve size in class representative particle size of class particle specific fracture energy (J/kg) ratio between the specific impact energy and the specific particle fracture energy kinetic energy used at the specific energy consumption in a mill/classifier circuit (kW h/t) median mass-specific fracture energy [specific impact energy that results in breakage of 50% of the particles in the sample in a single impact when impacted by a steel striker (J/kg)] median mass-specific fracture energy, corrected for the influence of the stiffness of the tools (J/kg) total specific impact energy consumed after parameter of the fracture energy distribution model ( cumulative distribution of specific fracture energy of particles in class stiffness of the particle (GPa) number of crushing and classification steps in the simulation procedure simulation stage average number of impacts required to break all particles in a given size fraction fraction passing in size fraction of particles contained in size ratio of the geometric progression of particle sizes fraction passing in 1/10 of the parent particle size from class parameter of modulus of elasticity (GPa) parameter of modulus of the upper-truncated Rosin-Rammler distribution- parameter of parameter of damage accumulation constant Poisson's ratio variance of the lognormal distribution of particle fracture energies The author would like to acknowledge the financial support from CNPq and FAPERJ of Brazil to this investigation. The comments and suggestions from Professor R.P. King during the course of this investigation are also deeply acknowledged.