The distinct element method (DEM) has proven to be reliable and effective in characterizing the behavior of particles in granular flow simulations. However, in the past, the influence of different force–displacement models on the accuracy of the simulated collision process has not been well investigated. In this work, three contact force models are applied to the elementary case of an elastic collision of a sphere with a flat wall. The results are compared, on a macroscopic scale, with the data provided by the experiments of Kharaz et al. (Powder Technol. 120 (2001) 281) and, on a microscopic scale, with the approximated analytical solution derived by Maw et al. (Wear 38 (1976) 101. The force–displacement models considered are: a linear model, based on a Hooke-type relation; a non-linear model, based on the Hertz theory (J. Reine Angew. Math. 92 (1882) 156) for the normal direction and the no-slip solution of the theory developed by Mindlin and Deresiewicz (Trans. ASME. Ser. E, J. Appl. Mech. 20 (1953) 327) for the tangential direction; a non-linear model with hysteresis, based on the complete theory of Hertz and Mindlin and Deresiewicz for elastic frictional collisions. All the models are presented in fully displacement-driven formulation in order to allow a direct inclusion in DEM-based codes.
                  The results show that, regarding the values of the velocities at the end of collision, no significant improvements can be attained using complex models. Instead, the linear model gives even better results than the no-slip model and often it is equivalent to the complete Mindlin and Deresiewicz model. Also in the microscopic scale, the time evolution of the tangential forces, velocities and displacements predicted by the linear model shows better agreement with the theoretical solution than the no-slip solution. However, this only happens if the parameters of the linear model are precisely evaluated.
                  The examination of the evolution of the forces, velocities and displacements during the collision emphasizes the importance of correct accounting for non-linearity in the contact model and micro-slip effects. It also demonstrates how these phenomena need to be considered into the model in order to perform deeper analyses on granular material in motion and, in general, for systems sensitive to the actual force or displacement. For these cases, more accurate models such as the complete Mindlin and Deresiewicz model should be addressed.The number of processes involving solids in the chemical, petrochemical, pharmaceutical, biochemical, food industry as well as in energy conversion and environmental processes is such that a high percentage of the research activity is concerned with solids. They appear as raw materials, products or intermediates at some stage in the process in a remarkable number of technological applications. Unfortunately, while the motion of gases and liquids is generally known to follow Navier–Stokes equations, the motion of solids presents different characteristics depending on the type of system, solid concentration and interactions, showing solid-like behavior when a packed bed is subjected to quasi-static stresses or liquid-like behavior, for example in fluidized beds, or a mixture of different behaviors with more complex rheological response. Although large sets of experimental data are available today on diverse granular and multi-phase flows, a proper discussion and understanding of the involved phenomena cannot be attained without the help of numerical simulations. The computational tools developed in the last decades allow the analysis of the processes at a very small time and space scale and with no intrusion in the system. For fluid–solid flows, typically in fluidized beds, an approach is based on an Eulerian model of the system, the two-fluid model (TFM), where the fluid and the solids are considered as interpenetrating continuous phases (recent applications can be found in Alternatively, a very promising technique appears to be the distinct element method (DEM) ( In the field of granular motion simulations, two methodologies exist for particle–particle contact modeling: DEM has been applied successfully in simulating and predicting the performances of many processes involving granular solids. A non-exhaustive list includes the work on hopper flow by Although the most common contact force model is the linear spring–dashpot–slider system, more detailed contact force models, based on the classical Hertz's theory ( Following the soft-sphere approach, the total contribution of simultaneous collisions is decomposed into the single contributions of each particle–particle collision. Under certain assumptions (Maw et al., 1976), a particle–particle collision can be geometrically simplified into two symmetric collisions of the two particles with flat walls placed on the plane of the contact area. In particular, if the contact area is assumed to be circular and the traction components perpendicular to the direction of motion are neglected, then the instantaneous force–displacement relation for a particle colliding with another particle will be equal to the corresponding force–displacement relation for a collision of the particle with a wall. Therefore, an elementary collision of a particle against a flat wall is considered in this work as a case study for comparison. Although in real collisions, a certain degree of dissipation is always present, due to microscopic plastic deformations and to friction between contacting surfaces, in the present work a frictional perfectly elastic collision will be examined. This idealized representation of the actual process provides the basis for models that take into account more complex phenomena. Also, well-established models for this problem are available in literature ( In DEM-based approaches, starting with the initial condition, the forces are related to the positions and velocities of the particles and Newton's second law of motion is integrated twice in order to find the new velocities and positions, so the cycle restarts. Therefore, the force–displacement calculation is performed in a displacement-driven manner, i.e. the forces depend on the actual displacements. The three contact force models examined differ in the functional relationship between these variables and/or in the different degree of approximation of the underlying phenomena. In conventional DEM approaches, the normal and tangential displacements of a particle colliding with a wall are evaluated in terms of the actual position and orientation of the particle. Considering the two-dimensional problem of a particle approaching a horizontal flat wall ( The theory of frictional elasticity of a compliant sphere in contact with a wall was first developed by When there is no tangential displacement, the impact is collinear and the evolution of the system can be described with a simple non-linear relation. Considering the solution of the elastic problem for the general case of two spheres with different properties, the maximum pressure In a constant normal displacement case, the normal force and hence the radius of the contact area are constant. In these conditions, the tangential force during the cycle can always be related to the actual tangential displacement, provided that the loading path, e.g. first loading, unloading or reloading, is defined. However, since this is not true when the normal and tangential displacements vary simultaneously (subsequent paragraphs), an incremental procedure must be used in general, relating the change in tangential force to the change in tangential displacement. The actual tangential force The unloading path is different from the loading path because of the presence of micro-slip between the contacting surfaces and a hysteretic behavior is observed. When the tangential displacement starts decreasing, the stress and local displacement distributions of the After a second turning point A set of rules is necessary in order to generalize the calculation reported in Circular contact area and pressure distribution as prescribed by Hertz theory. The change in normal displacement and the change in tangential displacement are not interconnected, i.e. the problem can be solved by superposition of the two separate effects. Each incremental step starts from a No torsion or rolling is taken into account. The As it is clear from The state change from the initial state From a computational point of view, state All the cases where the normal displacement decreases do not have problems regarding the The full transformation is subdivided into elementary steps. State The final force at state All the remaining cases, including all the cases near the turning points, can be treated in the same manner, paying attention to the subdivision into elementary steps and the corresponding stiffness constant evaluations. Other discussions of the procedure of Mindlin and Deresiewicz exist in literature such as the very clear presentation that can be found in The description of the micromechanics of contacting spheres presented by The contact area is subdivided into a number of concentric annuli, where the normal and tangential traction distributions and the displacements are evaluated at each time-step. At the foundations of the mechanical model only A resulting set of linear equations, one for each annulus, is solved for each time step during the collision. Different shape equations result from the tangential problem depending upon the state of the annulus considered. For sticking annuli the results of the elastic theory are used, whereas for slipping annuli the Coulomb's law of friction on a microscopic basis is applied. Analogous to the theory of Hertz–Mindlin and Deresiewicz, the approximated analytical results will be reported here in a general form suitable also for collision between bodies with different material properties. The normal problem leads to the following relation for the force ( The maximum radius of the contact area Equations are solved for each of the coefficients The non-dimensional results can be summarized in terms of these two parameters:  1<  Although the solution procedure MBF is rigorous and accurate, it is also extremely time consuming for The most intuitive and simple way of modeling mechanical relations is to use combinations of linear mechanical elements in series or parallel in order to represent the dynamical system with the appropriate characteristics. This was the idea of A more accurate mathematical representation of the physical problem can be obtained considering the model used by Although micro-slip is neglected, the gross sliding condition provided by Coulomb's law of friction is imposed as a constraint to the tangential force calculation. The complete theory of Hertz for the normal contact and Mindlin and Deresiewicz for the tangential problem is chosen for comparison as the more detailed model to use for collision simulations. The force–displacement relation is accurately modeled in all aspects examined by the theory of Mindlin and Deresiewicz. The influence of micro-slip on the microscopical tangential interactions has been discussed in The solutions of the frictional–elastic oblique impact of a sphere against a flat wall using the different models are to be compared on different scales. Microscopically, experimental measurements of the evolution of forces and displacements during collision are not available. Hence, on this scale, the results of the three models (linear, H–MDns and H–MD) are compared with the MBF solution. Since the basic assumptions of this approach are less restrictive than those necessary for the other three models (in particular, no assumptions regarding the loading history is necessary), and since the space discretization has been operated by using a large number of annuli ( On a macroscopic scale, the results are compared with the experiments run by In this work, the data for the simulations are taken as those used in the experiments of These mechanical properties, listed in the last column of The numerical method for the integration of the equation of motion is the Euler method, as in The simulated state variables, at the end of the collision, can be compared to the corresponding values obtained in equivalent experiments ( In order to understand the reasons for this discrepancy, the underlying phenomena must be examined. As described in In A further indication is given in The comparison of the data observed and simulated using the force–displacement models brings to light a very good representation of the particle behavior during a collision, validating the numerical simulation on a physical basis in terms of the main process properties. However, it shall be pointed out that no time-related effects appear in the analysis. Indeed, nothing is said regarding the time scale of the process itself and the evolution of the variables involved. Characteristic velocities at the end of the process are compared starting with equal initial conditions. Therefore, more detailed analyses are necessary before general conclusions can be drawn. On a microscopic basis, the models and the MBF “exact” solution can be compared for each time instant, evaluating the difference in the evolution of the normal and tangential forces, velocities and displacements. However, the duration of the impact modeled with a linear spring is different from that with non-linear relations. For the linear model, it is a function of the particle density, diameter and elastic constant. In fact, the collision duration is half the oscillation period of the corresponding spring-mass system. For non-linear models, The response of the system in normal direction is relatively simple. The evolution of the normal force during the collision for the non-linear (Hertz-based) models is indistinguishable from the “exact” solution ( A different behavior is observed in tangential direction depending on the initial impact angle, because diverse microscopic mechanisms are involved. For almost collinear collisions ( The evolution of the tangential velocity ( The results of the comparison for the collision at An oblique collision at  At Conclusions very similar to the The method for the evaluation of the parameters in the linear model has not attracted much attention in the literature. It is mentioned that the constants are related to the mechanical properties of the material but none suggests a way to do that. The correct choice of the parameters may be of crucial importance depending on the system to be simulated and it is worth pointing out what are the implications of an improper value for The best criterion for the choice of the parameter values is to calculate them from the actual mechanical properties of the system or to derive them by direct measurements. For example, the friction coefficient A procedure for the determination of the optimal value for the normal constant  It must be remarked that differences of orders of magnitude are found for all the variables characterizing the collision if a totally unrealistic elastic constant is used. The use of a very low Three mechanical models for the simulation of elastic frictional collisions were tested for accuracy, comparing the results, microscopically, to nearly exact analytical solutions, and, macroscopically, to experimental results. The analysis could be of interest for people working in the granular motion simulation area, because the models can be used in DEM codes. In order to facilitate the inclusion in this kind of codes, the models were reported in displacement-driven formulation. Particular attention was directed towards the evaluation of the parameters of the linear model. The macroscopic comparison emphasizes that the agreement of the simple linear model is exceptionally good, indicating that no significant improvements can be attained using the H–MDns and H–MD models. Actually, moving to the H–MDns model is disappointingly worse, especially at low values of the impact angle  For a collision of two spheres of different materials, the equivalent properties (radius