The treatment of cyanide-containing wastewater is very important for the sustainable development of gold industry. Treating wastewater by nano-titania (nano-TiO2) has the advantage of adsorbing heavy metals and catalyzing the decomposition of cyanogen simultaneously. Since the catalysis is limited by solid-liquid diphase system, the photocatalytic and adsorption efficiency is relatively low. This study aimed to enhance catalytic process based on silicon-based nano-TiO2 composite functional material to treat deeply cyanide-containing wastewater. The characteristics of the silicon-based nano-TiO2 material were studied by Brunner−Emmet−Teller (BET) and field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM)/ energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS), which indicated that the material has excellent dispersibility and large specific surface area(146.6±2.4 m2·g−1). Further, the comparison of the treatment effects of cyanide wastewater with pure nano-TiO2 and silicon-based nano-TiO2 material demonstrates that the latter is more effective on cyanide degradation. Almost 99.8% of cyanide degradation was achieved by silicon-based nano-TiO2 material under light irradiation within 135 min. The mechanism and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis. It was found that the final decompositions of Copper cyanide complex and zinc cyanide complex are CO2, NO2, Cu2+ and Zn2+.In the gold metallurgical industry, cyanide leaching followed by zinc dust precipitation is widely used to extract gold and silver from metal minerals ( Methods for treating cyanide-containing wastewater include purification and recovery. In the conventional purification method, the alkali chloride oxidation method ( Photocatalytic technology has been widely used by domestic and foreign scholars for the treatment of wastewater ( Simultaneously, the occurrence of conventional photocatalysis depends on the dissolved oxygen in the water. This is a typical solid-liquid reaction system in which there is a competitive relationship between cyanide degradation process and recombination of electrons and holes ( According to the above reasons, in order to improve its photocatalytic effect and remove metal ions in solution, two aspects, enhanced catalytic and removal of cyanide and metals simultaneously are crucial to be considered in whole process of treating cyanide-containing wastewater. In our study, the following aspects are focused: 1) We load TiO The cyanide-containing wastewater was procured from a gold mine in Shandong province. The composition analysis of the wastewater was presented in The total cyanide, the copper ion and zinc ion concentration in the solution are about 7500 mg·L Nano-TiO Compared with pure TiO Pure TiO The removal rate of total cyanide, zinc or copper is calculated as follows: In order to prove whether the cyanide was adsorbed or catalyzed, a comparative experiment was conducted. The experimental conditions: 1 h of stirring, room temperature, 2 h of catalytic period time, compressed air (0.1 MPa of pressure, 1.5 L/min of flow rate); there is no illumination at the 2 h of catalytic period time in NO.1, while NO. 2 had illumination. The regenerating experiment was performed in a 200 mL conical flask in a thermostatically controlled water bath with magnetic stirring. 100 mL of H Silicon-based TiO SEM image of the as-prepared pure TiO The cyanide concentration and cyanide degradation efficiency in the solution as a function of the illumination time was separately shown in  The origin Eh value of 100 times diluent was −137 mV, Eh value increased with time prolonging, and maintained at about −8 mV, which suggested redox reactions occurred. After illumination, the slope of Eh line increased, which showed redox reactions speeded up. After 1 h with illumination, redox reactions went slowly. At this moment the degradation efficiency of cyanide was over 80%, and copper adsorption was accelerated rate, which were consistent with the Eh variation.  Effects of dilution ratio on photo-catalytic activities were conducted under the condition of 1 h light-proof and 2 h illuminated period. Differently from Different dilution ratio resulted in different surface physicochemical properties in the solution, so affected the photo-catalytic activities. The dilution ratio had a certain effect on the degradation efficiency (  The pH of real wastewater was 11.5, H If original pH is high, the OH The experiment was carried out under normal temperature and pressure. During illumination, the mixture was vigorously stirred with the continuous supply of fresh air. It's worth noting that cyanide is the only substrate containing carbon (C) and nitrogen (N) elements in the target waste liquid, which exists in the form of metal complexes and free cyanide ion. The large specific surface area of silicon-based TiO The comparative experiments were executed according to The pseudo first-order Langmuir-Hinshelwood model is widely used to describe kinetics of photocatalytic degradation. When the cyanide initial concentration is low, the pseudo first-order dynamics model conforms to the following equation (  Catalytic processes usually occur on the surface of the material. Therefore, there will be traces of chemical changes on the surface of the material. The catalytically experimental materials were characterized by XPS, and the mechanism of the catalytic process was presumed based on the changes in the surface element valence and chemical bonds of the obtained materials. In In . As shown in Nano‑titanium dioxide has a relatively wide forbidden band, and the electrons in the valence band will only transition to the conduction band after being irradiated by photons with sufficient energy. The photogenerated electrons and holes generated after the electronic transition have high redox ability and can decompose many organic and inorganic pollutants in the water. The decomposition of pollutants mainly depends on hydroxyl radicals ( Pure TiO Natural electron scavengers (oxygen) can greatly improve photocatalytic efficiency. However, the low solubility and slow diffusion rate of oxygen in water limit its interaction with electrons in traditional diphase photocatalytic systems. In addition, pure TiO We introduce a carrier with micropores to make O In order to find out whether the oxidation product of N is NO In the process of catalysis, the final pH is a little more than 7 in the solution ( The recycling of materials after degrading the wastewater was evaluated. The regeneration and recycling experiments were carried out according to The sustainable technical process is proposed. The flow chart is shown in In this work, the silicon-based TiO The results of photo-catalytic experiment showed that almost 95.5% of cyanide degradation and 80% of copper removal was achieved by silicon-based nano-TiO  The authors declared that they have no conflicts of interest to this work. The authors would like to thank the