The leaching kinetics of a low grade-calcareous sphalerite concentrate containing 38% ankerite and assaying 32% Zn, 7% Pb and 2.2% Fe was studied in HCl–FeCl3 solution. An L16 (five factors in four levels) standard orthogonal array was employed to evaluate the effect of Fe(III) and HCl concentration, reaction temperature, solid-to-liquid ratio and particle size on the reaction rate of sphalerite. Statistical techniques were used to determine that pulp density and Fe(III) concentration were the most significant factors affecting the leaching kinetics and to determine the optimum conditions for dissolution. The kinetic data were analyzed with the shrinking particle and shrinking core models. A new variant of the shrinking core model (SCM) best fitted the kinetic data in which both the interfacial transfer and diffusion across the product layer affect the reaction rate. The orders of reaction with respect to (C
                     Fe3+
                     ), (C
                     HCl), and (S/L) were 0.86, 0.21 and −1.54, respectively. The activation energy for the dissolution was found to be 49.2 kJ/mol and a semi-empirical rate equation was derived to describe the process. Similar kinetic behavior was observed during sphalerite dissolution in acidic ferric sulphate and ferric chloride solutions, but the reaction rate constants obtained by leaching in chloride solutions were about tenfold higher than those in sulphate solutions.The direct leaching of the sphalerite has received considerable attention in recent decades due to the technical, economic and environmental limitations of the conventional Roast-Leach-Electrowinning (RLE) process for zinc extraction from zinc sulphide concentrates. The main advantage of the direct leaching processes is that the sulphide in the ore and concentrate is usually converted to elemental sulphur, thus avoiding the production of SO Ferric chloride is well recognized as an important oxidative leaching agent that has several advantages over ferric sulphate ( Commercial grade sphalerite concentrates usually contain > In most previous studies, all the parameters affecting the sphalerite leaching kinetics have not been investigated in detail, since this requires a large number of experiments. However, a quantitative estimation of the effect of various parameters can be determined by optimization using the statistical design of experiment (DOE) technique. For solid–fluid reactions, the shrinking particle and the shrinking core kinetic models ( This work addresses the most statistically significant factors affecting the dissolution kinetics of a low-grade calcareous sphalerite in HCl–FeCl The low-grade sphalerite concentrate sample used in the leaching experiments contained 32% Zn, 7% Pb and 2.2% Fe. The sample has been produced in laboratory flotation experiments from an original ore containing about 2.8% Zn and 0.8% Pb and classified in different size fractions by wet sieving ( The leaching apparatus and experimental procedure were similar to that described previously ( In the Taguchi approach, orthogonal arrays and analysis of variance (ANOVA) are used as the tools of analysis to reduce the number of experiments and obtain statistically meaningful results ( When sphalerite is leached in acidic ferric chloride solution, a variety of reaction products may result. This includes: zinc chloride, Zn(II) chloride complexes, elemental sulfur, ferrous chloride, Fe(II) and Fe(III) complexes and sulphides (H The shrinking core model considers that the leaching process is controlled either by the diffusion of reactant through the solution boundary, or through a solid product layer, or by the surface chemical reaction rate. Assuming that zinc sulphide particles have a spherical geometry and surface chemical reaction is the slowest step, the following expression of the shrinking core model can be used to describe the dissolution kinetics ( Similarly, when the diffusion of ferric ion through the elemental sulphur is the rate controlling step (RCS), the following expression of the shrinking core model can be used ( Sphalerite dissolution in the acidic ferric chloride solution has been reported to be a reaction-controlled process by several authors ( A major feature of dissolution kinetics of sphalerite in ferric chloride media has been reported to be the diminishing reaction rate as the sphalerite dissolution proceeds. Eqs. (3) and (4) are conventional topochemical models and can be used to describe the sphalerite dissolution process when only one step, chemical reaction or diffusion through the reaction product, controls the entire process. However, if the elemental sulphur produced during the sphalerite dissolution plays an important role in the final stages of leaching, then a model that considers both the chemical reaction and diffusion would be more realistic.  In general it can be concluded that a variety of models have been applied in the literature and there is no consensus on the mechanism of ferric chloride leaching of sphalerite concentrate. For analysis of the kinetic data in this study, the shrinking core models with surface chemical reaction and diffusion through product layer, Eqs. (3) and (4), and also the mixed-controlled model of Eq. (5) were evaluated. For this purpose, the left sides of these equations were plotted with respect to the reaction time. The degree of the explanation of these models on the kinetic data was evaluated using correlation coefficient ( Among these three models, the SCM with the diffusion through product layer showed a better fit to the data. However, detailed kinetic evaluation of the reactions that occurred during the leaching of the low grade-calcareous sphalerite sample indicated that the types of reaction did not conform either to chemical, diffusion or mixed-controlled model of Eq. (5). On the other hand, these models were not comprehensive enough to describe the dissolution reaction for total leaching period, because the curves obtained were not precise. Comparing to the reaction models discussed above, a new variant of the shrinking core model suggested by The results of the kinetic analysis of the leaching experiments including the apparent rate constants and correlation coefficients when the data were fitted to Eqs. (3), (4) and (6) are given in As can be seen in The dissolution rate constant from the best fitting kinetic model and the overall zinc extraction in the L The results of ANOVA analysis for overall zinc extraction and the reaction rate constant are presented in Based on the From the statistical results obtained, it was shown that the developed models were adequate to predict the desired responses in the range of variables under study. The values of correlation coefficient ( With respect to the optimization criterion, the process is optimized when the reaction rate constant is as high as possible. The main effect plots of the factors in the statistical models are shown in For maximizing the overall zinc extraction, ( The control factors used in the statistical modelling of the reaction rate constant in Combining Eq. (6) that showed the best fit to the kinetic data with Eq. (7), the following equation is obtained: The effect of temperature on zinc extraction from the low grade-calcareous sphalerite in acidic ferric chloride solution is given in The kinetic characteristics of the low grade-calcareous sphalerite leaching in H The kinetic data obtained from the leaching experiments in acidic ferric sulphate media were also best fitted to the kinetic model in Eq. (6). The overall zinc extraction and the reaction rate constants ( Rate constants for different temperatures were calculated from Although the estimated activation energy seems to suggest chemical reaction control, previous studies on the diffusion controlled ferric chloride leaching of zinc from chemical grade zinc sulphide reported an activation energy of 90 The kinetic factors of the dissolution of a low grade-calcareous sphalerite concentrate in HCl–FeCl Pulp density, Fe(III) concentration and reaction temperature were respectively the most significant factors affecting both the sphalerite reaction rate and the overall zinc extraction in the confidence interval of 95%. Their contribution percentage on the overall zinc extraction were 44%, 35% and 18%; and on the reaction rate constant were 49%, 34% and 10.4% respectively. The particle size of the sphalerite concentrate and the HCl concentration did not show any statistically meaningful effect on the dissolution kinetics within the range studied. The optimum conditions selected to maximize the reaction rate constant were ( The kinetic data best fitted a shrinking core model, in which both the interfacial transfer and diffusion through the product layer affect the reaction rate. Zinc extraction of 97.5% was obtained after 300 min of leaching. A proper semi-empirical mathematical model (Eq. (9)) expresses the dissolution rate. Similar kinetic behaviors were observed in the leaching of low-grade calcareous sphalerite in acidic ferric sulphate and ferric chloride solutions. However, the reaction rate constants obtained in chloride leaching were about tenfold higher. The activation energies of 49.2 kJ/mol and 52.1 kJ/mol were calculated for sphalerite dissolution in acidic ferric chloride and ferric sulphate leaching, respectively. The support of this study by Yazd Mineral Research Center (YMRC) is gratefully acknowledged.