The determination of a suitable combination of reaction model f(α), activation energy Ea, and pre-exponential factor A – the kinetic triplet – is a key issue in the modeling of solid state decomposition reactions. Two complementary methods for determination of the kinetic triplet were applied and compared: (1) an isoconversional method and (2) the multi-variate nonlinear regression method proposed by Opfermann (J. Therm. Anal. Calorim. 2000). The isoconversional method was based on the evaluation of master plots y(α) and z(α) and the activation energy according to the Friedman and Kissinger-Akahira-Sunose approach. The kinetic computations were performed for the determination of the kinetic triplet of the decomposition of mineral iron carbonate in nitrogen atmosphere. The industrial practice for mineral iron carbonate beneficiation is sintering in air to convert it into Fe2O3. Thermal decomposition of mineral iron carbonate in inert nitrogen atmosphere produces FeO and Fe3O4. Consequently, the specific iron content of the solid product is increased. This is economically and environmentally advantageous, as less reducing agent is needed for iron production from FeO and Fe3O4 compared to production from Fe2O3.Conversion (relative: 0–1) Value of α at maximum of y(α) Value of α at maximum of z(α) °C Stoichometric parameter used in Eqs. Standard Gibbs reaction energy % Maximum relative mass loss defined in Eq. Approximation function for temperature integral Stoichiometric coefficients Stoichiometric coefficients s s s s kJ kJ kJ kJ Value of the Reaction model Model parameter for the n Model parameter for Bna model Reaction order Factor used to determine the parameters n and m of the Bna model applying the isoconversional methodology Regression coefficient kJ min, s Time °C Temperature Mass fraction of element i according to ICP-OES analysis Weight ratio based on TG experiment (i Master plot curve y as defined in Eq. Master plot curve z as defined in Eq. Siderite minerals, containing varying amounts of FeCO A review of the thermodynamic properties and the general decomposition behavior of iron carbonate can be found in The decomposition kinetics of different mineral siderites in air was investigated for isothermal In this paper the decomposition kinetics of mineral Mg-Mn-siderite in nitrogen atmosphere, determined with two complementary methods is reported. The first method is based on the isoconversional methodology A Netzsch Jupiter STA 449C thermobalance and alumina sample pans were used in all thermogravimetry (TG) experiments. Nitrogen was supplied by Air Liquide in 99.999% quality. XRD spectra were recorded on an X’Pert Pro diffractometer manufactured by Panalytical (Co-Kα at 0.178901 The iron carbonate mineral (Erzberg, Austria) was supplied by VA Erzberg GmbH, grinded and sieved to 100–200 TG measurements described in Section All kinetic computations were performed on the experimental data sets recorded for the decomposition of the Mg-Mn-siderite [Fe The integral Kissinger-Akahira-Sunose The master plot functions y(α) and z(α) The extended Prout-Tompkins model, alternatively called (truncated) Sestak-Bergren model, Bna (see Eq. The parameters n and m for the Bna model can be calculated from the maximum of the y(α) curve α The MVNR method proposed by Opfermann The temperature dependency of the standard Gibbs reaction energy Δ The main element found in ICM200 is, as expected, iron at a level of 33.5%wt. Furthermore, calcium, magnesium, and manganese are present as carbonate forming elements (see As can be seen in The general decomposition behavior of ICM200 and SEP200 in inert nitrogen atmosphere was investigated by recording a TG curve at a heating rate of 3 The TG-curve of SEP200 shows a distinct single step due to the decomposition of siderite, followed by a negligible mass loss due to the decomposition of traces of dolomite. The TG-curve of ICM200 shows three consecutive steps of decomposition due to the different carbonates present in the sample. The ratio of the three consecutive mass loss steps amounts to 1:0.09:0.17. Up to approximately 500 As expected from the thermodynamic calculations (see A comparison of the XRD pattern of the products of the thermal decomposition of ICM200 and SEP200 ( Iron carbonate can form bivalent FeO and mixed bi-, trivalent Fe The relative mass loss for complete conversion of the Mg-Mn-siderite present in SEP200 can be calculated from the elemental composition determined by ICP-OES and applying Eq. These equations allow for the calculation of the weight ratio wr For SEP200 decomposition the activation energy calculated with the Friedman approach E The mean value of the activation energy (see Although the evaluated temperature range was limited to 550 In order to prepare the master plots y(α) (Eq. All y(α) curves for SEP200 ( The y(α) curves for ICM200 (see If y(α) has a maximum either Bna or An models should be used The values for n and m where calculated with Eqs. Three aspects of the calculation results shown in With respect to matter (a), an increase of E Regarding matter (b), it was found that reaction order and pre-exponential factor do not vary significantly for a constant E (c) According to In 2000 Opfermann presented a MVNR method that evaluates the suitability of various reaction models based on multiple heating rate datasets For both materials, the reaction models with two model parameters (Bna and n  In the case of ICM200, however, the isoconversional method with Bna as the reaction model and the individual parameters n and m (see To evaluate the predictive capability of the kinetic triplets computed with the two methods, a heating rate dataset recorded at 3 Zakharov and Adonyi A combinatorial approach applying ICP-OES, XRD, SEM/EDXS, and TGA was used to characterize the materials used in this study. The iron carbonate mineral used (ICM200) consisted of three carbonates: Mg-Mn substituted siderite, ankerite, and dolomite. Enrichment of the Mg-Mn-siderite phase was achieved by grinding, separation of the 100–200 The formation of wuestite and magnetite can be treated as a single step reaction, as the isoconversional activation energy E The shape and peak position of the master plots y(α) and z(α) suggest the use of the same reaction model as the MVNR method. The expanded Prout-Tompkins model Bna was confirmed as the most appropriate selection by both methods. The isoconversional method used in this work needs a constant value of the activation energy E Independent of the computational method, the decomposition of Mg-Mn-siderite present in SEP200 cannot be described with the same kinetic triplet as for ICM200. In the case of SEP200 the reaction order was found to be approximately one and is increased to approximately two for ICM200. Additionally, the activation energy is increased by 70–100 The project ‘Reduzierende Kalzinierung’ is funded by the Austrian ‘ Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following is Supplementary data to this article: