Cryogenic high energy ball milling has been used to synthesize nanocrystalline Cu–14Al, Cu–12Al–2Zr and Cu–12Al–2Y alloys by mechanical alloying. The alloys were studied with the aim of comparing the effect of substituting Y and Zr in place of Al, in Cu–Al alloys, on the grain size stability at elevated temperatures. The as-milled alloys were subjected to annealing at various temperatures between 200 and 900°C and the resulting grain morphology has been studied using X-ray diffraction and transmission electron microscopy. The addition of Y results in significantly reduced susceptibility to grain growth whereas in case of CuAl and CuAlZr alloys, the susceptibility to grain growth was much higher. The hardness is substantially increased due to Zr and Y addition in the as-milled CuAl powders. However, the hardness of Cu–12Al–2Zr gradually decreases and approaches that of Cu–14Al alloy after the annealing treatment whereas in case of Cu–12Al–2Y alloy, the relative drop in the hardness is much lower after annealing. Accordingly, the efficacy of grain size stabilization by Y addition at high homologous temperatures has been explained on the basis of a recent thermodynamic stabilization models.The study of thermal stabilities of nanocrystalline materials (produced via powder metallurgyroute) against rapid grain growth at elevated temperatures has been of considerable academic interest because the consolidation of nanocrystalline powders to obtain close-to-100% dense bulk materials requires a synergistic effect of high temperature and pressure. A compromise has to be made between good interparticle/intercrystalline bonding and minimal porosityon one hand, and loss of nanocrystallinity via grain coarsening on the other. The time-temperature window for consolidation depends on the susceptibility of the nano-crystalline alloy against significant grain growth. The present study explores the possibility of Zr and Y addition to Cu–14 Al alloy to reduce the susceptibility to grain growth and extend the time-temperature window for the processing of Cu–Al based alloys. The primary factor which influences the grain growth in conventional polycrystalline materials is the atomic diffusion in grain boundaries, and the kinetics of grain growth is governed by two significant parameters, namely, activation energy ( Cu-based alloys have been reported exhibit attractive properties in the nanocrystalline state, e.g. Cu–Al alloys (with 12–14 Cu alloys with 14 X-Ray Diffraction (XRD) provides a quick and informative analysis for grain size estimation. Since the XRD line broadening spectrum has been analyzed using Scherrer's method, the degree of accuracy of any grain size estimate beyond 40  The hardness of CuAl alloy prior to annealing is much lower as compared to CAZ and CAY alloys. The hardness gradually decreases from 3.3 to 2.6 The hardness in case of CAZ was significantly higher than CuAl for as-milled powder but reduces to around the same value with an increase in annealing temperature. In case of the CAY alloy, the decrease in hardness with increasing annealing temperature is much less pronounced as compared to CAZ alloy. In order to assess the role of heat treatment on the microstructure of the alloys, transmission electron microscopy (TEM) analysis was performed for the samples before and after annealing. The TEM micrographs of the CuAl, CAY and CAZ samples annealed at 900 The grain growth and the hardness trends in CuAl, CAZ and CAY alloys were found to be quite different. The effect of Zr and Y addition in grain size stabilization and the reasons for the difference in the hardness trends after annealing at different temperatures is discussed in the following section. The two important factors which may affect the grain growth characteristics in nanocrystalline alloys synthesized by ball milling are the high degree of micro-strain introduced by repeated fracture during ball milling process. It has been established in the literature that the release of the micro-strain occurs in the nanocrystalline samples prior or simultaneous to the advent of grain growth process. The Zr or Y solutes the grain boundaries may reduce the system energy and provide enhanced thermal stability by inhibiting the grain growth. This section discusses the role of alloying elements Y and Zr in enhancing the grain size stability in Cu–Al alloys by kinetic and/or thermodynamic mode of stabilization. Grain growth in the nanocrystalline materials is driven by the increased energy due to high grain boundary energy. This is usually seen in terms of pressure, where In case of kinetic stabilization by particle (Zener) drag, the pinning pressure, In essence, for thermodynamic stabilization to be effective, large elastic size misfit (which favors solute segregation at the grain boundaries) should be of prime importance while deciding the stabilizing element. The size misfit for the stabilizing elements Y and Zr in the Cu–Al matrix can be seen in terms of the bulk modulus of the solute, the shear modulus of the solvent and ratios of the atomic radii of Y and Zr with respect to Cu/Al. The elastic misfits and the ratios of atomic radii for Zr/Cu and Y/Cu binary systems are presented in As seen from The precipitation of Zr and Y intermetallics at high temperatures interfere with the grain boundary movement and reduce the grain boundary mobility. A careful look at The low elastic misfit of Al in Cu matrix (Δ The following conclusions can be drawn from the present study: Alloy additions having a negative enthalpy of segregation and high elastic misfit such as Zr and Y in Cu–Al have been shown to improve the grain size stability at high temperatures. The stabilization effect of Zr and Y for the Cu–Al alloys has been compared in this study and the effect of Y addition has been found to be much superior. In case of Y alloyed Cu–Al, the grain size is remarkably stable even up to a homologous temperature of 0.85. The greater efficacy of grain size stabilization in CAY as compared to CAZ has been attributed to superior thermodynamic stabilization in CAY resulting from the greater elastic misfit of Y in CuAl as compared to Zr in Cu The hardness of CAY and CAZ alloys are much higher as compared to CuAl in the as-milled state. However, the hardness of CAZ is gradually reduced and becomes almost equal to CuAl after annealing at 900 The work was sponsored by the