In this paper, we propose a two-stage stochastic linear programming model considering some of the right hand side parameters of the first stage constraints as multi-choice parameters and rest of the right hand side parameters of the constraints as exponential random variables with known means. Both the randomness and multi-choiceness are simultaneously considered for the model parameters. Randomness is characterized by some random variables with its distribution and multi-choiceness is handled by using interpolating polynomials. To solve the proposed problem, first we remove the fuzziness and then for multi-choice parameters interpolating polynomials are established. After establishing the deterministic equivalent of the model, standard mathematical programming technique is applied to solve the problem. A numerical example is presented to demonstrate the usefulness of the proposed methodology.In real life decision making problems, the input parameters of the problem under study are not known with certainty because relevant data are inexact or scarce, difficult to estimate, the system is subject to changes, etc. The uncertain parameters in the problem can often be modeled as random variables with “known” probability distribution. The occurrence of randomness in the problem parameters can be modeled as stochastic programming (SP) problem. SP is widely used in several real life problems such as, financial planning and control, supply chain management planning, airline planning (fleet assignment), water resource modeling, forestry planning, environmental planning, banking, and telecommunication. In a conventional two-stage stochastic program, a first-stage program must be solved before all the problem parameters are known with certainty. Once the uncertainty is realized, the decision maker then solves a second stage program, known as a recourse problem, that considers the solution to the first stage program as well as the outcome of a random event. The objective is to minimize the first-stage cost plus the expected second-stage cost. The formulation of two-stage stochastic programming problems was first introduced by Dantzig The situation occurs when there exist a set of choices for a parameter, out of which only one is to be selected to optimize the objective function of a mathematical programming problem. Such type of problem is modeled as multi-choice programming problem which was introduced by Healey The occurrence of randomness in the model parameters can be formulated as stochastic programming (SP) within a general optimization framework. Due to the robustness, SP is widely used in many real-world decision making problems of management science, engineering, and technology. Also, it has been applied to various areas such as, manufacturing product and capacity planning, electrical generation capacity planning, financial planning and control, supply chain management, airline planning (fleet assignment), water resource modeling, forestry planning, dairy farm expansion planning, macroeconomic modeling and planning, portfolio selection, traffic management, asset liability management, etc. Mathematically, a stochastic programming When some of the model input parameters are considered as multi-choice parameters, then the above model Two-stage stochastic programming (TSP) is an efficient method for solving stochastic programming problems with recourse. In the standard TSP paradigm, the decision variables of an optimization problem under uncertainty are partitioned into two sets. The decision variables decided before the actual realization of the uncertain parameters are known as first stage decision variables. After the random events have exhibited themselves, further decision can be made at a certain cost known as second-stage, or recourse, variables i.e. a second-stage decision variables can be made to minimize “penalties” that may appear due to any infeasibility Mathematically, a two-stage stochastic programming When some of the input parameters of the model are considered as multi-choice parameters, then the model can be reformulated as: Now, the equivalent deterministic models of the two-stage stochastic programming problem are derived when the right hand side parameter The probability density function (pdf) of the Assumed that Interpolating polynomials are established using the functional values at non-negative integer nodes to deal with the multi-choice parameter. We consider the following interpolating polynomials for the multi-choice parameter as follows. From the constraint Let Let Using We consider the following stochastic programming model: Further, using the above model The parameter values (i.e. On simplification, we get Thus, the deterministic model of the above two-stage stochastic programming model Now, the above deterministic model The above non-linear mixed integer programming problem Two-stage stochastic programming problems involving multi-choice parameter have many practical applications in the real life decision making problems. In this paper, both multi-choice parameters and random variables have been considered within a general optimization framework of two-stage stochastic programming problems. Deterministic models have been established before solving the proposed problem. Since the deterministic models are nonlinear programming with multi-choice parameters, we use Lagrange interpolating polynomial to handle the multi-choice parameters and solve the models by using LINGO 11.0 and MAPLE 12.0 softwares. The multi-choice parameters can also be handled by using other interpolating polynomials such as Newton’s divided difference, Newton’s forward and backward difference, etc. However, both the tools (i.e. MAPLE and LINGO) are providing the same optimal solutions for all the test examples.