A man 42 years old stumbles while fishing on wet rocks. He has a sore right ankle and leg and is unable to bear weight. No prior injuries. Presents to Emergency Department the same day. Seen the day of admission, he is acutely tender over the right ankle and midleg and is swollen as well. No other injuries. Rest of examination of the lower extremity is benign. Patient is 1.5 meters in height and 145lbs (70kg). Smoker, no past surgery. Drinks 10 drinks/week mostly beer. Takes antacid regularly. Unremarkable. Recorded as quite inactive. Occasionally will play ice hockey. Married and works as a warehouseman.   The key area to focus on is an accurate reduction of the syndesmosis. The current literature supports a precise syndesmosis reduction that correlates with improved patient outcomes ( In fibula fracture fixation, restoration of length and rotation are important. This case does involve shortening of the fibula and comminution. However, on the AP view, an accurate cortical read for length restoration can be achieved with intraoperative imaging. The key to this case is the accuracy of the syndesmosis reduction. Closed reduction of the syndesmosis is now known to be difficult with malreductions being common. The most significant predictor of a positive outcome is the reduction of the syndesmosis ( Intraoperative fluoroscopy showing medial clear space reduction, the “dime sign” for fibular length, and the reduction of the widened syndesmosis suggest restoration of ankle stability. An intraoperative true talar dome lateral to assess the posterior malleolar profile can be helpful to ensure reduction of the syndesmosis. Postoperative CT scanning can be used to compare the accuracy of reduction to the uninjured ankle. Malreduction leads to osteoarthritis in the long term and must be avoided ( Alignment, length and rotation. These are the three cardinal parameters that orthopaedic surgeons aim to normalise in fracture surgery. Why should an unstable fibula fracture in a weight bearing limb be treated differently? I struggle with the notion that one or two screws/buttons can correct the short and externally rotated fractured fibula, as well as maintaining syndesmotic reduction. It is simply asking too much. In a robust cadaveric paper, rotational stability, load to failure and stiffness were all found to be significantly higher with fibula and syndesmotic fixation, rather than syndesmotic fixation alone ( Accurate syndesmotic reduction is imperative. An important publication ( It appears that pioneers in our field also share this same opinion. In two recent, multicentre Level 1 studies comparing methods of syndesmotic fixation, the protocols were established to fix all fibula fractures ( These points combine to provide evidence that an accurate reduction of the high Weber C fibula fracture should be plated first before reduction and fixation of the syndesmosis. In fact, when the Weber C fracture is first plated, it makes for an easy and reliable reduction and fixation of the syndesmosis distally. In the early part of my career, ankle injuries were considered to have bony and ligamentous components and the bony components were of much more significance. We would openly reduce the bones to the best of our ability. We would then use a percutaneous clamp to reduce the syndesmosis blindly and clamp it tightly together and put in a big percutaneous syndesmosis screw. I am sure that the syndesmosis was malreduced each time with either shortening, malrotation or posterior or anterior malposition. Certainly, my practice had an occasional ankle fracture patient who quickly went on to OA and an ankle arthrodesis because of surgeon ignorance to the importance of the syndesmosis [4]. Later, when I joined the Swiss AO fracture group, I was introduced to Dr. Howard Rosen, a New York orthopedist. He informally had started the “Friends of the Fibula Club” signifying the importance of the fibula and that we must not ignore its bony or ligamentous pathology. My care for the syndesmosis changed radically. Fluoroscopic pictures are notorious for their lack of clarity, and if there is any doubt that the syndesmosis is not reduced, then any and all means to achieve an accurate An accurate Achieving an accurate fibular reduction (length, alignment and rotation) certainly is important but this can be achieved with or without fibular ORIF. But, if the fibula cannot be reduced accurately, at the syndesmosis, without an ORIF, it behooves the surgeon to reduce the bony fibula precisely before finishing with an accurate syndesmotic reduction.