The efficiency of secondary grinding of UG-2 (Upper Group 2) platinum ores is currently limited by the use of open-circuit grinding in many plants, which is inherently inefficient, due to short-circuiting of coarse particles and possible separation by gravity in the mill. The chromium oxide (Cr2O3) grade in UG-2 flotation concentrates is generally above 3% and this contributes to low efficiencies during PGM smelting.
                  Gravity separation of the chromite and silicate particles prior to secondary grinding was investigated with a spiral concentrator. Laboratory cleaner spiral tests were conducted on a plant sample from a secondary ball mill feed, to determine whether a chromite-rich stream could be removed and discarded from the process prior to milling. Analysis of the chromite-rich stream showed that it could not be discarded, as a significant proportion of the Platinum Group Elements (PGEs) in the feed to secondary milling (∼16%) would be discarded with about 55% of the chromite minerals. Pilot plant cleaner spiral test work confirmed the trends observed.
                  An alternative strategy of separate coarse grinding of the gravity concentrate, followed by combined flotation, resulted in a 32% reduction in the Cr2O3 entrainment to secondary rougher flotation concentrate, and most significantly, an increase of 3.7% in secondary recovery of PGE’s with the same overall grinding energy as the standard process.The exploitable reserves of Platinum Group Minerals (PGMs) within South Africa are primarily in the UG-2 (Upper Group 2) deposits. The UG-2 ore is made of high density chromite (FeO·Cr Mineralogical studies of UG-2 ore have shown that the PGE’s are associated with silicate minerals and that liberation of the PGE’s from chromite minerals can occur at an early stage of the comminution process. The concept of using a spiral concentrator circuit within a PGM flowsheet has been investigated. This study focuses on the investigation of the potential benefit of using a cleaner spiral concentrator circuit to discard a chromite-rich stream from a secondary UG-2 ore sample. A two-stage gravity and ball milling circuit configuration is compared to the standard process on a laboratory scale. The over-grinding of chromite particles in UG-2 ores is a problem as the fine particles are entrained to the flotation concentrate. Barnes and Newall (2006) noted that chromite entrainment leads to downstream processing problems such as difficulties in obtaining clean separation of matte and slag, higher operating temperatures, a shortened furnace life, and higher maintenance and operational costs with lengthy repair periods. The use of a single-stage rougher spiral concentrator in the secondary grinding circuit was investigated recently ( The circuit shown in An MG-type spiral concentrator unit was used for the batch laboratory test work. The pilot plant campaign was conducted in collaboration with a platinum producer, mineral processing consulting company and a spiral supplier, to investigate the best possible separation that was achievable using the latest available spiral technology. Two Very High Grade (VHG) spiral concentrators were used for the pilot plant run in the same configuration as shown in The results of the overall metal distributions to each stream are shown in The laboratory run indicated that 35.3% of the overall mass (64.1% of cleaner spiral feed) reported to the heavies stream with 16.3% of the overall PGEs. The PGE loss would be excessive if this stream were discarded, therefore rejection of the entire cleaner stream was not a viable option. An assay by size analysis of a laboratory cleaner heavies sample indicated that over 63% of the mass was distributed in the +106 Results of the pilot plant cleaner spiral test work showed similar trends. The mass distribution of the pilot plant spiral circuit showed a 6.1% mass split to the rougher lights stream as compared to 45% mass distribution to the lights noted for the laboratory run. A relatively clean rougher lights product was achieved in 1.8% of the mass with a 2.5% 4E and 0.7% Cr The following section shows the results of a potential cleaner spiral and milling circuit configuration without a chromite discard stream which was tested on a laboratory scale. Although chromite rejection prior to secondary ball milling was not viable; an extremely efficient gravity separation of chromite was achieved in the cleaner heavies stream (85.9% recovery of the Cr  The flotation results showed a 68.4% PGE and 1.5% Cr The modified circuit achieved a PGE recovery benefit of 3.7% with a 32% reduction in the Cr Laboratory and pilot plant studies on a cleaner spiral concentrator circuit revealed that a chromite-rich stream cannot be discarded prior to secondary ball milling of a UG-2 ore without losing a significant amount of PGEs. The laboratory and the pilot plant runs showed that PGE losses of 16% and 14% respectively would result when discarding the chromite-rich +106 An alternative gravity and milling circuit configuration without a Cr This study confirms the benefit of the gravity and milling circuit design for processing secondary UG-2 ore on industrial concentrators. An ore variability and plant economic study are recommended. “Any opinion, findings and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and therefore the NRF does not accept any liability in regard thereto”. This material is based upon work supported financially by the National Research Foundation. The authors wish to thank Mr. Allen Hemphill for the supply of UG-2 sample and flotation reagents, as well as the spiral supplier and minerals processing consulting company for their assistance with the pilot plant testwork.