Dissolved Air Flotation (DAF) is a well-known coagulation–flotation system applied at large scale for microalgae harvesting. Compared to conventional harvesting technologies DAF allows high cell recovery at lower energy demand. By replacing microbubbles with microspheres, the innovative Ballasted Dissolved Air Flotation (BDAF) technique has been reported to achieve the same algae cell removal efficiency, while saving up to 80% of the energy required for the conventional DAF unit. Using three different algae cultures (Scenedesmus obliquus, Chlorella vulgaris and Arthrospira maxima), the present work investigated the practical, economic and environmental advantages of the BDAF system compared to the DAF system. 99% cells separation was achieved with both systems, nevertheless, the BDAF technology allowed up to 95% coagulant reduction depending on the algae species and the pH conditions adopted. In terms of floc structure and strength, the inclusion of microspheres in the algae floc generated a looser aggregate, showing a more compact structure within single cell alga, than large and filamentous cells. Overall, BDAF appeared to be a more reliable and sustainable harvesting system than DAF, as it allowed equal cells recovery reducing energy inputs, coagulant demand and carbon emissions.Algae harvesting optimisation is a fundamental need for the feasibility of third generation biofuels (biodiesel, bioethanol, biohydrogen and biogas from microalgae) ( Centrifuges, membrane filtration and flocculation–flotation units are the common harvesting systems applied in large scale culture ( A modified DAF system, Ballasted Dissolved Air Flotation (BDAF), has been reported to achieve the same removal efficiency while saving from 60 to 80% of the energy demand, and related CO The present work investigates the performance of the BDAF technology applied to three different algae ( Algal harvesting batch tests were performed at the stationary growth phase (maximum yield) where the cell morphology is homogeneous and the AOM has the greatest effect on the coagulation. First, the algae cultures were characterised for cell morphology and the AOM composition. Secondly, optimal coagulation conditions were identified in terms of pH, coagulant dose, residual cells, turbidity and zeta potential. Subsequently, the characteristics of the optimal algae floc were investigated for size, strength and fractal dimension. The two green algae, Cell counting was performed manually using a light microscope with a haemocytometer or a Sedge-wick Rafter as appropriate. Algogenic organic matter (AOM) was characterised and extracted at the stationary growth phase after centrifugation and filtration (1 μm) according to the methods described by Jar test experiments were carried out using an EC Engineering DBT6 DAF jar tester (Alberta, CND). Separate experiments were carried out in duplicate at pH 5, 7 and 9, using aluminium sulphate (Al Jar testing of both systems was completed under verified optimum conditions of pH and coagulant dose. To create a growth and breakage floc profile, the algal particle size distribution was measured every minute using a Malvern Mastersizer 2000 (Malvern, UK). A peristaltic pump was used to maintain a constant flow of 1.5 l h Life cycle assessment (LCA) was carried out for hypothetical full scale DAF and BDAF systems having a treatment capacity (Q) of 20,000 m The saturator design was assessed according to the guidelines and parameters reported by Conventional hydrocyclones operate at a pressure value between 50 and 300 kPa ( The energy demand for pumping water into both saturator and hydrocyclone units were estimated in terms of water-energy according to Equation The coagulant (aluminium sulphate, Al Key differences between the three algae were observed in terms of their surface area, AOM concentration and composition as well as charge density ( Overall, the three algae showed clear physical and chemical differences, which, according to previous investigations have the potential to impact on the specific harvesting performance ( High algal cell recovery (≥99%) was achieved using both harvesting systems. However, significant differences for optimal coagulant dose and zeta potential were observed in relation to the algal strain and the pH value used ( Separation trials performed under a BDAF set up achieved the same cell recovery observed within the DAF experiment but at lower coagulant doses ( Overall, DAF was effective only on Aluminium sulphate was an effective coagulant and residual aluminium concentration in all clarified samples was always equal to or less than 1 mg l According to our observations, the BDAF has the potential to generate a more concentrated final algae paste than DAF. After conventional flotation of Floc comparison was made based on equivalent media volumetric diameter ( Using the steady state floc size as an indication of the floc strength ( A more detailed analysis of the floc strength between the two systems was possible comparing the floc strength coefficient (log C) and the floc strength constant (ɤ), as well as the floc response to increased shear rate exposure. The floc strength coefficient and constant were extrapolated from A microscopic analysis of the algae flocs confirmed that beads interact differently with unicellular and filamentous algae ( The results from the LCA show that, compared to the traditional DAF technology, the adoption of BDAF allows up to 33%, 58% and 44% carbon emission saving for From the economical perspective, the high price of glass beads (70–80 £ kg Ballasted Dissolved Air Flotation (BDAF) was demonstrated to be a more feasible and sustainable microalgae harvesting option compared to the conventional flotation technology. The adoption of floating microspheres as ballasting agents (1) allowed significant coagulant saving, (2) showed a more reliable technology benefitting from a reduced level of energy dissipation within the flotation chamber, and (3) lowered the overall carbon emissions and (4) the process costs. The comparison between the conventional and the ballasted floc structure and strength revealed that the algae-beads aggregation was more affected by the cell's morphology than the AOM. Single cell algae formed compact and strong algae-bead flocs, while filamentous species resulted in a more expanded and inferior structure. However, the AOM composition was confirmed to be a key parameter for the determination of optimal flocculation conditions, as it affected the coagulant demand in both DAF and BDAF technologies. Further research focused on the microspheres recovery process is required to optimise hydrocyclone configuration in order to guarantee beads recovery and energy/costs savings. The authors would like to thank the EU Framework 7 project