The sintered mullite is produced commercially, using clay and alumina as the source materials. South India has an abundant quantity of high aluminous clay. The present article reports the results of the mullitisation behavior of three south Indian clays (Neyveli, Panruti and Udayarpalayam clays) and three different alumina sources, (reactive alumina, gibbsite and boehmite) to produce stoichiometric mullite. The raw materials as per the stochiometric composition were weighed and wet milled in a planetary ball mill. The dried and powdered materials were passed through 75 μm sieve, then uniaxially pressed at 50 kN to make bars, and finally the specimens were sintered at 1600 °C for 3 h under normal atmospheric condition. By reaction-sintering the clay-alumina mixture reacts to form mullite. Physical characterization such as bulk density and water absorption and the mechanical properties, like flexural strength of sintered specimens were also carried out. The Neyveli-reactive alumina mixture showed high density (2.71 g cm−3) and high strength (82 MPa). The impure Udayarpalayam clay–reactive alumina mixture shows high strength (87 MPa), but low density (2.65 g cm−3). Microstructural studies on sintered and polished samples and X-ray diffraction studies on sintered specimens are carried out to estimate the mullitisation behavior of individual clays. Among the three clays and the three alumina sources, Neyveli clay and reactive alumina mixture gave the maximum mullitisation. The specimens with bohemite exhibited poor mechanical properties as well as poor physical properties.There has been considerable interest in mullite and mullite matrix composites in recent years due to their unique properties, such as low thermal expansion, low dielectric constant, high melting point, high thermal shock resistance and remarkable creep resistance In the kaolinite–alumina system, kaolinite is first dehydrated to meta-kaolinite in the temperature range of 500°–600 °C. It has been reported that below 1300 °C alumina was largely inert and the dominant reactions were the kaolinite reaction series to form primary mullite, amorphous silica, and cristobalite Three different clays from the southern part of India namely Neyveli, Panruti and Udayarpalayam The beneficiated clays The minerals present in clays were identified by X-ray diffraction technique (XRD) using Siemens D-500 powder diffractometer, with Cu The chemical composition of the starting materials used in the investigation is presented in The results of thermogravimetric analyses of samples are given In the clay gibbsite mixture, the weight loss occurred in four stages; at 110, 250, 325 and 550 °C. The weight losses at 110 and 550 °C are due to loss of adsorbed and structural water in clay respectively. The weight losses around 250° and 325 °C are due to losses of structural water from gibbsite The DTA results ( The physical properties of samples are given in XRD patterns for powders of different clay with alumina sources are shown in From the microstructural analysis ( The micrographs of clay–gibbsite are also not showing the presence of characteristic mullite crystals. In the Neyveli clay, the crystals are with imperfect ends, whereas Panruti clay shows larger pores along with mullite crystals. The Udayarpalayam clay does not show any perfect crystals. The microstructure of clay–boehmite mixture gives different micrographs. Boehmite samples yield lengthy needle shaped crystals for all the clay samples. The size of the primary mullite grains in Neyveli and Panruti clay base mixture are higher than 10 μm and width is 1–2 μm. The microstructure of clay samples fired at 1600 °C is shown The poor solid state sinterability of mullite powder is explained elsewhere In the boehmite samples, cracks are observed due to higher loss in structural water. The mullitisation behavior is confirmed by XRD and microstructural analysis. Even though the XRD results confirm the mullitisation, the high peak intensity is observed only for pure and fine particle size alumina source (Neyveli clay and alumina) samples. The microstructure of the above samples clearly confirms the presence of maximum amount of mullite. The impurities present in gibbsite make the mullite crystal shapes imperfect, especially in the impure Udayarpalayam clay. Though the physical properties are poor for boehmite samples, the microstructure confirms that better lengthy mullite crystals are formed. The following conclusions are drawn from the results of the present investigation. Pure Neyveli clay and fine alumina yield better mullite crystals with good physical properties. The mullite prepared using gibbsite shows that the presence of a higher amount of secondary mullite crystals than the primary crystals due to the presence of impurities. The mullite prepared using boehmite has poor mechanical strength though the aspect ratio of the mullite crystals is maximum. The impurities in the raw materials improve the strength but not density in mullite formation. No crystalline silica is observed for the sample prepared at 1600 °C.