This work presents a study of the leaching of chalcopyrite in acidic ferric chloride. Two chalcopyrite samples (natural chalcopyrite crystal and chalcopyrite concentrate) were leached under different conditions. The effects of stirring speed and temperature were investigated. It was found that agitation had a negative effect on copper recovery from chalcopyrite during the leaching process. This is explained by the fact that cupric chloride complexes are formed during the leaching process where cupric ion is considered as a stronger oxidant than ferric ion. Agitation sweeps away the cupric chloride complexes formed, whereas, under stagnant conditions cupric chloride complexes accumulate at the reaction interface causing enhanced dissolution of copper. The overall leaching reaction was found to be sensitive to temperature. The shrinking core model was fitted to the data and it was found that the leaching process was controlled by chemical reaction with activation energy of 69 kJ/mole.Chalcopyrite is one of the most important copper minerals in terms of scale of use and availability. Generally, chalcopyrite is treated by pyrometallurgical processes often in reverberatory furnaces or by using flash smelting techniques ( The most common lixiviants used for chalcopyrite leaching are chloride, sulphate, amine and nitrate. Despite the favorable kinetics of ammonia leaching and the formation of hematite out of solution, this process consumes considerable amounts of ammonia due to the formation of (NH From an economic point of view the most practical oxidants are ferric ions ( Chloride systems involve the use of hydrochloric acid as a leaching reagent to prevent hydrolysis with ferric chloride as the oxidant. Reaction Several researchers have investigated chloride leaching ( The aim of this work is to examine the catalytic action of cupric ions during leaching of chalcopyrite in ferric chloride. Additionally, it is attempted to study the effect of agitation on this catalytic action. Two different samples of chalcopyrite were used in this study. The first sample was prepared from copper sulphide ore obtained from Kennecott Utah Copper Corporation (KUCC) in North America. The ore was crushed and then concentrated by two stages of froth flotation. The second sample was prepared from natural high purity chalcopyrite crystals obtained from mineral dealer Gregory, Bottley & Lloyd (GBL), London, UK. Both samples were wet sieved to prepare several size fractions. Samples of the size fractions used in this study were totally digested for chemical analysis which was carried out by Inductively Coupled Plasma Atomic Emission Spectroscopy (ICP-AES). The chemical analysis of the samples is shown in The samples were also characterized by XRD analysis using a computer controlled Hiltonbrooks® generator with a Philips® PW 1050 diffractometer with an automatic divergence slit, and Cu anode producing X-rays of wavelength Two leaching systems were used in this study. The first set of leaching experiments was carried out in a 500 ml leaching vessel with a five neck lid. The vessel was immersed in a thermostatic water bath which controls the temperature within The second set of experiments was similar to the one described above but with the following modifications (see 100 ml of 0.5 M FeCl Two leaching experiments where carried out using the set up shown in The effect of agitation on the copper recovery from chalcopyrite crystals when leached in ferric chloride was studied at a temperature of 90 °C in 0.5 M FeCl At low stirring speeds (less than 300 rpm) it was observed that the chalcopyrite particles tended to coagulate as shown in The effect of temperature upon copper recovery from chalcopyrite crystals leached in ferric chloride was studied using particles with a size of < The kinetics of chalcopyrite leaching in acidic ferric chloride have been assessed on the basis of the shrinking core model as sulphur is produced on the surface of chalcopyrite particles. This model considers that the leaching process is controlled either by diffusion of reactants through the solution boundary layer or through a solid product layer, or by surface chemical reaction. The dissolution of copper was found to follow linear kinetics according to Eq. ( Where When Eq. ( As opposed to ferric sulphate, in ferric chloride leaching of chalcopyrite, it is possible to measure sulphate ions present in the leaching solution formed as a result of sulfur oxidation. This is because the matrix of the leaching solution is chloride based. The source of sulphate could be a result of sulphide oxidation to sulphate and/or as a result of the dissolution of any sulphates which were formed prior to leaching. In this study, it was attempted to measure the sulphate present in the ferric chloride leaching solution by ICP. The experimental results are shown in The molar ratio of Fe The quantity of sulphate formed is estimated to be less than 6% of the total oxidized sulphide. This is in agreement with the values reported in the literature ( The experimental results of the leaching experiments performed in the closed vessel are presented in The negative effect of agitation on the recovery of copper from chalcopyrite is surprising. Traditionally, one can expect an increase in the conversion when the diffusion through liquid film layer is eliminated by agitation. One would expect high conversion under stagnant conditions if the chemical reaction is a very fast exothermic reaction. In this case, the heat released due to the chemical reaction would rise the temperature at the reaction interface so that the actual reaction temperature is higher than the bulk one. The heat of formation calculated for chalcopyrite oxidation by ferric chloride (reaction On the other hand, in the closed vessel where a minimal amount of oxygen could participate in the oxidation reaction, the situation is different (see The amount of iron generated in the closed vessel is slightly higher under non agitated conditions (only 10% higher), whereas, the copper recovery is more than 180% higher under stagnant conditions ( Therefore, it is possible to suggest that the high level of sulphate in the leaching solution is associated with pyrite oxidation. Generation of sulphate during chalcopyrite oxidation is negligible and could reach up to 5% of the total oxidized sulphide sulphur ( The above facts suggest that agitation had a negative effect on chalcopyrite leaching whereas it had positive effect on pyrite oxidation. Pyrite when oxidized in acidic media produces sulphate. From the experiments in the closed vessel under agitated conditions where the oxygen in the system is limited, it can be seen that SO The arguments presented above do not address two issues. These are the higher recovery of copper under non agitating conditions in both open and closed vessels and also the considerable increase in copper recovery in the closed vessel under non agitating conditions compared to that from the open vessel. Regarding the first issue, one can present the following hypothesis: Under stagnant conditions the Fe Under non agitation conditions, it is possible that cupric chloride complexes accumulate at the reaction surface within the liquid film layer (see It can therefore be concluded that the enhanced reaction rate of chalcopyrite dissolution in ferric chloride without agitation is due to chalcopyrite oxidation by two parallel reactions (reactions In order to confirm that the higher copper recovery obtained when chalcopyrite was leached in acidic ferric chloride under stagnant conditions, an additional experiment was performed. In this experiment chalcopyrite concentrate was leached in 0.5 M FeCl Similarly, the amount sulphate sulphur measured in the leaching solution was found to have the same trend as for the copper recovered as shown in It is now evident that the enhanced recovery of copper from chalcopyrite when leached in acidified ferric chloride at stagnant conditions is caused by the catalytic effect of cupric ions produced by reaction This result indicates that most kinetic studies that have been carried out for the purposes of determination of the activation energy of reaction It is therefore, very important to take into account the existence of cupric chloride in the leaching solution when evaluating data produced during leaching experiments when formation of cupric chloride complexes is possible. This is especially true in the latter stages of leaching. Referring back to the kinetic study presented above, the value of activation energy for the dissolution of chalcopyrite in ferric chloride was calculated and compared to the literature data presented in Finally, there is currently no explanation for the considerable increase in copper recovery when chalcopyrite is leached in a closed vessel. A systematic study is currently underway to investigate this interesting result. In this work, the dissolution kinetics of chalcopyrite in ferric chloride have been investigated. It was found that the dissolution rate increased with an increase in temperature. However, agitation of the leaching mixture caused a reduction in copper recovery. This was explained by the fact that agitation results in removal of the cupric chloride complexes formed at the reaction interface between chalcopyrite particles and ferric ions. The cupric ion acts as a second oxidant in the dissolution reaction. Its concentration under stagnant conditions at the reaction interface is high enough to produce a positive effect on the overall reaction rate. The additional effect of cupric ions at stagnant conditions was confirmed by addition of cupric chloride salt to the leaching system. In this case, as expected, agitation enhanced the reaction rate by breaking up the fluid film layer around chalcopyrite particles. By fitting the shrinking core model to the kinetic data, it was found that the overall activation energy of chalcopyrite dissolution in ferric chloride was about 69 kJ/mole, which is in general agreement with several of the reported literature.