Characterization of a tight-gas sand formation using data from horizontal wells at isolated locations is challenging due to the inherent heterogeneity and very low permeability characteristics of this class of resources. Furthermore, characterizing the uncontrollable hydraulic-fracture properties along the horizontal wellbore requires financially demanding and time-consuming operations. In this study, a reservoir characterization model for tight-gas sand reservoirs is developed and tested. The model described is based on artificial neural networks trained with a large number of numerical-simulation scenarios of tight-gas sand reservoirs. The model is designed in an inverse-looking fashion to estimate the reservoir and hydraulic-fracture characteristics, once known initial conditions, controllable operational parameters, and observed horizontal-well performance are input. Validation with blind cases by estimating reservoir and hydraulic-fracture characteristics resulted in an average absolute error of 20%. The model was also tested successfully with published data of an average-performing well in the Granite Wash Reservoir. A graphical-user-interface application that enables using the model in a practical and efficient manner is developed. Practicality of the model is also demonstrated with a case study for the Williams Fork Formation by obtaining probabilistic estimates of reservoir/hydraulic-fracture characteristics through Monte Carlo simulation that incorporates the ranges of observed production performance.Tight-gas sands are natural extensions of conventional sandstone reservoirs with natural-gas accumulation, but with permeability values less than 0.1 mD, which may be as low as 0.000001 mD ( Existence of low ranges of permeability brings on additional challenges to characterization and evaluation of both dynamic and static reservoir parameters from well logs, borehole/surface microseismic surveys and core samples ( In this study, an inverse reservoir-characterization model is developed that can be used to address aforementioned issues by providing accurate estimations of some unknown reservoir and hydraulic-fracture characteristics. Presented study is a continuation and the inverse-looking component of the work presented by In this study, a numerical reservoir simulator is used to generate the data which describe the spatio-temporal instances of the tight-gas sand reservoir. A black-oil reservoir model ( The horizontal well is located at the center of a rectangular drainage area. The horizontal well is operated under constant flowing bottom-hole pressure. A single-layer reservoir is considered. Hydraulic fractures are in vertical and transverse form. Hydraulic-fracture height is equal to the thickness of the formation. A non-uniform grid-size distribution is used to incorporate different numbers of hydraulic fractures. The reservoir is fully saturated with gas. A 10-year production period is considered. Artificial neural networks are selected to model the relationship between process variables. Artificial neural networks were successfully used in many engineering problems including the ones related to reservoir characterization (     To determine the ranges of parameters to be used, it is aimed to cover a wide range of possibilities related to tight-gas reservoirs ( Earlier studies and technological developments are considered to determine the hydraulic-fracture properties ( To be consistent with horizontal wells used in the numerical model, a range between 40 and 2000 acres is chosen for drainage area. Considering improvements in horizontal drilling and hydraulic fracturing technologies, horizontal wells as long as 8000 ft and up to 30 hydraulic fracture stages are included. The wells are operated under constant flowing bottom-hole pressure constraint ( To represent the performance of the horizontal well, decline curve characteristics are chosen. Arps' hyperbolic decline curve ( Tight-gas systems are rather complex geological and petrophysical systems. Supplementary tools are generally needed to reduce the uncertainties related to unknown reservoir and hydraulic-fracture characteristics. Artificial-neural-network based models were successfully applied to various inverse problems in petroleum engineering, such as reservoir characterization and operational optimization applications, using both real-field data and synthetic or numerical-model based data. Examples for these successful applications include estimating fracture density by using production data ( To support a wide range of estimation problems encountered in well-logging, well testing, borehole or surface microseismic surveys and core sampling of complex tight-gas systems, when accurate petrophysical or fracture-design data do not exist, To obtain rapid solutions of inverse problems associated with computationally expensive simulation models of tight-gas systems (e.g., during a history-matching study). It is aimed to predict some of the key reservoir and fracture-effectiveness characteristics by using available historical well-performance data and some readily available information such as the length of the horizontal wellbore, drainage area, number of fractures, initial pressure, flowing bottom-hole pressure and reservoir temperature. This approach is very similar to the pressure-transient analysis approach, in which reservoir characteristics are estimated from pressure signals collected from wells. The inputs and outputs selected for the tool are shown in In the design phase of an artificial neural network, following characteristics are optimized during the designing process: Training algorithm Number of hidden layers Number of hidden neurons (in each hidden layer) Number of training, validation and testing cases Types of activation functions (transfer functions) Functional links There are many different type of training algorithms such as standard back-propagation algorithm (  In this study, MATLAB Neural Network Toolbox ( Difficulties and financially demanding nature of collecting samples and performing surveys create challenges in characterizing tight-gas sand reservoirs and making proper reservoir-management decisions in a timely manner. Variable performances from wells with similar operational conditions indicate the existence of uncertainties associated with reservoir and hydraulic-fracture characteristics. In tight-gas sand reservoirs where the hydraulic fracture plays an important role on the flow behavior, characterizing the effectiveness of the fractures poses additional challenges. It would be more realistic to define the distribution function and the range of observed horizontal-well performance. A Monte Carlo analysis protocol can follow by running a large number of scenarios that fit into individual distribution function for each variable. Probability distributions of output parameters can be obtained which give an idea regarding the uncertainty ranges of reservoir and hydraulic-fracture characteristics. Williams Fork Formation is considered to develop a case study for probabilistic assessment. It is assumed to have uncertainty in porosity ( To evaluate the performance of the inverse neural-network, average absolute prediction errors of main output variables (reservoir/hydraulic-fracture characteristics: A graphical-user-interface (GUI) application was developed using MATLAB ( Using the inverse reservoir characterization model, uncertainty in reservoir and hydraulic fracture properties can be quantified by statistically analyzing the observed or expected early-time production performance from one or more horizontal wells completed in a tight-gas formation. To demonstrate this, 10,000 cases were run using the numerical-simulation model with pre-defined uncertainties in reservoir and hydraulic fracture properties that represent Williams Fork Formation's characteristics with a 4000-ft well with 20 hydraulic fractures. Statistical characteristics of all parameters are shown in During the development stage, the neural-network model has been validated with observed errors ranging between 12.4% and 27.5%. A comparison was carried out in Aforementioned results indicate that the inverse neural-network model can provide reasonable estimates of reservoir and hydraulic-fracture characteristics once the uncertainty in production performance is quantified and input. Considering the readily-available production histories and challenges associated with obtaining accurate representations of the reservoir and results of hydraulic-fracture treatments in a quick and reliable manner, this case study demonstrates the practical application of the tool developed in this study. Therefore, it is possible to run as many as 10,000 cases using the inverse model within a reasonable amount of time with aforementioned accuracy levels. Completing the same set of runs using the numerical reservoir model took approximately 30 days of CPU time with a typical desktop computer. In this study, a neural-network based reservoir characterization tool with an inverse-looking nature is developed for tight-gas sand reservoirs. The key conclusions are: Presented methodology can be utilized to address inverse modeling problems such as reservoir characterization. The model developed for tight-gas sands was validated with average errors ranging between 12.4% and 27.5%. Although the error range is relatively high for a typical engineering-forecasting problem, it still can serve as a powerful model to reduce uncertainty ranges in a quick manner for the inverse problem of reservoir characterization. The graphical-user-interface application can be used to obtain expected quantities of the related parameters within a fraction of second in a practical manner, which is demonstrated with a case study of the Granite Wash Reservoir by using published data. The tool can be used to investigate many cases rapidly, and the methodology proposed is practical and computationally efficient. This is demonstrated with a case study by incorporating an observed range for production performance into Monte Carlo simulation. Probabilistic estimates of reservoir and hydraulic-fracture parameters are quantified and they are found to be in agreement with the pre-defined uncertainties in the numerical model. This characteristic of the tool can provide guidance to engineers before a more detailed history-matching study for a numerical model. Since numerical-simulation results and hyperbolic-decline coefficients are used to train the neural network, assumptions and errors associated with them are also carried into the new model. While this can be considered as the main limitation of the developed tool, the methodology presented can be followed by modifying the dataset and retraining the neural-network model, if needed.