The detrimental effect of seawater on Cu-Mo flotation has attracted much attention in recent years, which has mainly been focused on altering the detrimental effect of seawater on the floatability of molybdenum ore. The interaction between bubbles and particles during flotation is a key factor in understanding the detrimental effect of seawater. Therefore, this study aimed to investigate the effect of seawater on bubble-particle interactions with chalcopyrite and molybdenite surfaces. Moreover, the effect of emulsified kerosene, a typical molybdenite collector, on bubble-particle interactions in seawater was investigated. Artificial seawater was used as a seawater model solution in this study. Flotation tests using pure chalcopyrite and molybdenite showed that the addition of emulsified kerosene to artificial seawater at a specific pH could selectively improve the floatability of molybdenite while maintaining the low floatability of chalcopyrite. A study of the bubble-particle interactions was then performed to analyze the phenomenon. It was found that the kerosene adsorbed at the air/liquid interface of the bubble improved the bubble aspect ratio and reduced the bubble rise velocity in artificial seawater. Moreover, kerosene could accelerate the formation of three-phase contact between the bubble and both mineral surfaces at the natural pH of artificial seawater. Additionally, this study showed that seawater colloidal precipitate formed under high pH conditions might be adsorbed on the mineral surfaces and might improve the stability of the intervening liquid film on the surface, thus preventing bubble-particle attachment and decreasing mineral recovery. Under these high pH conditions, the emulsified kerosene and seawater precipitate might compete in terms of adsorption on the mineral surfaces and the flotation results would most likely depend on the kerosene and hydrophilic adsorbate coverage on the mineral surfaces.The detrimental effect of saline water and seawater on the floatability of Cu-Mo sulfide ores at a pH higher than 9 has been investigated intensively by various authors in recent years ( Various reagents have been proposed for altering the detrimental effect of seawater on the floatability of molybdenite under alkaline conditions. These include emulsified kerosene to improve the floatability of molybdenite ( The attachment of valuable minerals to air bubbles is the most important mechanism in froth flotation and is responsible for the majority of particles that are recovered in the concentrate ( Various mechanisms have been proposed to explain the detrimental effect of seawater. These mechanisms mainly involve a focus on the role of seawater colloidal precipitates (i.e., Mg(OH) The interactions of air bubbles with hydrophobic and hydrophilic surfaces have been reported in various studies ( The interaction between air bubbles and molybdenite surfaces in saline water has been studied by Emulsified kerosene has been used extensively in previous studies to improve the floatability of molybdenite ( Molybdenite (Wolfram Camp, Queensland, Australia) and chalcopyrite (Miyatamata Mine, Akita Prefecture, Japan) were used in the bubble-surface interaction experiments. The mineral sample was cut into a flat section and cast in an epoxy resin (SpeciFix-20 Kit, Struers, Germany). Afterward, the chalcopyrite surface was polished by using various, consecutive grits of emery paper along with 3- and 1- μm diamond sprays (Struers, Germany), in accordance with the procedures described by Mineral powders were used in the flotation tests. The chalcopyrite (Miyatamata Mine, Akita Prefecture, Japan) was ground using an agate mortar and pestle and was dry screened (<38 μm). Fine molybdenite powder (<30 μm) was supplied by the Sumitomo Metal Mining, Co., Ltd. (Japan). The mineral powders were stored in a vacuum bag under refrigeration to avoid further oxidation. To provide fresh surfaces, the mineral powders (5 g) were cleaned using a 1 M HNO Artificial seawater (Marine Art SF-1, As One, Japan) was used as a seawater model solution. The salinity of artificial seawater is ca. 33 g/L with an ionic strength of 0.65 M. The composition of artificial seawater including the major chemical species is presented in To determine the stability of the emulsion, the size of the kerosene emulsion particles was analyzed using a Zetasizer Nano ZS (Malvern Panalytical Ltd., United Kingdom) particle and molecular size analyzer. The average diameter of kerosene emulsion particles was 0.6 µm after the emulsification process and grew to 2.5 µm after 3 h. Therefore, based on this result, the kerosene emulsion was found to be relatively stable. Chalcopyrite and molybdenite flotation tests were performed using a Partridge Smith glass cell. The mineral powder (0.6 g) was suspended in 190 mL of artificial seawater (with or without emulsified kerosene) and ultrasonicated (Yamato 3510, Branson, Japan) for 1 min. The pH of the mixture was controlled at the desired pH (8.3–11) for 10 min. The flotation tests were carried out by injecting nitrogen gas through a glass frit at a flow rate of 70 mL/min for 2 min. Subsequently, the float and sink fractions were collected separately, filtered, dried in an oven at 105 °C for 12 h, and weighed. Single mineral recovery was calculated by using Eq. where m The polished surface was immersed in the treatment solutions (both with and without emulsified kerosene) under various pH conditions for 10 min. The mineral was then transferred into an acrylic container (2 cm × 2 cm × 20 cm) while ensuring that the mineral surface remained immersed in the treatment solution during the transfer. This was to prevent exposure of the mineral to the air during the transfer. A high-speed camera (Fastcam Mini WX 100, Photron, Japan) equipped with a Nikon Manual Focus Micro-NIKKOR 105 mm f/2.8 AI-s lens was used to capture single air bubble movements and interactions with the mineral surface at 2,000 The flotation results for the chalcopyrite and molybdenite under various pH conditions both in the absence and presence of emulsified kerosene are shown in A study of the bubble-particle interactions was conducted to investigate the flotation phenomenon and the depressing effect of seawater. The effects of emulsified kerosene on bubble parameters in artificial seawater at pH 8.3, 10, and 11 are presented in  Typical bubble movement during the approaching, colliding, and bouncing phases is shown in As can be seen in The cumulative percentage drainage time of the thin liquid film on both the chalcopyrite and molybdenite surfaces in artificial seawater at pH 8.3 is presented in Interestingly, the distribution of the thin liquid film drainage times for both minerals became narrower in the presence of emulsified kerosene ( Because the seawater colloidal precipitate formed at higher pH values (i.e., pH > 9), t Unlike the bubble behavior associated with the chalcopyrite surface, the bubble did displace the intervening thin liquid film on the surface of molybdenite at pH 10. However, some bubbles did require a longer time to attach to the surface at pH 10 as shown by the higher standard deviation value compared to that associated with pH 8.3 ( The pH-dependence of bubble attachment to the surface of molybdenite and chalcopyrite might be caused by the difference in concentration of seawater precipitate and the chemical species associated with the precipitate. A higher concentration of seawater precipitate might prevent the adsorption of emulsified kerosene on both mineral surfaces due to the formation of aggregates of emulsified kerosene and seawater precipitate. Similar aggregate formation associated with emulsified kerosene and Mg(OH) Furthermore, a higher concentration of seawater precipitate could increase the concentration of adsorbed precipitate on the surface and improve surface hydrophilicity, thus prolonging the thin liquid film drainage time. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) images of chalcopyrite and molybdenite reported in a previous study ( The chemical species of seawater precipitate might also affect the bubble-surface interactions, especially the surface hydrophobicity. A mechanism was proposed to describe the correlation between the flotation results shown in However, the presence of emulsified kerosene improved the recovery of both minerals at pH 8.3. The study of the bubble-particle interactions suggested that the kerosene was adsorbed on the mineral surface and improved the surface hydrophobicity. Additionally, the adsorbed kerosene destabilized the intervening liquid film and decreased the liquid film drainage time, allowing rapid bubble-particle attachment. Furthermore, kerosene was adsorbed at the air/liquid interface of the bubble, reduced the rising velocity, and reduced the surface mobility. This led to a beneficial increase in the contact time between the bubble and the particle during flotation, especially in column flotation as used in this study. All of these factors in combination resulted in an improvement in the recovery of chalcopyrite and molybdenite. The flotation results showed that only the recovery of molybdenite increased in the presence of emulsified kerosene in artificial seawater at pH 10. The recovery of chalcopyrite remained low under similar conditions. The study of bubble-particle interactions suggested that kerosene remained on the molybdenite surface, rendering the surface hydrophobic, and accelerated the formation of TPC, thus preventing the adsorption of hydrophilic seawater precipitate at pH 10. However, the adsorbed kerosene on the chalcopyrite surface could not prevent the adsorption of seawater precipitate, rendering the chalcopyrite surface hydrophilic and preventing the formation of TPC. The reason for the difference in the behavior of kerosene in terms of preventing the adsorption of seawater precipitate at pH 10 is likely the different kerosene affinity of both minerals due to the different crystal structures of chalcopyrite and molybdenite. Molybdenite possesses hydrophobic sulfur-atom faces which might interact strongly with kerosene, improving the surface hydrophobicity and reducing the adsorption of seawater precipitate on these hydrophobic faces. However, chalcopyrite does not possess these sulfur-atom faces and the kerosene might interact with only a fraction of the elemental sulfur on the chalcopyrite surfaces. Seawater precipitate could thus be adsorbed by areas on the surface that are not covered with kerosene as supported by the AFM images in Another proposed mechanism is related to the adsorption of kerosene at the air/liquid interface of the bubble while the bubble is rising. This adsorbed kerosene could spread and be adsorbed on sulfur-atom faces of the molybdenite during the bubble interactions with the surfaces (i.e., collision and attachment), improving the surface hydrophobicity and bubble-particle attachment, thus improving the recovery of molybdenite in artificial seawater at pH 10. However, a similar mechanism might not be effective in terms of improving the recovery of chalcopyrite at pH 10 because the chalcopyrite surface does not possess these sulfur-atom faces. The presence of a high concentrations of seawater precipitate at pH 11 reduced the effectiveness of the emulsified kerosene with respect to improvement of the recovery of chalcopyrite and molybdenite. This was likely caused by the formation of aggregates of kerosene and seawater precipitate. In agreement with the flotation results, bubbles could not form a TPC under similar conditions due to the adsorption of seawater precipitate on the surface that rendered the surface hydrophilic. All of these factors contributed to the low recovery of both minerals in the presence of emulsified kerosene in artificial seawater at pH 11. The depressing effect of seawater on the floatability of chalcopyrite and molybdenite was investigated in this study through the use of flotation tests and the study of bubble interactions with both mineral surfaces. This study of bubble interactions with chalcopyrite and molybdenite surfaces demonstrated agreement with the flotation results associated with both minerals in the absence and presence of emulsified kerosene in artificial seawater. Furthermore, it was found that the addition of kerosene emulsion in artificial seawater could reduce the bubble rise velocity and improve the bubble aspect ratio under all pH conditions, which was likely due to the adsorption of kerosene at the air/liquid interface. This study showed that the adsorption of seawater precipitate on the mineral surfaces prevented the air bubbles from draining the intervening thin liquid film on the mineral surface and forming a TPC, thus lowering the recovery of both minerals in artificial seawater at pH values higher than 9. However, the addition of emulsified kerosene in the presence of seawater precipitate at pH 10 could selectively improve the floatability of molybdenite while decreasing the recovery of chalcopyrite. The study of bubble-surface interactions suggested that kerosene remained adsorbed on the molybdenite surface and decreased the liquid film drainage time, thus leading to more rapid attachment to the molybdenite surface. This phenomenon might be caused by the difference in precipitate surface coverage on both minerals and the stronger affinity of kerosene for molybdenite surfaces, which was likely caused by the hydrophobic sulfur-atom faces of molybdenite.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was supported by a