A constitutive model is developed for dry granular materials that smoothly transitions across a wide range of pressures and temperatures. This model handles large deformations and is thermomechanically consistent. Ideas from critical-state soil mechanics, which model granular media at relatively low pressure via a breakage model, are combined with an equation of state for shock-loaded solids to investigate the compaction of initially unconsolidated brittle granular materials. The resulting constitutive equations provide a fully-coupled model containing a natural transition between granular and solid states through the Helmholtz free energy. The model is calibrated to data with a wide range of pressures and strain rates for Ottawa sand and silica and predictions of the model are compared with static compaction, penetration, and shock-loading results. The difference in Hugoniot temperatures between this calibrated model and a “snow-plow” model are negligible for pressures greater than 8 GPa; well below incipient melting.The response of brittle granular materials to dynamic loading is complex due to the collective response of the constituent grains that can deform or break to accommodate macroscopic deformation. A typical natural granular medium is composed of contacting grains with distributions of sizes and shapes. The porosity in this medium depends on the packing arrangement and is influenced by both of these distributions. As the media is loaded from zero stress, the grains interact through small contact regions, which have stress concentrations that cause local deformations and can even break the grains ( The development here, pertinent to the low pressure and temperature regime, can be viewed as an extension to the ideas of a continuum breakage mechanics (CBM) that have been recently investigated by The development of breakage models originated from the need to describe the compaction response of geologic materials in geotechnical applications, which has two main characteristics. They: (1) are composed of many small separate pieces, which cannot support significant tensile load; and (2) can behave differently depending on their initial states ( In contrast, shock compression models of initially porous media are typically described well by density-pressure relationships (e.g. There is a growing interest in understanding large deformation at low to moderate pressures in the critical-state soil mechanics literature, which correlate void ratio and shear strength ( The concept and term “breakage” will be used here in the same sense outlined in Investigations of high-speed impacts on terrestrial soils ( In this section, the kinematics, balance laws and main evolution equations are described. The framework of this model is constructed and evolution equations for the solid compression, porosity, and elastic distortional deformation tensor are described. In A representative volume element (RVE) of dry granular media consists of solid material and pore space. In the context of a constitutive model for a granular material, the response of the RVE characterizes the response of a material point in the continuum. In general, the pore space can contain gas between grains in a loosely consolidated sample but is assumed here to be evacuated. Moreover, the designation of a loosely consolidated granular media refers to some initial state where the relative density In the following development, a material point in the present configuration at time Within the context of the thermomechanical theory proposed by In these equations, The internal rate of entropy production can be separated into two parts  Within the context of an Eulerian formulation of constitutive equations, the work in The approach described here uses constitutive equations for the specific Helmholtz free energy The breakage parameter The breakage model developed in Motivated by the work in For simplicity, the electron and ion thermal contributions for high temperatures and pressures are neglected and the Mie–Gruneisen equation of state is used here to determine the solid pressure. Details of the Mie–Gruneisen equation of state are recorded in With the granular and solid free energies specified, the effective moduli can be examined as the material transitions from granular to solid response. In Following the work in The evolution Eqs. (18) and and its form for compaction These conditions characterize the granular constituent with: Intact compressed states The constitutive equations for the entropy Next, taking the material derivative of In the next section a yield function will be proposed, which ensures that elastic distortional deformation vanishes when The pressure To motivate these measures, These equations cause the coefficient of The functional form of Previous investigations of shock loaded granular ceramics as in To specify a constitutive equation for The constitutive equation for Next, it is convenient to introduce the auxiliary parameter Furthermore, if bulking is ignored by setting However, for The evolution equation for breakage Using The jamming porosity is determined by using Eqs. (18) and ( The value of Γ in Moreover, motivated by the work in Using the procedures for strain-space ( For the granular media discussed in The yield surface can be visualized with constant pairs of It is noted that for low pressure with The conservation of mass The Helmholtz free energy The numerical implementation of these equations is described in Experimental data for quartz sand spans many decades of pressures and strain-rates. The model described here is general enough to accommodate any brittle granular material, but focusing on one material will allow an in-depth analysis of the model capability. The model parameters were fit to Ottawa sand with The parameters for the solid material came from various sources. The constant specific heat Parameters corresponding to compaction and strength portions of the model were determined from multiple data sets for strain rates from 3 × 10 The versatility of the model to fit such a wide range of pressures, stress states and strain rates is shown in In A more integrated example of model validation comes from a penetration experiment with a 14 mm diameter steel sphere (11.17 g) impacting Ottawa sand at two different initial porosities with similar impact velocities: The simulations were performed using an embedded grid technique in ALE-3D ( The comparison of the simulation and experimental data for the two different initial porosities are shown in Three snapshots at times The model parameters in To examine the influence of the granular response at low pressures on the loading, consider the case when the breakage is the model is set equal to one Finally, from the Hugoniot temperatures for an initial porosity of The main contribution presented in this paper is a proposal for a Helmholtz free energy that predicts material response that smoothly transitions between gaseous, granular, and solid states. The proposed model treats the granular material as purely mechanical but the solid material is treated as thermomechanical and can be used for shock loading. The data used to calibrate and validate this model for quartz spanned 12 orders of magnitude in strain-rate and pressures up to 10 GPa. Material constants for other material could be determined using the procedures discussed in this paper (e.g.  The authors have no affiliation with any organization with a direct or indirect financial interest in the subject matter discussed in the manuscript. The work was performed under the auspices of the US Department of Energy by University of California, Details of the constitutive functions It is more practical to specify the incipient compaction pressure Using the definition of the Helmholtz energy, Next, confining attention to the compressed region with The following notes pertain to the implementation of an explicit time-stepping algorithm for the large-deformation continuum model of granular materials discussed in this paper. These equations model solid and gaseous states, compaction, breakage and distortional plasticity. In a wave propagation computer code the equations of motion and constitutive equations are often solved explicitly during a typical time step which starts at The numerical algorithm for the constitutive update will be strongly objective ( The mass density of the material is computed by the specific solution scheme of Eqs. (2) and computational cells may be fully or partially filled (e.g. Since the time step Δ Now, for a specified value of ΔΓ the above algorithm can be used to determine all quantities at the end of the time step except for the temperature This iteration process terminates once It is also necessary to estimate the current value of the sound speed in order to dynamically adjust the time increment. Since the low-pressure bulk and shear moduli of the granular material vanish for vanishing Under superposed rigid body motion (SRBM) the position vector In The value of Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: 