The flotation separation is the general method to recover molybdenite from a concentration containing molybdenite and bismuthinite, although the whole circuit could be long and complicated. In this paper, a novel selective electro-oxidation of molybdenite process has been introduced and systematically investigated for bismuthinite purification. It was found that Mo could be selectively separated by the electro-oxidation method under the conditions of pH not less than 9.0 and the applied potential at between 3.0V and 4.0V, by this circumstance Bi was hard to extract. The effects of NaCl concentration, liquid/solid ratio and stirring speed on electro-oxidation leaching were investigated. Optimum leaching conditions were found as follows: operated at room temperature, leaching time=2.5h, NaCl concentration=4mol/L, pH=9–10, applied potential=3.4V, liquid/solid ratio=30mL/g, stirring speed=400rpm. Under these conditions, Mo extraction yield was obtained at 98.4% and 99.3% of Bi remained in the residue. The chlorine evolution reaction at the anode which was effected by leaching pH was studied by linear scan voltammetry. Mechanism of electro-oxidation leaching of Mo was studied by cyclic voltammetry. Furthermore, the mass transfer of Mo from leachate to organic phase was introduced, and the two phase transfer could obtain as high as 99.6%.In China, bismuthinite associated with low grade molybdenite is quite abundant. At present, a flotation process is the main method of Mo separation from Bi concentrate ( Other methods used to separate Mo from polymetallic ores have been reported ( As a relatively novel technology in hydrometallurgy, electro-oxidation combines the leaching of polymetallic concentrates which can be oxidized by a current at the anode or oxidants generated at the anode with the electrowinning of metals at the cathode in acid solutions. The oxidants generated at the anode usually refer to chlorine oxidants which come from electrolysis of such acid chloride solutions as NaCl solution and KCl solution at the anode and electro-oxidation is mainly used to leach metal sulfides ( The oxidation sequence of metal sulfides at the anode ( The concentrate sample, of which the XRF result is listed, is as follows: Mo 5.26%, S 18.88%, Bi 38.12%, Cu 3.35%, Fe 8.70%, Ca 2.91%, Si 3.89%, Al 1.24%, O 10.44%, were provided by Shizhuyuan Mine, Hunan Province (EDX1800B X-ray Fluorescence meter produced by Skyray Instrument Co., Ltd., Kunshan, China). The particle size ranged from 10 The concentrate pulp was prepared by mixing the concentrate sample and reagents (H Linear scan voltammetry was employed to examine how pH affected the chlorine evolution reaction at the anode. In linear voltammetry tests, DSA electrode (100 All linear voltammetry tests were implemented in the self-made electrolytic bath and exposed to the air. Except for the pH and applied potential, the other experimental conditions (including stirring speed) of each linear voltammetry test were the same as those of leaching tests designed to investigate the effect of pH on electro-oxidation leaching. The anode (the working electrode), cathode (the counter electrode) and reference electrode in cyclic voltammetry were the same as those in linear voltammetry. Similarly CHI660B Electrochemical Integrated Test System was responsible for providing the potential between DSA anode and iron cathode and drawing I-E curves. All cyclic voltammetry tests were conducted in the self-made electrolytic bath with agitation and were exposed to the air. To obtain a fine scanning speed, different scanning speeds ranging from 5 to 90 To recycle electrolyte, it is necessary to recover Mo from leachate. The common methods of Mo recovery from leachate are acid precipitation and solvent extraction ( The voltammograms of the anode were drawn at different scanning speeds. The results shown in Every curve shown in As presented in Based on the above analyses, it is confirmed that the leaching of Mo was attributed to the oxidation of the concentrate sample by chlorine oxidants. Additionally, no solid matters including Mo and sulfur were found to appear at the electrodes according to observation during electro-oxidation leaching and no elemental sulfur was found in the slag, suggesting that Mo could not be reduced at the cathode and sulfur coming from molybdenite should not exist in the form of elemental sulfur after the electro-oxidation. It is indicated in According to the results displayed in Given that a preferable selective leaching of Mo could be achieved when pH The leaching results presented in The leaching efficiency–applied potential curve of Mo may be explained as follows: when applied potential was ≤ When applied potential was = As shown in According to the fact that when NaCl concentration was > The results displayed in That higher stirring speed brought about higher leaching efficiency of Mo is understandable, because increasing the stirring speed led to the increase of diffusion rate of ions such as ClO It is indicated in The following reason could be adopted to explain the trend of leaching efficiency curve of Mo. As L/S ratio rose, per gram of concentrate sample had access to much more chlorine oxidants, which finally improved the leaching efficiency of Mo, and L/S ratio 30 was adequate for the concentrate particles to contact with chlorine oxidants. The curve Bi in The usually used L/S ratio in treatment of bismuthinite by electro-oxidation is 3 ( X-ray diffraction pattern of the residue obtained under the optimized electro-oxidation conditions is presented in The extraction results are displayed in Electro-oxidation of Mo has been found to be selective relative to Bi in certain conditions, which can be used to reject Mo from a concentrate consisting of bismuthinite and molybdenite. Compared with the conventional flotation separation of Mo/Bi and/or the traditional electro-oxidation of metal sulfides, electro-oxidation of Mo is an efficient process as it is characterized by its fine application to a concentrate in which bismuthinite and molybdenite are intergrown closely and it is an environmentally friendly hydrometallurgy technology as little Cl The electro-oxidation leaching of Mo is mainly a result of the oxidation of concentrate sample by chlorine oxidants generated in the electrolysis of NaCl solution rather than by current at the anode. pH and applied potential are the parameters relevant to the leaching of Bi. When an appropriate pH value and applied potential were set, Bi could be selectively retained in the residue. Other parameters such as NaCl concentration, stirring speed and liquid/solid ratio are irrelevant for Bi leaching. These parameters, however, have distinct effects on the leaching efficiency of Mo, like pH and applied potential. The optimum leaching conditions were found as follows: room temperature, leaching time pH and A/O ratio could evidently impact the extraction of Mo by N235 from leachate to organic phase. Under the optimum conditions of room temperature, extraction time The authors are thankful to the