Arthroscopic greater tuberosity fracture fixation using a double-row suture-bridge technique provides a firm 3-point fixation that is minimally invasive and results in excellent shoulder outcomes. Fixation is the treatment of choice for displaced greater tuberosity avulsion fractures of the proximal humerus. Although open reduction has been the traditional method for internal fixation, recent case reports of arthroscopic greater tuberosity fracture fixation have described promising results. There is, however, insufficient evidence that the arthroscopic procedure consistently results in reliable fixation, radiographic healing, and satisfactory surgical outcomes. This prospective case series was designed to determine whether arthroscopic double-row suture bridge repair for displaced greater tuberosity avulsion fractures provided high fixation strength with minimal gap formation, repair integrity maintenance till ultimate radiographic healing, and satisfactory clinical outcomes. Prospective case series; level of evidence = 4. The study group comprised a consecutive series of 23 patients with isolated displaced greater tuberosity avulsion fractures of the proximal humerus, who presented within 6 weeks of injury with signs suggestive of shoulder impingement and rotator cuff deficiency. Exclusion criteria were associated fractures of the proximal humerus, associated shoulder dislocation, undisplaced greater tuberosity fractures, chronic (> 6 weeks) fractures with malunion or non-union, and elderly patients unfit for surgery. The 23 study subjects included 14 males and 9 females, with an average age of 58.5 years (range = 43 to 74 years). 11 patients had fracture comminution, and 8 patients had associated partial thickness rotator cuff tears. All patients underwent arthroscopic reduction and double-row suture bridge repair via the subacromial approach. The surgical technique involved insertion of a medial row of suture anchors (one or two double loaded anchors) at the junction of the fracture crater and the articular cartilage margin. Sutures in a horizontal mattress configuration were thereafter passed at the greater tuberosity-rotator cuff margin and repaired with sliding knots so as to achieve anatomical reduction of the greater tuberosity fragment to the fracture site. Suture strands from the knotted medial row anchors were retrieved and loaded onto lateral row footprint type anchors (one or two anchors depending on fragment size), following which, these were inserted 5 to 10 mm distal to the lateral edge of the greater tuberosity fragment/fracture crater. Anatomical reduction with fragment compression within the fracture crater was confirmed arthroscopically. Patients underwent a standard rotator cuff rehabilitation program that emphasized early active-assisted range of motion and graduated cuff strengthening. Patients were followed prospectively and the following parameters were evaluated : initial fixation strength assessed during arthroscopy by measurement of maximal gap formation to passive range of motion, repair integrity maintenance and fracture union estimated with serial radiographs, and clinical outcomes evaluated with American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons (ASES) and Constant scoring systems. The minimum follow-up was 1 year, and mean follow-up was 17 months (range 12 to 29 months). No patient lacked follow-up data or was lost to follow-up. Arthroscopic greater tuberosity fracture fixation with a double-row suture-bridge technique was possible in each case. The initial strength of the repair construct was adequate and no patient demonstrated gap formation to passive range of motion when assessed arthroscopically. Serial radiographs revealed no loss of reduction and all patients demonstrated radiological union within 3 months. 22 of 23 patients, had excellent pain relief and shoulder function at minimum 1 year follow-up. 1 patient developed reflex sympathetic dystrophy with shoulder-hand syndrome, and had persistent pain and stiffness at the 1 year follow-up. No other complications were encountered in this series. The average postoperative ASES score was 87.6, and average postoperative Constant score was 90.3. Arthroscopic greater tuberosity fracture fixation using a double-row suture-bridge technique provides a firm 3-point fixation that is minimally invasive. This repair construct improves bony contact area and compression across fracture surfaces. The resultant high fixation strength ensures minimal gap formation, with improved repair integrity and radiological union. Anatomical restoration of the avulsed rotator cuff footprint results in excellent shoulder outcomes and is hence likely to gain wide acceptance among orthopaedic surgeons.