The oxidation behaviour of hot-pressed β-SiAlON ceramics with different densities has been investigated up to 1853K in air using thermogravimetry (TG). The microstructures of the oxidised samples were determined by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and the phases after oxidation were confirmed by X-ray diffraction (XRD). The oxidation kinetics of the higher density sample was diffusion controlled. For the lower density sample, it was controlled by both an interface reaction and diffusion in the early stage but diffusion controlled after a certain time. The oxidation curves can be well described by Chou’s model with the “characteristic oxidation time” index introduced.β-SiAlON, a phase of the Si–Al–O–N system, has a structure similar to β-Si Deviations from diffusion control have also been reported for SiAlON ceramics This new rate law is valid in the time interval Chou has developed a simpler and physically meaningful analytical model to deal with diffusion- and non-diffusion-controlled oxidation processes In the present work, dense β-SiAlON ceramics with different densities were fabricated from coal gangue by hot pressing under different pressures. Thermogravimetry (TG), X-ray diffraction (XRD) and field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) have been used to study the oxidation behaviour of the synthesised β-SiAlON ceramics. Chou’s model was employed to discuss the effect of density of β-SiAlON ceramics on oxidation behaviour. This work is considered as a baseline of the application of SiAlON ceramics synthesised from natural aluminiosilicate minerals. β-SiAlON ceramics were prepared in two steps: (1) β-SiAlON powder was synthesised from coal gangue by the reaction sintering method and (2) ceramics were prepared from the β-SiAlON powder by hot pressing. The chemical composition of the coal gangue was (wt.%): SiO The β-SiAlON powder was isostatically cold pressed to form a cylinder of 40 Before oxidation, the ceramic sample was cut into pieces with dimensions of approximately 4 Cross-sections of the sample were studied using FE-SEM (ZEISS SUPRA™ 55, Germany) after oxidation. The crystalline phases present in the oxide scale were identified by XRD with Cu Kα radiation (M21XVHF22, Japan). The non-isothermal oxidation curve of sample A is shown in The isothermal oxidation experiments were carried out at 1773 The cross-section of the samples after oxidation is shown in XRD analysis of the surfaces of the oxidised samples showed that the characteristic peaks of β-SiAlON were still present ( From the above analysis, the equation of oxidation of the β-SiAlON ceramics can be described as follows: The oxidation of the β-SiAlON ceramics synthesised from coal gangue is a gas–solid reaction. Chou’s model is employed here to quantitatively analyse the oxidation behaviour and the effect of density. Two conditions should be taken into consideration when Chou’s model is used to describe the isothermal oxidation kinetics of β-SiAlON ceramics with different densities. One condition is that the oxidation is controlled by diffusion, and the other condition deviates from diffusion control. In the first case, an index, i.e., the “characteristic oxidation time” By introducing the index of the “characteristic oxidation time” According to Chou’s model, the “characteristic oxidation time” The formula describing oxidation controlled by the interface reaction is described as follows: For the reaction controlled by both the interface reaction and diffusion, Eqs. Our experiments show that the oxidation behaviour of β-SiAlON ceramics was affected by the density of the sample. For sample A with a lower density, the reaction was controlled by both the interface reaction and diffusion at the initial stage (dual control), i.e., time The average relative errors using Chou’s model on the oxidation of β-SiAlON ceramics can be calculated by the following equation: To evaluate the oxidation resistance of materials, many criteria have been proposed in the literature, such as the oxidation rate and the activation energy It is well known that the activation energy is a useful parameter to evaluate the oxidation resistance of materials A new index, called the “characteristic oxidation time” Chou’s model as employed in this work has revealed the physical meaning of the parameter “ Dense β-SiAlON ceramics were fabricated from SiAlON powder synthesised from coal gangue by hot-pressing under a nitrogen atmosphere at 2073 Oxidation of the β-SiAlON ceramics was investigated using the TG method. A higher onset reaction temperature and a lower reaction fraction of the β-SiAlON ceramics confirmed the good oxidation resistance of the material. The oxide layer consisting of α-cristobalite and corundum appeared to be intact after oxidation, indicating that oxygen had to diffuse across the oxide layer to further the reaction. The oxidation behaviour of the β-SiAlON has been described by Chou’s model. The oxidation of the sample with a lower density was found to be controlled by both the interface reaction and diffusion at the initial stage. After a certain time, the oxidation process was only diffusion controlled. In contrast, the oxidation of the sample with a higher density was mainly controlled by diffusion. A good agreement was obtained between the theoretical calculation using Chou’s model and the experimental data. The effect of the sample’s density on the oxidation rate was discussed quantitatively by employing the index of the “characteristic oxidation time”. The authors sincerely thank Ankit Kumar Singh, School of Materials Science & Engineering in University of Texas for his kindly help in discussing the English of the manuscript and also thank