The extraction behavior of uranium (VI) from nitric acid medium was investigated using dinonyl phenyl phosphoric acid (DNPPA: monomeric form (HA), dimeric form (H2A2)) as extractant either alone or in combination with neutral oxodonors (S) such as tri-n-butyl phosphate (TBP), tris(2-ethylhexyl) phosphate (TEHP), and Cyanex 923 (a mixture of four different trialkyl phosphine oxides) dissolved in n-paraffin. Indigenously synthesized DNPPA was purified by two routes namely (a) liquid–solid separation using neodymium salt, and (b) liquid–liquid separation using mono ethylene glycol. An attempt was made to compare different phosphoric acid extractants viz. di(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid (D2EHPA), 2-ethylhexyl phosphonic acid-mono-2-ethylhexyl ester (PC88A), bis(2,4,4-trimethyl pentyl) phosphinic acid (Cyanex 272) vis-à-vis DNPPA, for the extraction of uranium from nitric acid medium. The effects of different experimental parameters such as aqueous phase acidity (up to 8M HNO3), extractant and metal ion concentration etc. on uranium extraction were investigated. The presence of neutral oxodonors like TBP, TEHP, Cyanex 923 along with DNPPA showed synergistic enhancement in the extraction of U(VI) in the order: Cyanex 923>TBP>TEHP. The stoichiometry of the extracted U(VI) species using synergistic mixtures conformed to UO2(HA2)2·2S. These studies suggest that binary mixtures of DNPPA and neutral donors can be applied for uranium recovery from nitric acid media.Uranium is extensively used as fuel in nuclear reactors for electricity generation. The nuclear fuel cycle starts with the mining of uranium and ends with the disposal of nuclear waste. Nuclear fuel cycle operations lead to generation of large volumes of solid/liquid wastes containing varying amounts of uranium and other radiotoxic elements ( Uranium extraction from different acid media such as H In this context, phenyl phosphoric acids such as dioctyl-/dinonyl- phenyl phosphoric acid (HA: DOPPA/DNPPA) have been evaluated for the extraction/recovery of uranium from phosphate media ( An attempt has, therefore, been made to investigate the extraction behavior of uranium from nitric acid medium using DNPPA either alone or in combination with neutral extractants such as TBP, TEHP, and Cyanex 923, under varying aqueous phase acidity (up to 8 The quality of DNPPA used in solvent extraction studies is an important factor which may adversely affect the metal ion recovery efficiency. Therefore, detailed procedures of two different DNPPA purification routes have been described and compared. Non-linear least square regression and slope analysis of the solvent extraction data allowed the prediction of the stoichiometry of the predominant species formed during the extraction process. DNPPA (procured from Heavy Water Plant, Tuticorin, India) contained 87–90% diester, 4–5% mono ester and 7–8% neutral compounds. The presence of impurities such as unreacted nonyl phenol (neutral) and mono nonyl phenyl phosphoric acid (MNPPA) adversely affects the extraction of U(VI) from aqueous medium i.e. it leads to (a) reduced uranium extraction efficiency, (b) difficult phase separation, and (c) poor stripping of uranium. Therefore, the purification of DNPPA was carried out prior to solvent extraction studies employing two procedures as described below: A weighed quantity of impure DNPPA product was dissolved in benzene and was treated with 70% methanol/water mixture at least 3–4 times maintaining organic-to-aqueous phase ratio (O/A) as 1. Due to its hydrophilic nature, the mono ester fraction (present in DNPPA) was dissolved in methanol phase and was separated out. The resulting DNPPA/benzene phase (obtained after methanol wash) was then loaded with Nd(III) by equilibrating with 30–40 This purification route involves successive washings of DNPPA with NaOH solution and with mono ethylene glycol to remove impurities like nonyl phenol and mono-nonyl phenyl phosphoric acid (MNPPA), respectively. Nonyl phenol was separated in the form of insoluble third-phase after alkali wash of DNPPA. The washed and dried product was finally distilled using centrifugal molecular distillation unit at 100 A weighed quantity of DNPPA (~ TBP (BDH, 97% pure), Cyanex 923 (Cytec, USA, ~ Unicam UV500 (UV–visible) spectrophotometer and Jobinyvon Emission, Model No JY 328 (Inductively Coupled Plasma-Atomic Emission Spectroscopy, ICP-AES) instruments were used to determine the concentration of uranium and other trace impurities. Uranium concentrations in the aqueous phase were measured either by spectrophotometry using 2-(5-bromo-2-pyridylazo)-5-diethylaminophenol (Br-PADAP) as chromophore ( Solvent extraction experiments were carried out at least in duplicate by equilibrating equal volumes (15 Percentage extraction (%E) and stripping (%S) of uranium were defined as: Initial uranium concentration in the aqueous phase Uranium concentration in the aqueous phase at equilibrium Initial uranium concentration in the organic phase before each stripping stage Uranium concentration in the organic phase after each stripping stage   Reproducibility of the extraction data and the material balance was within error limits (±   The presence of neutral donors like TBP, TEHP, Cyanex 923 along with DNPPA showed synergistic enhancement in U(VI) extraction as compared to the pure extractants. In view of the strong synergistic enhancement in the extraction of U(VI), further experiments were carried out using the binary mixtures of DNPPA and Cyanex 923. Where ‘S’ refers to neutral oxodonor, Cyanex 923. Assuming that the activity coefficients of the species involved in the extraction process were constant under experimental conditions, the values of Similarly, the relationship between log The values of Using Eqs. This equation is valid at fixed concentration of PC88A, and A When concentration of neutral donor, S, is kept constant, it can be written as: Eqs. Stripping of uranium from 0.02 Extraction of U(VI) from nitric acid medium using DNPPA has been described. With increase in acid concentration there was a decrease in Authors thank Heavy Water Plant, Tuticorin, India for providing DNPPA.