The abundance of pyrite and other sulfide minerals in mine rock piles is a potentially significant if not a determinative factor in terms of the geochemical and geomechanical evolution of the dumps as oxidation produces acid solutions that drive hydrolysis reactions. A technique is presented here that supports the quantitative determination of pyrite abundance in mine rock dumps by heavy liquid mineral separation to concentrate pyrite for powder X-ray diffraction and then Rietveld method refinement of the diffraction data on a large number of samples using commonly available laboratory equipment. In order to improve and constrain the accuracy of XRD results, binary (pyrite-quartz) and 6-part mineral mixtures (pyrite and rock-forming andesite minerals) spanning a wide range of pyrite concentrations were prepared gravimetrically and run as standards. These standards were then used to minimize errors in pyrite abundance data by constraining key input parameters in the Rietveld refinement. A new polynomial relationship was derived between diffracting crystallite size and the Brindley microabsorption correction input size. This method provides a means to determine uncertainties in pyrite abundance, whereas conventional Rietveld refinement techniques done without the use of standards yield only statistical measures of the least-squares fit, rather than absolute uncertainties in mineral constituent weight percentages. The technique was applied to a number of mine rock pile samples and the uncertainty in the results determined by applying the relationship derived from the 6-part gravimetric standards to the results of the Brindley corrected Rietveld refinements. Uncertainties determined by this method are found to be on the order of ±10% for samples with pyrite content greater than ∼10wt% and ±30% for samples with pyrite content less than 10wt%. In order to evaluate the technique’s improvement upon traditional visual mineral abundance estimation the quantitative results are compared to manual volumetric estimates.The mining industry is beginning to appreciate that sulfide-bearing mine rock dumps are among the most chemically reactive rocks known on earth and that their long-term environmental management poses unprecedented challenges and significant costs. This growing awareness of the environmental sensitivity of mine rock piles is complicated by the fact that these rock piles have often been emplaced over a long time period with variable source rocks, while few records were kept, and before concern about their stability developed. Hence, the data relevant to mine rock pile behavior, especially in terms of geomechanical stability and acid production, is scant at best in some mines facing closure, or in those requiring a closure plan in order to keep operating. This paucity of available data on sulfide mineral abundance motivates the development of a new quantitative strategy for mine rock pile characterization required for modeling their long-term geochemical evolution and geotechnical stability. Specifically, pyrite abundance, distribution, and grain size (surface area) in combination with O As in natural supergene leaching and enrichment systems, it is the exposure of pyrite to bacterially catalyzed oxidation in the air-filled voids in the unsaturated zone of the rock pile that drives the creation of H Mine rock piles in general pose several problems when evaluating and quantifying their mineralogical composition. The manner in which the dumps were emplaced is a complicating factor, in that successive dumping events may have been separated by a considerable length of time, allowing oxidation and weathering to occur at the dump surface. This weathered surface is then covered by subsequent dumping events and a horizon that may be considerably different from the surrounding material is included in the growing pile. The rock fragments comprising the pile are of varying size as a result of blasting and can range from boulders to rock dust, greatly influencing the rate at which weathering and alteration reactions take place by means of increasing the effective surface area available for reaction. The model was developed and applied to mine rock piles at the porphyry Mo mine at Questa, New Mexico, and has wide application to many other existing mine rock piles worldwide including porphyry Cu and massive sulfide deposits. The Questa Mo mine, owned and operated by Molycorp, Inc., is located in the Sangre de Cristo Mountains in Taos County, northern New Mexico, USA, at an elevation of 2400–2900 The goal of this study is to develop a method that supports accurate and rapid quantification of mineralogy, especially pyrite, in mine rock piles. The level of accuracy and the degree to which these results are reliable (i.e. uncertainties), are extremely important in regards to providing meaningful inputs for geochemical modeling, and so the technique must both minimize error and provide for a reliable assessment of these uncertainties. In order to be practical, the analysis strategy must be both accurate and fast as an enormous number of samples are required to adequately characterize the heterogeneous nature of these large mine rock piles. Standard mineral mixtures were prepared to assess the accuracy and precision of the analysis scheme with simple binary (2-part) mineral mixtures of varying amounts of quartz and pyrite, and also a set of 6-part mixtures intended to simulate the altered andesite that is characteristic of the Questa site. All standard mineral materials are from the research grade series of Ward’s Natural Science Supply. The binary mixtures consist of quartz from Minas Gerais, Brazil and pyrite from Huanzala, Peru. Five to six replicates each were prepared in 1% increments over a span of 1–10 The 6-part mineral mixtures are composed of the same Brazilian quartz and Peruvian pyrite, as well as andesine plagioclase from Virginia (USA), orthoclase from India, montmorillonite from Arizona (USA), and kaolinite from New Mexico (USA). The silicate minerals were mixed in the following gravimetric proportions to simulate a slightly altered synthetic andesite: 2 parts andesine, 1 part each of quartz and orthoclase, and 1/3 part each of montmorillonite and kaolinite. The synthetic andesite was combined with pyrite in 1% increments over the span of 1–5 Samples of mine rock pile material in this study originate in several different mine rock piles and were collected from drill cores as well as sampling trenches cut into the rock piles. Thus, the sample inventory varies widely with respect to composition and texture. Following initial field collection, samples are crushed to ∼7 While the Mo ores at the Questa site are relatively enriched in pyrite, abundance of pyrite in the dump material varies tremendously and is often too sparse in bulk samples for accurate quantification by XRD. XRD analysis is therefore preceded by concentration of the dense mineral fraction including pyrite by heavy liquid separation so that the artificial concentrations in the separate are well above the detection limit of the XRD instrument used. Lithium polytungstate heavy liquid provides a suitable separation medium and offers the safest handling characteristics of the available heavy liquids. Differential gravitational settling is accelerated by the use of a centrifuge to increase the effective gravitational forces acting on the grains, causing sinking of grains denser than the heavy liquid, and buoyancy of the grains less dense than the liquid. Within the context of this study, a heavy liquid separation technique is employed that increases both the total heavy mineral fraction recovered as well as the precision (reproducibility) of the technique in regards to the hundreds of samples needed to accurately characterize rock pile materials. After selecting approximately 5 After heavy liquid separation of ∼5 The heavy mineral concentrate is wet ground in acetone by hand in an agate mortar and pestle until the operator is satisfied that no more mineral crystals are felt and heard to be cracking and the grind becomes consistent in terms of texture and acoustic emissions. This grinding procedure is the single greatest source of variability in this sample preparation scheme, as it relies on a human element of perception as to when the grinding is complete. In order to minimize this effect, the same operator ground nearly all of the samples in this study. The use of mechanized milling equipment such as a McCrone micronizing mill is precluded in this application by the time required for each sample to be ground as well as by the small amount of separated heavy mineral fraction material available. Given the properties of heavy liquid separates, preparation of uniform powder grain mounts of the samples is difficult. A traditional front, side or rear packed powder mount ( A common method of quickly producing a random-powder mount is to sprinkle the powder onto a slide or sample holder coated with a viscous material. Common high viscosity materials typically chosen include Vaseline, machine oil, and silicone grease. The sprinkle mount has the disadvantage of producing a quasi-monolayer of diffracting material that may not yield reliable diffraction intensities, while having the advantage of not producing any diffraction peak shifts due to sample height displacement ( The method employed in this study uses 0.2 This technique allows small amounts of sample to be reliably analyzed with materials commonly available with a high degree of reproducibility and to do so efficiently so that a large number of samples can be processed. Variations in mineralogical composition homogeneity within the sample volume are minimized as the viscosity of the grease is high enough to prevent differential gravitational settling of the minerals present. There is no sample height displacement effect because the sample height is fixed at the same height as the rim of the sample holder. Preferred orientation effects are also minimized as the sample is suspended in the grease in a random manner. This method also allows for the easy removal of the prepared sample and subsequent long-term archiving. Disadvantages are present in this method, most significantly through the introduction of increased background levels from the grease ( XRD data were collected on a GBC Scientific Equipment MMA (Mini Materials Analyzer) automated Bragg–Brentano diffractometer with a 3° incident Soller slit, 2° divergence slit, 1° scatter slit, and 0.3° receiving slit, as well as a Xe proportional detector fitted with a graphite monochromator and a 10 sample autochanger stage. Scans were conducted from 4° to 100° 2 X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) has been a widely applied method of determining the quantitative mineralogical composition of materials for almost 70 year ( Inherent in the RIR methods is a data reduction in the creation of a set of integrated intensities of resolved diffraction peaks into intensity lines. By utilizing the whole dataset obtained from an XRD scan, considerably more information is available for mineral quantification. The In practice, these conditions are difficult to meet across the wide variety of lithology and mineralogy present in mine rock pile material. Samples containing minerals possessing distinct crystal habit and which cannot be presented to the X-ray beam in a truly random fashion despite careful sample preparation, i.e. phylosillicates, can still be quantified accurately with the inclusion of the intensity-conserving March function during Rietveld refinement ( Microabsorption contrast is a more difficult problem, especially in regards to mineral quantification. First described by Linear absorption coefficients representative of X-ray absorption per The traditional solutions for minimizing absorption contrast effects are to either irradiate the sample with a different X-ray source or to reduce the powdered sample’s particle size to the order of 1 The effects of absorption contrast between phases can be corrected by applying a particle absorption factor All X-ray diffraction data were refined with SIROQUANT v2.5 by CSIRO of Australia ( There are several particle size measurement techniques which will produce an overall particle size distribution including sieving, laser diffraction, and electron microscopy. However, these methods do not discriminate between various mineral phases present. The microabsorption contrast between pyrite and silicate minerals is sufficient so that a particle size for the Brindley correction parameter for each phase is required. Optical microscopy in reflected light allows a direct measure of the physical particle size as well as a differentiation between opaque minerals (sulfides) and translucent minerals (silicates). The samples were prepared for optical analysis using an acrylic disc of 25 In order to interpret the resultant particle size distribution in terms of a median particle size with respect to mineralogy, a stereological correction is necessary. It is a well-known phenomenon that a plane slicing a system of randomly spaced spheres will produce a distribution of sections of those spheres that underestimates the true median diameter of the spheres because the plane will only rarely intersect the center of each sphere. A number of stereological corrections are available, with the Saltykov area analysis being the most appropriate for the present application ( In Rietveld refinement of the binary quartz–pyrite standard mixtures, the effects of microabsorption contrast becomes immediately apparent in that systematic over or under calculation of pyrite wt% is found by varying the Brindley correction parameter from 1 Standard deviations of the refinement parameters reported by the Reitveld software are often interpreted as a direct indication of the uncertainty in the true quantitative values of the phases present in a sample. Instead, these statistical measures are reflective of the likely uncertainty within the Rietveld least-squares refinement itself. That is, they are indicative of the precision of the least-squares regression, rather than the accuracy of the results of the refinement. For the binary quartz–pyrite system, 10 standards at compositional intervals of approximately 10% pyrite content were examined. In all, 27,754 grains were measured, which would have been an intractable number under manual optical counting methods. For the 6-part system, 3 standards were analyzed and 7026 grains were measured. As seen in According to Bragg’s law, X-ray scattering from crystallographic planes ( When the diffracting crystallite size is calculated from diffraction peak broadening by means of the Scherrer equation (Eq. The crystallite size given by the Scherrer equation can be thought of as the ultimate diffracting crystallite size; whereas the Brindley correction particle size can be thought of as conceptually analogous to an aggregate of these diffracting crystallites, more akin to the actual particle size of mineral grains in the XRD sample mount. By establishing the relationship of the Scherrer size to the Brindley size, an The wide variation in optically determined particle size yields a pyrite aggregation factor that is similarly variable and which has no compositionally dependant trend, whereas the quartz aggregation factor is more consistent across a wide range of compositions ( By fixing one of the two Brindley sizes, the possible combinations of input parameters drop from practically infinite to a more tractable number. As seen in An appropriate pyrite Brindley size that yields the most reliable results with the quartz Brindley size fixed at 6 As a more realistic application of this technique, the same rationale and methodology applied to the binary standards is invoked for the 6-part system of standards. In this case, because the optically determined particle size for the silicates in the 6-part system were comparable and within the maximum and minimum bounds of the binary system, a similar Brindley size of 6 In order to apply the appropriate Brindley corrected Rietveld refinement to a sample of unknown composition, a refinement is first done with a Brindley particle size input of 10  Within the context of mine rock pile characterization, quantitative mineralogical analysis by XRD and Rietveld refinement is a powerful and readily employable technique. Advantages to this technique include a straightforward sample preparation scheme with a high sample throughput in a laboratory setting that is relatively common. Rietveld method based quantitative XRD analysis is often described as a standardless method, in that no mineral standard diffraction data are collected and used in the quantitative analysis. This avoids problems associated with obtaining mineral standard materials that are similar to and prepared in the same way as the unknown samples. However, without use of standards, the absolute accuracy of the results cannot be ascertained. A good idea of the precision of the model is found by examining the uncertainty estimates (standard deviations) provided by the least-squares regression, but this uncertainty reflects a statistical measure based solely on the refinement input parameters. In effect, while an XRD user can derive quantitative results, the accuracy of the results in relation to measured, compositionally known samples are unconstrained. Given the 14 input parameters in the Rietveld method, a reasonable concern can be raised in quantitative XRD by the Rietveld method about how so many parameters can yield unambiguous results without use of standards. In order to constrain the uncertainties associated with quantitative results, it is necessary to analyze a set of gravimetrically prepared mineral mixtures. This independent check of the analysis scheme allows the parameters, which can cause significant errors to be adjusted appropriately, especially with respect to sample composition. A very significant factor in the context of mine rock pile material is microabsorption contrast between minerals. The effects of microabsorption contrast are well described in the literature, but in practice are commonly ignored due to the difficulty in compensating for them. The Brindley correction is effective when an appropriate input particle size is found by independent means. Commonly applied arbitrary “default” values are shown to be a major source of error. Here a method for determining an appropriate Brindley correction input that is based on empirically derived data from a set of standards with a known gravimetric composition has been developed. By establishing a relationship between Scherrer size and Brindley size in the form of an aggregation factor, a useful tool has been created allowing for the appropriate selection of an input parameter that has a substantial benefit in increasing the accuracy of results. Simple binary standards of quartz and pyrite are representative of the general mineralogy present in the mine rock dumps to a first order approximation. Six-part mineral mixtures are a better approximation of the mine rock dump material, and serve to more realistically constrain the error associated with a quantitative result. In this study, errors for the 6-part standards are approximately twice those of the binary standards, suggesting that the diffraction analyst can chose an appropriate level of standard mineral mixture complexity based on the needs of the specific analysis situation. This establishes the usefulness of incorporating at least a set of binary standards into any Rietveld based quantitative XRD analysis, especially when pyrite or a significant microabsorption contrast is involved. Considering the relative ease of incorporating a set of standards into an analysis scheme, the use of standards as an independent assessment of uncertainty levels is recommended even in situations where absorption contrast is minimal. In the context of the stated goals of this study, which are to provide a reliable and efficient method to quantitatively assess the abundance of sulfides in mine rock pile material, the method has proven to be practical. Not only does the technique present a method that allows for processing and analysis of many hundreds of samples, but it also provides a means with which to evaluate the accuracy and precision of those results. When attempting to model the geochemistry and geotechnical evolution of these sorts of rock piles, this minimization and constraining of uncertainty is crucial when assessing the reliability of any type of modeling. This work was funded by a grant from Molycorp, Inc., as part of its Questa Mine Rock Pile Weathering and Stability Project as well as various UC-Berkeley fellowships, most notably the Charles Meyer Fellowship. The authors thank M. Logsdon of Geochimica, Inc. for helpful proposal reviews, T. Chatwin of the University of Utah for project administration, K. Donahue and numerous others from New Mexico Tech for sample collection, processing and shipment, T. Teague of UC-Berkeley for shop and lab expertise, C. Kelaart of CSIRO for SIROQUANT expertise and advice, J. Krauss of Analytical X-ray Instrument Sales for technical support, and A. Vanegas of UC-Berkeley for computer support. The authors also thank two anonymous reviewers for helpful comments.