The hot deformation behavior of T1 (W18Cr4V) high-speed steel was investigated by means of continuous compression tests performed on a Gleeble 1500 Thermomechanical simulator over a wide range of temperatures (950–1150°C) with strain rates of 0.001–10s−1 and true strains of 0–0.7. The flow stress under the above-mentioned hot deformation conditions is predicted using a BP artificial neural network. The architecture of the network includes three input parameters: strain rate 
                        
                           ε
                           ̇
                        
                     , temperature T and true strain ε; and just one output parameter: the flow stress σ. Two hidden layers are adopted, the first hidden layer including nine neurons and the second 10 neurons. It has been verified that a BP artificial neural network with 3–9–10–1 architecture can predict the flow stress of high-speed steel during hot deformation very well. Compared with the prediction method of flow stress using the Zener–Holloman parameter and hyperbolic sine stress function, the prediction method using the BP artificial neural network has higher efficiency and accuracy.During the hot deformation process, there are many factors that influence the flow stress of the metal. The effects of these factors on the flow stress are very complex and the relationships between the flow stress and these factors are non-linear: consequently, it is very difficult to describe the flow stress of a metal during hot deformation. In the past, the main description method of flow stress during hot deformation was the constitutive equation or mathematical model of the measured flow stress curves resulting from experiments. However, a lot of the mechanisms concerning the effects of various factors on the flow stress cannot be accepted to construe and describe with sufficient accuracy for present day purposes. Consequently, empirical methods have to be adopted, i.e., the selection of an empirical mathematical model in which constants in mathematical model are determined by means of regression. Considerable work have been done in order to develop constitutive equation in the past years Unlike the method of regression, the artificial neural network (ANN) does not require a mathematical model. ANN can perform not only a highly accurate non-linear fit, but also retains memory of data. Further, the ANN is powerful in handling dispersed data, and moreover it can also adjust the state of the network on the base of the original network in order to adapt to new data-sets through training with these new data-sets. In this paper, an ANN is used in predicting the flow stress of T1 high-speed steel during hot deformation, and the optimum structure of the ANN is also proposed. The prediction results are compared with those obtained using the Zener–Holloman parameter and hyperbolic sine stress function. The composition of the T1 high-speed steel used is given in True stress/true strain curves for different temperatures and strain rates are shown in At present, the flow stress of metal during hot deformation is usually analyzed using the creep equation The structure of a neuron is shown in A multi-layer perceptron (MLP) is a kind of widely used ANN. Between, the input layer and output layer of this kind of network are several hidden layers. Theoretically, an MLP with a hidden layer can achieve an estimation of the function very well through an appropriate training. An MLP with a hidden layer is shown in The training of an MLP usually adopts a back-propagation algorithm (BPA), which was first proposed by Rumelhart et al. The training rule of an ANN adopts the continuous perceptron training rule that is also called the Delta rule. The training value is In order to minimize error, the weights should be adjusted with respect to the direction of negative gradient, consequently the following is taken: The unique austenitization procedure of all samples is taken, thus it can be considered that the original microstructures of the samples are identical. Therefore, the input mode is ANN requires that the range of both input data and output data should be 0–1, consequently, the data must be unified. The widely used method of unification is The architecture of the ANN adopted in this paper is 3–9–10–1 ( The investigation results of this paper indicates that the ANN can predict the flow stress of T1 high-speed steel during hot deformation very well. However, the following two problems should be investigated further. Firstly, there is not yet theoretical guidance to the determination of the number of hidden layers and neurons in each hidden layer: however, different architectures from ANN have great effects on the prediction results. A BP ANN can predict the flow stress of T1 high-speed steel during hot deformation very well and the prediction results from ANN show greater accuracy than those from the conventional regression method. The optimum architecture of the ANN is 3–9–10–1: the input includes The authors wish to acknowledge funding by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC). Acknowledgement is also due to Professor Dang Zijiu and Professor Zhang Yan who provided help in the hot deformation test. The authors are indebted to Dr. Zhou Zhijie, Dr. Gu Wentao and Dr. Li Chaoyang for their help in the investigation.