Converter slags are by-products of pyrometallurgical processing of copper concentrates in Chile, which contain significant amounts of copper (close to 40.0% in the material considered here), converting them from a passive material (material that is not feasible to process) to an active material (it can be processed). This study analyses column leaching of converter slag with the use of ammonium hydroxide. A preliminary analysis was carried out on acid leaching (in an agitated system). Later, in ammonia medium, several variables were assessed, including particle size and NH4OH concentration, as well as different grades of acid purity to adjust the pH of the leaching solution. The experiments were carried out in 1.2 m high columns with a cross-section diameter of 7.5 × 10−2 m, using 2.0 kg of slag. The results show that using an acid system (i.e. ordinary leaching), reagent consumption reached 473.9 kg H2SO4/ton of slag, with copper recovery of only 50.8% and Fe recovery of over 67.0%. On the other hand, using an ammonia system, the recovery values reached 87.7% for Cu, with almost no impurities, with reagent consumption of 3.8 kg H2SO4/ton of slag. The working pH was 10.5. These recovery levels are due to the leaching of Cu2O and Cu° from the converter slag. When using an acid contaminated with impurities to adjust the pH, the copper extraction rate was increased. The impurities of antimony, bismuth and arsenic are not significant. The copper in pregnant solution (PLS) obtained was put into contact with NaSH to generate hydrated chalcanthite (CuSO4·5H2O) with a high grade of purity, while the remaining solution can be returned to the leaching stage due to its high level of ammonia content.Converter slag is a waste product in pyrometallurgy processing of copper concentrate. Specifically in the conversion process, where oxygen-rich air is used to oxidise the copper species (such as Cu In our study, the converter slag had a high level of Cu content, reaching values up to 40.0% Cu. Therefore, it is important to develop alternative processes to process the slag. Currently this slag is disposed as produced, however there are pyrometallurgical processes for copper recovery, such as the use of electric furnaces (HLE). However, there is a motivation to develop alternative and environmental friendly methods, such as via hydrometallurgical processing. Several studies have processed converter slag by agitated leaching. Altungogan and Tümen( The studies mentioned above discuss the treatment of converter slag in different systems, always with agitation, and with the use of very fine particle sizes. Several of these examples required pre-processing of the slag (sulphurisation and/or roasting). However, none of these investigations used coarse particle sizes nor a leaching system in line with current industrial practice, such as percolation columns representing heap leaching. Here we propose a method based on column leaching. Since column testing is a preliminary step for scaling to heap leaching ( The Converter slag studied here was provided from the “Ventanas” Smelter located in Quintero-Chile, which belongs to CODELCO. The process flowsheet of “Ventanas” Smelter is shown in Samples of size 7.5 mm were analyzed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Thus, the morphology and degree of occlusion of the converter slag particles could be known. For the acid leaching, the experiments were carried out by firstly placing 1 L of sulphuric acid leaching solution into a 2 L reactor. The temperature of the acid leaching solution was at about 25 °C. The reactor was comprised of a heating mantle, condenser (to decrease the evaporation rate), mechanical agitator, thermocouple and a tube to extract liquid samples. The scheme used in this work (acid leaching) can be seen in detail in a previous paper ( Ammonia leaching was carried out in leaching columns measuring 1.2 m in height, with a cross-sectional diameter of 7.5 × 10 After performing the experiments, the liquid samples were sent for analysis by Atomic Absorption Spectroscopy (AAS) in order to analyse the Cu and Fe content. In some cases, analysis was carried out for arsenic, bismuth and antimony. Solid samples were also analyzed by washing and drying residues. The analysis method in this case was XRD and backscattered electrons images (BSE). Preliminary tests were carried out to evaluate reagent consumption and metal recovery rates with normal (commonly used) leaching with sulphuric acid. The experiments were carried out at different pH values: 1.0, 2.0, 2.5 and 3.0. The pH was adjusted by adding undiluted concentrated sulphuric acid (98.0% purity). A total of 125 g of converter slag at 30.0% solids was used. It can be seen that as the pH values increase (becoming less acid), copper recovery decreases from 50.8 to 18.3%, for pH values of 1.0 and 3.0, correspondingly. The consumption of acid per ton of slag also fell from 473.9 to 54.8 kg H The reactions above show that the copper comes from delafossite and cuprite. However, part of the copper is lost in the solution due to disproportionation (2Cu As a result of the above, a base leaching system was used to lower the consumption of sulphuric acid, increase copper recovery, decrease impurity extraction and concentrate the useful metal. The leaching solution chosen was ammonium hydroxide.  It can be seen in this figure that as the particle size decreases, copper extraction from the converter slag increases. Thus, for an average particle size of 11.0 mm and a time of 1700 h, copper recovery was 40.2%, while for a size of 5.5 mm, the recovery rate reached 87.7%, i.e. 2.2 times higher. This increase is due to two factors: Higher level of metal liberation (copper species), and the increased surface area of the particles allowing greater reaction between the NH Copper extraction from converter slag mainly occurs due to the diffusion of the leaching solution through the slag by means of micro-fissures (pores) in the particles( BSE analysis was performed on sample leached for particle size conditions of 7.5 mm and 1700 h. The result is shown in This interesting discovery about the presence of microcracks inside the slag could be studied in more depth through studies with techniques such as B.E.T. (Brunauer, Emmett and Teller), where it would allow to determine the specific surface of the solid. With regard to impurities, iron recovery can also be seen in the Three different concentrations were evaluated: 1.2, 1.6 and 2.4 M of NH The figure shows that the NH A sample was taken from the final experiment (2.4 M of NH Therefore, copper compounds, such as Cu The compounds that provide copper ions are delafossite (copper ferrite), cuprite and metallic copper. In the case of CuFeO In the case of cuprite, it can be leached by the decomposition of ammonium hydroxide when in contact with water. This instantaneously produces ammonia (NH For reaction 6, the hydronium ion follows an electrochemical process that provides the necessary electrons to generate the oxide/reduction pair (using reaction 8) and thus dissolve the Cu The free cupric ions in the solution (released via reactions 6 and 7) form complexes due to the ammonium ion, generating copper tetra-amine (Cu(NH Finally, the Cu In the case of the metallic copper, the oxidation reaction that represents it is given by expression 11: The leaching of Cu° then follows an electrochemical leaching process, using reaction 8 to generate the oxide/reduction pair. The cupric ion produced in the previous expression is complexed in accordance with Reaction 9. Therefore, considering the decomposition of the NH For the tests carried out so far, a chemical agent was used as the pH regulator in the medium. This was high grade sulphuric acid of grade A purity (purity of 98.0%). The amount of acid used to maintain the pH value was 3.8 kg H It can be seen that for both acid types, copper recovery reaches a value of 69.0% after 1700 h. However, the difference lies in the copper extraction rate. Thus, after 500 h, Cu recovery for the grade A and grade C acids were 28.5 and 41%, respectively. The impurities present in the grade C acid should also be noted. These impurities were: arsenic, bismuth and antimony. The presence of these impurities was not significant. Arsenic, bismuth and antimony recovery reached values of 18.0, 3.8 and 3.3%, respectively. These low amounts in the leaching solution are due to the low solubility of the impurities in the ammonia system, or possibly to the baseness of the solution leading to their precipitation. These results indicate that the use of grade C acid, which is an acid waste product, would be recommended for the process of converter slag leaching, producing a copper leaching solution that is free of impurities. The grade C acid requires further study in order to consolidate this analysis. After obtaining high levels of copper recovery from the converter, the copper was then removed from the pregnant leaching solution (PLS) using sodium hydrosulphide (NaSH) to generate two products: i) Copper precipitate, and ii) A residual solution with ammonium hydroxide. The main objective of this process was to be able to reuse the remaining solution, which is free of useful metal, in a new converter slag leaching cycle. The tests were carried out with the use of a solution rich in copper at 15200 mg/L in 0.2 L of ammonia solution. This was put in contact with different volumes of NaSH (at a concentration of 42.0% p/p) in a range of 2.5 to 40.0 mL. The working temperature was 20 °C with agitation at 300 RPM. The experiment was run for 10 min. The results for copper concentration in the solution as a function of the added volume of NaSH are shown in It can be seen that as the volume of NaSH added to the solution increases, the copper concentration decreases. Thus, for a volume of 1.8 mL of NaSH, the precipitation efficiency was 12.3%, while for 7.5 mL, the efficiency increased to 82.3%. For volumes over 10.0 mL, the efficiency of the precipitation reached 99.0%, obtaining a solution with very little copper. By in situ observation, it was seen that solid species were generated in the solutions. In order to identify the species in question in the ammonia medium, the precipitates formed during each test (2.5, 5.0, 7.5 and 10.0 mL NaSH) were extracted, washed with acetone (to eliminate surface moisture) and dried at 30 °C for subsequent XRD analysis. The results of this analysis are shown in  Hence, using concentrations above 7.5 mL NaSH, the reaction representing the formation of chalcanthite (CuSO Then, as crystals of CuSO  Copper sulphate pentahydrate is commonly used the agro-fisheries industry in animal fee, as a fungicide, in tank cleaning to remove algae, among other uses. Previous research conducted in the leaching of converter slag where focused on pre-processed slag particles, via size reduction and chemical treatment. Here we successfully processed the slag as received, with no further treatment. Since converter slag cannot follow the traditional route for copper oxide leaching due to high sulphuric acid consumption, an ammoniacal leaching route was implemented for column leaching. The column testing shows a high degree of copper recovery (up to 88%). Increasing the ammonium oxide increases the leaching rate, without affecting the recovery. Among the leached species, the main ones are Cu The copper in pregnant solution produced by the ammoniacal leaching was recovered via precipitation with sodium bisulphide (NaSH). This was added to the pregnant solution, producing high purity chalcanthite. The residual solution, high in ammonia, can be returned to the leaching process. Given the success in the implementation of ammonium leaching of slag at laboratory scale, the concept can be expanded to consider scaling to heap leaching at industrial scale.