The purpose of this study was to obtain and characterize the oriented collagen/hydroxyapatite (COLL/HA) composite materials, using different kind of electric field. The orientation process takes place due to the dipolar collagen structure. The collagen molecules are electrically charged and can become oriented if an electric field is applied. The composites were obtained by the co-precipitation method starting from collagen gel and hydroxyapatite precursor. The mineralized collagen gel was introduced in an electric field for 1h, frozen and lyophilized. In order to study the orientation process parameters, two types of electric fields were tested: pulsatory and superposed (both direct and pulsatory). The obtained materials were characterized by XRD, FTIR and SEM. Best results in what it concerns the oriented character of the microstructures, as resulted from SEM images, were obtained for a pulsatory field of 0.93V/cm, the presence of the direct electric field component decreasing the orientation degree. The average orientation degree, calculated at the magnification of 1000× was about 95%.Presently, the most studied composite materials seem to be those based on collagen and hydroxyapatite There are many collagen/hydroxyapatite based composite materials used as bone substitutes. The main problem with these materials is that they have lower mechanical properties than bone. The most important step in the development of collagen/hydroxyapatite based composite materials with improved mechanical properties for, especially, compact bone grafting, is to achieve an oriented collagen/hydroxyapatite pattern. It is known that the cancelous bony tissue and the cortical bony tissue have different mechanical characteristics, due to their different microstructure Consequently, many researchers are focusing their work in order to obtain oriented structures, with improved mechanical properties. Till now, the best results on collagen/hydroxyapatite orientation were obtained by Cunyou Wu Many research dates show that the orientation of different materials occurs in electric field. Such materials are: poly (γ-benzyl-glutamate) The aim of this work is to induce orientation of collagenous pattern by applying different electric fields. For this purpose three types of fields were applied: direct, pulsatory and composed electric fields. A key point of this work was to explain why the pulsatory electric field gave the best results regarding to the natural osteosynthesis which occurs in young cortical bones (from the point of view of orientation). The collagen gel was obtained in the Leather and Footwear Research Institute-Collagen Department, starting from calf hides, by chemical and enzymatic extraction. The collagen molar mass is Hydroxyapatite was obtained For orientation purpose of the mineralized collagen gel, there were considered two types of electric field: pulsatory field (0.93 The mineralized collagen gel is maintained for 1 The electric field is obtained with a “home-made” device, consisting in two different electric generators, each with its own role. One is responsible for the direct current, while the other for the pulsatory current generation. These two generators can work separately, at a maximum potential of 30 When no electric field is applied, the collagen molecules dipoles are randomly disposed, without any orientation. If an electric field is imposed, the collagen dipoles are becoming oriented, due to the interaction between collagen and the electric field. The electric field parameters influence on the characteristics of the composite materials as it can be relieved by SEM, XRD, FTIR, all analysis being performed on dried collagen/hydroxyapatite composite samples. They were compared with the properties of samples which weren't treated in electric field. The obtained material was investigated through X-ray diffraction, IR spectroscopy and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). X-ray diffraction analysis was performed using a Shimadzu XRD 6000 diffractometer at room temperature. In all cases the Cu Kα radiation from a Cu X-ray tube was used. The samples were scanned in the Bragg angle, 2 SEM images were obtained by HITACHI S2600N with an EDAX probe, the samples being covered with a silver layer. For IR spectroscopic measurements a Shimadzu FTIR 8400 spectrophotometer was used. The spectra were recorded over the wave number range of 400–4000 The X-ray diffraction study ( The infrared spectroscopy was used for all samples of mineralized collagen gels in order to study the collagen stability in the applied electric field ( The infrared spectra presented in The SEM micrographs ( The mineralization process of collagen gels leads to composite materials with a structure similar to that of spongy bone ( The orientation degree can be quantified function of the deviation angle of each collagen fibers from the direction of the applied electric field. The orientation degree of mineralized collagen fibers is highly influenced by magnification; with the increasing magnification the orientation degree increase. At a magnification of 1000× the average of deviation degree is less than 5% while the orientation degree is more than 95%. The average fiber deviation and also the orientation degree of collagen fibers can be quantified based on the following equations: If a combined electric field is applied, the influence of the electric field on the microstructure of samples is not that evident, the structure exhibiting a very low degree of orientation ( It is well known that the natural osteogenesis is assisted by the collagen piezoelectricity. Briefly, the piezoelectricity can be defined as the translation of the mechanical stress into electric field The aim of this work was to obtain COLL/HA composite materials with oriented structure by orientation in electric field. The dimension of the obtained samples were The used characterization methods prove the synthesis of COLL\HA composite materials without sodium chloride and any other phosphate salts than hydroxyapatite, while IR spectra prove that collagen was not altered during the orientation process. The good stability of the collagen can be explained based on the mild orientation methods; the use of pulsatory electric field did not induce any degradation processes, perhaps due to the very low electro-osmotic flow. SEM images revealed that the samples that were placed in a pulsatory electric field, at 0.93 The pulsatory electric field assisted synthesis of COLL/HA composite materials can be compared with the natural synthesis of cortical bone because in both case, the orientation of the microstructure of the composite material is due to the electric field. Two main differences can be identified: a) in natural osteogenesis the electric field is generated due to a mechanical stress while in the presented paper an external pulsatory electric field is applied in order to induce orientation and b) the applied pulsatory electric field amplitude is much more higher than the electric field produced by piezoelectricity (even if the orientation degree is the same). We may conclude that the presented method for synthesis of COLL\HA composite material, starting from collagen gel and HA precursors, followed by an orientation process performed using an pulsatory electric field, can be a promising method for obtaining COLL/HA composite materials with an oriented microstructure.