Vanadium is an important by-product that is used almost exclusively in ferrous and non-ferrous alloys due to its physical properties such as high tensile strength, hardness, and fatique resistance. Vanadium consumption in the iron and steel industry represents about 85% of the vanadium-bearing products produced worldwide. The ubiquitous vanadium is employed in a wide range of alloys in combination with iron, titanium, nickel, aluminum, chromium, and other metals for a diverse range of commercial applications extending from train rails, tool steels, catalysts, to aerospace. The global supply of vanadium originates from primary sources such as ore feedstock, concentrates, metallurgical slags, and petroleum residues. Vanadium-bearing host minerals consist of carnotite, mottramite, patronite, roscoelite, and vanadinite. Deposits of titaniferous magnetite, uraniferous sandstone, bauxite, phosphate rock, crude oils, oil shale and tar sands host vanadium. Apart from titanomagnetite and ilmenite ore deposits containing vanadium, slags from the ferrous industry are a major source of supply. At present, known world reserves are expected to supply the next century’s needs. Vanadium-bearing materials are treated by means of several processes such as calcium reduction, roast/leach, solvent extraction and ion exchange to recover vanadium either as metal, ferrovanadium, vanadium pentoxide, or in the form of various chemicals. The recovery of aluminum and magnesium metal from smelters and refineries generates vanadium and associated compounds. Countries such as China, South Africa, and Russia are the largest world producers of ferrovanadium and its toxic oxides while about 40 other countries contribute smaller quantities in different forms for global consumption. Australia is poised to become a major player for this essential substance during the next decade. The supply and demand of vanadium products during the past 20 years has been relatively stable and subject to a gradual decline in delivered price. The paper describes established industrial processes for recovery of vanadium from sources such as raw ore and process reverts. The comprehensive condensation of pertinent facts is intended to provide a single reference source rather than the reader perusing many articles.Vanadium was named after the Norse goddess Vanadis which represented beauty and fertility. The appellation was selected since the element’s beautiful colours are used as a dye for the manufacture of pottery and ceramics ( Major players in the global supply of vanadium-bearing products include China, South Africa, and Russia while minor amounts are generated in countries such as Australia (e.g., Vanadium Australia) and the United States (e.g., Orbit Metallurgical Ltd., and Gulf Chemical & Metallurgical Corp.). Several companies such as Mackenzie Bay International are engaged in mineral and resource exploration while many chemical suppliers exist worldwide. In the early 1900s the fatigue resistance and toughness of vanadium was employed in alloys utilized in the fabrication of axles, gears, ball bearings, and crankshafts such as in the famous “Model T” and other Ford cars. Vanadium’s attributes of high tensile strength and hardness make it well suited to form alloys such as nickel/vanadium, chrome/vanadium and ferrovanadium (FeV). Springs and transmission gears are fabricated from chrome–vanadium steels. Aluminum combined with vanadium has provided additional strength for titanium alloys used in missile cases, nuclear reactor components, jet engine housings and associated airframes ( The September 2002 price for American produced ferrovanadium ranged in a narrow band of US$4.55–5.00/lb of vanadium content compared to a wider spread in previous years while vanadium pentoxide prices varied from US$1.35 to US$1.65/lb March 2003 prices for vanadium pentoxide (93% minimum in flakes) rose to US$6.60/lb due to geopolitical tensions. European prices for ferrovanadium dropped from their August level of $3.30–3.80/lb of vanadium content ( Vanadium originates from primary sources such as ores, concentrates, metallurgical slags, and petroleum residues ( Magnetite ores from Australia, China, and Russia plus iron sands from New Zealand constitute the source of vanadium rich slags which serve as feedstock for the production of ferrovanadium employed in the iron and steel industries. Vanadium-bearing phosphate and uranium ores from the USA are a source of vanadium oxides and ammonium vanadates which may be treated by four possible processing routes: namely, (i) ferrovanadium (ii) vanadium metal and alloys (iii) aluminum–vanadium master alloy for titanium alloys and (iv) vanadium chemicals and catalysts. Oil residues from the Middle East and Venezuela coupled with power plant ash and spent catalysts are directed to any other processing route mentioned herein. Currently, only Japan and the USA are regarded as being capable of recovering significant amounts of vanadium from petrochemical residues. About 85% of vanadium consumption arises from the production of high-strength and low-alloy steels (HSLA) in conjunction with tool and die steels, another 10% is employed in the aerospace industry which requires titanium–aluminum alloys, while the remainder reports to the chemical industry ( The USA is an established exporter of vanadium products while remaining a net importer of vanadium-bearing raw materials ( An economic impact arises from secondary vanadium production worldwide. This is generated from (i) iron and steel manufacture, (ii) as a co-product from uranium production and (iii) recycling. The pig iron from steel manufacture contains the majority of vanadium-bearing material smelted with the iron ore. The molten pig iron is oxygen lanced to produce a slag containing 12–24% V which is either treated by downstream high temperature smelting or alternatively chilled then treated by solvent extraction (SX) to produce V A publication titled It is noteworthy that China and Russia presently account for about 67% of the world’s new vanadium metal production while South Africa contributes about 30% ( The Lanshan and Chienshan ore deposits located within the Sichuan province of China are a major source of supply. Ore types include titanomagnetites as mined in the former Soviet Union (USSR). The titanomagnetites found in the Sichuan province and Urals (Russia) are considered Paleozoic complexes. China obtains vanadium from mining operations in its Sichuan and Anhui provinces (e.g., Chengde Xinghua Vanadium Chemical Co.) plus material extracted from slags imported from New Zealand, The Russian Federation, and the Republic of South Africa (RSA). The Panzhihua mine in Sichuan has estimated reserves of 1.2 billion tonnes grading 0.5% V The Katschkanor area in the Urals of the Russian Federation represents a major source of supply for vanadium-bearing ores and minerals. The Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) has surfaced as another major supplier of vanadium and its associated forms (  Three Russian enterprises represent the majority of vanadium production: namely JSC (Joint Stock Company) Kachkanarskiy, JSC Volkovskiy, and JSC Pervoural’skoye ( Producers such as ChMZ and JSC Vanadiy-Tula generate 90–95% grades of contained vanadium pentoxide. In the former USSR, V The Donetskiy Chemical-Metallurgical plant located in the Ukraine supplies sufficient ferrovanadium for domestic consumption. By the year 2010, it is planned to construct electric furnaces with a capacity of 1500 tpa ferrovanadium. The Ukrainian iron and steel industry is the second-largest consumer of vanadium in the CIS. Since the collapse of the former Soviet Union in late 1991, the Leninbadskiy Rare Metal Combine in Tajikistan remains idle and only supplied 12 tonnes of alloys in 2000. After 1998, Russia doubled its output of ferrovanadium to a level approaching 5900 tonnes in the year 2000 with exports to the Netherlands, Germany, Latvia, and Hungary. Conversely, Russia’s FeV imports only amounted to 817 tonnes in 2000 from sources in China, Finland, and the Netherlands. According to the State Customs Committee, Russia balanced its import and export of vanadium metal in 2000 at 31 and 30 tonnes respectively. Russia’s assessment of the worldwide vanadium consumption concluded that 85–87% of production reports to the iron and steel industry, 5–8% is used in the non-ferrous industry such as formation of titanium alloys, while the remainder of 5–8% is employed in the chemical industry. Vanadium is regarded as one of the most important alloying elements in the iron and steel industry. Within Russia, the iron and steel industry consumes up to 90% of vanadium produced similar to the western world. Domestic ferrovanadium consumption in Russia represents 46% of its annual production. The Ural Institute of Metals in Yekaterinburg developed new compositions of vanadium-bearing alloys ( Kazakhstan is a supplier of vanadium pentoxide (V Pure vanadium is difficult to produce since it is readily contaminated by many other elements. Processes to produce the pure metal include calcium reduction, thermal decomposition, solvent extraction, and electrolytic refining ( World vanadium pentoxide production is estimated at 60,000-metric tpa of which 40% originates from South Africa while China and Russia contribute 25% and 20% respectively ( Ferrovanadium is commercially available in steel alloys containing 40%, 60%, and 80% vanadium. The higher grades are produced by aluminothermic reduction in an electric furnace while lower grades typically employ a silicon reduction technique. Special alloys are produced by aluminothermic reduction of vanadium oxides followed by vacuum refining. Ferroniobium may be substituted for ferrovanadium in some applications in the event that the pricing structure becomes more favorable. Electric power generating plants employ hydrocarbon fuels in their boilers and vanadium reports to the residual fly and boiler ashes. After concentration, this material is added to furnaces in which the slag is converted to ferrovanadium by reduction with silicon (Sources of Vanadium is recovered as a co-product during uranium processing such as in Utah upon treating ore from Colorado. Solvent extraction is employed to separate the vanadium and uranium fractions which is then followed by an ion exchange stage which leaves the vanadium in the acid solution. The acidic solution is next oxidized to allow recovery of vanadium from the organic salts by means of soda ash. Precipitation with ammonium sulphate results in the production of vanadium polyvanadate. Metallurgical slags from China and Russia contain 12–20% V Australia began vanadium production in 1999 and details are presented herein for this upcoming major participant in the vanadium industry. Vanadium Australia Pty Ltd. represents a joint venture between Precious Metals Australia and Glencore International for the Windimurra Project. Windimurra is located about 610 km northeast of Perth, Western Australia. The property boasts the world’s largest undeveloped reserves ranging from 106 to 300 million tonnes grading about 0.47% vanadium pentoxide. The property is an extension of the Linfield station’s 170 million tonnes grading 0.46% V According to