Fat emboli are a common phenomenon, but are rarely detected or reported on extremity CT imaging. We present a case of fat embolus in the popliteal vein in the setting of a femoral fracture. This is the most distal fat embolus described in the literature. There are no guidelines regarding intervention if a fat embolus is detected in a peripheral vein on CT. A review of all the previous cases of peripheral fat emboli is presented for reference.The phenomenon of fat embolism is well-established, having been described separately in humans in the 1800s by von Bergmann and Zenker A 52-year-old male with no significant medical history presented as a level 2 trauma transfer after a 15 foot fall from a roof at work, sustaining an open right distal femoral intra-articular fracture and a left proximal humeral fracture. The patient did have a greater than 40 pack-year history of smoking. A non-contrast CT scan of the right femur including the knee joint was performed for further characterization of the fracture with slice thickness of 1.25 mm utilizing bone and soft tissue kernels. The CT was obtained in traction, with a pin through the proximal tibia. The three-dimensional reconstruction images show the extent and severe comminution of the distal femoral fracture ( Upon discovery of the fat embolism, vascular surgery was consulted with recommendations to obtain duplex ultrasound and administer anticoagulation post-surgery. IVC filter placement was not considered necessary given lack of strong evidence to support such an intervention in the setting of fat embolus. ORIF of the femoral fracture was performed without complication approximately 24 hours after admission. Anticoagulation with enoxaparin at prophylactic dose (30 mg subcutaneous injection every 12 hours) was started on postoperative day 4 following femoral ORIF (postoperative day 1 following humeral ORIF). Sequential compression devices were applied throughout hospitalization. A duplex ultrasound of the right lower extremity on postoperative day 3 following femoral ORIF demonstrated a patent popliteal vein without embolus ( Fat embolism is a widely recognized and encountered complication after trauma and orthopedic surgery, most commonly involving a large long bone such as the femur. Although rare and often clinically silent, the patient may develop significant clinical sequelae of Fat Embolism Syndrome (FES). This typically presents after 24-72 hours with a classic triad of respiratory distress, neurologic symptoms, and petechial rash. Two theories attempt to describe the pathogenesis. A mechanical theory postulates that traumatically displaced bone marrow enters torn venules that remain tethered to the bone Fat embolism is likely a common phenomenon, but it is unclear why fat emboli in-transit have been rarely reported. Nearly all reported cases of peripheral fat emboli detected on CT have been published after 2014, suggesting that this phenomenon may have been infrequently imaged or under-recognized previously. Our case is the only reported case of a fat embolus seen distal to the fracture site. This is also the only case of fat embolism detected below the level of the knee, making it the most distal fat embolus reported in the literature. In our case, the fat embolus may have persisted in the lower extremity due to occlusion/near occlusion of the vein superiorly causing stagnation of blood flow and fortuitous detection of the fat embolus. Diagnosis of FES may be difficult due to delayed presentation and confounding symptomatology. Communicating the rare diagnosis of embolic fat in-transit within venous drainage to the clinician may increase suspicion and expedite diagnosis and treatment for FES. Major veins should be inspected on CT examination in the setting of trauma to exclude regional fat embolism. There are no guidelines for prophylaxis of FES if an asymptomatic fat embolism in-transit is detected on CT. Retrievable IVC filter placement may be considered, although there is minimal evidence to support this intervention given the rare occurrence of this finding. There is a single case report showing an IVC filter clearly capturing a fat embolism on CT Treatment of FES is supportive. The role of systemic anticoagulation and corticosteroids is controversial, as these have not proven to improve morbidity or mortality. In particular, heparin stimulates lipase activity and therefore increases the clearance of lipids from circulation, but the associated increase in free fatty acids could exacerbate the underlying proinflammatory physiology Of the ten previously reported cases of fat embolism detected on CT, five exhibited pulmonary and/or neurologic symptoms, although some pulmonary symptoms or requirement for mechanical ventilation may have been related to trauma rather than fat emboli Vigilance for fat emboli on extremity CT examinations obtained for fracture is advised, and these may even be present distal to the fracture site. The clinical significance of such fat emboli in-transit without associated symptoms is unknown, although our case suggests that such fat emboli could be incidental without clinical consequence. The rarity of this finding precludes evidence-based recommendations. IVC filter placement and possibly surgical thrombectomy may be considered, especially if the fat embolus is large or progressively increasing in size. The role of anticoagulation in fat embolism and fat embolism syndrome is controversial.