Clavicle fractures are relatively common injuries that are typically diagnosed and followed with plain radiography. The goals of this article are to review the imaging evaluation, common classification systems, and relative surgical indications for clavicle fractures.The clavicle is a relatively thin S-shaped bone that articulates with the sternum and acromion at its medial and lateral expansions, respectively. Clavicle fractures are relatively common injuries and account for approximately 2%-5% of all fractures in adults. Clavicle fractures most commonly result from a direct blow to the point of the shoulder (eg, fall from a vehicle, bicycle, or height and sports injuries) and less commonly from direct blows to the clavicle or fall onto an outstretched hand. The goals of this article are to review the imaging evaluation, classification systems, and relative surgical indications for clavicle fractures. Clavicle fractures are well depicted on radiographs. In the trauma setting, these fractures may be first detected on anteroposterior (AP) chest radiographs. Dedicated radiographs are recommended for the evaluation of clavicle fractures and include a horizontal AP view and an apical oblique projection of the clavicle obtained with 10°-40° of cephalic angulation (the location of the clavicle precludes its assessment with true orthogonal radiographic projections). Fractures of the middle and distal thirds of the clavicle are well evaluated by radiographs and CT is rarely required for the assessment of these fractures. Multiple classification systems exist for clavicle fractures, none of which have proven to be ideal. Allman originally classified these fractures based on location and decreasing order of frequency as: Group I (middle third clavicular shaft fractures) ( Fractures of the distal clavicle were further subdivided by Neer and subsequently modified by Craig into 5 types based on absence or presence of displacement, articular extension, relationship to CC ligament and CC ligament integrity ( Robinson developed an alternative classification based on a prospective review of 1000 consecutive clavicle fractures ( Pertinent features for describing clavicle fractures can be partially construed from the above classification systems and include: fracture location (including location relative to the CC ligament in distal clavicle fractures), fracture morphology (including presence and degree of comminution as well as description of segmental fracture fragments), articular extension, and degree of displacement of fracture fragments and clavicular shortening. Delayed union, nonunion, and malunion may occur with clavicle fractures. Delayed union is defined as radiographic healing between 12 and 24 weeks postinjury, while nonunion is defined as lack of radiographic healing 6 months postinjury. Malunion is ubiquitous with conservatively treated displaced fractures ( Multiple factors (including fracture pattern, patient factors, and surgeon's preference) affect the management of clavicle fractures. Clavicle fractures are relatively common injuries and are typically diagnosed and followed with radiography. Understanding the concepts underlying the most common classification systems along with knowledge of the relative surgical indications for these fractures, improves the targeted description of clavicle fractures in radiology reports. Pertinent features for describing clavicle fractures on imaging include: fracture location (including location relative to the CC ligament in distal clavicle fractures), fracture morphology (including presence and degree of comminution as well as description of segmental fracture fragments), articular extension, and degree of displacement of fracture fragments and clavicular shortening. The author declares that she has no conflict of interest.