In this paper, the effective thermal conductivity (ETC) of softwood bark and softwood char particle beds which are highly polydispersed has been studied theoretically and experimentally. Use of the linear packing theory and unit cell model of heat conduction enabled to express ETC of polydisperded beds as a function of particle size distribution. Each of the softwood bark and softwood char samples were sieved into seven fractions. The initial porosity and binary packing size ratio of the particles have been characterized as a function of mean sieve size. ETC of polydispersed beds of bark and char has been predicted as a function of particle size distribution. Model predictions were in good agreement with the experimental measurements. The proposed approach can be used to predict the ETC of any size distribution of softwood bark and softwood char beds without measuring the in situ bed porosity.shape factor radiation constant of a black body (5.67×10 particle size (mm) function of optical properties of the particles, emissivity particle interaction function defined by particle interaction function defined by reduced thermal conductivity ratio reduced thermal conductivity in the Knudsen regime, reduced thermal conductivity due to radiation, bed thickness (m) number of particle fractions constituting the polydispersed bed pressure (Pa) heat flux (W equivalent packing size ratio (small to larger) particle size ratio (small to large)= temperature (K) specific volume of the particle defined as 1/(1− size fraction of the bed porosity accommodation coefficient thermal conductivity (W bed density (kg modified mean free path-gas molecule (m) effective bed property effective equivalent fluid gas the order of particle species particle radiation Heat transfer is the rate governing step in pyrolysis reactors. These reactors often handle gravity controlled randomly packed beds, composed of polydispersed feedstock particles such as softwood bark. When softwood bark is treated in a pyrolysis reactor, it is converted into polydispersed particle beds of softwood char. Determination of heat transfer coefficient in such reactors, requires the determination of the effective thermal conductivity of polydispersed beds of softwood bark and softwood char. The thermal conductivity of bark and char beds have been measured experimentally in the literature. The values, however, are scattered and are not correlated to the polydispersity of such beds While many studies are encountered in the literature concerning the ETC modelling in mono or binary beds composed of spherical particles, little information is available on modelling of ETC in polydispersed beds Over the last decade significant progress has been made in the mathematical modelling (although empirical to some extent) of the relationship between bed porosity and particle size distribution in the packed beds In the present work, the modified ETC modelling strategy The proposed ETC prediction strategy is based upon integration of the linear packing theory Linear packing theory Initial porosity characterizes the behaviour of monosize particles and can be easily measured for the participating particles. The particles interacting functions depend on the shape of the interacting particles. Such functions are difficult to evaluate for polydispersed systems. These functions have been studied in detail, elsewhere The binary packing size ratio The unit cell model In general softwood bark particles are multi-layered flaky particles of highly irregular shape and size. During debarking process, little fractions of fibrous wood particles are also added. In the present study the softwood bark sample (B000-001) was procured from Pyrovac Institute Inc., in Ste-Foy, Province of Quebec. These samples contain around 81% (w/w) of pure bark and 19% (w/w) of wood. To determine the size distribution, the sample was sieved in a Combs Gyratory Sifting Machine, using standard sieves according to ASTM E-11 specifications. Mean single particle density of this sample was determined through a procedure described elsewhere Particle samples were oven dried and kept at room temperature (24 Softwood char is the solid residue obtained after pyrolysis of the softwood bark. It is rich in carbon. During the pyrolysis process, complex chemical reactions with simultaneous mechanical wear and tear produce highly porous and brittle char particles. Like the mother bark particles, the char particles are also highly irregular in shape and size. In the present analysis, the softwood char sample (CH000413/12:50-0.2) was produced by Pyrodev Inc. in Jonquière, Province of Quebec, Canada, in a 3000 The char samples were oven dried and were stored at room temperature. The average single particle density of these samples is 299 Application of the proposed ETC prediction strategy for a polydispersed bed requires the knowledge of The thermal conductivity measurement apparatus used in this study is based on ASTM C-518 guidelines. ASTM C-518 describes a method for measuring the thermal conductivity of insulations by measurement of steady state unidirectional thermal transmission through the flat slab specimens using a heat flow meter apparatus. In order to handle the loose particle beds of softwood bark and softwood char, slight modifications were incorporated in the original design guidelines. Objective of the heat flow apparatus is to establish steady state unidirectional heat flux through a test specimen between two parallel plates at constant but different temperatures. The test specimen is supported by a 5 To control the temperature of top and bottom plates, two OMEGA CN76000 series microprocessor based temperature controllers were employed. The bottom plate and top plate holding the water tank were supported by a metallic frame. While the bottom plate is stationary, the top assembly can be precisely slided up and down over the bottom plate with the help of a thread and pulley arrangement. When experiment is run, the bottom plate, cylindrical PVC ring supporting the specimen, and the cold plate with water tank are properly insulated with fiber glass wool to prevent heat loss in the radial direction. The ETC of the particle bed The apparatus was calibrated by a standard reference material (SRM 1453, Expanded Polystyrene Board) supplied by Building and Research Laboratory, NIST, Maryland, USA. Five calibration tests were conducted and thermal conductivity values at 309 Particles of known composition were first premixed manually and then poured from a height of 0.1 Combining the linear packing theory and the modified unit cell model enables one to correlate the ETC of a polydispersed bed as a function of particle size distribution Results of differential sieve analysis for softwood bark and softwood char particles are given in It is observed that more than 80% of softwood bark and softwood char particles are distributed in the range from 0.5 to 5 The measured values of initial porosity for the seven fractions of softwood bark and softwood char are depicted in  To determine the binary packing size ratio  Thus For bark  In this work, a total of nine bed arrangements were considered for softwood bark. Bed (B1)–(B4) are composed of monosized sieve fractions each, while beds (B5)–(B8) are composed of quaternary mixtures of four size fractions ( For the mono-sized beds, both measured and predicted thermal conductivities were found to increase with the increase in particle size. This trend was found to be in line with the observations of Tsotsas and Martin The seven bed systems were made of with different size fractions of char particles. Beds (C1)–(C3) are composed of mono-size particles of size fractions The experimentally measured values of ETC are presented in The predicted ETC in bark was found to be a little lower than the measured values when the share of large particles ( In this work, the ETC of softwood bark and softwood char particle beds which are highly polydispersed and have a wide size distribution, was studied theoretically and experimentally. The ETC prediction strategy involved the linear packing theory and unit cell model. Instead of measuring the in situ bed porosity as suggested by Tsotsas and Schlundler We are grateful to the Fonds pour la Formation de Chercheurs et l'Aide à la Recherche (FCAR, Gouvernement du Quebec), for partial financial support of the first author of this article.