0.2M CMPO in isodecanol(10%)–dodecane system was taken for evaluating the extraction behavior of actinides in different oxidation states. The order of decrease in distribution ratio at fixed acidity was found to be M4+
                     >MO2
                     2+
                     >M3+ (M=actinide ion). The metal–ligand stoichiometry was determined by slope analysis. Though, increasing isodecanol content decreases the distribution ratio, no perturbation was found on OUO moiety as revealed by UV–vis spectroscopy. Application of van't Hoff equation to the extraction data at different temperatures enabled the determination of thermodynamic parameters. The radiolytic stability of the solvent system was evaluated by dose dependent study (gamma exposure in the range of 0–500kGy). Finally the solvent system was used for actinide partitioning from simulated high level waste (SHLW) of fast breeder reactor (FBR) fuel.Nuclear energy is one of the cleanest forms of energy to meet the growing energy demands of the twenty first century. The back-end-reprocessing and waste management-cycle of the nuclear industry is an important safety issue to be addressed for many years of future generations due to the radiotoxicity of the long-lived minor actinides (MA). Partitioning of MA from high-level waste (HLW) solutions is one aspect that seems to mitigate the severity of the above problem and so it is being actively pursued all over the world with individual schemes to achieve this. Now it is recognized that instead of tackling it per se, a collective effort will be more beneficial ( CMPO was synthesized and characterized using NMR, IR and other methods as given elsewhere ( The general procedure for the solvent extraction experiments is given as follows. For the batch studies, aqueous solutions of nitric acid traced with the radioactive tracers as outlined above were equilibrated with equal volumes of organic phase of 0.2 The valency of Pu was adjusted to the + 0.5 0.5 0.5 1.5 The analytical experiments were carried out using computer controlled, high resolution, simultaneous atomic emission spectrometer (Spectro Arcos, Germany) with ICP and DC Arc as excitation sources and a charged coupled device (CCD) as detector. The instrumental specification and experimental parameters were summarized in Standard solutions for rare earth and other common impurity elements were prepared from CertiPUR® ICP multi standard solutions (E-Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) by proper dilution with 0.5 The UV–vis absorption spectra of uranyl complexes were recorded using the instrument, JASCO V530 model (JASCO Analytical Instruments, USA) with tools for data acquisition and analysis by the software JASCO Spectra Manager with a double beam technology (400–1100 Extraction profiles were established for Np(IV), Pu(IV), U(VI), Am(III) from 0.01 Since, the solvent system of 0.2 Let the equation showing the uptake of acid by CMPOI  To design the effective extraction behavior, it is required to understand the nature of the species and its stoichiometry. A systematic study was carried out to determine the stoichiometry of the metal–ligand complex and the conditional extraction constants (K Eq. In the case of U(VI) and Pu(IV) a slope of ~ The intercepts of the above plots give, as mentioned above, the conditional extraction constants K' In order to get further insight into the nature of complex formed with CMPO, a systematic study was carried out using UV–vis absorption spectroscopy on the complexation of uranyl ion with CMPO in dodecane and dodecane–isodecanol system separately. The UV–vis absorption spectra of UO The changes in the energetics, i.e. Gibb's energy, enthalpy, and entropy due to the extraction of the actinides by CMPO in dodecane–isodecanol system were studied. The effect of temperature on the distribution ratio of metal ion is presented in A plot of log D vs 1000/T(K) should give a straight line and from the slope, the change in enthalpy can be calculated. It was observed that the D values for UO  As CMPO in isodecanol–n-dodecane system, as shown above, is one of the promising extractants for actinide ion extraction from HLW solutions, its radiolytic stability needs to be studied for its recycling or reuse when applied to the actual waste conditions. Generally, these studies are carried out exposing the solvent to the equivalent γ radiation using a The scope for feasibility of using the solvent system for actinide partitioning is obtained from using it for extraction of metal ions from simulated high level waste (SHLW) to assess the decontamination factor. In this, the SHLW taken was pertaining to the HLW resulting from the fuel reprocessing of fast breeder reactor at 1,50,000 A systematic feasibility study was carried out to evaluate the CMPO in isodecanol–dodecane system for actinide partitioning. The distribution ratio values for the tracers from low acidities were found to follow the order DNp The authors wish to acknowledge Dr. A. Goswami, Head, Radiochemistry Division, BARC for his constant support and encouragement.