This paper is devoted to application of ordinary kriging method in Choghart north anomaly iron ore deposit in Yazd province, Iran. In order to estimate the deposit, 2329 input data gained from 26 boreholes were used. Fe grade was selected as the major regional variable on which the present research has focused. All of the available data were changed to 12.5m composites so that statistical regularization could be reached. Studies indicated that iron grade input data had single-population characteristics. To carry out ordinary kriging, a spherical model was fitted over empirical variogram. Then the model was verified through cross validation method and proved to be valid with a coherence coefficient of 0.773 between the estimated and real data. Plotting the empirical variogram in different directions showed no geometric anisotropy for the deposit. To estimate the Iron grade, ordinary kriging method was used according to which, all of the exploitable blocks with dimensions 20m×20m×12.5m were block estimated within the estimation space. Finally tonnage-grade curve has been drawn and reserve classified into measured, indicated and inferred.Reserves estimation, either globally or locally, has become a standard geostatistical application in the mining industry. Kriging is a geostatistical interpolation technique used in mining industry for interpolation of input point data and estimation of a block model (mineral resource model). The name “kriging” was given by Prof. Georges Matheron in honor of the South African mining engineer Danie Krige. Kriging is an optimal spatial regression technique which requires a spatial statistical model, popularly known as a variogram, representing the internal spatial structure of the data. The input data (used to estimate any particular block) are weighted based on the variogram model, search parameters and the number of samples used to krige or estimate a block. A variety of kriging techniques are used in the mining industry. The most common kriging techniques are variants of ordinary kriging, grouped as “linear kriging” techniques. The more complex kriging techniques, such as indicator kriging, disjunctive kriging, etc. are based on non-linear transformation of grades and are grouped as “non-linear kriging” techniques. Kriging is known by the acronym BLUE: or, the best linear unbiased estimator. In the kriging process the sum of weights assigned to the input data is adjusted to one, and the error of estimation is kept to a minimum. Kriging utilizes the variogram, which does not depend on the actual value of the variable (data), rather its spatial distribution and internal spatial structure. A variogram provides penetrating insight concerning the data used to construct a kriging interpolation system. When a good robust variogram model is available, kriging provides the estimation best representing the spatial distribution of the input data. This paper is intended to investigate and to evaluate the potential and applicability of ordinary kriging method, as a tool for estimating the reserve of Choghart north anomaly iron ore deposit. To estimate, all of the exploitable blocks with dimensions 20 Ordinary kriging is a spatial interpolation estimator The deposit under the case study is an iron deposit, which is in the northwestern of the famous Choghart Mine in central Iran zone ( The North Anomaly of Choghart deposit occurs in the Bafq mining district, which is part of the narrow N–S trending Pan-African rift zone at the eastern margin of the so-called Lut block. Berberian and King suggested that the development of this rift zone was the result of stretching of the Arabo-Iranian continental crust during an Infracambrian extensional phase Hematite is the second ubiquitous mineral after magnetite. Although some primary hematite is also found in the drill cores, most of hematite is secondary in origin. Some goethite and hydrous iron oxide occur on the surface, but disappear rapidly with increasing depth. Calcite, dolomite, secondary hematite and talc occur throughout the orebody as veinlets and cementing material of oxidized ore. Rutile and goethite are probably the result of total transformation of the earlier formed martite. According to field observations, the host rocks are metamorphic rocks, hornblendite–pyroxenite, volcanic rocks (rhyolite, andesite) and the pyroclastic fill of the vent. Principally, this deposit was explored by 26 boreholes ( Usually, the random field that represents the regionalized attributes under study, does not have any univariate distributions, and therefore, must be transformed into a field with a distribution suited to a known isofactorial model. In the Gaussian case, this procedure is known as normal scores transformation. The problem in this case is that the variable is not normal (Gaussian) distributed, and therefore, it has to be transformed from the original distribution into a standard Gaussian distribution, the process known as the Gaussian anamorphosis transformation. The histogram of the iron concentrations ( Taking spatial variety and randomicity into account, variogram function can reflect spatial variable structure of regional variable. To study the anisotropy of the ore deposit, variography was done in different directions and dips in ore deposit. After studying of more than 30 variograms it was found out that the ore deposit has no anisotropy, because in most of the variograms same ranges and sills were obtained. Variogram analysis of the normal scores data, One of the methods to check the validity of the results of estimation is cross validation. In order to do that using the fitted variogram, in each step one of the data being removed and its value was estimated based on the other real data of the searched area. Then the difference between the estimated value and the known value was discussed. The correlation coefficient between the estimated points and known points was 0.773 ( Ordinary kriging was applied for calculating the reserve of Choghart north anomaly iron ore deposit. The estimation space of Choghart north anomaly iron ore deposit includes 44 horizons with 12.5 Grade-tonnage curves are one of the tools which enable the mine managers to determine the correct long-time, mean-time and short-time parameters for ore producing. Drawing grade-tonnage curves needs to finding the tonnage of different grades. To find the tonnage of each block, the specific gravity of ore and core recovery percent is required. So according to this data, we could calculate the deposit based on different cut-off grades. One of the most important reasons for determining reserve classification is to justify investment which is especially important early in the life of the mine From the case study, we concluded that ordinary kriging can be used to model and estimate the iron ore deposit. The empirical non-directional variogram model of iron grade of the ore deposit is spherical with 150