Duplex austenite–ferrite stainless steels were prepared from the premixes of 316L and 434L stainless steel atomized powders. Pronounced densification was observed after 1350°C sintering in hydrogen. 316L-60w/o 434L steel composition exhibited maximum transverse rupture strength, while 40 and 60w/o 434L containing compositions showed total immunity in 1N H2SO4 even after a exposure time of 360h. Anodic polarization curves also suggest high-corrosion resistance of those two compositions. Magnetic coercivity decreased with increase in sintering temperature while magnetic saturation follows the reverse trend. Wear resistance of the duplex stainless steels under sliding condition was in between the straight steels.Duplex ferritic–austenitic stainless steels are characterized by an outstanding combination of strength, toughness and corrosion resistance. Ferritic steels have lower toughness and austenite steels have lower stress corrosion resistance, whereas duplex stainless steels have properties which are compromise between those two. Furthermore, due to lower nickel content duplex stainless steels are much cheaper than comparable austenite grades. They have therefore, found applications in off-shore constructions, heat-exchangers, gas and oil pipe lines as well as in the chemical industry. However, these steels posses considerable difficulties from the manufacturing point of view. This serves powder metallurgy an excellent alternative to produce this steel. Attempts have been made to introduce ferrite phase through the introduction of silicon powder in austenitic stainless steel In the present work powder metallurgical duplex stainless steels obtained from premixes of 316L and 434L powders are studied. The study includes mechanical, magnetic, microstructural and corrosion behaviors. The investigation was carried out using water atomized and annealed 316L austenitic and 434L ferritic stainless steel powders supplied by AMETEK (Eighty Four, PA, USA). The chemical compositions and properties of two powders are shown in Premixes of 316L and 434L were prepared in Turbula mixer, type 12C Nr921266 for half an hour. 434L content in different premixes were selected as 20, 40, 60, 80 Cylindrical green compacts of 12.76 Densities of green and sintered cylindrical compacts were calculated from the mass and physical dimension measurements of the sample. The xylene impregnation method was also used to measure density and a very little difference was detected in the values. The following formula was used for determining the densification parameter (Δ The transverse rupture strength test for three point loading was performed on a fixture where the sintered test piece was kept on two carbide rollers of 5 Wear testing of selected sintered samples was performed using a Wear and Friction Monitor, Model TR-20 of Ducom, Bangalore, India make which was a pin on disc type machine. Magnetic property like coercivity was measured by using a COERCIMETER of EMTR, Thane (India) make. Magnetic saturation of specimens was also measured by using a Sigmameter, Model SM-75 of Lab Physik Magnet, India make. Corrosion behavior of straight 316L and 434L and their composites sintered at 1350°C in H Optical and SEM metallographic techniques were used to study the microstructural changes. Grain size was measured directly on etched samples under an optical microscope Metallux-3. About 20–25 grains were measured at various fields and the average value was reported. The scanning micrographs of the fractured surfaces of the TRS test specimens for measuring transverse rupture strength were taken on Jeol, 840A scanning electron microscope. After sliding wear testing also scanning micrographs of worn surfaces were taken. Sintered density increases with increase in sintering temperature and the variation of sintered density with respect to temperature is shown in  Grain coarsening is also noticed from the microstructures ( Transverse rupture strength (TRS) increases with increase in 434L content in 316L and reaches to a maximum at 316L-60w/o 434L. Same test could not be performed for 316L and 434L because of their pronounced ductility. Sliding wear results (   Variation of magnetic properties ( Percentage weight loss variations of the dual phase steels as well as the straight stainless steels in 1N H  It is well known fact that ferritic stainless steel increases yield strength and provides resistance to stress corrosion cracking, whereas austenitic steel imparts toughness along with good corrosion resistance. Keeping this in view, a mixed structure of ferrite and austenite would offer good corrosion resistance along with high-strengths and reasonable toughness. So far, the attention of stainless steel powder manufacturers has not yet turned to produce ferrite–austenite duplex stainless steel prealloyed powders. A reasonable way is, therefore, to study 316L–434L premix sintered compacts. As evident from the results ( The increase in microhardness after 1150°C sintering, with increase in 434L addition in the premix ( The relatively large grain size of straight 434L among all alloy compositions after any sintering can be attributed to greater atomic mobility due to its open bcc ferrite structure. Increase in TRS with 434L addition in austenitic stainless steel is attributed to alloy strengthening effect. TRS of 60w/o 434L containing alloy is higher than its 80w/o 434L containing counterpart, as the former has larger share of tough austenite phase. This is also confirmed from SEM fractograph ( Coming to wear behavior, the minimum wear loss of 316L is attributed to its high-work hardening rate compared to 434L. It appears that addition of 434L in 316L based compositions optimizes hardening and toughening, with the result that the material removal during sliding is absent. However the only exception is 20w/o 434L containing composition, which has wear response more or less similar to 434L. Reason for such behavior is not clear. The decrease in coercivity of the alloy compositions with increase in sintering temperature ( The main mechanism affecting the low-corrosion resistance of the sintered austenitic stainless steel in 1N H  Densification increases with increasing sintering temperature for duplex stainless steels. Percentage porosity decreases with increase in 434L content only after 1350°C sintering. Ferrite–austenite two phase structure is observed for 40 and 60w/o 434L containing compositions after 1350°C sintering. Divergence of microhardness in 80w/o 434L containing alloy composition also suggests possibility of two phases. 316L-60w/o 434L compositions exhibits maximum TRS value. Wear loss during sliding. Wear is minimum for straight 316L and maximum for straight 434L. For other compositions, the values are intermediate. Corrosion weight loss in 1N H Coercivity of 316L–434L alloy compositions decreases with increase in sintering temperature, whereas magnetic saturation increases with increase in sintering temperature. The authors are grateful to Ametek, Inc., Pennsylvania, USA for supplying the austenite and ferrite stainless steel powders.