Alternative beneficiation strategies are now being adopted to upgrade the iron values in low-grade iron ores that do not respond to physical beneficiation owing to their complex texture and poor liberation pattern. Thermal treatment prior to beneficiation, in order to enhance the liberation and downstream beneficiation operation, is one such method. In this context, a low-grade hematite ore with 56.5% Fe has been subjected to heat treatment followed by grinding and wet high intensity magnetic separation (WHIMS). The magnetic separation results indicate that an enhancement in yield by around 15–20% by weight is possible when the ore is heat-treated at 500–800 °C. The sink and float studies indicate a negligible improvement in mineral liberation arising due to the thermal treatment while the Frantz isodynamic separation results suggest a remarkable increase in the mass magnetic susceptibility value from 14.4 × 10−9 to 30 × 10−9 SI units for the treatment at 500 °C. Detailed mineralogical characterization studies of the heat-treated samples using optical microscopy and Electron Probe Micro Analysis (EPMA) show the development of crystallinity as well as formation of both intergranular and transgranular cracks within the ore thereby facilitating the separation process.The utilization of low-grade iron ore resources is now receiving attention due to the depletion of high-grade iron ores in tandem with the gradual increase in the demand of steel. The major difficulty in subjecting these low-grade ores to iron making is the presence of gangue materials like silica and alumina that need to be removed through beneficiation [ Literature reports the application of a few alternative strategies for the difficult-to-treat iron ores. Reduction roasting followed by magnetic separation both by conventional heating [ Other than the publications discussed above, which strictly deal with the grinding and liberation aspects of thermal treatment, there are a few communications that discuss the effect of heat treatment on the enhancement of the magnetic properties of iron ores. A pyrite sample was subjected to heat treatment and the results showed that the wet magnetic recovery of pyrite sample could be improved from 25% to 90% after treating it at 500 °C [ Taking into account the above discussion, the present work focuses on the effect of thermal treatment on the magnetic separation of a low-grade hematite ore. The WHIMS studies at different magnetic intensities have been carried out for the ore treated at varying heat treatment conditions. The magnetic separation studies have been supported by Franz Isodynamic Separation and micro-structural studies. The key intention behind this work is to study the textural changes that occur in the massive hematite as well as the gangue material as a result of thermal treatment and to correlate them with the magnetic separation efficiency. The low grade iron ore samples were collected from Andhra Pradesh, India. The representative bulk sample was crushed to a very fine size and subjected to standard wet chemical analysis using the dichromatic method. It was found to contain 56.5% Fe, 13.5% SiO Sink and float analysis was undertaken to assess the liberation characteristics of the ore. The studies were carried out on different particle sizes. Each size fraction was subjected to a heavy liquid separation using Tetrabromoethane (Specific gravity 2.89). The bulk representative sample was crushed to below 10 mm particle size and batches of 200 g sample put in refractory crucibles were subjected to heating in a laboratory scale muffle furnace. The samples were heat-treated at different temperatures for different time intervals. On completion of the experiments, the heat-treated samples were water-quenched and ground in a laboratory scale ball mill to the particle size below 75 μm. The ground samples were undergone magnetic separation studies using a batch laboratory model WHIMS supplied by Box Mag. Rapid, England. A solid percentage of 25% was maintained during the experiments. The WHIMS was operated at several magnetic intensities such as 0.77, 1.05, 1.18 and 1.54 T. A standard groove plate, appropriate for the particle size, was used for the separation and the required current was applied to maintain the desired magnetic intensity. The products, viz. magnetics and non-magnetics, were collected separately and analyzed for iron values. In the present work, Frantz isodynamic magnetic separator (Model L-1, S.G. Frantz Co. Inc., U.S.) was used to study the magnetic properties of the hematite ore before and after heat treatment. The instrument is generally used to characterize the magnetic properties of the ore minerals. It finds many applications such as separation of one mineral from a group of minerals, determination of quantity of different magnetic mineral constituents, and determination of mass magnetic susceptibility. The isodynamic separator consists of an electromagnet having long contour shaped two pole pieces with a long narrow air gap between them. The feed material to be separated is fed into one end of the magnetic field and allowed to travel through its entire length. The paramagnetic particles are influenced to move towards the narrow side of the gap. The particles are separated by a wedge shaped divider which directs the particles into two separate streams. The magnetic coil is fitted on a universal mounting so that it can be slanted in any direction with respect to gravity. The forward and side slopes of the magnetic coil facilitate particles to travel under the influence of magnetic and gravitational forces. The separator is equipped with a variable transformer that supplies power (current 1.8A) to the magnet and generates a maximum of 2.0 T magnetic field intensity. The experiments in WHIMS were carried out in order to understand the role of thermal treatment on the magnetic separation of the iron ore. Initially, the samples thermally treated at temperatures 500, 600, 700, and 800 °C for a fixed time interval of 30 min were undergone WHIMS at different magnetic intensities such as 0.77, 1.05, 1.18 and 1.54 T. The magnetic separation results in terms of the Fe (%) and yield (%) of the magnetic fractions were compared with those obtained from the magnetic separation of the untreated ore and displayed in The figure indicates that with an increase in magnetic intensity, the Fe percentages are decreasing with a simultaneous increase in the yields. As the magnetic intensity increases, the particles having less magnetic susceptibility are also attracted. Therefore, the application of a higher magnetic intensity results in drawing in more particles to the product causing an increase in the yield at the cost of the decrease in the Fe percentage. A relative increase in both yield and Fe percentage as a result of thermal treatment is clearly observed from the figure. For example, the magnetic separation of the unheated ore at 0.77 T results in a product having a yield of 30.3% and 62.5% Fe. On applying the same magnetic intensity, the ore treated at 500 °C gives rise to an enhanced yield of 43.55% with a decrease in Fe percentage to 61.68%. This slight drop in Fe grade for the sample treated at 500 °C is clearly because of the remarkable increase in the corresponding yield of the magnetic product. Similarly, as the treatment temperature goes up to 700 °C, the yield increases further up to 55.26%. However, the Fe percentage does not increase much. At 800 °C, the magnetic intensity of 0.77 T gives rise to a product with 63.36% Fe at a yield of 54.9%. Though the yield is a little lower than 700 °C, an increased Fe percentage compensates for that. Similar trends of Fe percentages and yield can be observed for all the products obtained at different magnetic intensities. It can be conferred that with the increase in the temperature up to 700 °C, the yield keeps increasing. However, at 800 °C, the yield is slightly less compared to that at 700 °C and in contrast, the Fe percentage follows the reverse trend on the increase in temperature from 700 °C to 800 °C. Further, experiments were carried out to correlate the effect of heating time with magnetic separation. Samples after being treated at different temperatures for time intervals of 30 to 75 min were subjected to WHIMS and the corresponding results in terms of Fe (%) and yield (%) are displayed in The results at 500 °C and 600 °C indicate that with the increase in heating time, the yields are increasing. However, this trend is reversed when the time increases above 45 min for the temperatures of 700 °C and 800 °C. When the temperature is 700 °C, the yields decrease as the time of treatment is increased from 45 min to 60 min. Similarly, at 800 °C, it is noteworthy that the yields at 75 min of heat treatment are lower than that at 30 min. As the yields are decreasing with an increasing time at the temperatures of 700 °C and 800 °C, the corresponding Fe percentages are found to increase. With a rise in temperature, the Fe percentages increase. Though there is no remarkable increase in the values with an increase in temperature from 500 to 600 °C, the Fe values of over 63.5% at the temperature of 800 °C are notable. The highest values of Fe percentages are observed in the case of the treatment at 800 °C for a time period of 75 min. For example, the magnetic separation of the ore treated at the aforementioned conditions with a magnetic intensity of 0.77 T results in 64.2% Fe at a yield of 52.2%. The WHIMS studies, on an average, conclude that thermal treatment can lead to a better Fe recovery. Sink and float analysis is generally used in mineral processing to assess the gravity separation feasibility [ Columns 2 and 3 of The materials retained on screens having sizes of 212, 150, 106, 75, and 45 μm were subjected to sink-float analysis. The size fractions below 45 μm particle size that constitute 37.2% by weight for the untreated sample and 11.6% by weight for the heat-treated sample were not subjected to sink-float analysis due to the analytical constraints related to the ultrafine size of the particles. The weight percentages of sink and float fractions with respect to the feed are shown in columns 4 to 7. It can be observed from The experiments in Frantz isodynamic magnetic separator were carried out to calculate the mass magnetic susceptibility of the iron ore particles following a standard procedure documented elsewhere [  Cumulative weight distribution of magnetic fractions against the applied current shown in The magnetic separation studies indicate that heat treatment induces a significant enhancement in iron recovery. The Franz isodynamic separation studies also corroborate with these findings. However, the sink and float method suggests that there is no remarkable enhancement in the degree of liberation as a result of heat treatment. Therefore, characterization studies were undertaken in order to understand the mineralogical transformation that ultimately increases the magnetic susceptibility of the ore causing a better separation in WHIMS. The samples, both original and heat-treated, were studied under XRD, optical microscope and electron microscope in order to monitor the changes in the textural peculiarities as a function of the treatment temperature. The sample heating time was kept fixed at 75 min. The XRD pattern of the feed iron ore sample as given in The optical micrographs of the feed sample reveal the complicated nature of the mineral association. The micron sized hematite minerals are finely dispersed within the silica matrix ( Microscopic studies were further extended to the heat-treated samples and the optical micrographs are presented in The crystallisation of quartz appears to be more pronounced at 700 °C ( Electron probe micro analysis was carried out to supplement the optical microscopic findings. The image maps of Fe, Si and Al in the feed sample as given in The overall observation of this characterization study is that as the temperature increases, the crystallinity of quartz increases and the quartz grains are transformed from anhedral to euhedral hexagonal crystals ( Attempts to develop alternative beneficiation strategies to upgrade the iron content in complex low-grade iron ores hold importance considering the depletion of high-grade iron ores at present. Therefore, the present work was focussed on the enhancement of magnetic separation of a low-grade hematite iron ore using thermal treatment. With heat-treatment at 500 °C, WHIMS could be able to produce an iron ore concentrate with 43.5% yield, which was around 10% higher if compared to the magnetic separation of the untreated ore at the same magnetic intensity of 0.77 T. At a heat treatment of 800 °C, the ore could be upgraded to 64.2% Fe at a yield of 52.2%. The improvement in magnetic separation results was mostly attributed to the increase in magnetic properties of the iron phase as the sink and float studies suggested only a minor change in the liberation. The characterization studies revealed that the thermal treatment helped in the development of crystallinity in the quartz phase resulting in the formation of euhedral equigranular quratz crystals from the anhedral inequigranular quartz, which ultimately led to better separation of quartz from the iron phases both in Franz isodynamic separator and WHIMS. The formation of both transgranular and intergranular fractures owing to the thermal treatment of the ore also played a role. These two observations put together explained the enhanced magnetic separation behaviour of the iron ore. The authors are thankful to the Director, CSIR-IMMT, Bhubaneswar for his kind permission to publish this paper.