Zn0-activated persulfate (PS) is a novel advanced oxidation technology for the degradation of organic pollutants in aqueous solution. The effects of the initial solution pH, the dosages of PS and Zn0, and the temperature were investigated through a series of batch experiments using methyl orange (MO), an azo dye, as a model organic pollutant. The results demonstrated that MO could be effectively degraded by Zn0-activated PS. The chemical oxygen demand and the total organic carbon decreased by approximately 85% and 58%, respectively, in the solution containing 98mg/L MO at the initial pH 5 and 25°C within 3h. The optimum dosages of PS and Zn0 were 71mg/L and 1.3g/L, respectively. The highest removal of MO was realized at an initial pH 5. Tertiary butyl alcohol, an 
                        
                     OH-specific radical scavenger, and l-histidine, a universal radical scavenger, corroborated that both 
                        
                     OH and SO4
                     −
                      contributed to MO degradation. Three stages were observed during the degradation of MO at 15 and 25°C, a rapid removal of MO in the initial stage of the reaction, followed by a very slow one and then a relatively quick degradation process.Azo dyes, which contain one or more nitrogen to nitrogen double bonds ( Due to the aromatic character and the stability of the molecules of azo dyes, traditional biological, physical and chemical techniques for the removal of azo dyes are not efficient enough Compared with other activation techniques, the activation of PS by transition metal ions is easy to implement since it could be operated at room temperature and under atmospheric pressure. However, in addition to their high costs, some transition metal ions such as Ag It is well known that zero-valent zinc (ZVZ) is a stronger reductant than zero-valent iron (ZVI). Thus, it is presumed that ZVZ might result in a more rapid and complete degradation of organic contaminants. Gao et al. MO was purchased from Beijing Chemical Reagents Company and its stock solution was prepared in deionized water. PS was provided by Chengdu Chemical Reagents Company and its stock solution was also prepared in deionized water. Micro-scale Zn All the glassware was cleaned by soaking in 1 To remove oil film and oxides on the Zn All the batch experiments for MO degradation were conducted in 100 DMPO, a commonly used spin trapping agent for various types of free radicals, was utilized to generate stable paramagnetic adducts for electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) characterization At given time intervals, 2 The solution pH during the reaction process was measured with a CyberScan pH2100 Bench Meter (Eutech Instruments) after three-point calibration. Total organic carbon (TOC) in aqueous solution was determined with Shimadzu TOC-L analyzer (Japan) at 680 As shown in The reductive degradation of MO by Zn The removal of MO by Zn SO In the MO/Zn However, the removal of COD and TOC in the MO/Zn It is proposed that both SO It is also inferred that the same reactions listed in Eqs. To directly prove the generation of SO The effect of pH in a range of 3–8 on the degradation of MO was investigated and the results are illustrated in Huang et al. The species distribution of Zn(II) is probably another reason for the lower removal of MO at high pH. The analysis of species distribution of Zn(II) obtained by MINEQL Nevertheless, it is strange to us that the degradation of MO by Zn The effect of initial PS concentration (0–119 The influence of Zn Temperature is an important factor influencing the decomposition of PS and the generation of SO MO cannot be effectively removed by PS or Zn This study was supported by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 