Comminution represents one of the most important operations in mineral processing due to the high energy cost and tool wear. This paper presents a new population balance model (PBM) of ball mills that understands the ball mill process as a hybrid of a perfectly mixed mill and piston flow mill. Usually, PBM for grinding is related to a perfectly mixed mill. In this case, the piston flow was introduced for a more realistic process. The ball mill modelling process is described as the point where the feed entering the distribution size is coarse, and where there is an overflow and discharge of the mill, the distribution size is fine and equivalent to the product distribution size. In this work, the evolution of the size of particles along the mill piston flow process was studied. The relationship between the particle size and position in the length of the mill was established. The equation of the balance population model was formulated, and the parameters were determined for a tungsten ore.Large amounts of energy are necessary to reduce the particle size in ore processing, usually representing a significant amount of the total expenses of the processing ( The equation of the PBM for a perfectly mixed mill derives directly from a simple mass balance for materials in any specific size class. This would be the simplest case, but it is also sufficiently realistic. This case assumes that once the material is inside the mill, it is broken directly to the product particle size. All of the material inside the mill has the same characteristics. In practice, there are some restrictions when the material inside the mill moves towards the outlet stream. Larger particles do not pass through the discharge grate, and then they are not released from the mill. In the overflow discharge mills, when the discharge grate is not used, larger particles do not leave the mill because finding a path to rise in the medium bed to the discharge is difficult ( The present work aims to study the evolution of particle size along the mill process to establish the relationships between particle size and its position along the mill. The study is based on the population balance models to determine the evolution of the particle size during the grinding process. It can be assumed that the distribution size is coarse at the feed inlet, the distribution size is fine at the overflow and discharge of the mill, and it is the product distribution size. Given this, it is credible that the distribution size changes along the mill; therefore, the real process can also be partly interpreted as a piston flow mill. Approximately 400 The methodology can be divided into three different stages: (1) Preparation of the materials and determination of operative parameters, (2) selection of the model and executing experiments, and (3) modelling and back-calculation to find the different parameters of the breakage and selection functions. Four experiments were performed with a laboratory scale overflow ball mill. Three were conducted to study the process and determine the parameters, and the last was for validation. The internal dimensions of the mill are 48.26 Two main hypotheses have been proposed: (1) Perfectly mixed milling occurs once the material enters into the mill. (2) A percentage of material behaves as a piston flow phenomenon when a selection function discriminates the particle sizes with a certain probability to be influenced by this mechanical breakage. The perfectly mixed mill dynamic Eq. Eqs. The experiments developed show that the milling process is regulated in the first step by a perfectly mixed, continuous mill, and this explains the existence of a gap from the feed distribution particle size to the particle size distribution in the feed inlet. Then, the grinding continues and its progress is regulated by the piston flow. The reduction rate obtained from the product and feed particle size distributions are 39, 32.5, 40 and 41 for experiments 1, 2, 4 and 5, respectively. These high reduction values are explained by the long residence time ( The differential mass inside the mill with respect to the differential mass of the product exhibited the same behaviour as the cumulative mass. The piston flow phenomenon is clearer in the coarsely size particles, where the differential mass curve decreases along the mill and increases again for the finest particle sizes ( The difference between the particle size product and the particle size in the feed inlet of the mill represents the selection function, and this is defined in the coarse particle sizes, where the reduction process was observed. The selection function for this work represents the mass fraction of the flow in the piston flow mill. From this criterion, this mathematical function is used to discriminate between the particles entering the piston flow and those that are not affected. The experimental average values achieved for this selection function are ω The back-calculation results are plotted as simulated curves in The back-calculated parameters show similar values for the different experiments. In two cases the standard deviation was 0.000, and in the other case it was 0.060, all extremely low values. This can be justified because the experiments have the same operational conditions. To demonstrate that the model presented in this work fits better than the perfectly mixed mill, a comparison of the simulations of the piston flow model against the perfectly mixed model has been made ( Another experiment (Exp. 1) was developed to validate the previously back-calculated parameters. The average parameters shown in The fitting error, 0.30, demonstrates the goodness of the adjustment between experimental values and the simulated curve ( The comminution in a continuous ball mill can be described as a dual process. However, when a perfectly mixed mill process is predominant, a certain percentage of particles follow the piston flow phenomenon. The observation inside a lab-scale mill, where different samples from the feed inlet, the centre and the exit of the mill were obtained, evidences this behaviour. The analysis of the particle size distribution of the cumulative mass and the differential mass from these samples reinforces this proposal. A mathematical expression is presented as a selection function, which describes the probability of the particles going to this stage. The exponential regression was based on the plot of the difference between the differential mass of the product and the sample obtained from the feed inlet of the mill. A new population balance model is presented, with two stages, with a perfectly mixed mill solution combined with a piston flow equation as a second stage. The breakage function and the specific rate of breakage function parameters were found using back-calculation techniques. Theses parameters were used for validation, and they show an excellent prediction of the product. This work is part of the OptimOre project. This project has received funding from the