The combination of LIX®63 with the carboxylic acid Versatic 10 exhibits synergistic properties, enabling direct separation of Co and Zn from Mn, Mg and Ca, a process of interest to the proposed El Boleo copper/cobalt project. Previous work on the chemical stability of this system had revealed the potential for rapid degradation of LIX®63 oxime (‘oxime’) at high temperature (40, 50°C) when extracting cobalt and zinc from El Boleo solutions. The present study under extract conditions at 30°C found increased manganese loading, achieved by increasing operating pH from 4.5 to 6.0, facilitated increased rates of oxime degradation and ‘irreversible’ loading of cobalt. This cobalt was able to be reductively stripped using zinc metal, yielding anti oxime and ‘keto-oxime’. Operation at pH 4.5 resulted in low manganese loading (about 0.2g/L) and a calculated oxime half life of 67weeks. Increasing the pH to 6.0 resulted in manganese loading of 2.5g/L and a decrease in oxime half life to 24weeks. Operation at pH 6.0 in the absence of manganese gave an oxime half life of 66weeks. Zinc loading, cobalt loading and changes in pH between 4.5 and 6.0 (excluding the resulting impact on manganese loading) did not appear to have any adverse effect on oxime stability. At a given pH (5.0), ‘irreversible’ Co loading increased with increasing Co concentration in the aqueous solution. This did not have any noticeable effect on oxime half life.
                  The metal:oxime:carboxylic acid stoichiometries of the Zn, Mn and Co synergist complexes were determined by continuous variation and maximum loading studies to be 1:3:2 for all three metals although 1:2:2 remained a possibility for manganese.
                  Inter-conversion of syn oxime to anti oxime was observed to occur via two different mechanisms under the conditions used: a rapid process facilitated by manganese complexation; and a slower, temperature-based isomer re-equilibration process which occurred in the absence of manganese. This inter-conversion process, which resulted in increased manganese and zinc loading occurring relative to fresh organic (cobalt already being fully loaded), also opens up the possibility of decreasing the amount of LIX®63 required in the El Boleo process.Recent work has raised interest in the use of a synergistic solvent extraction system containing LIX The current paper is the last of several which have focussed on understanding, controlling and thereby minimising reagent degradation specifically under El Boleo operating conditions, in addition to assessing the impact of degradation products on the solvent extraction process. Although the experimental parameters used here are operation-specific, work on a different system suggests the overall behaviour of the organic system is generally applicable (e.g., The active component in LIX The first study specifically under El Boleo conditions assessed LIX The initial work also uncovered a second issue which required clarification-despite the loss of up to 40% oxime under extract conditions, the pH isotherms constructed using the extract-degraded organic solutions were almost identical to those obtained using fresh organic. In contrast, the small oxime loss under strip conditions appeared to have a minor adverse effect. Two possibilities were proposed to account for this behaviour, namely: oxime degradation under extract conditions resulted in a product (presumably keto-oxime) with synergistic capabilities, or oxime isomer inter-conversion from the inactive These possibilities were subsequently investigated along with the impact of other degradation products on phase separation and metal selectivity ( This left the marked rate of oxime degradation under extract conditions as the one major impediment remaining to be overcome before commercial application could be considered. Using copper SX oxime chemistry as a reference, rapid degradation of oxime under extract conditions is unexpected, but not unprecedented. For instance, loss of aromatic aldoxime via irreversible nitration has been observed under extract conditions ( Attention therefore turned to understanding the role of complexed redox active metals, cobalt and particularly manganese, on oxime stability. Oxime isomer inter-conversion subsequent to the initial metal loading was considered to be permitting unintended and undesired increases in manganese loading to occur. This possibility required verification. Minimising degradation by operation at a lower temperature than trialled previously was also considered necessary from the perspective of industrial application. The present study therefore aimed to establish the effect of manganese and cobalt loading on oxime stability when mixed for 12 weeks under El Boleo extract conditions at 30 A bulk organic solution (3.0 Four synthetic aqueous solutions were prepared: a standard El Boleo feed solution; El Boleo feed solutions containing either high or low cobalt levels; and a nil-manganese El Boleo feed solution. Assay results for these solutions are presented in The nine stability tests were each performed in square glass jars (108 Experiments A–F were used to assess the impact of manganese loading on oxime stability. Given this required changes in pH, experiment I was used to assist with deconvoluting the effects of Mn loading and pH. Experiments B–D were replicates to assess experimental reproducibility. Experiments B–D, G and H were used to assess the impact of cobalt loading on oxime stability. In each system, the organic solutions were loaded with the requisite aqueous feed solution at an A:O ratio of 2:1 (500 Organic samples (about 8 mL) were taken from each vessel after mixing for 5, 14, 28, 42, 56, 70 and 84 A Varian 3800 gas chromatograph fitted with a flame ionisation detector was used. The chromatograph was fitted with an EC-1 fused silica capillary column (30 To enable the detection of the oxime extractant, samples (85 Versatic 10 analyses were performed on the same instrument using an Alltech EC1000 capillary column (30 The HPLC instrumentation and methodology used has been described previously ( Organic (200 Seven organic solutions containing pure After determining the likely ligand ratio in the complex via continuous variation, maximum metal loading tests were performed using the relevant organic solution and multiple contacts (A:O 1:1) with a 100 Subsequent to the earlier work, a re-optimisation of the El Boleo organic solution was undertaken in response to initial high rates of oxime degradation. Use of the re-optimised organic solution at pH 5.0 was planned. In addition, given the suspicion of the role of manganese, steps were undertaken by Baja Mining Corporation to minimise its content in the aqueous feed solution. Therefore, prior to the commencement of the stability tests, a pH isotherm was constructed to permit selection of appropriate pH values to use in the stability study. The resulting pH isotherm, determined using a low-calcium El Boleo synthetic aqueous solution (Ca 0.088 The pH of the nine systems was regularly monitored over the first five days of the stability trial. A small but clear decrease in pH was observed primarily over the first two days in all Mn-containing aqueous systems. A less pronounced decrease was observed in the manganese-free system. These systems were adjusted back to the target pH as required. Given the ongoing change in pH, the metal loading levels of the day 2 and day 5 samples were determined. For each sample, day 2 and day 5 results were comparable. Co loading in all samples was > As a precautionary measure due to these observed initial changes, each system was converted to operation under oxygen-reduced conditions after day five. To further reduce the chances of additional oxygen ingress, the aqueous solutions were not replaced during the trial. Previous work by us and others ( For all manganese-containing samples, inter-conversion appeared to be essentially complete within five days, based on the comparable 5, 14 and 28 Although Results from oxime analyses are presented in The half life ‘errors’ in Examination of the oxime content and day 2 metal loading results from the nine experiments revealed the following regarding experimental reproducibility and oxime stability: The three replicate Mn-pH5.0 samples resulted in comparable oxime content and metal loading results with time, giving confidence in the reproducibility associated with the experimental regime. These samples at 30 Operation at pH 4.5 saw the oxime half life increase to 67 Oxime half life decreased to 37 and 24 Operation at pH 6.0 in the absence of manganese resulted in a much longer half life relative to the manganese-containing system (66 versus 24 Increasing the cobalt loading levels at a constant pH of 5.0 had no clear adverse effect on oxime half life, with half lives of 48 and 43 The negative correlation between day 2 manganese loading and oxime half life indicated in the dot points above was found to be statistically significant (R value of − It can be observed from The currently observed oxime half life at pH 4.5 (67 The benefit of minimising manganese loading in the El Boleo system was also shown in a pilot plant study where manganese loading was kept under 150 Results from Mn, Co and Zn loading levels in the nine experiments throughout the trial, determined by the ability to strip each particular metal from the organic phase, are presented in A marked pH-related decrease in Co loading was also seen, with ‘losses’ ranging from 12% (0.07 To test the possibility of irreversible cobalt loading accounting for the ‘missing’ cobalt, the final organic samples (10 UV–visible analysis of selected samples before and after reductive stripping was attempted in order to ascertain the UV–visible spectrum of the irreversibly loaded species. However, the absorbances of the unstripped, undiluted species below 600 Increasing pH in the presence of manganese resulted in more irreversible cobalt loading. Conversely, operation at pH 4.5 resulted in relatively little irreversible cobalt loading (0.08 Selected samples were analysed by HPLC using PDA detection before and after reductive stripping. An alkyl benzene peak from the diluent was used as an internal standard and an A key difference in the present study relative to any plant operation is that the samples remained loaded for long periods of time in the present work, whereas these would be rapidly stripped under routine operation. It is however very likely that the mechanism leading to the irreversible loading here would also occur with time in an operating system. Indeed, a single, rapid contact of LIX Overall, the current results indicate that operation at lower pH levels (4.5 or possibly slightly lower) whilst monitoring raffinate for excessive loss of zinc would help to keep oxime decomposition and ‘irreversible’ cobalt complexation to a minimum in an operating plant. The possibility of antioxidant (e.g. Ionol, also known as butylated hydroxytoluene or BHT) addition to further inhibit oxime degradation is worthy of investigation, although any benefit would need to be assessed on both chemical efficacy and economic merit. Besides oxime content, samples were also analysed for changes in the degradation products keto-oxime, diketone and acyloin during the trial. The amounts present in the different organic samples at the completion of the trial are summarised in Keto-oxime was the most prominent of the degradation products and showed a statistically significant positive correlation with manganese (and to a lesser extent cobalt) loading and irreversible cobalt loading. The generation of keto-oxime suggests some oxygen was still present in these nitrogen-purged systems. Acyloin content decreased in all systems with time. It showed a statistically significant negative correlation with increasing pH (and thus also Zn loading), all being lost within 4 and 8 Diketone content increased slightly and to a comparable extent in all systems, suggesting its generation was unrelated to pH and/or metal loading. Formation of diketone has previously been shown to be temperature dependent ( Underivatised duplicate day 84 samples were analysed for Versatic 10 content. The results revealed that there was negligible (2–3%) loss of Versatic 10 over the 84 days in all samples. The stoichiometries of the Zn, Mn, and Co synergist complexes have not been determined previously. The method of continuous variation and saturation metal loading (e.g. In the case of zinc, continuous variation ( In the case of manganese, the results are still open to some interpretation. Continuous variation results at pH 6.0 and 6.7 ( An identical approach was also used to establish the likely stoichiometry of the extracted cobalt complex, which was also found to be 1:3:2. This cobalt data will be presented in a future paper. These stoichiometries differ from the generally observed 1:2:2 ratio for the nickel synergist complex (e.g. Analysis of oxime utilisation can be undertaken based on the determined metal complex stoichiometries ( As discussed previously in A discussion on the likely roles of the two oxime isomers in the synergistic system has been presented previously (Section 3.1.3 in Despite the El Boleo experience, this favourable oxime inter-conversion process is not expected to occur naturally in all operating systems. Due to its economic importance, we have been and continue to investigate factors affecting rapid The present study aimed to clearly establish the effect of manganese and cobalt loading on oxime stability in the optimised El Boleo organic system when mixed for 12 Upon commencement of this work, the conversion of Increasing operating pH in the presence of manganese resulted in increased ‘irreversible’ loading of cobalt. This was able to be reductively stripped, with recovery of some Stoichiometry of the Zn, Mn and Co synergist complexes were determined by continuous variation and maximum loading studies. The metal:oxime:acid stoichiometries are believed to be 1:3:2 for zinc, manganese and cobalt, although 1:2:2 remained a possibility for manganese. Reconciliation of synergist complex stoichiometry with metal loading and Inter-conversion of Due to its economic importance, factors affecting rapid The support of