The quality of fine coal is deteriorating day by day, while its quantity is increasing. To highlight this problem, a typical size consist and variation in the quality of size fractions of Indian fine coal are specified. The application of a fine and ultrafine separation process as a function of particle size is also indicated. The production of fines and problems related to beneficiation are studied. The cost of cleaning fine coal is always higher than that of coarse coal. Different methods of fine coal cleaning have been dealt with. Though froth flotation is the leading process, it cannot cover the full size range of fine coal. It is necessary to apply other technologies that depend upon the specific situation. In addition to physiochemical processes, gravity-based systems are discussed. The scenario of fine coal beneficiation in India warrants special consideration as the existing flotation units are not performing well. The costs of treatment and recovery of fine coal is many times higher than those of coarse coal. Clarification of the process water by closed circuit operation is imperative for recovery of fine coal and reduction of water consumption and environmental pollution. Unless the process water is relieved of fines, the performance of the plant is affected. Cleaning of fine coal is the subject of this chapter. The size grading of coal depends upon many factors. Mechanised mining will generate a much greater quantity of fines compared to hand mining. The amount of fines generated is directly proportional to the degree of mechanisation. The increasing generation of fines and deterioration in quality are shown in Number of picks, their lacing pattern and speed of shearers; Type of breakers used; Transfer chutes height; Type of design in coal preparation plants; Nature of coal, value of hard groove index; Transport system – conveyor system produces more fines than mine coal transport, skip winding adds yet more fines. The generation of fines should be kept to a minimum as the beneficiation of fines involves several issues as follows: Higher investment and operating costs; Higher cost of dewatering and drying of clean coal and rejects; More environmental control problems with disposal of rejects; Increased handling problem due to a rise in the production of slurry; Elaborate processing system involved; Closer control and optimisation of process parameters. The quality of ROM coal has deteriorated along with the decrease in size, and Thin dirt bands which are mined along with coal, the entire quantity of which is added to the coal; Part of the thick dirt bands to be mined by selective mining methods, partly contribute towards contamination of coal; Contamination due to the roof and floor of the coal seams; Contamination due to tectonic disturbances; Some shales break down readily on contact with water, weak pieces disintegrate to <0.5 Loss of selectivity in mining creates more contamination. In addition to the above, better-quality coal has been almost depleted. Coal resources with declining quality gradient are now being exploited and thus coal preparation plants are burdened with the task of upgradation of inferior-quality coal. The upgradation of fines has become necessary for the following reasons: Inferior-quality coals are supplied to the washery as the deposits of good-quality coals are already exhausted; Increased mine mechanisation leads to free dirt and a greater quantity of fines; Contamination of sands with coal due to sandstowing in underground mines; Finer crushing of raw coal for liberation of coaly matter and subsequent generation of more fines; Wider fluctuation of raw coal quality; Mechanised transport system and repeated handling generate more fines; Removal of pyritic sulphur if present; Crushing of middlings in coal washeries with the result of production of more fines. A typical size consists and corresponding ash content of different size fractions have been indicated in The results of float and sink and optimised flotation tests have been indicated in A comparative study has been made with regard to cost indices of coarse coal (>0.5 There have been tremendous improvements in fine coal cleaning technologies over the past few decades. High ash content slime material from ultrafine coal can be selectively removed by column flotation, the most efficient technology currently available. In parallel, oil agglomeration processes have also demonstrated this capability but have been stemmed from commercial use by the high usage cost. The flowsheet of a typical fine coal-cleaning circuit for different size fractions used in coal preparation plants is shown in There are various methods available for cleaning fine coal, of which froth flotation has become the most common practice. Froth flotation depends on differences in surface properties between coal and shale. Air bubbles are generated within an aqueous suspension of fine raw coal with a solids concentration of less than 10%. The hydrophobic coal particles attach to the air bubbles and are buoyed to the top of the froth flotation cell where they are removed as froth. The hydrophilic shale particles remain as a suspension and are removed over the tailings weir. The property of hydrophobicity is imparted to coal particles by the addition of a collector like diesel oil. This facilitates the attachment of coal to air bubbles in preference to gangue Conventional mechanically agitated flotation machines use relatively shallow rectangular tanks, whereas column cells are usually tall vessels with heights normally varying from 7 to 16 Hydrodynamic analyses have shown that the use of air bubbles smaller than typically generated by conventional flotation machines can improve fine coal recovery. The selectivity also increases as smaller bubbles rise more slowly through the pulp, leaving the high ash impurities at the bottom. One disadvantage of flotation is that efficiency reduces for size range below 100 Flotation circuits are simple for Indian coals. Concentrates can be produced in one stage of flotation, and recleaning of the products may not be generally necessary. In the case of highly oxidised coal, two-stage flotation may be required to be incorporated, with rougher cells and cleaner cells. The circuit consists of a number of banks depending upon the total quantity to be handled, whereas each bank can have four to eight cells. For smooth operation of the system, proper operation and control are necessary. It is observed that the existing flotation circuits in India are not working well. There is substantial loss of coal substance along with tailings. The causes of poor performance can be attributed to the following major factors as stated by Variation in pulp density of feed slurry; Variation in quantity of slurry (cum/min) from thickener underflow; Improper conditioning; Inconsistency and poor quality of frother; No provision for multiple dosing; Less solids content and higher proportion of ultrafine particles (<0.053 Poor recovery of cakes from vacuum filter. In addition, the quality of coal fines has deteriorated and other parameters have changed. Lower seam coals of inferior quality are now supplied. The concept of treating fine coal may need changes. The floatability tests are illustrated in The working features of the StackCell technology are presented in These compact, stackable units offer considerable savings for new installations and are ideal for expanding capacity in an existing plant. This The latest full-scale plant trials suggest that this low-profile technology can provide coal recoveries and product qualities comparable to column flotation systems. Two full-scale approaches have been tested, including a single unit rougher application as well as a three-stage ( It provides an alternate means to efficiently achieve column-like performance when plant space and/or capital are limited. In particular, the small size and low weight of this new technology make it amenable to low-cost plant upgrades where a single unit can be placed into a currently overloaded flotation circuit with minimal retrofit costs. To summarise, the features of StackCell are: small footprint, gravity feed system, high throughput with low residence time, stackable design, low-energy input costs, and high sheer bubble generation. After conditioning with suitable reagents, the pulp is fed to a single aerating unit arranged in the vertical pipe above the flotation cell. The aerated pulp flows through the central pipe to the slurry distributor ring located at the bottom of the cell where it is vertically deflected upward through high wear-resistant ceramic nozzles. A special aerator, a self-aspirating unit, plays an important role, as the slurry is pumped at high velocities through the aerator, bubble/particle attachment is achieved in a few milliseconds. Only one aerator unit per flotation cell is needed to achieve high performance. This Pressures between 1.5 and 2.8 bars are applied to the system. The higher the slurry velocity, the higher the shearing forces that will be present with the result of producing finer air bubbles. Pneuflot technology is able to produce air bubbles between 5 and 1000 It is generally accepted that teeter bed technologies can only be applied to mineral systems that have (1) a relatively narrow particle size distribution and (2) a moderately large difference in particle densities. To overcome the shortcomings of traditional hindered-bed separators, a novel device known as the Eriez HydroFloat Separator was developed. The HydroFloat separator offers the dual advantage of a flotation device and a density separator. The HydroFloat separator is an aerated fluidised-bed (or teeter-bed) separator. The synergistic effect of combining flotation with gravity concentration results in an outcome that cannot be achieved by either approach alone. HydroFloat separators improve coarse particle recovery through: The reduced velocity increases the contact time between bubbles and particles, thereby removing the probability of adhesion yet enhancing flotation recovery. This phenomenon is particularly important for coarse particles. The high solids concentration within the teeter bed will also improve recovery by increasing the collision probability between bubbles and particles. Increased residence time, the longer retention time allows good recoveries to be maintained in a relatively small cell volume. Decreased mixing helps the HydroFloat cell make more effective use of the available cell volume than conventional processes. The reduced cell turbulence significantly increases the maximum particle size limit for effective flotation. Decreased buoyancy restrictions prevent particles coarser than about 0.3–0.5  The cyclones used for beneficiation of fine coal are of two types – water-only cyclones and heavy-medium (HM) cyclones. The former type of cyclones is designed such that the cone angle is made relatively longer and no heavy medium is required for separation. The water-only cyclones are an already established method and they are used in several washeries in India. This type of cyclone washer can be effectively used for reduction of ash content by 2%–6%. The efficient range of cleaning is limited to a minimum size of 100 The concept of processing fine coal in spirals is not new. Innovation in design and construction materials has improved the performance of spirals. High levels of processing efficiency can be realised at comparatively low capital and operating cost. Plant capacity can be increased by diverting part of HM cyclones and froth flotation feed in an existing plant to spirals. The efficiency levels can be further improved by rewashing the middlings of primary spirals in secondary units. The drawback of the spiral circuits is their inability to make a low density cut at below 1.5 sp. gr. ( Low capital cost; Lightweight fibreglass construction; Ease of operation due to the lack of moving parts; Requires no reagents or medium; Inexpensive to install and maintain; Generally capable of maintaining good recoveries of clean coal when correctly configured and properly operated; Ability to resist coal from entering the tailings stream, while requiring limited supervision and maintenance; Due to their light weight, two or three spiral units are intertwined around a single supporting shaft, which significantly improves throughput capacity per unit of floor space. At the same time, spirals suffer from problems, which include ( High-density cut-off point, relative density (RD)≥1.9; Poor feed distribution; Sanding/beaching; Improper splitter settings; Incorrect liquid and solid flow rates; Likely misplacement of significant amounts of rock into the clean coal product. Spirals are used extensively to process fine (<1±0.15 Since spirals have low unit capacity (2–4 WOC: Spiral: WOC-Spiral: The optimal spiral performance can be achieved when the spiral circuit is properly designed, operated and maintained. Some of the impacting factors are enumerated below: Lack of uniformity in feeding results in substantial falls in operating efficiency and can lead to severe losses in recovery, this is especially true with coal spirals ( The feed tonnage to the spiral should not be allowed to exceed 3.0–3.5 Compound rougher-cleaner spirals with middlings recycling give superior separation performance ( Control of dry solids tonnage, slurry flow rate, feed solids content, distributer level, oversized particles, sanding/beaching and good operating practices with effective maintenance programmes ( The Ludowici Reflux Classifier (RC) units, developed originally by Galvin and coworkers at the University of Newcastle, Australia, are state-of-the-art fine particle technology (gravity-based separation) and offer significant advantages in capacity, adaptability and efficiency. They are ideally suited to separation of coal (typically <2.0 A RC has the dual advantages of gravity-based separation and particle size classification ( There are commercial units from RC850 up to RC3000 ( Through extensive research work it has been established that it is possible to beneficiate very fine coal slimes by selectively flocculating gangue particles ( In the oil agglomeration process, the difference in surface properties between coal gangue particles is made use of similar to forth flotation. Here, two types of liquids are used; one is furnace oil as bridging liquid as much as 10%–20% by weight of feed coal, another is diesel oil as conditioning liquid to the turn of 0.2% by weight of feed. When the mixture of coal, oils and water with a pulp density of 10%–15% solids by weight is thoroughly agitated, the macerals form micropellets. This process is valid for particles (0.5–0) The Central Fuel Research Institute (CFRI) has developed an emerging process ( High yield of cleans with very low loss of carbonaceous matter through tailings; Easy dewatering characteristics of cleans and improvements in the coking propensities of the cleans; Clean coal particles form dense, compact and spherical agglomerates and mineral matter remain dispersed in water; These materials (agglomerates and tailings) are passed over a bent sieve followed by a vibrating screen; The agglomerates being larger in size are separated and collected and the water carrying the mineral matter passes through the aperture of the screen; The process provides an attractive method of beneficiation and dewatering; The process has been successfully demonstrated in a 2 A 10 The surface-based flotation process may not be favourable for all types of coal fines. EGSs can do efficient upgrading of ultrafine particles down to below 325 mesh (38 The Falcon C (Continuous) Gravity Concentrator works on the principles of flowing film through a centrifugal sluice. It is a smooth bowl spinning at a very high speed. A centrifugal force up to 300 The Kelsey centrifugal jig (KCJ) ( Operating and maintenance cost savings; Improved recovery; Improved final concentrate grade; Simplifying the processing circuit. The Knelson concentrator was one of the first EGSs to find commercial success for free gold or other heavy mineral recovery ( The Mozley multigravity separator (MGS) is another kind of EGS system which operates at a lower g force compared to Falcon and Knelson concentrators. Thus, its throughput capacity is low. The operating principle is simultaneous rotation and shaking of the cylindrical drum. The desired separation takes place due to the combined effect of centrifugal acceleration and forces in conventional tables. Light particles are carried by the flowing film to the far end of the drum, while heavy particles that get pinned against the wall by the centrifugal field are carried by rotating scrapers to the opposite end of the drum ( The performance of different enhanced gravity concentrators for the treatment of coal fines is illustrated in Advanced coal cleaning refers to an improvement in the cleaning process. In physical separation, the particle size is reduced to almost totally liberate coal substance from mineral matter. Alternatively, it may be feasible to use chemical and biological methods. A number of advanced processes for cleaning coal of fine and ultrafine sizes are under development. The shaking table is one of the oldest methods of beneficiation of fine grain minerals. The tabling method is widely used in the United States. It is known for its good separation efficiency in regard to desulphurisation. It has not been very popular in other countries because of certain disadvantages As far as circuit design is concerned, split flotation is fairly popular. The size fractions of 500–150 From the study conducted by Froth flotation for feeds finer than about 0.3 Spirals for feeds sized to 1 × 0.3 Teeter-bed systems (particularly the HydroFloat technology) for feeds larger than 1 Water-only cyclones are not recommended as standalone units due to the potential for high coal losses when secondary back-up units are not available within the plant circuitry; Possibility of applying EGSs for ultrafine coal. Progressive mechanisation of mines has increased the production of dirty fines. Further crushing, grinding and handling prior to processing add to the proportion of fines. It has now become necessary to crush ROM coal below 13 The froth flotation is the most promising and versatile process for commercial upgradation of coal fine slimes. The alternative processes are also under development for the replacement of flotation processes where suitable. All the unit processes described here have shortcomings. There is a limitation to each of these pieces of equipment, either for the top or bottom size of coal feed. In the case of flotation, coarser particles will be lost along with the tailings due to the sanding effect. Another drawback of froth flotation is that it is not effective for oxidised coal. For Indian coal with a high percentage of near gravity materials it is advisable to go for the froth flotation method except when the coal is oxidised. From the With the growing need for upgradation of fines, all existing coal washeries in India should be modified to incorporate fine coal treatment circuits, likewise the new coal washeries should also have provision for fine coal treatment. The beneficiation of fine coal is a more complex and costly operation as compared to that of coarse coal. Thus, comprehensive research and techno-economic studies are required before the finalisation of any flow scheme.