Mastication is a sensory-motor activity aimed at the preparation of food for swallowing. It is a complex process involving activities of the facial, the elevator and suprahyoidal muscles, and the tongue. These activities result in patterns of rhythmic mandibular movements, food manipulation and the crushing of food between the teeth. Saliva facilitates mastication, moistens the food particles, makes a bolus, and assists swallowing. The movement of the jaw, and thus the neuromuscular control of chewing, plays an important role in the comminution of the food. Characteristics of the food, e.g. water and fat percentage and hardness, are known to influence the masticatory process. Food hardness is sensed during mastication and affects masticatory force, jaw muscle activity, and mandibular jaw movements. When we chew for instance a crispy food, the jaw decelerates and accelerates as a result of resistance and breakage of food particles. The characteristic breakage behaviour of food is essential for the sensory sensation. This study presents a short review of the influence of oral physiology characteristics and food characteristics on the masticatory process.Chewing is the first step in the process of digestion and is meant to prepare the food for swallowing and further processing in the digestive system. During chewing, the food bolus or food particles are reduced in size, saliva is produced to moisten the food and flavors are released. Taste and texture of the food are perceived and have their influence on the chewing process. The water in the saliva moistens the food particles, whereas the salivary mucins bind masticated food into a coherent and slippery bolus that can be easily swallowed All ingested solid foods, regardless of bite size and initial texture, are processed in a stereotyped way by humans Characteristics of the oral system, like, e.g., bite force, chewing performance, and salivary flow rate will influence the masticatory process, e.g., size reduction of food particles, salivation and mixing of food particles into a food bolus that can be swallowed. The number of chewing cycles needed to prepare food for swallowing (stage I transport until swallowing), defined here as swallowing threshold or moment of swallowing, is rather constant within a subject for one type of food, whereas large variations in the number of chewing cycles until swallowing were observed among subjects Chewing performance can be determined by quantifying the degree of fragmentation of an artificial test food (Optosil, a silicon rubber) after a fixed number of chewing cycles The moment of swallowing was shown to be only weakly correlated with the chewing performance Mechanically stimulated salivary flow rate can be determined from chewing on a piece of tasteless Parafilm. Over a period of 5 The effect on the sensory ratings of adding fluid to a solid food is unknown. Food properties may be modified by the additional fluid, which may lead to changes in chewing force, mandibular jaw movements, and number of chewing cycles to prepare the food for swallowing. It can be hypothesized that an artificial increase in the amount of saliva mixing with food could also influence the perception of the food. Preliminary results of a study in our lab in which various fluids (water, solution of α-amylase, or artificial saliva containing mucins) were added to solid food showed a significant influence of these fluids on oral physiology parameters as well as on textural and sound attributes Characteristics of the food, like, e.g., water and fat percentage and hardness are known to influence the masticatory process. Food hardness is sensed during mastication and affects masticatory force Food characteristics also have a large influence on the number of chewing cycles needed to prepare the food for swallowing Dry and hard products required more chewing cycles before swallowing. Evidently, more time is needed to break the food down and to add enough saliva to form a cohesive bolus suitable for swallowing The movement of the jaw, and thus the neuromuscular control of chewing, also plays an important role in the comminution of the food. Chewing requires muscle activity to make the movements of the jaw and to exert forces in order to cut or grind the food. A relatively low level of muscle activity is observed in the surface EMG of the closing muscles of subjects making pseudo-chewing movements without food. More muscle activity is generated if the closing movement is counteracted by food resistance The brain stem has been shown to be an essential part of the central nervous system that is necessary for mastication, because decerebrate animals and animals without a cerebellum or spinal cord can still chew Comparison of the movements and the activity patterns in the motor nerves evoked by cortical stimulation of the paralyzed animal with those of natural chewing before paralysis, has demonstrated the important role of sensory feedback in mastication The neuromuscular control of chewing in humans has been studied in our laboratory, e.g., Refs. The masticatory system is mainly closed-loop controlled. A reason for this may be the fact that the relatively large forces needed for food fragmentation must be controlled under uncertain conditions. First, no optical feedback is available in the chewing process. Furthermore, food resistance may vary largely from cycle to cycle. Thus, immediate muscle response is necessary to maintain a constant chewing rhythm. Force-velocity properties of the jaw-closing muscles play a major role in the situation that the food resistance suddenly disappears An experiment with rhythmic arm movements, comparable to the rhythmic jaw movements described above, showed that arm and jaw muscles respond differently to loading The crispy/crunchy nature of food products is an important sensory characteristic on which consumers base their appreciation. When we chew crispy food, the jaw decelerates and accelerates as a result of resistance and breakage of food particles. The characteristic breakage behaviour of a crispy food is essential for the sensory sensation. Our chewing muscles will generate the chewing force needed to break the food. The electrical activity of the chewing muscles will abruptly decrease when the food breaks, thus preventing too fast jaw closing and damage of the teeth. The breakage behaviour of a crispy food during chewing could be quantified by studying the neuromuscular control of the jaw movement during chewing of crispy foods. Such a study was recently performed on crispy foods Another approach to study the chewing of crispy foods is to simulate the mechanical resistance of a crispy food This work was supported by the University Medical Center Utrecht, and the Institute for Dental Sciences, The Netherlands. One of the authors (LJP) received a scholarship from CAPES — Brazil.