A phase equilibrium model of the O2–ZnSO4–H2SO4–H2O system with the mixed solvent electrolyte (MSE) model is presented. The available thermodynamic properties, including mean activity coefficient of ZnSO4 in water, and the solubility of ZnSO4 in water and in H2SO4 solutions were modeled first to obtain model parameters: equilibrium constants for solids and the MSE ion interaction parameters between Zn2+–SO4
                     2− and Zn2+–HSO4
                     − ion pairs. The solubility of O2 in the ZnSO4–H2SO4–H2O system was modeled with additional interaction parameters between O2(aq) and ions (H+, HSO4
                     −, and Zn2+). The application of the MSE thermodynamic framework to O2–ZnSO4–H2SO4–H2O shows that the model is able to give an accurate prediction of different types of experimental data in binary (ZnSO4–H2O), ternary (ZnSO4–H2SO4–H2O), and quaternary (O2–ZnSO4–H2SO4–H2O) systems.Phase equilibria for electrolyte systems are of considerable importance in hydrometallurgical processes. Oxidative pressure acid leaching for Zn sulfide mineral is a typical hydrometallurgical process Many models have been developed to calculate the activity coefficient of ionic species in aqueous electrolyte systems. The most widely applied models include the Debye–Hückel model As to the aqueous neutral species like O Recently, OLI proposed a speciation-based mixed solvent electrolyte (MSE) model which can calculate the activity coefficient of both ionic and neutral species The solubility of minerals has been reviewed by Pitzer Therefore, the objective of this paper is to model the phase equilibrium of O ZnSO ZnSO O O In the O The vapor–liquid equilibrium of O The criterion for VLE is that the chemical potentials of O The equilibrium constant for reaction Solid ZnSO The equilibrium constant of reaction In the H The equilibrium constants for the two ionization reactions are, From Eqs. The equilibrium constant of a reaction is evaluated from the Gibbs free energy relation: However, the equilibrium constant for the SLE calculation in Eq. As to the calculation of activity coefficient for aqueous species (Zn Although the detailed description of the MSE model is given elsewhere In the MSE model, a symmetrical reference state and the mole fraction-based concentration scale is adopted since molality approaches ∞ in highly concentrated solution. In the conventional unsymmetrical reference state, the solvent and solute activities are calculated on the basis of two different reference states: the solute is based on infinite dilute reference state, whereas pure water is the reference state for the solvent. Commonly, molality is used for the solvent (electrolyte), and mole fraction is used for solvent (water). The activity coefficients satisfy In the symmetrical reference state, both solvent and solute follow the same reference state, i.e., pure solute (ionic or neutral species) and pure water. In this case, the mole fraction unit scale is used. The activity coefficient for each component satisfies, In the MSE model, the activity coefficient of any aqueous species A Pitzer–Debye–Hückel expression is used to account for the long-range interaction between ions at low concentration The middle-range term deals with the interactions involving ionic species (i.e., ion/ion and ion/molecule). A symmetrical second virial coefficient-type expression is used, given by: As to the short-range interaction term, it primarily deals with the interactions between neutral species. The UNIQUAC model is selected to account for the short-range contributions which become important in systems containing non-aqueous solvents. In most hydrometallurgical processes, the solutions are typical aqueous electrolyte systems which only involve ion–ion and ion–molecule interactions. Hence, the long-range and middle-range interactions are adequate. For any of the three contributions Eq. Experimental data, such as mean activity coefficient, or solubility available in literature, are often in terms of the molality scale. In order to use the OLI regression facility for the MSE model, molality must be transformed to mole fraction. Therefore, the following relation for a single electrolyte was used for the conversion: Mean activity coefficient Several compilations of experimental data were used to estimate model parameters. Mean activity coefficient data of ZnSO The solution chemistry of the binary H The middle-range parameters for Zn The middle-range ion interaction parameters for Zn As mentioned before, the equilibrium constant can be calculated from the Gibbs free energy of reaction (Eq. With the solution chemistry of the ZnSO Experimental measurements of oxygen solubility in pure water and various electrolyte solutions have been complied by Battino The equations provided by all previous researchers show high accuracy against experimental data. The thermodynamic properties of O It can be seen that all three calculations give almost the same accuracy in predicting O Due to the salting-out effect, the presence of electrolytes like H In order to test the model parameters obtained from simple electrolyte systems, the solubility of O Examination of The thermodynamic equilibrium for the O The MSE model proved to be an accurate model for describing complex phase equilibria. The research of this work identified errors in previously reported oxygen solubility measurements in ZnSO The financial support of the Centre for Chemical Process Metallurgy of the University of Toronto, as well as the National Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) of Canada are gratefully acknowledged.