XRF bulk sorting is put forward as a credible intender for pre-concentration methods in mining. This paper presents a preliminary study employing a bench-scale approach to calibrate XRF surface sensing to a target concentration of interest related to its volume so as to assess the feasibility of a case barren copper ore “slots” to bulk sorting. Firstly, various top sizes, along with different operators and specimens’ weight/volumes, were examined to quantify the minimum readings needed (MRN) for XRF spot scanning at this scale. Multiple linear regression with a correlation coefficient of 0.921 was validated to be a reliable algorithm for calibrating XRF surface response to Cu volumetric concentration, owing to its consideration of elemental interacts. With the aid of graphical representations of calibrated data on recovery/grade curves, cut-off grade of 0.23% was chosen to enable 30% mass below the threshold to be discarded as waste and the remainder to go for further processing.It is generally recognized that comminution is an energy-intensive process. Estimations show that energy consumption for comminution accounts for approximately 75% of beneficiation operations ( For this purpose, one of the most beneficial developments in mining within the past 10 years was the development of high technology sensors to enable pre-concentration or sorting of mine ores ( However, the typically available ore sorting technologies are particle sorting, i.e., rocks are positioned into a monolayer in order to be scanned individually, resulting in restricted throughput. Moreover, ore sorting is struggling with challenges such as common misconceptions about the actual impacts and benefits of ore sorting ( One possible option of values determination with good repeatability may be sorting based on X-rays, which are described ( In the infancy of XRF-based sorting, only homogenous waste streams were treated. Currently, XRF is acquiring its reputation in heterogeneous materials sorting ( To this end, this manuscript highlights the benefits of effective and higher capacity bulk sorting technique, available for segregating the “rich-ore” from waste and shrinking the volume processed downstream. X-ray fluorescent (XRF) was chosen for sensing low-grade copper ores owing to its quantitative response to elements in question. To the application of XRF based sorting, matrix effects on XRF digitized response should be taken into consideration. The intensity of XRF radiation is a complex function of device factors, matrix composition ( One of the issues affecting bulk sorting XRF based is the reliability of surface sensing. In other words, whether the XRF surface sensing can be convergent, and whether the measurement of surface characteristics is sufficient to directly represent the object’s volumetric distribution or indirectly represent it under a suitable correlation. As for the correlation, a single rule cannot be adopted in every case due to mineralogical diversities of different deposits ( Another issue determining bulk sorting is the ores’ inherent characteristics. According to As explained above, this study firstly concentrated on the identification and quantification of adequate spot scanning times needed for XRF surface sensing, at different size distribution (top size), different operators and sample weights (volumes). Secondly, a bench-scale method, including artificially creating a set of copper ore lots with an intrinsic heterogeneity, was proposed to evaluate the amenability of barren copper ores towards XRF-based bulk sorting. Next, the calibration of XRF readings on the interest at the surface to elemental contents in the volume was performed. Finally, using the calibrated data, the feasibility of ores in question to XRF based bulk sorting was evaluated and scaled. A series of bench-scale tests taking advantage of XRF were carried out on samples of low-grade copper ores from Copper Mountain mine in Canada. The as-sampled ores were screened into five size fractions ranging from 0 mm to 37.5 mm. The XRF tests were performed on various top sizes, different operators, and total weights to determine the minimum spots readings needed (MRN). Next, case barren copper ore “lots” were artificially created, comprising 78 “groups” with the same weight (±5%) but different levels of value, i.e., with a specific heterogeneity. The XRF surface readings of every “group” were correlated to volumetric Cu concentration. Based on the calibrated data, feasibility to bulk sorting was evaluated. Materials and methodology are elaborated hereinafter. Low-grade copper ores approximately 400 kg from SAG belt were sampled from Copper Mountain mine in Canada, and its particle size distribution is shown in In this present work, XRF tests were carried out with the aid of Innov-Xsystms α-6000 (INNOV-X SYSTEMS IN., WOBURN, MA) shown in For each specimen, the 50 readings of the wanted Cu were compiled and averaged sequentially from the first one, the first two, the first three,… up to all the 50 readings. Percentage difference, defined as the difference between the average values of a reading alignment versus the last one within the alignment, was introduced to assess the averages’ stability. The average of XRF readings could be regarded as acceptable if percentage difference within the range of ±2% or ±5% at successive 5, 7, 10, or 11 sequential averages, and the fewest reading times of acceptable average value were designated as minimum spots readings needed (MRN). Additionally, the averaged concentration of all the 50 readings was regarded as its measured Cu concentration at the surface. Contributions of sample top size along with five operators and total weights to MRN were investigated to check whether the set 50 readings were adequate at those scales. Firstly, according to the mass percentage in It is acknowledged that the predominant copper-bearing mineral in Copper Mountain mine is chalcopyrite, a brassy yellow mineral consisting of a mixed copper-iron sulfide, CuFeS To create a series of “lots” with intrinsic heterogeneity, 6 “lots” with 0%, 20%, 40%, 60%, 80%, 100% yellow particles were prepared. Thirteen groups of 250 g (±5%) comprised each lot, namely as A1, A2, … A13; B1, B2, … B13; C1 to C13; D1 to D13; E1 to E13; F1 to F13, and size distributions of each group were in accordance with For effective sorting, materials need to have sufficient levels of distribution heterogeneity (DH). In Bern’s manuscript to be published, the definition around “Distribution Heterogeneity” has been extended to a sample within a set of samples, or one lithological or geometallurgical unit among the set of lithological units of interest (i.e., different ore-zones within a deposit), as shown in Eq. where After XRF scanning of 50 spots was implemented, every 78 bags of groups were pulverized, homogenized, and re-sampled into transparent sample bags to carry out XRF measuring, with soil mode of sequential and combining test results, 30 s on standard test and then 30 s on light element test. Four spots, diagonally at two parallel superficial surfaces, were scanned. The average value of the four readings of the pulverized sample was treated as the “assayed” grade and used for correlating the surface XRF readings. To the “Lots”, all of the surface readings of 78 groups were correlated to the volumetric distribution of the interest Cu with the assistance of single linear regression paired with multiple linear regression. In order to verify the XRF readings of pulverized powder on behalf of “assayed” grades, simultaneously to identify grade difference between the segregated yellow particles and non-yellow particles, 250 g yellow and non-yellow particles of each size fractions were investigated. Firstly, the particle samples were carried out with XRF surface scanning for 50 random spots. Secondly, they were pulverized individually forwarding to XRF sensing of 4 selected spots and inductively coupled plasma (ICP) chemical assaying respectively. Finally, each sample’s result of 50 XRF readings of particle surface sensing, four readings of pulverized powder and ICP analysis were compared. Treating each 250 g specimen as a group in a lot, the whole artificial six lots included 78 groups, the DH of artificial lots could be calculated with Eq. Samples of 1000 g (±5%) with top size 37.5 mm, 25 mm, 16 mm, 9.5 mm, and 4.75 mm separately were deployed for XRF scanning of 50 spots. The percentage difference trended with XRF reading times are presented in To quantitatively illuminate MRN for a centralized value, averaged XRF readings of Cu concentration are summarized in By comparison of the MRNs from narrow (top size of 4.75 mm) to wide size fractions (top size of 37.5 mm), it is shown that more MRN is generally needed with size distribution widening. In a more general case, self-absorption of the characteristic X-rays ( Additionally, a fact in Results generated by five operators (I, II, III, IV, and V) with 1000 g samples with top size of 37.5 mm are compiled in As The densities of the barren copper ores could be looked as equal to interfere, thus it is acceptable for different weights to represent different volumes. Alike with all analytical techniques, XRF results of surface scanning only rely on the sample actually examined instead of the ‘‘bulk’’ sample submitted. Known from XRF scanning results of top size and operators, Cu concentration of −37.5 mm was estimated to be diluted as 0.1–0.2%. With the aim of minimizing the level of data inaccuracy, as-sorted yellow particles were blended with non-yellow particles with the ratio of 3:2, to prepare 250 g, 500 g, 1000 g, 2000 g and 2500 g, where the size distribution complied with those in As can be observed in Also, in spite of the five overall Cu grade averages fluctuating more or less, the Cu concentrations of samples were all certified dilute lower than 0.6%. Hence, it could be concluded that 50 reading times were reliable for the present study. For some mineralogies, the disposition of surface properties adequately represents the bulk, and sensing accuracy can be improved by using multiple sensors in different orientations and/or combining responses. However, the feasibility of XRF surface sensing should be tested and verified in every case. The averaged Cu concentration of 50 XRF particle surface readings of yellow and non-yellow particles of every size fractions are summarized in As can be seen in Furthermore, average values of XRF surface scanning are found in correspondence with the two latter measured grades of powder in the same rows from Comparison of XRF reports of particle surface and pulverized powder can reveal the relation of Cu distribution at surfaces and inside particles. For the 78 specimens artificially created, As shown in Whereas Cu_pul grades shows to increase with the corresponding Cu_sen grades, and Cu_sen was believed to be related to Cu_pul. On behalf of correlating and converting the Cu_sen to Cu_pul, correlation and regression by both single linear and multiple linear were recommended, to identify the superiority of the two methods on groups of this dilute ore. Correlation analysis is different from regression analysis in that the former focus on inspecting the con-variating tendency of two random variables, and the latter aims to predict independent variables with dependent variables using certain equations. In correlation analysis, both variables must be random variables simultaneously, and the strength of linear association between two variables can be assessed by Pearson’s correlation coefficient ( At First, the correlation of Cu_sen to Cu_pul was modelled in terms of single linear regression. As demonstrated in Next, in order to build up a more sophisticated model to improve the calibrating accuracy of single linear regression, correlating with the help of multiple linear regression was carried out. As well known in mineralogies, copper en-associates itself with several elements in the process of deposit formation, e.g., copper correlates with iron in chalcopyrite mineral. Therefore, correlative elements were taken into account in the multiple linear regression. Among the 78 particle samples, 50 arrays including all the component elements were reported for each sample. The 50 readings of every element were averaged to get an elemental concentration at the surface. And then, taking XRF pulverized grades as targeted values, Cu_cal grades were computed by means of stepwise regression method in Matlab modeling system, regarding the averaged elements’ concentration and the interacts of each element with copper. Correlation analysis results recognized that the distributions of copper (Cu) and lead (Pb) at the surface, as well as interact of sulfur-titanium (S-Ti), copper-sulfur (Cu-S), and copper-stibium (Cu-Sb), positively related to calibrated Cu grade (Cu_cal for short) in the order of Cu ＞ Pb ＞ S-Ti ＞ Cu-S ＞ Cu-Sn ＞ Sn. While, it was discovered that the concentration of arsenic (As) at the surface, and the interact of copper-cadmium (Cu-Cd), were negatively relating to Cu_cal. The calibrated equation was shown as Eq.  Provided the 78 specimens as 78 individual groups to be bulk sorted, on the basis of Cu_pul and Cu_cal achieved by multiple linear regression, ideal and calibrated curves of cumulative Cu recovery/grade versus mass yield are drawn correspondingly in As can be observed in Making use of these grade-recovery curves, the mass of pre-rejected waste and values’ recovery can be calculated by setting an acceptable cut-off grade as required, to assess the impact of bulk sorting on uplift and comminution processes, as well as to predict the run-of-mine grade with more confidence that is traditionally derived from geological exploration at the block scale (∼15 m). Supposed in an ideal sorting, the ores with below the cut-off grade are dispatched to shrink the capacity downstream processed. For the present case “slots”, by setting 0.23% as a Cu cut-off grade, 30% groups with lower than this cut-off grade could be rejected as waste. Although 10% values would be lost in the rejected rocks, the expense could be traded off by the huge potential for saving comminution cost and upgrading the head from 0.4% to 0.52%. In the light of the calibrated curves, different cut-off grades can be set to predict sorting efficiencies as required. However, performances of bulk sorting systems are also reliant on the degree of distributional heterogeneity (DH, variation in content within a set of individual lots) and particle sorting systems on constitutional heterogeneity (CH, variation in content within one lot) ( Nevertheless, in cases of various ores in different levels of heterogeneity, there definitely are diverse algorithms correlating XRF surface response to the value’s volumetric grade, which necessitates assessing the amenability of specific ores to bulk sorting. Application of bulk sorting in mining stage might be a general process in future, and a bench-scale qualitative assessment of sortability is possible for justifying further pilot testing. Processed-capacity shrinking and energy saving are of prime importance in the mining process. Therefore, it seems to be significant for the mining process to reject dilute rocks at an acceptable recovery of the wanted. The selection of any pre-concentration or sorting technique depends on requirements and the amenability test results. This manuscript outlines the principle of XRF based bulk sorting at bench-scale. At first, minimum readings needed (MRN) for a convergent grade generated from XRF surface readings were investigated to examine the contribution of 5 different top sizes, five operators, and five total weights. The results showed 50 spots readings were reliable. Next, 78 groups (specimens) were incorporated into a series of “slots” with a specific heterogeneity. Then correlation of XRF surface sensing to volumetric Cu grades was carried out. XRF readings of pulverized powder were proven to be in good agreement with ICP results consistently, so it was reasonably considered to be “assayed” Cu grades and used for calibrating XRF surface readings. For the calibrating process, this study attempted single linear regression first. Later, multiple linear regression was performed for this barren copper ore “slots”, since it considers elemental constituents and their interacts. In case of this barren copper “slots”, the correlation coefficient 0.921 of multiple linear regression ascertained that the calibrated Cu grades were reliable for sortability evaluation. Based on calibrated data, it was demonstrated that 30% material below the threshold grade 0.23% could be pre-rejected. The remaining concentrate could be upgraded from 0.40% to 0.52%, at the expense of 10 percent values loss, which would be offset by comminution savings. Looking towards the application of bulk sorting in industry, this study offers a new conceptually viable process of bench-scale XRF based bulk sorting, which could be zoomed in the pilot-scale test by enlarging specimens’ amount, particle size, and sample volume, to establish a customized correlating regression orienting to commercial application. With the help of the pre-established regression, substantial XRF reported data are computed and calibrated. The calibrated data were compared with a relevant threshold, notifying a mechanical actuator to accept or reject the bulk rocks. Undoubtedly, for a certain lot size, the heterogeneity is the matter for bulk sorting. Revisiting the annoying diversities of barren rocks, the outcome obtained in this paper were restricted to the case copper ore herein. However, the bench-scale approach would be certainly conductive to XRF based bulk sorting of other ores. The authors are thankful to the