This paper deals with the results of continuous grinding tests carried out with two different grinding machines on some marble and limestone units with silicon carbide and diamond type abrasives. The results showed that the relationship between the surface roughness and the surface glossiness of stones with homogeneous structure are independent of abrasive types. However, this argument is not valid for stones giving orange peel effect and not going through entire ductile behaviour due to their softer mineral and other materials content. Appropriate series of abrasives and operational conditions should be chosen for obtaining desired surface quality. For this reason, the results of surface quality measurements should be used in conjunction with stone properties.Continuous grinding and polishing are done with automatic belt polishing machine in stone plants. Stone slabs move continuously on the conveyor belt where the velocity of the band can be adjusted. First, the slabs are usually calibrated with metal-bonded diamond-type abrasives to obtain a uniform slab thickness. The surfaces of the slabs are then ground and polished with an appropriate series of abrasives. According to the type of machine preferred, the width of slabs, the number of calibrating and grinding heads can vary from 30 Stone polishing refers to the successive grinding and then smoothing of a stone surface using progressively finer abrasive particles ( There have been no recognized standards for quality control checks until the last two decades other than running a thumb nail on the surface or a visual inspection, both of which rely upon the expertise of the operator, and therefore have been very subjective. There was an apparent need for a quantitative analysis method suitable for use on the production line ( Gloss meters which are used for the determination of surface glossiness digitally send rays to the surface on which measurement is performed, with a certain angle and determine the glossiness of the surface according to the reflecting angle of the light ( The performances of different types and series of abrasive materials on several stone units and production conditions have not been put forth sufficiently for these machines. Moreover, studies which identify surface roughness and glossiness gained in grinding and polishing steps for each abrasive series are very few in number. Because of this, identifying the type of abrasives and series together with working conditions suitable for the stone types worked with, will on one hand provide to enhance the production quality and productivity of grinding–polishing process, on the other hand, lower the overall cost ( Surface grinding and polishing experiments have been carried out by means of a machine that had a head movement pattern, two calibrating and eight grinding-polishing heads for Zile Beige and Yıldız Black limestone units. A second machine used had one calibrating and five grinding–polishing heads for Muğla White, Afyon Sky-Blue, Afyon Sugar marble units and Akköy Beige limestone. In the first machine, the diameter of each grinding head was 45 In this study, Talysurf instrument (Taylor Hobson Surtronic 3+ model) was used for roughness measurements. The surface texture parameters evaluated by this instrument are the arithmetic mean of the absolute departures of the roughness profile from the mean line (Ra), the rms parameter corresponding to Ra (Rq), the maximum peak to valley height of the profile within a sampling length (Rt), the maximum peak to valley height of the profile in the assessment length (Ry), the average of Rt values within sampling lengths (Rz(DIN)) and the average value of the distances between profile peaks (Sm) ( Calibrating leaves a rough surface with visible grooves on stone slab surfaces depending on grain size of diamond abrasive used on calibration head, the thickness of moved stone and stone type. The values of Ry and Ra are varying between 40–70 Ra and glossiness values are shown in For each stone type, the relationship between average Ra and glossiness obtained from each grinding stage are given in Roughness and glossiness behaviour of Zile beige and Yıldız black are different for SiC and diamond abrasives ( Although Ra and Ry values of diamond and SiC abrasives used on Zile Beige and Yıldız Black are close to each other, the reason for having less glossiness can be explained in two ways. First, Zile Beige and Yıldız Black include an amount of clay and fossils ( Secondly, According to According to When Following calibration stage, despite both diamond and SiC abrasives having the same grain size, diamond abrasives were more effective in decreasing roughness, therefore in following stage their Ra and Ry values declined rapidly. Diamond abrasives Ra line gradients are less than SiC abrasives ( It is naturally expected that there would be a roughness level left on the stone surface depending on the grain size of each abrasive. The reason for the decreasing of abrasive effect on each following stage can be explained by the surface roughness values coming from a previous stage being close to their own work to bring roughness to a minimal level. In such circumstances, use of finer grain size abrasive on one hand will help to increase surface quality (decline in roughness, increase in glossiness) and on the other hand will improve abrasive effectiveness. The results obtained from this study indicate that abrasives giving around 40% decrease in roughness in successive grinding stages can be conveniently preferred. The choice of abrasive type depending on desired surface quality following continuous or step by step grinding operations is one of the most important factors in determining the overall cost. Thus, it becomes more important to choose appropriate abrasive series for different stone units. Surface roughness and glossiness are the most important quality criteria in stone-grinding operations. It is safe to say that various stones give different surface roughness–glossiness relationship under similar working conditions depending on the abrasive types and series used. The relationship between surface roughness and surface glossiness of stones with homogeneous structure are independent of abrasive types. However, this argument is not valid for stones giving orange peel effect and not going through entire ductile behaviour due to their softer mineral and other materials content. Although it is commonly believed that only glossiness measurements are enough in making decisions on the effectiveness of abrasive and surface quality, it is possible to say that the determination of surface quality should not only be depending on glossiness but also roughness which prevents misleading results. Calibration procedure appears to have conspicuous effect on continuous grinding operations and in this operation, one of the important factors affecting the obtained surface quality and overall cost is effectiveness of abrasive. Apart from operating conditions and stone properties, the important factors which affect this are surface roughness level coming from a previous stage and the structure of abrasive. Seen from this point of view, diamond abrasives are more effective than SiC abrasives. However, as the difference in the grain size of successive diamond abrasives comes closer, their effectiveness becomes weaker than SiC abrasives. For this reason, in order to increase the effect of grinding procedure, diamond abrasives should be placed with wider range. It is proposed that appropriate series of abrasives and operational conditions should be chosen to obtain the desired surface quality. For this reason, the results of surface quality measurements should be used in conjunction with stone properties. The authors are grateful to the Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey (TÜBİTAK-MİSAG 108) and Cumhuriyet University Research Foundation for providing financial support. The authors also thank C.L. Kılınç, Dr. S. Kılınç, Dr. E. Arpaz and Dr. Y.S. Durutürk for their help.