The mechanical properties and mechanical stabilities of pipewall hydrate deposition are of great importance to the prevention and removal of pipeline hydrate plugging. In this paper, the mechanical properties and mechanical stabilities of pipewall hydrate deposition are quantitatively investigated by modelling and numerical simulation. First, a structural model for pipewall hydrate deposition is established based on particle packing theory. Using this structural model, the main mechanical parameters of pipewall hydrate deposition can be calculated. Then, numerical simulations using finite element method and ANSYS Mechanical APDL 14.5 are conducted based on the calculated mechanical parameters. Through the simulations, the structure deformation, internal stress distribution and failure of pipewall hydrate deposition when it is under the action of external forces are studied and the influences of flow rate, deposition thickness and deposition length are investigated. The results of this paper can provide guidance for pipeline flow assurance.Natural gas hydrates (NGH) are crystalline solids composed of water and gas molecules such as methane, ethane, propane, and carbon dioxide ( Hydrate deposition on the pipewall is identified to be an important reason that could lead to pipeline hydrate plugging ( Recent years, many researchers have found that the deposition of hydrates on the pipewall is always accompanied by sloughing or washing out ( In this paper, the mechanical properties and mechanical stabilities of pipewall hydrate deposition are quantitatively investigated by modelling and numerical simulation. First, a structural model for pipewall hydrate deposition is established based on particle packing theory. Using this structural model, the mechanical parameters of pipewall hydrate deposition can be calculated. Then, numerical simulations are conducted based on the calculated mechanical parameters to further study the mechanical properties and mechanical stabilities of pipewall hydrate deposition when it is under the action of external forces. The results of this paper can provide guidance for pipeline flow assurance. In this section, a structural model for pipewall hydrate deposition is established based on particle packing theory and is then used to analyze the mechanical properties and mechanical stabilities of hydrate deposition. Particle packing theory is a discipline focuses on the packing regularities and packing characteristics of a large number of particles in a finite space ( Porosity is defined as the volume fraction of the voids between hydrate particles in the deposition. Porosity can be calculated by: Packing fraction refers to the volume fraction of hydrate particles in the deposition and is defined as: Coordination number ( For the five kinds of pipewall hydrate deposition, their porosity, packing fraction and coordination number can be obtained by simple spatial calculation according to their packing patterns and the calculation results are listed in In this section, the mechanical properties and mechanical stabilities of pipewall hydrate deposition will be investigated by calculating mechanical parameters. In this paper, the mechanical parameters of pipewall hydrate deposition mainly refer to compressional wave velocity, shear wave velocity, Poisson’s ratio, Young’s Modulus, bulk modulus, shear modulus and tensile strength. All the mechanical parameters above are closely related to the packing parameters of pipewall hydrate deposition. For compressional wave velocity and shear wave velocity, they can be calculated by Eq. Poisson’s ratio is defined as ( Young’s modulus can be calculated by Eq. According to assumption According to the work of Compressional wave velocity and shear wave velocity, collectively referred to as the elastic wave velocity, are important parameters that represent for the hard and dense degree of a certain material. Generally, the higher the elastic wave velocity, the harder and denser the material is. Therefore, it can be seen from The sloughing and washing out of pipewall hydrate deposition are closely related to its tensile strength. In order to calculate the tensile strength of pipewall hydrate deposition, the number of hydrate particles in an unit area, the coherence force between hydrate particles and the interlayer coordination number must be obtained. For the number of hydrate particles in an unit area, it is independent of the packing pattern of the deposition and can be calculated by: Considering that there is water filling in the voids between hydrate particles, the coherence force between hydrate particles should be calculated as liquid bridge force ( The interlayer coordination number ( Quantitatively analysis on the tensile strength of different pipewall hydrate deposition is necessary. Based on the analysis above, the tensile strength of pipewall hydrate deposition can be calculated by: According to relevant experimental data, when calculating the tensile strength of pipewall hydrate deposition, hydrate particle diameter is set to 1–1000 μm ( As seen in According to the experiments in relevant literatures ( When calculating, As seen in Shear strength is also an important indicator of the mechanical stability of pipewall hydrate deposition. Usually, shear strength can be calculated by Coulomb – Mohr failure criterion ( In this section, the mechanical properties and mechanical stabilities of pipewall hydrate deposition are further investigated by numerical simulation. Finite element method (FEM) and ANSYS Mechanical APDL 14.5 are used and the structure deformation, internal stress distribution and failure of pipewall hydrate deposition are focused on in the simulation. In this work, upper pipewall hydrate deposition is selected as the object of the numerical simulation and two-dimensional plane geometric models of five different sizes are adopted, as seen in In In  Taking case 2 as an example, the structure deformation and internal stress distribution of pipewall hydrate deposition under the action of external forces are investigated first. As seen in For the internal stress distribution, as seen in Case 1–3 are used to study the influence of flow rate on the structure deformation and internal stress distribution of pipewall hydrate deposition. In this work, the structure deformation and internal stress distribution of pipewall hydrate deposition in all the other cases have the similar characteristics with that in case 2. Therefore, no repetitions will be given below. However, it should be noticed that, from case 1 to case 3, with the increase of pipeline flow rate, flow impact force and flow shear force acting on the pipewall hydrate deposition would also increase. Under these circumstances, the maximum displacement and the maximum internal stresses of the pipewall hydrate deposition increase sharply from case 1 to case 3, as listed in Case 2, case 4 and case 5 are used to study the influence of deposition thickness on the structure deformation and internal stress distribution of pipewall hydrate deposition. As seen in Case 2, case 6 and case 7 are used to investigate the influence of deposition length on the structure deformation and internal stress distribution of pipewall hydrate deposition. As seen in According to the discussion above, the influences of deposition thickness and deposition length on the mechanical stabilities of pipewall hydrate deposition are achieved mainly by changing the flow impact force and flow shear force acting on the deposition. Therefore, in order to further investigate the influence of deposition thickness and deposition length, variable-controlling method should be used. The simulation conditions of case 8–11 are designed by variable-controlling method, where the flow impact force and flow shear force are constant at different deposition thickness and deposition length. For case 2, case 8 and case 9, they are used to study the influence of deposition thickness on the mechanical stabilities of pipewall hydrate deposition. For case 2, case 10 and case 11, they are used to study the influence of deposition length on the mechanical stabilities of pipewall hydrate deposition. As seen in When the internal stresses of pipewall hydrate deposition are larger than its tensile strength or shear strength, failure will happen. In this work, the failure of pipewall hydrate deposition mainly refers to sloughing or washing out. Taking case 2 as an example, the failure analysis of pipewall hydrate deposition is conducted below. As discussed before, orthorhombic packing pipewall hydrate deposition is used in the simulation. Therefore, the tensile strength of orthorhombic packing hydrate deposition in  According to the failure analysis method above, the failure critical flow rate below which the failure of pipewall hydrate deposition would not occur can be determined by simulation trial calculation. For example, as seen in In this paper, the mechanical properties and mechanical stabilities of pipewall hydrate deposition are quantitatively investigated by modelling and numerical simulation. The mainly conclusions of this paper can be seen as follows. The mechanical stabilities of pipewall hydrate depositions gradually increase from simple cubic packing to pyramid packing. The tensile strength of pipewall hydrate deposition gradually decreases with the increase of inside hydrate particle diameter. When hydrate particle diameters are the same, the magnitude of tensile strength follows the orders: pyramid packing > tetrahedral packing > rhombohedral packing > orthorhombic packing = simple cubic packing. The tensile strength of pipewall hydrate deposition increases sharply and becomes independent of hydrate particle diameter after sintering. Under the action of external forces, the magnitude of internal stresses of pipewall hydrate deposition follows the order: σx < τxy < σy. The mechanical stabilities of pipewall hydrate deposition would be greatly reduced by the increasing flow rate. Pipewall hydrate depositions with smaller thickness have better mechanical stabilities. However, deposition length has little effect on the mechanical stabilities of pipewall hydrate deposition. The failure critical flow rate of pipewall hydrate deposition can be determined by simulation trial calculation. Due to the lack of relevant experimental data, the model calculation results and numerical simulation results in this paper are hard to be verified at the present time. However, the research ideas and research methods used in this paper provide a good way to investigate the mechanical properties and mechanical stabilities of pipewall hydrate deposition. Also, for the first time, some mechanical parameters of pipewall hydrate deposition, such as tensile strength and failure critical flow rate, are given by quantitative calculation. In the future, for modelling design ( This work was supported by