The plating fixation of forearm bones fracture is biomechanically and clinically reviewed in this chapter. First, biomechanical aspects of forearm bones and effective muscle-tendons in various positions of the forearm are briefly reviewed. After understanding forearm biomechanics, biomechanical testing methods that could be utilized for evaluation of forearm fracture fixation are explained. Then clinical-biomechanical challenges of forearm plating fixation are explored. In this regard, the associated challenges in volar and dorsal plating fixation methods, plating fixation of fracture with a fragmentary dorsal fracture, plating fixation with variable angle locking system, plating fixation of fracture with radial column fragmentary, irritation of flexor tendons in volar plating fixation, plating fixation of comminuted fractures, etc. are extensively reviewed. Furthermore, clinical considerations that are normally contemplated before, during, and after operation are then elaborated. Finally, overall biomechanical and clinical aspects of forearm plating fixation are discussed.Introduction Biomechanics of Forearm Plating Fixation of Distal Radius Fractures Plating Fixation Under Compressive Loading Plating Fixation Under Bending Moment Plating Fixation Under Tension Loading Plating Fixation Under Torsion Loading Volar Plating Fixation Method Plating Fixation of Fracture With Fragmentary Dorsal Plating Fixation With Variable Angle Locking System Screw Configuration in Plating Fixation of Distal Radius Fractures Plating Fixation of Fracture With Radial Column Fragmentary Fracture Load-Bearing Advantage of the Median Column Irritation of Flexor Tendons in Volar Plating Fixation Dorsal Plating Fixation Method Plating Fixation of Comminuted Fracture Preoperative Consideration of Plating Fixation Intraoperative Considerations of Plating Fixation Postoperative Considerations of Plating Fixation Diaphyseal Plating Fracture Fixation Proximal Radius Fracture Fixation Discussion Remind and Learn Think and Challenge References  Biomechanical and clinical benefits of the forearm are defined when the forearm bone-muscle-tendons mechanism has adequate mechanical strength with full ROM at the radius and elbow joints (attached bone-muscle-tendons to the forearm bones are well illustrated in the web-reference Forearm bones are radius and ulna bones that are connected to each other via interosseous ligament (IOL) at the diaphysis portion. This ligament provides relative stability of radius and ulna bones in longitudinal and transverse axes while enhancing load transferring between radius and ulna bones Radius bone could be fractured at distal, shaft, or proximal portions. The radius is mostly fractured at the distal portion due to falling from a height, a motor bike accident, or slipping and falling in elderly. Therefore, fixation of distal radius fractures has been more clinically evaluated among the radius fractures. Distal radius fracture have been reported to be one sixth (17%) of the skeletal fractures When the forearm is aligned vertically (position A1, A2— Compressive load generates considerable bending moment to humerus bone in position A2 ( Fracture fixation of distal radius bone is significantly affected by axial compressive force and a significant number of biomechanical studies have evaluated the strength of distal radius plating fixation under compressive loading conditions. The compressive force in position A1 and A2 is the weight of gripped object by hand (e.g., object with 5 In the position that the arm is upright or horizontal and forearm is horizontally stated (position B1 and B2— The bending moment in the position that both arm and forearm are stated in horizontal position (position B2), would generate bending stress on forearm and arm bones. The transferred bending stress to the humerus bone is considerable, while the stress to the forearm bones is similar as position B1. In position B2, the force from triceps and biceps muscle-tendons would reduce the transferred tension to the collateral ligaments at elbow joint (collateral ligament at elbow joint links metaphyseal portion of humerus and forearm bones at the joint to constraint the joint movement in various rotation or translation axes). A forearm in position B could be used for biomechanical evaluation of plating fixation for bone fracture at diaphyseal portion of ulna and radius bones. Because the bending stress is bearing on radius and ulna bones at diaphyseal or shaft portion, it is beneficial to contemplate both ulna and radius bone in biomechanical testing of fracture at diaphyseal radius or ulna bone. Forearm and arm bones are bearing tension stress in position C1 and C2 ( Torsion moment is applied to the forearm when the rotation of radius bone around ulna bone is constrained. The torsion stress is borne by ligaments at the wrist (radiocarpal) joint between radius and carpal bones. Ligaments at distal radioulnar joint (DRUJ) cause creation of torsion stress on the median column of distal radius during rotation of the radius bone. This rotation may cause dislocation of a fragment at median column in early stage of fracture healing. Therefore, it is recommended to prevent pronation of forearm (turning of forearm to face down the hand palm) immediate after operation In the volar aspect of distal radius bone, flexor muscle-tendons provide flexion of the hand at the wrist joint while in dorsal aspect, the extensor muscle-tendons provide extension of the hand. Soft tissue coverage of distal radius bone is higher than dorsal aspect, which would encourage plating fixation distal radius fractures from the volar aspect Extraarticular fracture pattern has been normally utilized for biomechanical evaluation of distal radius fracture fixation. Volar plating fixation could be biomechanically evaluated for dorsal fragmentary or complex fractures If integration between screw and dorsal fragment is sufficiently strong, a fragmentary dorsal would not be dislocated or collapsed and therefore generate bending stress from The fixed and variable angle volar distal radius plates were biomechanically compared in fixation of intraarticular distal radius fractures. The osteotomy was produced on cadaver bones to simulate the AO 23-C2 fracture type ( Screw configuration at distal and shaft portions of the distal radius plate would influence on the strength and stability of fracture fixation. Using adequate numbers of locking screws at the shaft portion of the plate is essential to enhance the mechanical strength of plating fixation. Likewise, it was shown that by using sufficient locking screws at distal screw holes of the plate, the fracture fixation stability is significantly improved Variable angle was found to be advantageous for fixation of small fragmentary at radial or median columns of distal radius bone. Stanbury et al. Distal portion of forearm is clinically categorized in three columns. The intermediate or median column has denser subchondral or cancellous bone compared to radial and ulnar columns Flexor tendons are protected by pronator quadratus muscle at the volar aspect of distal radius; therefore, the plate is exposed to pronator quadratus (PQ) muscle. For those plates developed for fixation of bone fragments close to the volar rim or watershed line, the distal head of plate is positioned up to watershed line in volar aspect of distal radius. The prominence of plate at distal head may irritate flexor tendons. Rupture or irritation of flexor tendon is one of the main complications in volar plating of distal radius fractures when the plate is placed close to watershed line. This would limit extension of hand and implant removal might be needed immediate after fracture union. Extensor tendons are gliding on the dorsal aspect of distal radius ( In comminuted fractures, the bone is fractured to more than two fragments and small fragments might be observed at radial or median columns. Anatomic volar locking plates were developed to fit anatomically on the volar aspect of distal radius bone to restore the comminuted bone fragments in anatomical position. Normally four threaded screw holes (or even above) have been created at distal portion of volar distal radius plates with polyaxial trajectories to enhance capturing of multifragmentary bone in comminuted fractures. Final clinical outcomes in the treatment of distal radius fractures are not predictable. Good clinical outcomes are achieved when the patient has full function of wrist joint with no pain (full function with no pain might be achieved even when the anatomy of healed bone is not similar to the healthy bone Various types of distal radius plates have been developed for treatment of distal radius fractures. Based on fracture pattern, a suitable implant would be selected for effective capturing of bone fragments and securing in anatomical position. Trajectories of distal screw holes should not cause penetration of the screw to the radiocarpal or wrist joint. For fixation of fractures close to the watershed line (the most distal portion at volar aspect of distal radius bone), trajectories of distal screw holes for the selected plate are tended to be proximal to eliminate risk of joint penetration when the plate is placed up to volar rim or watershed line After selection of the suitable plate, a good operation plan could enhance the quality of fracture fixation significantly. Firstly, bone fragments are placed in adequate anatomical position using surgical instruments (manipulation of wrist joint sometimes could be helpful to bring back the fragments in anatomical position). Then reduced fragments are stabilized using small pins, k-wires, or even surgical clamping tools. A good stabilization of bone fragments has significant influence on fracture fixation stability and ultimately on clinical outcomes. It was reported that the DRUJ should be anatomically preserved during fixation of distal radius or ulna fractures. Due to involvement of radioulnar ligaments in pronation and supination of the wrist, if DRUJ has not been properly preserved, these movement of wrist may not be fully obtained and patients might experience the complication of chronic pain Anatomical reduction of bone fragments at distal forearm is achieved when the radial height, radial inclination ulnar variance, and volar tilt are secured in the acceptable range After reduction, the plate is placed on the stabilized bone fragments, and it is essential that it be anatomically fitted on volar aspect of distal radius bone. The plate would provide proper screw holes with effective trajectories to catch the bone fragments, particularly in metaphyseal bone without penetration of screws to the joint or soft tissues. Based on the extended length of fracture from metaphyseal distal radius to the diaphyseal radius bone, the plate length could be adequately increased to provide sufficient mechanical stability of fracture fixation (biomechanical Once the operation is finished, postoperative treatments are initiated and followed by orthopedic surgeons. Postoperative planning might be different based on patient’s severity of fracture, bone density, overall body conditions, and clinical needs. In this regard, it is crucial that the physiotherapy program and extent of loading at the fracture site be well organized to obtain successful clinical outcomes Good clinical outcomes have been reported for treatment of intraarticular comminuted distal radius fractures using an anatomic volar locking distal radius plate Fixation of factures with dorsal angulation of more than 20 Fixation of radius and ulna shaft fracture has been less reported compared to distal radius fractures fixation. However, suitability of locking plating fixation has been biomechanically investigated with higher bending and torsional stability compared to nonlocking plating fixation Publication for plating fixation of fracture at proximal radius is scarce. Clinically, if the radial head could not be effectively fixed, secondary loss of reduction might be caused that promotes risk of nonunion. Various plating and screw fixation methods have been biomechanically evaluated for fixation of radial head fracture at proximal portion of the radius ( In this chapter, forearm bones (radius and ulna) were reviewed in view of biomechanics and clinical aspects. In In this section, some questions are provided to enhance the reading and learning of the concepts that were reviewed in this chapter. P 11.1: Describe the trend of joint function in relation with extent of loading conditions. P 11.2: What are the attached muscle-tendons to forearm bones? (Refer to Refs. P 11.3: What are the ROM at wrist and elbow joint? P 11.4: What are the biomechanical benefits of IOL? Describe how triceps and biceps muscle-tendons would influence forearm biomechanics. P 11.5: What kinds of loading conditions could be transferred to forearm bones? P 11.6: Express in what conditions distal radius fractures are severe. P 11.7: Compare volar and dorsal plating fixation of a distal radius fracture. P 11.8: Describe how compressive forces could be applied to a distal radius fracture fixation. P 11.9: Describe the compressive load transferring from carpal bones (scaphoid and lunate) through humerus bone. P 11.10: Why does biomechanical evaluation of distal ulna fracture fixation necessitate involving distal portion of radius bone? Likewise, why does biomechanical evaluation of proximal radius fracture fixation involve the proximal portion of the ulna bone? P 11.11: Explain why heavier objects could be held by hand in position A1 compared to position A2 ( P 11.12: What is the purpose of using compressive loading conditions in biomechanical evaluation of distal radius fracture fixation? P 11.13: Describe the loading mechanism in forearm bones and effective muscle-tendons (triceps and biceps muscle-tendons) when the forearm is stated in position B ( P 11.14: Express the benefit of using bending moment for biomechanical evaluation plating fixation at the diaphyseal portion of radius and ulna bones. P 11.15: Describe how the tension force is borne by forearm bone and effective muscle-tendons attached to carpal, forearm, and humerus bones. P 11.16: Explain why pronation of forearm is prohibited immediate after operation. P 11.17: Why is volar plating fixation preferred to dorsal plating fixation of distal radius fractures? Referring to P 11.18: How could an extraarticular fracture pattern be created for biomechanical testing? Express the characteristics of the osteotomy (location and dimensions), which is created for simulation of the extraarticular fracture pattern. P 11.19: Describe the complex fracture at distal radius bone and explain why this type of fracture could be considered as a worst-case condition for biomechanical evaluation of distal radius plating fixation. P 11.20: What is the benefit of volar distal radius plate with two or three rows of screw holes at distal head? Does this P 11.21: In what loading or motion conditions, might volar plating fixation of dorsal fragmentary fracture be affected? What is the main reason of collapsing or dislocation of dorsal bone fragment? P 11.22: Compare the axial stiffness of a fixed and a variable angle locking system. Express your answer with associated reasons. P 11.23: What is the benefit of using an adequate number of locking screws in distal and shaft portions of distal radius plate for plating fixation distal radius fractures? P 11.24: Describe the benefit of using variable angle locking system for plating fixation of a small fragmentary fracture in radial or median columns of distal radius bone. Does a variable angle locking system have adventurous for plating fixation of simple fracture pattern? Why? P 11.25: Explain why preservation of median column is so crucial in plating fixation of distal radius fractures. P 11.26: How might flexor tendons be irritated or ruptured in volar plating fixation of distal radius fractures? P 11.27: What is the dorsal nailing plate? What are the advantages of this plate for fixation of dorsal fragmentary fractures compared to volar plating fixation? Does axial stiffness of plating fixation with DNP compare with volar plating fixation under dynamic physiological loading condition? P 11.28: How could dorsal plate be developed for elimination of extensor tendon irritation in dorsal plating of distal radius fractures involving dorsal fragmentary? P 11.29: How could an adequate number of the plate screw holes with polyaxial trajectories (fixed or variable) enhance plating fixation of comminuted fractures at distal radius bone? P 11.30: What are essential preoperative considerations for plating fixation of distal radius fractures? P 11.31: What are the benefits of anatomical reduction of fracture in plating fixation of distal radius fractures? Describe how the plate is selected for effective fixation of bone fracture. P 11.32: Describe the effective parameters in postoperative treatment of plating fracture fixation. What kind of complications could be arisen postoperatively? P 11.33: What types of trauma plate has better axial and torsional stiffness in plating fixation of radial head fracture? Why? In this section, some questions are provided to explore the challenges that could be further discussed and investigated in relation with the concepts that were reviewed in this chapter. P 11.1: Discuss how biomechanical evaluation methods involving muscle-tendons and ligaments could be developed for more effective validation of trauma plate and screws for fixation of forearm bone fractures.