The influence of incorporating filler particles of varying size and hydrophilic strength in a model myofibrillar protein gel was investigated. Two particle sizes (7–10μm and 30–50μm) having differing surface chemistry (uncoated, or amino-coated) were incorporated into a comminuted meat system at varying volume fractions (ϕf). Both particle sizes were able to reduce and arrest cooking loss during gelation, as well as improve large deformation mechanical attributes such as Hardness and Resilience. The smaller particles were found to increase these parameters at lower ϕf, reaching a plateau as the filler content increased (at ϕf
                     ≥0.03). The use of amino-coated particles resulted in a greater increase in liquid retention and large deformation properties; however, not significantly so. The larger particles produced a continuous decrease in cooking loss during gelation, but there was an associated lag in the improvement in large deformation properties. At the highest ϕf tested (ϕf
                     =0.12), the large deformation mechanical properties of the composites containing the 30–50μm particles either reached a plateau (uncoated) or exhibited a slight decrease (amino-coated). This was attributed to the clustering of particles at higher ϕf, which would weaken the gel network, as the glass particles only weakly interacted with the protein network, as suggested by SEM images. Pulsed NMR relaxometry indicated the presence of the glass particles stabilized the aqueous phase prior to gelation, resulting in the improved water retention which was associated with the observed increase in mechanical properties. However, despite the stronger dipole moment associated with the amino functional groups bound to the surface of the coated glass beads, these particles did not provide an improvement in the stability or large deformation mechanical properties of the composite gels. This work corroborates with previous studies suggesting that micron-sized, insoluble, hydrophilic filler could be used to improve the mechanical attributes and water retention of comminuted meat products.A variety of food systems can be described as particle-filled soft solids, in which a dispersed fat phase is embedded in a continuous matrix, such as a protein gel. Some examples include cheese and processed cheese products, fat-filled puddings or custards, and processed meats such as frankfurters, bologna, and pâté. In such systems, the size, quantity, and physical state of the particulate inclusions can influence the rheological, mechanical, and organoleptic properties of the product ( In a recent study, we compared the effect of filler size and surface chemistry (hydrophobic vs. hydrophilic) on the large deformation properties of particle-filled myofibrillar protein gels ( The goal of the present study is to further investigate the influence of particle size and surface properties (extent of hydrophilicity) on the reinforcement of myofibrillar protein gels at low ϕ Approximately 25 Two sizes of spherical glass beads were obtained for the present study, having a mean diameter of 7–10 All composites were prepared in a household food processor (Braun Household, Germany) and formulated to have a final protein content of 11 After chilling, for each composite batter, 40 After overnight storage, the composite gels were equilibrated to room temperature and the excess liquid which was expelled during thermal treatment was drained and weighed. Cooking loss was expressed as the mass of the total expelled liquid relative to the mass of the meat batter (i.e. excluding the filler) prior to thermal treatment. No fat loss was observed. Evaluation of mechanical and textural properties of the gels was carried out using a two cycle uniaxial compression test ( Samples were prepared for SEM by sectioning small cubes (∼3 Low-field NMR T Statistical analyses (one-way ANOVAs) were performed to determine statistical differences between formulations using the GraphPad Prism software package (Prism 5.0, GraphPad Software Inc., San Diego, CA, USA). The cooking loss as a function of ϕ It was previously proposed that a reduction in cooking losses with increasing glass bead content in a comminuted meat system could be attributed to the hydrophilic nature of the glass particles ( Although it was proposed that the reduction in cooking loss appears to be dependent on the filler size (and thus surface area), it is worth noting that the observed losses do not scale linearly with total filler surface area present in the gel matrix. The cooking loss as a function of total filler surface area (per 100 As it has also been shown that the glass particles interact with the gel matrix (albeit weakly), this discrepancy may be in part due to differences in the exposed surface area; i.e. that which is not interacting with the protein network. Smaller, more homogeneously distributed particles could be expected to have more opportunity to interact with the hydrophilic regions of protein exposed during denaturation. This would increase surface coverage, thus reducing the effective surface area of the glass particles available to stabilize the aqueous phase. Alternatively, this discrepancy may suggest there is more to the underlying mechanism than surface area alone. Overall, there was only a minor reduction in cooking loss seen in the samples containing the amino-coated glass beads relative to the equivalent formulations with the uncoated particles. This can be attributed to the positive surface charge arising from the protonated nitrogen chemically attached to the surface of the glass. Incomplete coverage of the glass surface would also allow water to interact with both the exposed glass and the amino functional groups, and may facilitate a greater interaction with the aqueous phase, giving rise to the stronger association with water, and the resulting decrease in cooking loss (again, not significantly so). TPA was used to evaluate the influence of filler size and surface properties on the textural and mechanical traits of the model comminuted meat products. All samples were compressed to 50% of their original height to avoid fracture, and a characteristic TPA curve is presented in  It was previously suggested that the reinforcing effect of micron-sized glass beads could be attributed to the interaction of the glass filler with the aqueous phase, as opposed to an interaction with the gel matrix, or a structural rearrangement during denaturation/gelation induced by the surface chemistry of the filler. As noted above, Interestingly, in the present work, the larger particles exhibit a greater reinforcement effect, reaching a plateau of ∼12 The Resilience of the composite gels with increasing ϕ The samples containing the 30–50  For the gels prepared with the 7–10 As with the gels formulated with the 7–10 In other words, the addition of glass beads initially stabilizes the water phase, decreasing microstructural damage in the gel network caused by water migration. This, in turn, leads to an increase in the mechanical properties of the continuous phase, counteracting the negative impact of the partial dissociation of the filler during the first compression and resulting in an improvement in the textural properties of the composite material. Conversely, once the aqueous phase has been stabilized so as to minimize water migration and the formation of micro-fractures, no additional reinforcement in the large deformation properties will occur, at which point the weak association between the matrix and filler begins to dominate, resulting in a decrease in mechanical properties. This is most prominent in the amino-coated 30–50 The microstructure of the glass-filled myofibrillar protein gels was characterized using a fixation and dehydration process to expose the internal gel matrix ( In the glass-filled composite gels, the appearance of a porous structure was largely notable, and many glass beads can be seen having exposed surfaces with little adhered protein (see At higher ϕ Pulsed NMR relaxometry has been used in various meat systems, including whole-muscle pork, ( The T After thermal treatment, the T The T The influence of particle size and surface properties on the stability, large deformation mechanical properties, and microstructure of glass bead-filled comminuted meats (myofibrillar protein gels) were addressed. For both particle sizes tested, as ϕ The addition of inert microspheres to meat gels had a tremendous effect on cooking loss and harness. The addition of these microspheres eliminated all cooking liquid loss, thus translating to increased yield of products such as hot dogs, bologna, etc. (comminuted meat products). This could translate to enormous economic benefits to meat producers. Moreover, the mechanical properties of the resulting meat gels was also enhanced, which could be used to modulate textural properties in comminuted meat products. The authors would like to acknowledge the financial assistance of the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following is Supplementary data to this article: