This paper proposes an efficient simplified method to determine the modal dynamic and earthquake response of coupled flexible beam–fluid systems and to evaluate their natural vibration frequencies. The methodology developed extends available analytical solutions for mode shapes and natural vibration frequencies of slender beams with various boundary conditions to include the effects of fluid–structure interaction. The proposed method is developed for various beam boundary conditions considering lateral interaction with one or two semi-infinite fluid domains. Numerical examples are provided to illustrate the application of the proposed method, and the obtained results confirm the importance of accounting for fluid–structure interaction effects. We show that the developed procedure yields excellent results when compared to more advanced coupled fluid–structure finite element solutions, independently of the number of included modes, beam boundary conditions, and number of interacting fluid domains. The proposed simplified method can be easily implemented in day-to-day engineering practice, as it constitutes an efficient alternative solution considering the fluid–structure modeling complexities and related high expertise generally involved when using advanced finite elements.Several civil engineering and industrial applications involve the vibrations of beam-like structures in contact with water or fluid domains, including dams, navigation locks, quay walls, break-waters, offshore platforms, drilling risers, liquid storages, nuclear reactors, oil refineries, petrochemical plants, fuel storage racks, etc. This popular topic has attracted many researchers over the last decades and various approaches were proposed, varying from simplified to more complex analytical and numerical formulations. Neglecting structural flexibility, Westergaard Most of the previous studies focused on cantilever structures surrounded by fluid. Work on beam-like structures interacting with 2D semi-infinite fluid domains was mainly related to dam monoliths impounding water reservoirs, while fewer researchers investigated the behavior of slender beams subjected to hydrodynamic loading of this type. Xing et al. The present paper is motivated by the need to develop simplified methods extending results from classical vibration beam theory to include the effects of 2D hydrodynamic forces on one or both sides of a vibrating beam. The majority of the previous work and other relevant literature addressed hydrodynamic effects on cantilever beams, fully clamped or partially restrained at the base, and little attention has been given to other boundary conditions such as pinned or sliding supports. Most of the previous studies also focused on the determination of the modal properties of a vibrating beam interacting with a fluid, while less concern has been devoted to the time evolution of beam’s earthquake response indexes indicators such as displacements, shear forces, and bending moments. These restrictions will be addressed in this paper.  We first assume that the beam–fluid system is subjected to a unit harmonic free-field horizontal ground motion Based on previous studies      The mode shapes for slender beams were reported in many references such as Introducing beam mode shapes into the integrals of Eqs. The numerical values of parameters The expressions in Eqs. To obtain the dynamic frequency response of the studied beam–fluid systems, the system of Eqs. The resonant frequencies of a vibrating beam–fluid system is an important feature characterizing its dynamic behavior. These frequencies can be approximated by the frequencies If two beam modes are included in the analysis, the system of Eqs. An important result brought by Eq. In this section, we assess the effectiveness of the proposed formulation in determining the dynamic response of beam–fluid systems. For illustration purposes, we consider a beam–water system where the beam has a height of We first validate the ability of the proposed formulation to evaluate earthquake time-history responses for displacements, accelerations, shear forces and bending moments. For brevity, the results are shown only for the beam–water systems having a Clamped–Free (CF) configuration, subjected to the horizontal acceleration component of Imperial Valley earthquake (1940) at El Centro illustrated in It is also important to compare the finite element solution and proposed method in terms of execution CPU times. For illustration purposes, this information is compared next for the computation of time-history accelerations at point A of the concrete beam–water system having a CF configuration, and subjected to El Centro earthquake as described previously. The same time step of In the previous section, the response of the beam–fluid systems was studied in the time domain under the effect of an earthquake having a given frequency content. In this section, the frequency domain response of the beam–fluid systems is investigated. For this purpose, frequency response curves of beam lateral accelerations are determined using Eq. In this section, we assess the efficiency of the proposed method in predicting the 10 first natural frequencies of the concrete and steel beams described previously. The natural frequencies are determined for all the above-described beam configurations and the results are expressed in terms of the frequency ratios A new formulation was proposed to study the modal dynamic and earthquake response of flexible beam-type structures vibrating in contact with one or two fluid domains. The methodology developed extends available analytical solutions for mode shapes and natural vibration frequencies of slender beams with various boundary conditions to include the effects of fluid–structure interaction. Simplified expressions are then developed to determine the frequency- and time-domain dynamic response of coupled beam–fluid systems and predict their natural vibration frequencies. Two beam–fluid systems were selected to illustrate the application of the proposed method and validate the results against advanced coupled fluid–structure finite element solutions. We showed that the proposed technique gives an excellent assessment of (i) the earthquake and frequency responses of coupled beam–fluid systems and (ii) the natural vibration frequencies independently of the mode number and beam boundary conditions. The numerical results confirmed the importance of accounting for fluid–structure interaction effects which may reduce by more than twice the fundamental vibration frequency of the dry beam and amplify its response quantities. From a practical standpoint, the proposed procedure offers an obvious advantage when compared to advanced finite elements including fluid–structure interaction capabilities. In the latter case indeed, the complexity of constructing the finite element model of the beam–fluid system is added to the need to satisfy convergence criteria related to the number of elements or nodes in the beam model as well as the truncation length of the fluid domain. The proposed method can be easily implemented in day-to-day practice, and can be used efficiently either to predict the modal dynamic properties and response of beam–fluid systems for design purposes, evaluate such properties and response for existing beam–fluid systems, or extract dynamic properties of a dry beam based on available modal data of a beam–fluid system. Finally, the methodology proposed can be extended to other types of structures for which mode shapes and natural vibration frequencies can be evaluated or approximated using closed-form expressions. The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support of the This appendix reviews the mode shapes For Clamped–Free (CF), Clamped–Pinned (CP), Clamped–Sliding (CS) and Clamped–Clamped (CC) boundary conditions For Pinned–Pinned (PP) boundary conditions For Pinned–Clamped (PC) and Sliding–Clamped (SC) boundary conditions, the mode shapes and their derivatives can be obtained by replacing the coordinate The corresponding functions For Clamped–Free (CF), Clamped–Pinned (CP), Clamped–Sliding (CS) and Clamped–Clamped (CC) boundary conditions For Pinned–Pinned (PP) boundary conditions For Pinned–Clamped (PC) and Sliding–Clamped (SC) boundary conditions