We recently showed that the selective extraction of aluminium from the amorphous phase of a South African ultrafine coal fly ash can be achieved via thermochemical treatment with ammonium sulphate for 1h followed by aqueous dissolution, as an alternative to conventional hydrometallurgical processes. In this study, insight gained from the previous work was applied to investigate and compare total vs selective aluminium extraction efficiencies using ammonium sulphate or ammonium bisulphate either on its own, or as a mixture of the two salts as extracting agents during a 2h thermal treatment process. The effects of (i) ash-to-extractant mass ratio and (ii) temperature during thermal treatment on extraction efficiency was investigated. While a maximum, but non-selective, recovery of 46.6% total aluminium was achieved using ammonium bisulphate at 400°C, the most technically appropriate results for selective recovery yielded 37.3% aluminium, with only 0.3% silicon, 0.1% titanium and 3.9% iron having been co-extracted when using ammonium sulphate at a processing temperature of 600°C. Extraction of most of the calcium and magnesium could not be prevented. Using mixtures of ammonium salts as extracting agents during thermochemical treatment may however introduce technical difficulties on large scale. Our results indicate that any of the two ammonium salts could be used on their own during thermochemical treatment. Thermochemical treatment of coal fly ash using ammonium salts may therefore represent a promising technology for extracting aluminium from South African coal fly ash.The recovery of aluminium (Al) from coal fly ash (CFA) is of particular relevance to South Africa because the country has no economically viable bauxite deposits. Although South Africa has been actively involved in CFA beneficiation and/or utilisation research, the recovery of alumina as the precursor for aluminium production has not been widely pursued ( Due to the long distance between the power stations and the industrial hub of the country it is customary in South Africa to process and beneficiate CFA at source prior to being transported to the market. Air-classification is used to extract the particular size fractions required by the market. One of these is a commercial-grade, ultra-fine fly ash that is used as a high-performance pozzolan in the cement industry and as a filler for polymers (plastics). This fraction of ash was used in the present study because it is slightly higher in alumina than other South African coal ash resources, and has an elevated amorphous content and a high specific surface area. The pioneering work by Grzymek ( Our recent study indicated that thermochemical treatment using ammonium sulphate ((NH Since ammonium bisulphate (NH A representative sample of an ultrafine siliceous coal fly ash (CFA) was obtained from the Ash Resources Pty Ltd.’s ash beneficiation site at Eskom's Lethabo Thermal Power station, South Africa. This commercial-grade CFA is specified to have > Reagent grade (99.5%, Merck) ammonium sulphate and ammonium bisulphate (hereafter referred to as “AS” and “ABS” respectively) were used in all experiments. The first step of the staged process involved processing CFA by thermochemical treatment using either AS, ABS or a mixture of both in various mass ratios as extracting agents. CFA and the ammonium salts were thoroughly mixed in fused quartz crucibles at CFA:AS:ABS mass ratios of 2:6:0; 2:4:2; 2:3:3; 2:2:4; and 2:0:6. These ratios were chosen to give a stoichiometric excess of SO Characterisation of all CFA The occurrence of new mineral phases during 1 Quantitative XRD analysis ( Characterisation of the non-dissolved residues (CFA Contrary to previous results ( Extraction efficiencies of the main elements (Al, Si, Ca, Fe, Mg and Ti) from untreated CFA and CFA The amounts of Fe and Ti extracted was marginally affected by the ratio of extracting agents tested but it could be controlled and substantially limited (Fe: 2.6%; Ti: 0.2%) by increasing the treatment temperature from 500 The potential for selectively extracting Al over Si, Fe and Ti from an ultra-fine coal fly ash was demonstrated in this study, with Al extraction efficiencies of up to 46.6% being achieved. The process was not selective with regard to Ca and Mg extraction, whereas varying the extracting agent and treatment temperature permitted the selective extraction of Al over Si, Fe and Ti. Both AS and ABS were found to be suitable chemical agents to facilitate the extraction of Al from CFA, although not under the same reaction conditions. ABS promoted better elemental efficiencies at lower temperatures used during thermochemical treatment, which presented the advantage of lower energy consumption and probably minimal loss of the reagent for subsequent ABS recycling. The penalty was co-extraction of Fe and Ti, and the fact that recycling of ABS is more complex, more costly, and requires higher water consumption. Thermochemical treatment at higher temperatures, with the resulting energy penalty, was required to obtain comparable extraction efficiencies using AS as extracting agent. The use of higher temperatures during thermochemical treatment is unfavourable for industrial application due to a significant loss of sulphur, in the form of SO The following is the supplementary data related to this article. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The project was financially supported by the