ZTA-TiC-FeCrNi cermets are prepared by a fast and furnace-free way called high-gravity combustion synthesis. The synthesized cermet samples show the maximum relative density of 97.6% and a hierarchical microstructure with grain sizes from submicron to >50µm. The content of TiC has a strong influence on the microstructure and mechanical properties of the cermet samples. A higher TiC content results in refined microstructure, improved hardness, and reduced coefficient of friction. With increasing TiC content, the strength and toughness of the samples first increase and then drops, and reach the maximum of 469±26MPa and 11.3±0.2MPam1/2 at 20% TiC. Compared with commercial polycrystalline Al2O3 ceramics, the ZTA-TiC-FeCrNi cermets exhibit better wear resistance, and the volume loss is lower by one magnitude than Al2O3 under the same condition.Cermets, which are composites consisting of both ceramic and metallic phases, are attractive for applications as cutting tools because of their good mechanical properties Consolidated bulk cermets are generally produced by powder sintering, such as pressureless sintering (PS) In this paper, multi-component ZTA-TiC-FeCrNi cermets were prepared by high-gravity combustion synthesis. Which include zirconia toughened alumina ceramic matrix and antioxidant FeCrNi stainless steel metal phase reinforced by TiC hard particles. The effects of composition and microstructure of the ZTA-TiC-FeCrNi cermets on their mechanical properties including hardness, strength, toughness, and wear resistance were investigated. Commercial powders of Al, Fe The thermite system was used to produce Al The powder mixture of the raw materials were well homogenized by rotatory ball milling for 2 The synthesized samples were machined with an electroplated diamond wire saw and then well polished. The bulk density of samples was measured according to the Archimedes principle. The phase assemblage was identified by X-ray diffraction (XRD; D8 Focus, Bruker, Germany). The microstructure was examined by scanning electric microscopy (SEM; S4800, Hitachi, Japan), and energy dispersive spectroscopy (ESD; INCA, Oxford Instrument, UK) was used for chemical analysis. The Vickers hardness was measured by the indentation method with a load of 98N and dwelling time of 15 After high-gravity combustion synthesis, bulk samples are obtained for all the compositions in   The content of TiC has a clear effect on the microstructure of the ZTA-TiC-FeCrNi cermets. At a lower TiC content of 10%, large FeCrNi grains with sizes of larger than 50 The content of TiC has an important influence on the hardness of the ZTA-TiC-FeCrNi cermet samples. As shown in In contrast to the hardness, the strength and toughness of the ZTA-TiC-FeCrNi cermets do not always increase with increasing content of TiC. As shown in  For evaluating the wear resistance of the synthesized ZTA-TiC-FeCrNi cermets, a wear resistance test is carried out for the cermet sample with 20% TiC in comparison with a commercial polycrystalline Al To reveal the relationship between wear resistance and microstructure of the samples, SEM observation is carried out at the surface of the samples after the wear resistance test. As shown in ZTA-TiC-FeCrNi cermets with different TiC contents have been prepared by a fast and furnace-free way called high-gravity combustion synthesis. The maximum relative density of the synthesized cermet samples reaches 97.6%. The cermet samples show a complex and hierarchical microstructure including multiple components with grain sizes from submicron to >50 This work is supported by