In particle bed comminution energy is dissipated by several microprocesses which accompany the flow of particles, their compaction, and breakage. It is unknown how much energy is associated with each microprocess and what the ratios are between the energies dissipated by the different microprocesses. Based on an experimental study, a model has been developed to calculate a critical compaction velocity and the energy dissipated by flow losses. The critical compaction velocity describes the probability of the deaeration of a particle bed. Since the flow losses consume less than 0.1% of the total energy input, this microprocess can be considered negligible compared to others.The stressing of particle beds aims at forming a compact body or breaking the constituent parts into finer pieces. Both results are achieved by an initial flow of individual particles followed by their deformation and breakage. On this basis the total energy input (energy absorption) has been divided amongst several microprocesses ( energy loss due to friction between the particles as well as between the particles and the confinements of the particle bed (friction losses), energy absorption till breakage (breakage energy), energy loss due to irreversible structural changes of particles (plastic deformation work), energy loss due to friction occurring while displacing the fluid in the pores (flow losses), energy loss caused by the wear of the confinements of the particle bed, and energy loss due to thermoplastic effects, sound wave propagation and oscillation of elastically deformed fragments. Unfortunately, it is unknown how much energy is associated with each microprocess. Even the ratio between the energies, which are consumed by the individual microprocesses, is often estimated without any real knowledge. The breakage energy is assumed to make up only a small part of the energy absorption (1.5…12% ( An experimental study was used to derive a model for calculating flow losses and evaluating their relevance in particle bed comminution. The flow through a packed particle bed is influenced mainly by the external dimensions of the bed and its internal porosity, the fluid inside the pores, and the fineness of particles. Therefore the porosity and the fineness had to be investigated very carefully since both parameters change during stressing. A range of particle sizes between 1 and 1000 Prior to each experiment the materials were dried for more than 10 height 10 diameter 30…70 The annular gap between the piston and the die was around 200 The particle size distributions of the products were measured by sieving and laser diffraction after sufficient dispersion. The size distributions were used to describe the grinding kinetics and changes in fineness. This focused on the volume-specific surface area The energy absorption Initially the model development focused on an appropriate description of the changes in the porosity of the particle bed as a result of compaction. Furthermore an evaluation was necessary to which extend the fluid is trapped inside the pore volume. Finally the energy consumption due to flow losses was calculated. As known from literature, the important parameters in uniaxial compaction are the pressure, the material type, the particle size, the particle size distribution, and the stress velocity ( The correlation between plastic deformation and pressure on the particle bed is often approximated by an equation with two parameters ( model parameter 1: reference compression model parameter 2: reference pressure Due to its mathematical form, Eq. The reference pressure and thus the resistance against compaction increases significantly with decreasing mean particle size and increasing stress velocity for narrow size fractions ( The mean particle size of a material with a bimodal particle size distribution has a much smaller influence on the reference pressure than that of a material with a narrow unimodal size distribution ( A critical stress velocity of compaction   This critical velocity depends on the geometry and the porosity of the particle bed, the pressure drop across the particle bed, the characteristics of the fluid, and the fineness of the particles ( In a coarse-grained particle bed the flow velocity decreases with increasing compacting pressure because of the high increase of volume-specific surface area and increasing flow resistance. The flow velocity increases in fine-grained particle beds. Since the size reduction of this material is not as significant as the one of coarser feed fractions, the flow resistance increases only slightly. This small increase is more than counterbalanced by the compaction and a higher pressure gradient of air between the inside and outside of the particle bed. These findings are illustrated in Since at least a part of the fluid is trapped in the pore volume at high stress velocities, it will be compacted with the particle bed consuming additional compression energy. This additional energy can be a measure for the flow losses of a rapidly stressed particle bed. Since the compression is very fast, an adiabatic change of state can be assumed in order to calculate these flow losses. The maximum magnitude of the flow losses was first determined by assuming that the compaction is fast enough to trap all the fluid which is initially in the pore volume. This assumption can be made since the fluid velocity in the pores ranges from 0.1 to 10 mass of stressed particles initial fluid pressure in pore volume isentropic exponent compaction function from Eq. The adiabatic work depends strongly on the feed material as well as the pressure on and the compaction behaviour of the particles ( The values of the energy absorption of the examined materials are between 10 and 25 this microprocess is negligible compared to friction losses, breakage energy, and plastic deformation work, and the limiting assumptions of the calculation regarding the maximum magnitude of flow losses are justified.