The Kadikoy–Kartal subway is a unique underground transit line in the Asian part of Istanbul, and has been in operation since August 2012. The 22km underground subway line includes 16 stations and two main tubes. This study focuses on the last 13km, where the excavation was performed by excavators and loaders, to obtain the distribution of geotechnical and construction parameters from geostatistical methods. Rock quality designation (RQD), geological strength index (GSI), uniaxial compressive strength (UCS), elasticity modulus of intact rock (Em
                     ), and rock mass elastic modulus (Er
                     ) were determined from laboratory and site studies as geotechnical parameters. The daily advance rate (AR) for the excavation of underground tubes was collected as a construction parameter. Geostatistical methods were applied to estimate the magnitude of the unsampled points from sampled points. The validity of the proposed methodologies was confirmed by the previous researches, working with site specific parameters, determining the regional dependence functions, and applicability of kriging matrices. After regionalization of the parameters, semivariograms (SV) and crossvariograms (CSV) were determined to run kriging and cokriging techniques that were used to estimate the magnitude of regionalized variables (ReV). Cokriging is used to estimate the magnitude of Er
                     , which has scarce data, from UCS, which is highly correlated to Er
                     . The effect of areas that are changing between 49m and 212m for geotechnical and construction parameters were determined by SVs. This is important to show the applicability of the geostatistical methodologies prior to the construction stage for tunnel projects especially to prepare a well-organized drill hole program. Distribution maps for each parameter were then determined. The distribution of Er
                      was obtained from cokriging technique that was not possible to determine from classical statistical and geostatistical techniques because of the insufficient number of data. Consequently, this research demonstrates that the application of kriging, cokriging techniques, and SV functions as geostatistical methodologies are usable for tunnel projects, therefore the techniques and interpretations based on the distribution maps can be used to assist the similar high budget subway projects.Investigation into the geotechnical properties of geological formations along a tunnel route is crucially important because of the economical and safety aspects of high budget tunnel projects. Excavation and support systems for underground openings are designed based on geotechnical properties. Laboratory and site investigations are carried out using samples taken from drill hole investigations. The results obtained from geotechnical studies as well as the tunnel construction parameters should be evaluated by statistical approaches. Geostatistical methodologies can be applied to estimate the magnitude of variables even for unsampled points based on spatial statistics methods that cannot be determined from conventional statistical approaches. The expected benefit from these applications is to obtain the distribution of data for each point in the study area in order to estimate the magnitude of parameters for construction and geotechnical properties.  In this study, the Kadikoy–Kartal underground subway line is selected as the case study area to investigate geostatistical research alternatives of geotechnical and constructional parameters along the tunnel route. RQD, geological strength index (GSI), and rock mass elasticity modulus ( The Kadikoy–Kartal underground subway line, which is used by approximately 1 million people each day, is becoming a part of the solution for Istanbul’s heavy traffic problem. As shown in The subway project consists of two underground main tunnels (tubes 1 and 2), 16 stations, shafts, shaft tunnels, switch tunnels, and connection tunnels. Simple demonstrations and details of these underground structures are given in Total length of the underground tunnels is 56.10 Main geological formations in this 13-km tunnel route are Kartal, Kurtkoy, and Dolayoba formations. Aydos and Gozdagi formations also exist in this 13-km zone. A geological cross-section is given in Kartal is the longest formation from 3.50 The aim of the geostatistical methodology is to estimate the magnitude of ReVs for unsampled locations in any given spatial. The semivariogram (SV) function can be used to measure the dependency of an ReV according to the distance and magnitude defined in Eq. Theoretical SV function must fit the experimental SV function in order to make the function applicable to the estimation problem via the kriging matrix, which provides the best linear unbiased estimator (blue) of unknown characteristics. An unsampled location can be estimated by Eq. A problem with two unknown parameters in the above equation can be solved using the kriging matrix given in Eq. The cokriging technique can be used to estimate the magnitude of ReV as primary variable from the spatial relation as well as the correlation between other ReVs, called secondary variables ( The error of such a system can be used to describe the difference between estimated and real values as follows (Eq. The matrix notation of error is shown in Eq. There are also two important conditions in cokriging: unbiased assumption (Eq. After computing the partial derivation of In the application of such a cokriging estimation procedure, first isotropic and cross semivariograms (CSVs) are determined, and then a cokriging map is created in order to obtain the distribution of primary variables in the study area for both sampled and unsampled points. Note that the most difficult step of this application is modeling cross SV. The Chauchy–Schwarz inequality given in Eq. The distributions of RQD, GSI, UCS, The scarce data as well as the good correlation between UCS for Theoretical SV functions were first determined after regionalization of the geotechnical parameters for RQD, GSI, UCS, The results show that the effect of areas for the geotechnical parameters change from 49 Cokriging was applicable by using the SV and cross variogram of Ordinary kriging was used for pointwise estimation of RQD, GSI, UCS, A cokriging map of Regionalization of the variables in the study area was used to perform geostatistical approaches in order to make pointwise estimation of the ReVs. Distribution maps of ReVs in the subway construction route were determined from the geostatistical applications via kriging and cokriging techniques. The SV functions, kriging, and cokriging maps are used to generate the following interpretations for the study area. Theoretical SV functions were priory determined to understand the variability of ReV in the spatial; from these functions, the effect area (  Here, RQD and GSI as rock mass properties are quite coherent and adaptable with the distribution of UCS as rock material properties along the tunnel route except between 17+500 The cokriging map of The results support the idea of using geostatistical methodologies for the geotechnical investigations in tunnel projects. Firstly, regionalization which is a first rule of geostatistics can be easily applicable for a route of tunnel construction so the distribution of parameters can be searched by considering not only the effect of magnitude but also the location. This is also important to understand the homogeneity or heterogeneity behavior of the geotechnical parameters based on the results of regional dependency functions called as SV. Increasing value of the effect of area determined by SV function reflects the homogeneity of the ReV while the decreasing value can be claimed as heterogeneity. The applicability of the SV function can be obtained by the relation between experimental and theoretical SVs which can be measured by correlation coefficients. The Daily advance rate (AR) as described by The Kadikoy–Kartal subway project was selected as the study area to show the usability and importance of geostatistical approaches for high budget tunnel projects. The total length of the subway is nearly 22 After transforming the variables into regionalized variables (ReV), the distributions of RQD, GSI, UCS, This research show that kriging maps can be used to understand the ReV magnitude of unsampled locations; SV function is also applicable to find the area effect, which is useful for geotechnical planning of drill hole locations. Other tests such as rock mass elasticity modulus, which is time consuming and expensive, can be correlated with simple mechanical properties such as uniaxial compressive strength, and the distribution can be determined in the study area by cokriging. AR as a construction parameter is lastly predicted from the simulated variables values that could not be operated by actual data. Multiple regression analysis technique proposed a model to predict AR from the simulated values of RQD, GSI, and UCS. The prediction can be useful to make extrapolation for the similar sites as well as to construct method for geotechnical and constructional data analyses for tunnel projects.