 In this introductory chapter, I shall focus on the institutional beginnings of materials science, and materials engineering as well; indeed, “MSE” became an accepted abbreviation at quite an early stage. Following an examination, in Northwestern University, in Illinois not far from Chicago, was the first university to adopt materials science as part of a department title. That grew out of a department of metallurgy. Morris Fine, who was head of the department at the time, has documented the stages of the change (  At almost the same time as the 1958 faculty meeting, the US President's Science Advisory Committee referred to universities’ attempts to “establish a new materials science and engineering” and claimed that they needed government help ( The dean told the head of the department that various senior metallurgists around America had warned that the new department might “lose out in attracting students” by not having ‘metallurgy’ as part of its title. That issue was left open, but the department clearly did not allow itself to be intimidated and Fine, who as we have seen played a major part in willing the new structure into existence, had ( From 1959, then, the department of materials science at Northwestern University taught graduates the new, broad discipline, and an undergraduate course for materials science and engineering majors followed in due course. The idea of that discipline spread fast through American universities, though some eminent metallurgists such as Robert F. Mehl fiercely defended the orthodox approach to physical metallurgy. Nevertheless, by 1969 ( Henceforth, ‘materials science’ will normally be used as the name of the field with which this book is concerned; when the context makes it particularly appropiate to include ‘and engineering’ in the name, I shall use the abbreviation “MSE”, and occasionally I shall be discussing materials engineering by itself. There were also universities which did not set up departments of materials science but instead developed graduate programmes as an interdepartmental venture, usually but not always within a ‘College of Engineering’. An early To give a little more balance to this story, it is desirable to outline events at another American university, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. A good account of the very gradual conversion from metallurgy to MSE has been provided in a book ( In 1967, the department's name (after much discussion) was changed to ‘Metallurgy and Materials Science’ and not long after that, a greatly broadened undergraduate syllabus was introduced. By that time, 9 years after the Northwestern initiative, MIT took the view that the change of name would actually enhance the department's attractiveness to prospective students. In 1974, after further somewhat acrimonious debates, the department's name changed again to ‘Materials Science and Engineering’. It is to be noted, however, that the reality changed well before the name did. Shakespeare's Juliet had, perhaps, the essence of the matter: All the foregoing has been about American universities. Materials science was not introduced in European universities until well into the 1960s. I was in fact the first professor to teach and organise research in MSE in Britain – first as professor of materials technology at the University College of North Wales, 1962–1964, and then as professor of materials science at the University of Sussex, 1965–1981. But before any of this came about, the Department of Physical Metallurgy at the University of Birmingham, in central England, under the visionary leadership of Professor Daniel Hanson and starting in 1946, transformed the teaching of that hitherto rather qualitative subject into a quantitative and rigorous approach. With the essential cooperation of Alan Cottrell and Geoffrey Raynor, John Eshelby and Frank Nabarro, that Department laid the foundation of what was to come later in A few industrial research and development laboratories were already applying the ideas of MSE before those ideas had acquired a name. This was true in particular of William Shockley's group at the Bell Telephone Laboratories in New Jersey and also of General Electric's Corporate Laboratory in Schenectady, New York State. At Bell, physicists, chemists and metallurgists all worked together on the processing of the semiconductors, germanium and silicon, required for the manufacture of transistors and diodes: William Pfann, the man who invented zone-refining, without which it would have been impossible in the 1950s to make semiconductors pure enough for devices to operate at all ( The General Electric Laboratory has a special place in the history of industrial research in America: initially directed by the chemist Willis Whitney from 1900, it was the first American industrial laboratory to advance beyond the status of a troubleshooting addendum to a factory (  Hollomon's ethos, combined with his ferocious energy and determination, and his sustained determination to recruit only the best researchers to join his group, over the next 15 years led to a sequence of remarkable innovations related to materials, including man-made diamond, high-quality thermal insulation, a vacuum circuit-breaker, products based on etched particle tracks in irradiated solids, polycarbonate plastic and, particularly, the “Lucalox” alumina envelope for a metal–vapour lamp. (Of course many managers besides Hollomon were involved.) A brilliant, detailed account of these innovations and the arrangements that made them possible was later written by Guy Suits and his successor as director, Arthur Bueche ( The projects outlined by Suits and Bueche involved collaborations between many distinct disciplines (names and scientific backgrounds are punctiliously listed), and it was around this time that some of the protagonists began to think of themselves as materials scientists. Hollomon outlined his own conception of “Materials Science and Engineering”; this indeed was the title of an essay he brought out some years after he had joined GE ( Suits and Bueche conclude their case-histories with a superb analysis of the sources, tactics and uses of applied research, and make the comment: “The case histories just summarised show, first of all, the futility of trying to label various elements of the research and development process as ‘basic’, ‘applied’ or ‘development’. Given almost any definition of these terms, one can find variations or exceptions among the examples.” Hollomon's standing in the national industrial community was recognised in 1955 when the US National Chamber of Commerce chose him as one of the ten As we have seen, the concept of MSE emerged early in the 1950s and by 1960, it had become firmly established, as the result of a number of decisions in academe and in industry. In that year, as the result of a sustained period of intense discussion and political lobbying in Washington, another major decision was taken, this time by agencies of the US Government. The Interdisciplinary Laboratories were born. According to recent memoirs by Frederick A formal proposal was developed and submitted, early in 1957, but before this could result in a contract, von Neumann was taken ill and died. Things were then held in abeyance until the launch of the Soviet Sputnik satellite in October 1957 changed everything. Two things then happened: a proposal to fund 12 laboratories emerged in Washington and Charles Yost of the Air Force's Office of Air Research was put in charge of making this happen. Thereupon Donald Stevens, head of the Some 20 years after the pressure for the creation of the new interdisciplinary laboratories was first felt, one of the academics who became involved very early on, Prof. Rustum Roy of Pennsylvania State University, wrote eloquently about the underlying ideal of interdisciplinarity ( Administratively, the genesis of these Laboratories, which initially were called Interdisciplinary Research Laboratories and later, Materials Research Laboratories, involved many complications, most of them in Washington, not least when in 1972 responsibility for them was successfully transferred to the National Science Foundation (NSF). As Sproull cynically remarks: “To those unfamiliar with the workings of federal government (and especially Capitol Hill), transfer of a program sounds simple, but it is simple only if the purpose of transfer is to kill the program”. Lyle, in a multiauthor book published by the two National Academies to celebrate the 25th birthday of the MRLs ( The COSMAT Report of 1974 (a major examination of every aspect of MSE, national and international, organised by the National Academy of Sciences, itself reviewed in 1976 in some depth by This book is primarily directed at professional materials scientists and engineers, and they have no urgent need to see themselves defined. Indeed, it would be perfectly reasonable to say about materials science what Aaron Katchalsky used to say about his new discipline, biophysics: “Biophysics is like my wife. I know her, but I cannot define her” ( David Turnbull, in his illuminating The COSMAT Report of 1974, with all its unique group authority, defines MSE as being “concerned with the generation and application of knowledge relating the composition, structure, and processing of materials to their properties and uses”. It is probably a fair comment on this simple definition that in the early days of MSE the chief emphasis was on structure and especially structural defects (as evidenced by a famous early symposium proceedings entitled As mentioned above, Names of disciplines, one might think, are not particularly important: it is the reality that matters. I have already quoted Shakespeare to that effect. But it is not really as simple as that, as the following story from China ( Although almost the whole of this introductory chapter has been focused on the American experience, because this is where MSE began, later the ‘superdiscipline’ spread to many countries. In the later chapters of this book, I have been careful to avoid any kind of exclusive focus on the US. The Chinese anecdote shows, albeit in an extreme form, that other countries also were forced to learn from experience and change their modes of education and research. In fact, in most of the rest of this book, the emphasis is on topics and approaches in research, and not on particular places. One thing which is entirely clear is that the pessimists, always among us, who assert that all the really important discoveries in MSE have been made, are wrong: in Turnbull's words at a symposium (