This article illustrates the application of the proton-induced X-ray emission (PIXE) technique to detailed documentation of mineral assemblages, with emphasis on base–metal ores. Some of the investigations aided by the PIXE laboratory at Guelph since 1993 include determinations of the distribution of minor and trace elements in magmatic Ni–Cu ores, volcanogenic massive sulphide Cu–Pb–Zn–(Ag–Au) ores and lode Au–(Ag) deposits. Minor elements of importance include possible by-products or co-products of metal refining, as well as deleterious impurities in mill-feed, e.g. Cd, In, Sn, As, Se, Te, Tl and Hg. Weathering products of primary sulphide mineralization, including tropical laterites and other oxidized assemblages, have been analysed successfully and can contain a wide range of minor elements which reflect the bedrock style of mineralization. The iron oxyhydroxide goethite, α-FeO(OH), contains trace levels of many elements, and in some cases 1 wt.% or more of base metals and arsenic, elements which are invisible in reflected-light microscopy. Other metals such as Ag are of sporadic occurrence in oxidized ores: they may be found as discrete mineral species, not incorporated into the dominant oxyhydroxides. A summary of findings from three base–metal deposits in Canada, the Philippines and Portugal serves to illustrate the manner in which PIXE data benefit our knowledge of metal distributions in metallic ores. PIXE can contribute to several facets of mineral-deposit research, such as: (1) the development of ore textures, and specifically the distribution of elements within zoned crystals, or between multiple generations of a particular mineral; (2) the location of precious metals, Ag being in general the simplest case; and (3) pinpointing elements that may have implications for ore genesis, environmental quality or metal refining, such as Cr, As and Se.Applied mineralogy can constrain the composition and sources (provenance) of diverse materials of natural and industrial origins. Specific applications relate to mineral exploration, mineral beneficiation and metal refining, archaeometallurgy and archaeology, meteoritics and forensic science. Proton-induced X-ray emission (PIXE) has been of interest to materials scientists for many years due to its ability to deliver rapid analyses of many trace elements at levels as low as a few parts per million (ppm) by weight, with a spatial resolution Simple sulphides and oxides of the lighter elements are well-suited to PIXE analysis, with detection limits in the 5–50 ppm range, which are hard to attain with conventional electron probe microanalysis (EPM). In each study, EPM is conducted on the sample suite prior to energy-dispersive (EDS) PIXE analysis at the Guelph facility using GUPIX data reduction software. Minerals dominated by high- The sequence of methods applied to most suites of samples can be summarized in nine stages. Sample preparation includes fabrication of (1) polished thin sections (30 μm nominal thickness), with prior impregnation of loose or friable materials in epoxy resin, and (2) circular, 25-mm-wide polished mounts made from sliced off-cuts liberated from samples in stage (1). Classical microscopic analysis includes (3) petrography in reflected transmitted light, comprising a sequence of mineral identification, an estimation of the volume proportions of each phase, description of mineral assemblages and textures (including notes and speculations on the sequence of mineral deposition, grain size, encapsulation of gold grains in host sulphides, etc). This may be accompanied by (4) photomicrography, and rarely by (5) reflectance and micro-hardness tests on selected grains. Qualitative microanalysis is conducted by EDS SEM/EPM methods (6), including identification of enigmatic mineral grains. Quantitative microanalysis of key minerals (7) is accomplished by wavelength-dispersive (WDS) EPM. These same phases, after major-element analysis by EPM, are then analysed by PIXE (8) for major, minor and trace elements ( The use of scanning electron microscope and electron microprobe techniques The case studies described below each focus on electrically conducting ore minerals, yet a thin conducting carbon film also permits the analysis of insulators, such as glasses and rock-forming silicate minerals. PIXE has a demonstrated capability for analysis of silicate minerals and glasses with good reproducibility and accuracy The applied mineralogy of three contrasting base–metal deposits has been determined using the techniques summarized above. The locations and mineralogical features of these deposits are summarized in The volcanogenic massive sulphide (VMS) deposits of the Myra Falls mining complex, located at the south end of Buttle Lake on central Vancouver Island, include the Price, Myra, H–W and Lynx mines plus more recent discoveries, including the Battle and Gap zones The distribution of Au in VMS ores is often of vital importance in feasibility studies for polymetallic deposits, since 1 ppm of Au, at current metal prices, is potentially as valuable as. ∼0.5–1.5 wt.% of a base metal such as Cu, Zn or Pb. Bulk Au assays of some VMS ores are in the 1–5 ppm range, although many ores contain <1 ppm Au while rich ores contain >5 ppm Au. At lower grades, the bulk of the Au may reside less in discrete grains of native gold than in “invisible gold”, which is trapped by various mechanisms in the lattice of host minerals such as sulphides or sulpharsenides. An attempt was made to locate at least some of this “invisible gold” using the highly sensitive techniques of SIMS At the Canatuan deposit in Mindanao, Philippines Oxidized weathering products such as laterites and gossans are relatively hard to examine using the techniques of classical microscopy, but a combination of microbeam methods and electron microscopy can help to define cryptic chemical variations within apparently monotonous oxides. Use of secondary-electron and backscattered-electron imaging (SE/BSE), in conjunction with a microbeam method, can first identify and then characterize rare or unfamiliar oxidized phases such as iodargyrite (AgI, this paper) or bromian chlorargyrite (AgCl, BSE imaging and EPM analyses indicate that Ag and Zn occur mainly in discrete mineral phases, with Ag in small (<200 μm) grains of iodargyrite (AgI) and acanthite/argentite (Ag Gold was not detected in the Canatuan samples. Gold is relatively hard to analyse in sulphides using PIXE. Recent analyses of moderately arsenical pyrites (⩽2 wt.% As) in other projects at Guelph, with appropriate filtering of the characteristic X-rays, yields MDLs of 13–22 ppm for Au. Arsenical pyrite (also known as arsenian pyrite) with a maximum of 200 ppm Au has been analysed in contemporary studies at Guelph. The third case study concerns the massive sulphide ores of the Feitais orebody of the Aljustrel mining complex in Beja province, southern Portugal, part of the famous Iberian Pyrite Belt PIXE analysis reveals the locations and concentrations of various important minor and trace elements. The sphalerite, which varies from near-colourless to rich orange–brown in transmitted light, contains 0.7–6.5% Fe. It also contains the highest levels of Cd and Hg (up to 2000 and 2100 ppm, respectively). Sn, In and Se occur mainly in chalcopyrite. In most samples, As is hosted by pyrite; it occurs at much higher levels in a few samples containing arsenopyrite and tetrahedrite. Tl and Sb occur in pyrite: the Sb is also present in arsenopyrite and sulphosalts. The porous P2 pyrite appears to contain more As and other trace metals than the recrystallized P3 pyrite grains. Tetrahedrite contains 0.4–4% Ag, as determined by EPM, while galena contains 0.04%, as measured by PIXE. Previous studies have shown the utility of combined EPM and PIXE analysis, for example, in determining the partitioning of trace elements amongst co-existing Cu–Fe sulphides such as: chalcopyrite; cubanite, CuFe Tim Barrett instigated the studies on base–metal ores summarized in this article, in the course of his own research at the Mineral Deposit Research Unit, University of British Columbia. Claudio Cermignani assisted with electron microprobe analysis at the Department of Geology, University of Toronto, where George Taylor and Shawn McConville produced the polished specimens and Karyn Gorra provided photographic and graphics services. Measurements of Au in the H–W ores, by SIMS and AMS, were conducted, respectively, at CANMET (Ottawa) and the IsoTrace Laboratory, Toronto. We acknowledge Boliden Westmin (Canada) Ltd. (Myra Falls operation), TVI Copper Inc. (Canatuan) and EuroZinc Mining Corporation (Feitais) for permission to publish summaries of material from five reports by Turnstone Geological Services Ltd. This article was improved by the comments of Tim Barrett and an anonymous reviewer.