Ferric iron is a low-cost oxidant frequently used in hydrometallurgy and is particularly suitable to leach various metals from printed circuit boards (PCBs). This paper presents the use of the BRGM-KCC acidophilic consortium to generate ferric iron solution in a bubble column run in continuous mode. The influence of influent ferrous iron concentration, ranging from 1 to 9 g L−1 on the bio-oxidation rate was studied in the presence of a solid support. The impacts of the quantity of solid support, the hydraulic residence time (HRT), the culture medium and the type of support were established. Stable performance was achieved over an extended period with a Fe2+ oxidation rate of 1400 mg L−1 h−1. Cryogenic scanning electron microscopy was used to observe the attachment of cells on the solid support in different operating conditions and showed that the clogging of the solid support with jarosite precipitates influenced its colonization by the micro-organisms and the stability of the bioprocess. The operating conditions, and especially the influent ferrous iron concentration and nutritive medium composition, also influenced the structure and the abundance of the microbial community.The metal content of spent printed circuit boards (PCBs) can reach up to 35% (in weight), including precious and strategic metals even at greater concentrations than in primary resources. For instance, gold and copper are 25 to 250 times and 20 to 40 times more concentrated in spent PCBs than in ores, respectively ( Today, high-grade PCBs are treated by pyrometallurgy to recover valuable metals but some metals, such as aluminium, iron and precious metals, are lost in the slag during this operation ( Within this framework, biohydrometallurgy is very promising. In the literature, some studies deal with the use of bioleaching for the treatment of spent PCBs by means of acidophilic micro-organisms ( The main issue raised by research studies dedicated to the development of bioleaching processes for PCBs treatment is linked to the reproducibility of the results, mainly because of the large heterogeneity of PCBs that leads to large variation of sample composition. Most studies dedicated to acidophilic bioleaching of spent PCBs to date have been performed in simple shake flasks and the quantity of PCBs added for each batch test is often too low to be representative of the whole composition of the PCB sample. Moreover, the results are highly variable as important parameters, such as dissolved oxygen concentration, pH or micro-organisms are diverse. Finally, the addition point of raw material after inoculation influences greatly PCB bioleaching efficiency. This parameter appears particularly important as PCBs may be responsible for the inhibition of microbial growth and activity ( However, due to the high concentrations of ferric iron, Where A During 6 months, This paper reports the performance and the limitations obtained for the bio-oxidation of ferrous iron in a bubble column run in continuous mode, which will be used as the first stage of a biolixiviant reactor for leaching spent PCBs. The influence of influent ferrous iron concentration on the bio-oxidation rate was studied over an extended period of time. The influence of the type and quantity of solid support and of the medium composition on bio-oxidation yield were investigated. The colonization of solid support was observed by cryogenic scanning electron microscopy to understand the phenomena that affect the stability of bio-oxidation performance. The main objective of the study was to determine the operating parameters which enabled stable and maximal performance over a period of several weeks. The inoculum used for the cultures was obtained from the BRGM-KCC microbial consortium subcultured on pyrite tailings ( Continuous culture experiments were carried out in two separate 150 mL (working volume) bubble columns (4.5 cm in diameter, 30 cm in height) immersed in a water bath to maintain the temperature at 36 °C. A schematic diagram of the bubble column used for this study is given in Finally, biotic and abiotic shake flasks experiments were done to determine the chemical oxidation of ferrous iron by the activated charcoal itself. Flasks (250 mL) contained 100 mL 9Cm medium with 10 g of activated charcoal. Biotic tests were inoculated with 10% ( Oxygen and carbon dioxide concentrations in the off-gas from the bioreactor were analysed by using ADC MGA 3000 Multi-Gas Analyzer (Analytical Development Company Ltd). Total iron concentration was determined by flame atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS) using a Varian SpectrAA-300. Ferrous iron concentration was determined by using the correlation between redox potential and total iron concentration as reported by Yue et al. ( The number of micro-organisms in the supernatant was monitored by counting on Thoma cell counting chamber. The same methodology was used to count attached cells on the solid support, after cell detachment performed by slowly shaking with a mixing shaker (Heidolph Reax 2) at minimum speed (24 rpm) 500 mg of solid support in 1.5 mL of fresh acidic medium (0Km with pH <2) with 0.25% v/v Tween 20 (from Sigma Aldrich), for 1 h. This method was used to observe the attachment of cells onto the solid support without prior steps of preparation. Fresh aliquots of solids sampled from the bubble column were introduced on a copper frame with carbon paste. Samples were immersed into liquid nitrogen at −176 °C and a pressure depression enabled to reach −210 °C (slush nitrogen). From this point, samples were set under vacuum and transferred into the SEM (Hitachi S-4500 field-emission operated at 1 kV). They were warmed to −70 °C to remove ice that was formed on the sample due to moisture condensation and cooled to −105 °C for observations. Detection of secondary electrons was performed on the surface or inside samples after cryo-fracturing. Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) was used to characterize the sample composition with SEM operated at 5 or 15 kV. The CE-SSCP technique was used on polymerase chain reaction (PCR) product of 16S rRNA gene to obtain a diversity profile and to determine relative abundances of the detected bacterial strains. Samples containing 0.5 mL solid support or 2 mL liquid phase were taken from the bubble column. Solid samples and pellets (from centrifugation of the liquid samples for 10 min at 14000 g) were washed by re-suspension in Tris buffer (100 mM, pH 8) until pH reached around 7. Genomic DNA was extracted with the FastDNA Spin Kit for Soil and using the manufacturer's protocol (MP Biomedicals) with a FastPrep®-24 at a speed of 5 m s Activated charcoal produced from black granular coal was chosen as support for this work because high bio-oxidation rates can be achieved with this type of support ( In order to examine the kinetics of bio-oxidation at different influent ferrous iron concentrations, 15 g of activated charcoal were introduced in the bioreactor and the HRT was set to 12 h. This mass of activated charcoal corresponded to an apparent volume of 33 mL. The maximum bio-oxidation rate obtained was 375 mg L Bio-oxidation performance as a function of HRT is presented for bioreactors with 1 and 9 g L In order to minimize the instabilities obtained at high influent ferrous iron concentrations, the impact of the quantity of solid support was investigated. The amount of activated charcoal influences the amount of biomass attached onto and into the solid, and therefore, the performance of the bioreactor. The quantity of activated charcoal at 1 g L  Results obtained with both media were quite similar at 1 g L The bio-oxidation rate in the presence of a highly porous support (activated charcoal) and a non-porous support (polyvynil chloride beads) is shown in Cryo-SEM was used to observe the colonization of activated charcoal particles by bacteria. Such a technique is particularly suitable for this study since it allows the observation of fresh biological materials as no dehydration step is required during sample preparation and it is possible to obtain high-resolution images at low voltage. This method also enables the breaking of the charcoal particles into sub-particles without damaging the biofilm in order to observe the interior of porous material: an example of ore breakage was described by   The edge of a representative charcoal particle after colonization in a growth medium containing 9 g L Microbial diversity profiles were determined in bioreactors by 16S rRNA gene CE-SSCP. A comparison was performed between solid and liquid phases in bioreactors for two different influent ferrous iron concentrations (1 g L Finally, cell distribution between solid and liquid phases was determined in the same conditions as the previous characterization of diversity profiles. Observations with Cryo-SEM highlighted the fact that activated charcoal from the bioreactor containing 9 g L This hypothesis could explain the difference in diversity profiles between both bioreactors: It is consistent with results obtained when the growth medium composition was changed: the decrease in ammonium concentration limited ammonium jarosite precipitation, thus limiting the coating of solid support. It enabled more stable performance. In these conditions, maximal oxidation rates were obtained at 1400 mg L The nature of the support seemed to have a high impact on bio-oxidation performance since the use of non-porous polyvinyl chloride beads reduced the iron bio-oxidation yield to <20% while it reached 99% in the same conditions with activated charcoal. This was probably due to a difference in porosity, which influenced the number of accessible sites for cell attachment: with 33 mL, the accessible surface with activated charcoal is estimated to 14,520 m Concerning these results, one way to improve the kinetics could be to change the solid support. A study with woven nylon performed by The highest oxidation rate obtained in 9Cm was 1400 mg L To recover metals from different resources, particularly spent printed circuit boards, the production of a biogenic lixiviant solution is of great interest. However, the monitoring of the process should be controlled and the stability of this production over long periods of time is necessary. In this work, a bubble column inoculated with BRGM-KCC microbial consortium in the presence of activated charcoal was used for ferric lixiviant generation. Results were not reproducible at 9 g L This work was supported by the Chair “Mines Urbaines” from ParisTech foundation supported by Eco-systèmes. Authors would like to thank Christopher G. Bryan for his careful reading of the paper.