The present work evaluates the environmental impact of including phase change materials (PCM) in a typical Mediterranean building. A Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) is developed for three monitored cubicles built in Puigverd de Lleida (Spain). It is possible to control the inner temperature of the cubicles using a domestic heat pump for cooling and an electrical radiator for heating: The energy consumption is registered to determine the energy savings achieved. The aim is to analyze if these energy savings are large enough to balance the environmental impact originated during the manufacturing of PCM.
                  Some hypothetical scenarios, such as different systems to control the temperature different PCM types or different weather conditions are proposed and studied using LCA process to point out the critical issues. Furthermore, a parametric analysis of the lifetime of buildings is developed.
                  Results show that the addition of PCM in the building envelope, although decreasing the energy consumption during operation, does not reduce significantly the global impact throughout the lifetime of the building. For the hypothetical scenario considering summer conditions all year around and a lifetime of the building of 100 years, the use of PCM reduces the overall impact by more than 10%.It is widely known that the building sector contributes largely in total energy consumption and CO The process used to quantify and evaluate these environmental impacts is known as life-cycle assessment (LCA). It analyzes the impact of a product from “cradle” (raw materials extraction), through manufacturing, transportation and use, to “grave” (disposal). Several recent studies have evaluated the environmental impact of buildings. Rodrigo et al. An emerging technology largely studied in order to reduce the energy consumption and CO On the other hand, due to the high embodied energy (EE) of PCM, an LCA study is required to determine if the reduction of the operational impact can balance out the one produced during the manufacturing and disposal of the PCM and the encapsulation. No references of such analysis are found in the literature for buildings with PCM. Therefore this paper addresses the use of this technology in a global point of view, focussing in the whole life cycle from cradle to grave. The LCA will be focus on three experimental cubicles studied in Castell et al. The Life Cycle Assessment developed is based on the impact assessment method EcoIndicator 99 (EI99) The evaluation of each impact category is given by The hierarchist perspective is considered and two different phases in the life of the system are considered: the manufacturing/dismantling and the operation. The Life Cycle Assessment is developed for three house-shaped cubicles located in Puigverd de Lleida ( First a Life Cycle Inventory has to be detailed for the manufacturing and dismantling phase of the cubicles. The correspondence between the experimental components and the EcoInvent database is shown in The hypotheses used for the Life Cycle Assessment in all the studied scenarios are: The expected lifetime for one cubicle is 50 years. However, a parametric analysis of lifetime is also developed and results for 75 and 100 years are presented. The electricity used considers the production mix corresponding to the Spanish energy production system (#674 in the EcoInvent database). Because of no data available in the EcoInvent database, disposals of paraffins and hydrated salts are estimated. An average ratio between the impact of all the others used components and their disposals is calculated. This ratio is applied to the paraffin and hydrated salts components to obtain the impact value of their disposals. The three studied cubicle have the same dimensions: 3 The PCM are encapsulated using CSM panels in coated aluminium. To evaluate the operational phase, measured energy consumption from the cubicles is used ( Winter period: 4 months with similar heating demand to the third week of February 2009. Comfort conditions are achieved using an electrical radiator with a set point of 24 Summer period: 4 months with similar cooling demand to the fourth week of August 2009. Comfort conditions are achieved using a heat pump with a set point of 24 No controlled temperature: 4 months without temperature control. Life Cycle Assessment is also developed for the following hypothetical scenarios: Hydrated salts case: SP25 hydrated salt is used instead of RT-27 due to the high embodied energy of the paraffins. Same energy savings during operational phase and same encapsulation is assumed for SP25 and the RT-27. The hypothetical cubicle with hydrated salt is appointed as PCM Heat pump scenario: a heat pump is used in spite of an electrical radiator during the winter period. Therefore the electric consumption for heating is reduced by the COP (considered as 3). The use of hydrated salts rather than paraffins is also compared in this scenario. Summer scenario: summer weather conditions are assumed during the whole year, with similar cooling demands to the fourth week of August 2009. Therefore the energy demand for every month is based on the heat pump consumption, with a set point of 24 Moreover, Gustavsson A list of all the materials used in the construction of the studied cubicles and their impact is shown in Assuming that the real PCM The impact for each damage category during the manufacturing phase is shown in row A of The impact during the operational phase of the cubicles is based on the measured energy consumptions for heating and cooling. These energy consumptions are presented both for winter and summer period in The impacts for each damage category during the operational phase of the real scenario are shown in the rows B and D of The addition of polyurethane reduces the global operational impact in comparison to the reference case from 3733 to 2290 impact points. On the other hand, the addition of PCM further reduces this value, but only 21 points in comparison to the PU cubicle. The impact categories with highest results during the operational phase are the respiratory effects and the fossil fuels which belong to human health and resources damage categories, respectively. As previously said, LCA has to take into account two phases: manufacturing/dismantling and operational. The use of hydrated salt SP-25 instead of paraffin RT-27 in the PCM cubicle results in an impact reduction during the manufacturing phase from 167.35 to 152.14 points. Hydrated salts have 0.058 points of impact per kg of material, thus is a reduction of 72% in comparison to the paraffin. As said before, the impact of the paraffins represents a 12% from the total manufacturing impact, while the use of hydrated salts reduces this impact to 4%. The manufacturing impact for both PCM is detailed in Note that the embodied energy difference is due to the fossil fuels impact category, belonging to the resources damage category. All the others impact categories present similar results. For the electric radiator case and considering the same operational behaviour for hydrated salts and paraffins, The use of a heat pump instead of an electric radiator for heating reduces by a third the operational impact of the cubicles during winter due to a much higher efficiency (COP considered as 3). From the experimental results obtained in the cubicles it is clear that the use of PCM improves the operational impact during summer, since the PCM are only working under those conditions. Therefore, the use of this technology with summer conditions throughout the year will increase the PCM usage and will also present much better improvements. Moreover, the impact during the operational phase will change drastically due to the lower energy consumption for cooling than heating. The experimental results can be extrapolated to a location with such a weather conditions during the whole year. The E row of As it was previously discussed, the use of PCM reduces the impact results during the operational phase but increases them during the manufacturing phase due to the high embodied energy. In order to analyze the savings achieved, a parametric study of the lifetime was developed. As it was expected, the scenario where the use of PCM presents a higher impact reduction is with summer conditions during 100 years. The improvement achieved in the PCM Moreover, the parametric analysis of lifetime determines that the manufacturing impact of hydrated salts and paraffins is balanced out by the impact savings during the operational phase for a lifetime of 25 and 61 years, respectively. In this work the environmental impact of using PCM in a typical Mediterranean construction has been analyzed using Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) based on the EcoIndicator 99 (EI99). The study has been developed first for real monitored cubicles, and second for additional hypothetical scenarios. LCA results for the real cubicles show an impact reduction of 37% when PU is added to the reference cubicle. The addition of PCM does not produce a significant variation of global impact results because the impact savings achieved during the operational phase are balanced out with the manufacturing impact of PCM. Therefore, a different PCM type must be considered. The use of hydrated salts (SP-25 A8 in this study) presents manufacturing impact about 75% lower than paraffins (RT-27), helping to reduce the global impact and enhancing the benefits of using PCM. From the different scenarios extrapolated, it is observed that the PCM must operate as long as possible during the year to reduce the operational impact. Although the use of a heat pump was considered to decrease the winter impact, the absolute impact reduction between the PCM and non-PCM cubicles was still the same. On the other hand, the scenario with year-round summer conditions increases the PCM cycles and therefore the operational impact is reduced all year around. In this case the global impact of the PCM is improved. From this work some recommendations can be drawn for the use of PCM in buildings: It is better to use salt hydrates than paraffins in order to reduce the manufacturing/disposal impact. The use of PCM throughout the year has to be maximized. The benefits of the PCM will increase in locations where the weather conditions are similar all the year long, since the PCM will perform more cycles. The global benefit of using PCM in buildings can also be maximized by designing both the building and the PCM for a long term operation. From the lifetime analysis of the real scenario, the payback time of global impact is determined as 25 and 61 years for the hydrated salts and paraffins, respectively. As expected, the hypothetical scenario with summer conditions during 100 years of lifetime presents the best results for the PCM cubicles, reducing the global impact more than a 10% in comparison to the PU cubicle. The work was partially funded by the