High-quality image reconstruction techniques allow the generation of high pixel density images from a set of low-resolution micrographs. In general, these techniques consist of two main steps, namely, accurate registration, and formulation of an appropriate forward image model via some restoration method. There exist a wide variety of algorithms to cope with both stages and depending on their practical applications, some methods can outperform others, since they can be sensitive to the assumed data model, noise, drift, etc. When dealing with images generated by Z-contrast scanning transmission electron microscopes, a current trend is based on non-rigid approximations in the registration stage. In our work we aimed at reaching similar accuracy but addressing the most complex calculations in the reconstruction stage, instead of in the registration stage (as the non-rigid approaches do), but using a much smaller number of images. We review some of the most significant methods and address their shortcomings when they are applied to the field of microscopy. Simulated images with known targets will be used to evaluate and compare the main approaches in terms of quality enhancement and computing time. In addition, a procedure to determine the reference image will be proposed to minimise the global drift on the series. The best registration and restoration strategies will be applied to experimental images in order to point up the enhanced capability of this high quality image reconstruction methodology in this field.High-resolution Z-contrast Scanning Transmission Electron Microscopy (HRSTEM) provides images of crystals at atomic resolution, where the location of atom column positions is greatly simplified The process of taking a sequence of under-sampled Low Resolution (LR) images of a particular scene and generating a High Resolution (HR) image, providing far more detail and quality than any individual LR image is known as Super-Resolution (SR) image reconstruction in standard Image Processing In general, HQIR methodology comprises two stages: registration and reconstruction. In the registration process LR images need to be mapped into a common reference frame and that can be made in two ways. Some authors, as Yankovich Thus, Image registration involves the geometrical (rotation, translation, shearing, scale, …) alignment of images where one of them is used as reference. Image registration is a crucial step in all image analysis tasks in which the final information is gained from the combination of various data sources Image registration methods can be classified into Non-rigid and Rigid approaches. Currently, some authors use non-rigid alignment in order to determine possible irregularities in the atomic structure achieving sub-picometre precision Because the number of rigid registration algorithms is too high, in this paper different techniques have been selected based on their potential applications on the field of microscopy. Three of the selected methods (Marcel's Frequency domain HQIR methods provide the advantages of theoretical simplicity and low computational complexity, as well as they are highly amenable to parallel implementation due to the decoupling of the frequency domain equations The original Vandewalle approach uses the differences of amplitudes in the Fourier transform seeking the maximum correlation for the calculation of the rotation angle. To do this, it defines the precision in degrees that will have the rotation angle between the images by converting the Fourier transform to polar form. Subsequently the low frequency values are discarded and rectangular windows are traced over the Fourier transform being the window size equal to the precision angle. The profile from the average of the amplitude values is correlated to the reference image. This correlation determines the rotation angle between both images with high accuracy and it is very noise resistant. In this work, we also introduce a variant of this registration approach by combining Vandewalle's rotation angle calculations together with a similar procedure based on normalized cross correlation (NCC) to calculate the shift. The NCC of a series of images A regarding the reference image B is defined as: On the other hand, spatial domain methods allow for more general motion models. Some typical criteria for intensity-based registration are the minimization of the squared error between the compared images, the correlation maximization Even in the best cases, a certain drift effect (shift, shear or rotational) can occur that influences the overall image acquisition process. If the sample moves in the xy plane perpendicular to the optical axis, the image of the series undergoes a corresponding positional displacement on the image sensor. Additionally, each image of the series could suffer of non-linear displacements, such as flags (the pixel rows are shifted horizontally) and/or skips (the pixel rows are convoluted to neighbouring rows). While most of the registration applications use as reference the first image from the raw series, we hold that the reference image should be carefully selected in order to minimise i) the global drift on the series and ii) the presence of skips and flags. If an image of the series were randomly taken as reference, there would exist a high risk i) to loose information in the opposite direction to the drift, resulting in a final image after the registration process with less useful pixels in that direction or ii) to select an image with a high density of scanning errors. Thus, we propose the following algorithm to select the best reference image (to minimise the drift effect) working with a low-pass filtered series of low-resolution images (see In all HQIF restoration methods, an improved resolution image is generated from several low-resolution aligned images. Generally, HQIR restoration approaches in frequency domain have developed slowly since they lack ability to take the information in time-domain to frequency-domain At the simplest level, the value of a function between known samples could be estimated by taking the value of the nearest sample (nearest neighbour) or by using a weighted average of two/four translated neighbour pixels, so in our experiments we have been applied linear (LI) and bicubic (BI) interpolations Iterated Back Projection (IBP) Non-Local Means (NLM) denoising algorithm was proposed by Buades et al. Anyway, reconstruction methods can be addressed either by maintaining the same number of pixels or by increasing the number of pixels per unit area. First approaches fall into the category of typical restoration algorithms while HQIR algorithms are specifically focused on increasing this number of pixels per unit area Simulated images of monocrystalline InP are generated and used as initial targets. On these images, we first apply different noise levels, followed by some other degradations as shifts and rotations and finally downsampled to obtain various series of LR frames. The aim is to apply the HQIR methodology to these series of LR frames. The resulting HQIR images will be compared against the initial targets in order to assess the performance of the above registration and restoration approaches when they are applied to HAADF-STEM images at different noise levels. A supercell of InP containing all the information about atom position, composition, site occupancy and Debye-Waller factors is generated. This model together with the microscope parameters constitute the input to the SICSTEM program Poisson noise, inherent in experimental micrographs, is modelled by a Normal distribution, and added to this simulated image. In this work, we have made 3 high resolution target images using different Gaussian distributions, namely σ = 0.005, 0.01 and 0.02, (where σ is the standard deviation) in order to compare the effect of the noise in the HQIR methodologies ( From these three high-resolution target images, three sequences of 10 LR images were generated through degradation procedures. These procedures involve the application of different displacements and rotations as well as a downsampling by a factor of 4. Gaussian zero-mean random variables are used for the shift (pixels) and rotation (degrees) parameters. For the shifts, a standard deviation of 4 pixels is used, while the rotation angles have a standard deviation of 0.0625°. The sum of the displacements applied in the image series will be less than The execution time and two quantitative/empirical measurements are used to assess the effects of these image enhancement algorithms on image quality. Indeed, Mean Absolute Error (MAE) can be used to assess the accuracy of the motion estimates (shift and rotation) and to evaluate detail accuracy and border distortion. Secondly, Peak Signal to Noise Ratio (PSNR) will be applied to compare the original and the reconstructed image in terms of noise reduction. MAE measures the amount by which the values of the original image differ from the HQIR image. It is calculated as the average of the absolute errors between the estimates, PSNR, usually expressed in terms of the logarithmic decibel scale, is defined as the quotient between the maximum possible value of a signal (power) and the power of distorting noise that affects the quality of the representation MAX MSE is the Mean Squared Error:     and Five selected registration algorithms will be assessed: (1) Keren from the spatial domain, and (2) Marcel, (3) Lucchese, (4) Vandewalle and finally, (5) our proposal, Vandewalle variant using cross-correlation (Vandewalle_NCC), from the frequency domain approach. In terms of rotation estimates, all the methods show very similar results for the three noise levels considered, with very low mean and standard deviation, except Lucchese approach, whose absolute error values are too high. However, when focusing on shift and time measurements there exist significant differences among the different approaches. The low computational time employed by Marcel and Lucchese methods does not compensate the poor results obtained by the shift estimate. For this reason, Lucchese and Marcel methods can be discarded to align HAADF images. From the three remaining methods, the most accurate results are reached by our proposal, but at the cost of the highest computational time. Classical Vandewalle and Keren approaches show very similar results in terms of rotation and motion estimates, although the real-space based algorithm of Keren has the best results in terms of computational time. Keren is a very good alternative when a trade-off between accuracy and computational time is required. However, our proposal of using Vandewalle_NCC clearly surpassed the accuracy of the rest of the algorithms, spending around thirty seven seconds, which results in a very insignificant awaiting time. Thus Vandewalle variant using cross-correlation is selected as the alignment approach to be applied hereafter. In this restoration stage, first, our procedure to choose the reference image has been implemented in order to reduce drift and border effects in the final HQIR image, and then the LR series have been registered applying Vandewalle_NCC. Then, 8 different reconstruction techniques from  On the other hand, all the methods have the same behaviour against noise, showing worst MAE and PSNR results as the noise level increases. PG could be considered the most robust method against noise, since the differences between the 3 levels of noise are very low. At the highest noise level (0.02), results from PG and NLM tend to be more similar, although always NLM shows better accuracy and quality. Finally, in terms of the computational time, while LI or BI restoration only spends around 8 s, a NLM restoration uses 13 h and NLM-median almost 24 h. This awaiting time is compensated by the very accurate results that are achieved, namely, the lowest MAE and the highest PSNR. PG algorithm could be an interesting option whenever the computing power is limited. In order to illustrate how the selected strategies for registration and restoration perform in real images, we have applied the proposed methodology to a series of experimental HRHAADF images. The sample consisted of a layer of InAs quantum dots (QDs) grown by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) on a GaAs substrate. A series of 7 high-resolution aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM images with a size of 2048 × 2048 pixels were acquired at 200 kV along the [110] direction and captured every 8 s using a X-FEG FEI Titan probe-corrected STEM dedicated to advanced STEM imaging.  Following Bals et al. The results are shown in Nevertheless, better results are obtained using NLM algorithm at the expense of a high computational time against PG approach. The NLM image can be used when high precision is needed, as in In this paper, different frequency and spatial domains HQIR methods have been evaluated in the HAADF-STEM imaging field, differentiating between registration and restoration stages. For this comparison, simulated images have been used adding different distortions such noise, rotation and drift and finally this degraded images have been downsampled. In the case of the registration stage, a novel procedure to select the reference image has been implemented. This procedure guarantees the reduction of the global drift in the resulting HQIR image. Absolute error mean and standard deviation were used to assess 5 different alignment approaches. Among them, our proposal, a variant of the Vandewalle's approach using normalized cross-correlation, has obtained the best alignment results. MAE, PSNR and computational time have been used to compare the performance of eight restoration procedures. Papoulis-Gerchberg algorithm could be considered a good restoration method, since reasonable results can be obtained with little computational time. In contrast, the computational time in NLM is the highest, spending around half a day to get the final image. However, NLM has been selected as the best restoration approach to be applied to Z-contrast images because more accurate images, and with better quality, are achieved. To reduce this time, a parallel version could be implemented and run the software in supercomputers. The HQIR methodology proposed in this work uses a simple rigid registration and addresses the most complex calculations in the reconstruction stage with NLM. We have demonstrated that with a small number of experimental images resolution can be enhanced while distortions can be minimized, providing a more detailed and realistic HQIR image than any individual image from the series. We would like to acknowledge funding from the