Nickel sulfide ores occur as disseminated or massive ore bodies. The nickel sulfide is separated from the host rock by flotation. The flotation concentrate is smelted to produce a converter matte, which is then refined either by carbonyl refining or in a hydrometallurgical refinery. This route is by far the most dominant. Alternatives to smelting and converting include various hydrometallurgical processes that treat concentrates, which have been demonstrated in the past, but are not currently practiced. Heap leaching of the ore is practiced at only one location. About half the global production of primary nickel is extracted from the sulfide ores. This chapter describes nickel sulfide ores and provides an overview of the methods used to extract nickel and cobalt from these ores. These extraction processes are described in detail in subsequent chapters in the following sequence: the production of nickel-rich sulfide concentrates is discussed in the smelting and converting of the nickel concentrate to molten sulfide matte is discussed in the refining of the sulfide matte to high-purity nickel metal and other products is discussed in Nickel sulfide deposits occur as massive sulfides or as disseminated ores. Massive sulfides have a mineral sulfide content of 90%−95%. Disseminated sulfides are a mixture of sulfides and siliceous gangue rock. The sulfide minerals found in nickel sulfide ores are given in Virtually, all the nickel in nickel sulfide ores occurs in the mineral pentlandite [(Ni,Fe) The proportion of nickel and iron in pentlandite is variable. Pentlandite typically contains approximately 36% Ni, 30% Fe and 33% S (plus about 1% Co). Pentlandite always occurs with other sulfide minerals, mostly pyrrhotite [Fe The mineralogical compositions of five ores are given in Besides nickel, pentlandite ores contain copper, cobalt, silver, gold and platinum-group elements (Pt, Pd, Rh, Ru, Ir) to a greater or lesser extent. The main extraction process for treating nickel sulfide ores is shown in the production of a nickel−cobalt concentrate; the production of nickel−cobalt converter matte; and, the refining of this converter matte into pure metals or chemicals of nickel and cobalt. Mined sulfide ores contain pentlandite, pyrrhotite, chalcopyrite and gangue rock. A high-grade nickel concentrate is produced from these ores by the following minerals-processing techniques: crushing and grinding the ores to liberate the nickel- and cobalt-bearing minerals from the other minerals and gangue; froth flotation to separate the nickel-, cobalt- and copper-bearing minerals from the gangue rock and pyrrhotite; and, froth flotation to separate the nickel- and cobalt-bearing minerals from the copper-bearing minerals. These process steps result in a high-grade concentrate that is a suitable feed to a nickel−cobalt smelter. The nickel- and cobalt-rich concentrates are smelted and converted to form a converter matte that has a high nickel−cobalt content and a low iron content. As shown in The smelting of nickel−cobalt sulfides involves the following three processes: the partial oxidation of the nickel−cobalt sulfide to nickel−cobalt oxide; the oxidation of iron sulfide to iron oxide and the dissolution of the iron oxide in the silicate slag; and, the melting of silicate gangue rock to form a silicate slag. In the electric furnace process, there is a separate roaster for the oxidation of nickel and iron sulfides. The melting of these roasted products then occurs in an electric furnace. Two products are separated in this electric furnace: the furnace matte, which is rich in nickel−cobalt and lean in iron, and the silicate slag, which is rich in iron and lean in nickel and cobalt. In the flash furnace process, the oxidation and melting reactions both occur in the furnace. The advantage of this process is that the heat of reaction from roasting is used to power the furnace. The disadvantage of this type of operation is that the losses of nickel to the slag are higher than in the electric furnace. Both the flash furnace and the electric furnace produce a furnace matte that contains 40% Ni, 0.5% Co, and 25% Fe, with the remainder being sulfur. The furnace matte is converted, which is the oxidation of iron and sulfur to produce a converter matte that contains 50%−60% Ni, 1% Co, 1% Fe, and 20%−23% S. There are two flash furnace installations where strong oxidizing conditions are used. This results in a furnace matte that is similar to the converter matte, thus by-passing the need for a converter. The converter matte is refined, either using vapometallurgical or hydrometallurgical techniques. Converter mattes are refined to pure nickel and cobalt either in a vapometallurgical refinery (carbonyl process) or in a hydrometallurgical refinery. The basis for the carbonyl process is that carbon monoxide, CO, reacts preferentially with nickel to form nickel carbonyl, Ni(CO) In contrast to the established nature of carbonyl refining, there is no standard flowsheet for the hydrometallurgical processing of converter mattes and nickel sulfides. Broadly, the hydrometallurgical refining of nickel sulfides occurs in the following steps: (i) leaching, (ii) solvent extraction and one of either (iii) electrowinning or (iv) hydrogen reduction. These topics are examined in separate chapters, starting with The product of the refining processes is high-purity nickel metal, suitable for applications. An alternative to the smelting of nickel concentrates to matte, which is then refined in a hydrometallurgical refinery, is to treat all of the concentrate hydrometallurgically. There are three different process chemistries that such a hydrometallurgical treatment facility can be based on: (i) ammoniacal, (ii) sulfate and (iii) chloride routes. Nickel concentrates were pressure leached in ammonia solutions using air in Fort Saskatchewan, Alberta from 1954–1987 and at Kwinana, Western Australia from 1970–1987. Both operations used the Sherritt process. The mines supplying concentrate to the Fort Saskatchewan operation became depleted. This led to the processing of various feeds, such as nickel−copper mattes, and in 1987 exclusively to leaching of mixed The Kwinana nickel refinery began processing concentrate in 1970. In 1974, low-iron matte from the Kalgoorlie nickel smelter was blended with concentrate feed. The proportion of matte was gradually increased until 1987 when the entire input became matte ( Both refineries could still process concentrate; however, this would probably lead to lower production rates and increased amounts of residue. Both of these refineries are now in built-up communities making residue disposal more challenging. Pentlandite concentrates can be processed in sulfate solutions, in a manner similar to the processing of mixed nickel−cobalt precipitates and converter mattes. However, the concentration of nickel in the concentrate is about 15%, whereas it is about 50% in converter mattes. This means that the rate of processing must be about three or four times more efficient in the hydrometallurgical process that treats concentrates than in a similar process that treats converter matte if the same size of process plant were to be used. Because of the need to minimize capital investment, attention has focused on increasing the rate of leaching. The rate of leaching can be increased in two ways: (i) increase the intrinsic rate by adding a catalyst, such as chloride ions or increasing the temperature, and (ii) decrease the particle size ( Vale plans to add hydrochloric acid to the leaching liquor in order to accelerate the rate of leaching for their Voisey's Bay operation ( CESL have proposed the same strategy for their process ( The addition of hydrochloric acid complicates the processes, particularly the choice of the materials of construction. This may explain why industrial adoption has been slow. Another process using sulfate solutions is Activox (Norilsk). This process adopts the second strategy mentioned above for increasing the rate of leaching, which is, decreasing the particle size. The process was demonstrated at Tati Nickel, in Botswana, but the full-scale operation was not built. The concentrate was ground very fine, to about 10 Outotec has developed an ambient pressure Cl The most important disadvantage of hydrometallurgical options for processing nickel concentrates is the difficulty of recovering both the precious metals and the base metals. Smelting and converting are able to remove gangue, sulfur and iron from the concentrate while leaving all the base and precious metals in the matte. This simplifies the hydrometallurgical recovery of the nickel, copper, cobalt and precious metals from the matte. A schematic flowsheet for the Voisey's Bay process is shown in The discharge slurry from the autoclave goes through the counter-current decantation section, where undissolved and precipitated solids are separated from the solution. The solids are neutralized and transferred to disposal. The solution goes to impurity removal where iron and other contaminants are removed. After impurity removal, the solution is transferred to copper solvent extraction. Copper is removed from the solution by solvent extraction using LIX 84. The stripped solution from solvent extraction is the feed to copper electrowinning, where high-purity copper is produced. Cobalt is extracted from the solution by solvent extraction using CYANEX 272. Cobalt is electrowon from the strip solution from solvent extraction as cobalt rounds. The raffinate from cobalt extraction is the feed to nickel electrowinning. The nickel electrowinning occurs in a divided cell, with anode bags for the collection of chlorine and oxygen gases. These gases are used in the leaching section of the process. The nickel spent, or anolyte, is recycled to leaching. The Voisey's Bay process has been extensively piloted. The demonstration plant showed that both magnesium and silica built up in the circuit. Effective controls measures were implemented. It is anticipated that this process will be commissioned during 2013. The advantage of this process is that the capital-intensive steps of smelting and converting are avoided. The process cannot, however, recover precious metals. An alternative to intensifying the rate of leaching of concentrates is to heap leach the whole ore. This has the significant advantage of eliminating the concentration of the sulfides, which is the step that has the lowest recovery on route from ore to metal. Nickel sulfide ores are processed by heap leaching in Sotkama, eastern Finland ( open-pit mining of 0.2% Ni, 0.5% Zn, 0.1% Cu, and 0.02% Co sulfide ore; four-stage crushing; rotary kiln agglomeration with sulfuric acid; stacking the agglomerate in 8 m high heaps; leaching nickel and other metals from the agglomerate by sprinkling metal-depleted, purified, recycle solution on the heaps; and, maintaining adequate temperature and conditions to promote bacterial activity. Copper, zinc and nickel are recovered from the pregnant leach solution by sequential hydrogen sulfide precipitation of separate metal sulfide precipitates. The heaps are typically leached for 1.5 The planned production of nickel in the sulfide precipitate is approximately 50 000 tonnes per year. Recent production has been considerably lower ( Nickel sulfide ores occur as disseminated or massive orebodies. The nickel sulfide is separated from the host rock by flotation. The flotation concentrate is smelted to produce a converter matte, which is then refined either by carbonyl refining or in a hydrometallurgical refinery. This route is by far the most dominant. Alternatives to smelting and converting include various hydrometallurgical processes that treat concentrates, which have been demonstrated in the past, but are not currently practiced. Heap leaching of the sulfide ore is practiced at only one location.