Childhood and adolescence are critical periods of skeletal mineralization. Peak bone mineral density achieved by the end of adolescence determines the risk for later pathological fractures and osteoporosis. Chronic disease and medication often adversely affect bone health. Epilepsy is one of the most common neurological conditions occurring in persons under the age of 21. Epilepsy may affect bone in a number of ways. Restrictions of physical activity imposed by seizures, cerebal palsy or other coexisting comorbidities adversely affect bone health. It has been observed that treatment with phenytoin and phenobarbital can be associated with rickets. More recently, established agents such as carbamazepine and valproate have been shown to be associated with decreased bone mineral density. The literature related to bone health in pediatric epilepsy is reviewed.Childhood and adolescence are critical periods of skeletal mineralization. There is very little bone mineralization at birth. This rapidly increases to reach peak bone mass peaks between the second and third decade of life. Peak bone mineral density achieved by the end of adolescence determines the risk for later pathological fractures and osteoporosis. Chronic disease and medications that interfere with bone mineralization or adversely affect bone health can have significant long-term implications for bone health. Epilepsy is one of the most common neurologic conditions occurring in persons under 21 years of age. Patients with epilepsy frequently experience trauma resulting from seizure-related falls. Antiepileptic-induced bone disease has a heterogeneous spectrum of severity. Henderson et al Childhood-onset seizures have a profound long-term impact. In a prospective cohort study of 245 patients with epilepsy diagnosed before the age of 16 and followed up over a 30-year period, epilepsy was found to have a severe negative impact on quality of life. At birth, bone is minimally mineralized. With development, bone becomes progressively more mineralized until a plateau is attained in the third decade of life. In otherwise healthy people, at the sixth decade of life bone lost is a result of involutional osteoporosis. Chronic illness, particularly renal disease and other diseases that impair constitutional development, adversely affects the mineralization process. Furthermore, many of the medications used in the treatment of chronic disease also adversely affect bone mineralization. There is increasing evidence suggesting that epilepsy and comorbid conditions that frequently coexist, such as cerebral palsy, a hypoactive state, and depression, may adversely affect bone mineralization in childhood. Cerebral palsy, which frequently is associated with epilepsy, is a powerful predictor of muscular and skeletal hypoplasia. Bone is a complex dynamic tissue that responds to external and internal forces. Accordingly, body weight, exercise, and calcium homeostasis can alter bone structure and architecture. Enzyme-inducing antiepileptics alter vitamin D concentrations and may predispose to reduced bone mass, Patients with epilepsy frequently experience injuries resulting from seizure-related falls Patients with epilepsy have an increased risk for fracture because of trauma injury incurred during seizures themselves. In the report by Vestergaard et al Generally, there are 3 main situations that predispose patients with epilepsy to fractures. Bone density reduction has been found in patients using enzyme-inducing AEDs. Phenytoin, phenobarbital, and carbamazepine appear to be associated with reductions in bone mineralization by virtue of their enzyme-inducing properties. Children treated with valproate have a 10% or greater reduction in BMD compared with controls. The pathogenesis of valproate-associated reduction in BMD remains undefined. Valproate has been associated with reversible Fanconi syndrome, A 2-year longitudinal study performed by Verrotti et al Increased bone turnover during a critical period of mineralization can have long-lasting consequences on bone health. A recent cross-sectional study of patients on AEDs under age 50 years showed that 40% were osteopenic, whereas 10% had osteoporosis. Other models attribute bone loss to the high-turnover state that results from drug-induced interference with calcium absorption as well as direct effects on osteoclasts and osteoblasts. The resultant hypocalcemia can exacerbate seizures that are treated with higher doses of anticonvulsants, which sets up a vicious cycle. Despite the emerging concern of epilepsy treatment on bone health, few neurologists routinely screen for osteoporosis. Of the newer AEDs used in the treatment of pediatric epilepsy, only lamotrigine has been evaluated regarding BMD. Guo et al Growth stature and pubertal stage were studied in girls receiving oxcarbazepine and carbamazepine. Dual-energy radiograph absorptiometry (DEXA) scans are a cost-effective method of quantitatively evaluating BMD. The hip and lumbar spine are the sites most frequently measured for central mineralization and are most frequently involved in involutional fractures. Measures of the distal third of the radius determine the “peripheral” mineral content. Between 30% and 40% of mineral content must be lost before a routine radiograph can shows osteoporosis. In contrast, DEXA can detect 2% to 5% of bone mineral loss. Standardized normative data are available for most bone sites at risk of fractures. Patients with 1 to 2.5 standard deviations below normal mineralization are considered to have osteopenia, whereas 2.5 standard deviation below normal is defined as osteoporosis. The National Osteoporosis Foundation cites the following risk factors for the development of osteoporotic fractures in the general population: a history of fracture as an adult, history of fragility fracture in a first-degree relative, low body weight (<58 kg), current cigarette smoking, female gender, estrogen deficiency at an early age (menopause before age 45 years or bilateral ovariectomy or prolonged premenopausal amenorrhea [greater than 1 year]), white race, advanced age, lifelong low calcium intake, alcoholism, inadequate physical activity, recurrent falls, dementia, impaired eyesight despite adequate correction, and poor health/frailty. Medical conditions such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, gastrectomy, hyperparathyroidism, hypogonadism, multiple myeloma, celiac disease, the use of glucocorticoid therapy for more than 3 months, or the use of anticonvulsants are also risk factors. Patients with any of these conditions are classified as high risk and should be screened with a DEXA scan. Currently, it is not clear if children with epilepsy should routinely be screened with DEXA scans; nevertheless, DEXA is being used increasingly in children. Although bisphophonates are the major drugs used for the treatment of bone diseases associated with excessive resorption, their use in children is controversial. In growing rats, bisphosphonates block the removal of both bone and cartilage, thus retarding the modeling of the metaphysis, which becomes club shaped and radiologically denser than normal. This effect is also observed in children who are treated with high doses of bisphosphonates. Vitamin D supplementation has been advocated as a potential therapy to counteract the negative effect of AEDs on bone. However, there are few prospective trials of vitamin D supplementation in patients on AEDs, and the found conflicting results. Patients who have already sustained a low-intensity fracture should have their AED therapy evaluated. The change from an enzyme-inducing agent or valproate to another AED should be considered. This decision is at times difficult, especially for patients who have not experienced a seizure for many years or are concerned about the cost of changing AEDs. Once a low-intensity fracture has occurred, the chance of further fractures increases. Patients with a BMD <2.5 should have their AED regimen evaluated. The decision to change AED therapy in patients with a BMD in the osteopenic range (BMD of −1 to −2.5) should be discussed with the patient. For patients with BMD in the normal range, no AED change may need to be considered. Patients with epilepsy appear to have an increased risk for fracture because of trauma from both seizures and from fall-related fractures that are not seizure related. Fractures in persons with epilepsy not directly caused by seizures frequently occur in the lower leg, ankles, and feet.