Animal models of pulmonary tuberculosis in the mouse and guinea pig contain to provide new information about the host response in the lungs, changes in immunopathology, and the protective effect of new vaccine candidates. These include Mtb72F, a polyprotein vaccine that gives excellent protection and also boosts and prolongs the protective effect of the BCG vaccine.In this brief review I will discuss some of the more interesting (and in some cases, confusing) aspects that have arisen from the current NIH-funded TB vaccine screening program at Colorado State University, how they affect our understanding of the vaccination process, and how this may influence rational vaccine design in the near future. The widespread use of the mouse model to test new tuberculosis vaccines is a logical progression from classical studies showing that the acquired immune response to When infected with This simple model thus provides a cost-effective method for testing large numbers of candidate vaccines based upon their capacity to induce a state of heightened resistance to the aerosol challenge. As will be described below it may not be a perfect method, but it should identify most of the promising new leads. As described elsewhere in this Volume by Izzo, a large number of candidates have now been assayed by the NIH screening program, and have now provided several highly promising candidates that have gone on to more advanced testing. Having said that, there is clearly a reticence on the part of some workers in the field to accept that animal models have any value. This is probably because such people do not appear to understand the disconnect between the various problems BCG vaccination has had in the field and its root ability to generate TH1 immunity. Moreover, in vaccination trials, or studies of human exposure, much of the clinical data by necessity has to rely on PPD skin testing. This reaction is mediated by T cells but other than that its mechanism has never been explained; in the opinion of this author, it is merely one step away from witchcraft. It is axiomatic to state that the purpose of any new tuberculosis vaccine would be to establish a long-lived state of immunity to protect the individual against exposure at some later time from It is now apparent however, that this may be different from events seen in natural disease. In mice infected by aerosol there is a gradual emergence of acquired immunity over the first 30–40 days that results in the slowing of the infection and the onset of a more chronic state of disease. This also corresponds to changes in T cell subset phenotypes, including the emergence of cells dropping expression of the CD45RB marker. Our own studies on these events were originally performed on spleen cells from mice intravenously infected with These data have all sorts of implications. Does BCG really induce T cell memory in humans, or something more akin to the effector cells seen in the mouse lung? If the latter, this might explain why the protective effect of BCG wanes in people, and this might be accelerated if the person lives in an endemic area (repeated antigen exposure leading to effector cell turnover and cell death). A further twist to this tale consists of unpublished data from our laboratory indicating that if mice are given BCG subcutaneously and then chemotherapy to establish a “memory immune” mouse, then a small but significant number of T cells expressing the effector phenotype suddenly appear in the lungs. In a sense, this breaks all the rules regarding memory immunity, at least in the way mainstream immunology defines it. However, these rules have been based upon viral infections (CD8 mediated) or responses to ovalbumin in transgene mice (TH2), and immunity to a complex deadly bacterial pathogen may be a different kettle of fish altogether. Having said that, the ovalbumin model has recently been used to provide evidence that may be directly pertinent to how we develop new vaccines for tuberculosis. It is probably true to say that most immunologists working in tuberculosis agree with the concept that IFNγ-positive T cells emerge as effector cells in response to the infection, and that a percentage of these differentiate into longer-lived memory cells. Thus, a vaccine that generates lots of IFNγ cells quickly in the lungs in our screening procedures is not only strongly protective but it predicts good strong memory as well. A recent study from Seder's laboratory suggests otherwise. It would obviously be beneficial to have a new vaccine that could be given to people already exposed to infection that would prevent the reactivation tuberculosis often seen in older people, people who are malnourished, or become infected with HIV. A mouse model that can be potentially used for this purpose exploits the behavior of the lung infection in certain inbred strains of mice, including the DBA/2 and the CBA/J. As we have demonstrated, these animals are initially capable of establishing a chronic disease state, but this is not stable, and about 150 days after aerosol infection the lung bacterial load tends to swing upwards and the animals die. We do not at this time fully understand this process or why it should occur, but we have a variety of clues. We have noticed for instance that the bronchial epithelia, which at least a portion of incoming mononuclear cells seem to cross, becomes degenerative in the “reactivation prone” animals. This is further compounded by the fact that T cells in these mice, even after BCG vaccination, very poorly express the adhesion molecules and integrins needed to cross these barriers and to move through the extracellular matrix. Can this model be used to test potential anti-reactivation vaccines? It is too early to tell, but studies by Apt and his colleagues reported elsewhere in this Volume using a slightly different approach suggest we can be optimistic. In terms of our own studies, using the C57BL/6 model for post-exposure or therapeutic studies, results have to date been disappointing, and there is the added risk that certain vaccines may if anything worsen the course of the disease rather than improve it. Turning to the issue of vaccine testing in the guinea pig model, this is generally considered the most stringent model because of the similarity of the lung pathologic response to tuberculosis in humans, and it is only not more widely used because of its expense, animal space needs, and level III biosafety requirements. We found it interesting to note however that perusal of the classical literature, much of it performed by Smith and his colleagues at Madison in the last three decades, told us little about the histology and immunopathology of the guinea pig infection model, since this type of analysis was (seemingly) not considered by the Smith group as informative. To address this then, we conducted a sequential analysis of the pathology of tuberculosis infection in non-vaccinated guinea pigs to try to establish baseline data that can then be applied to determining how new vaccine candidates might affect this process. This analysis, which is published elsewhere, By day 100 or so the central core has completely mineralized and is very large. The other cellular layers are mostly thin and disrupted, and many lesions can be seen to have eroded into surrounding large blood vessels or airways. These observations allow us to challenge two existing dogmas in the field. First, we hypothesize that the central necrotic core is a consequence of the degranulation of the early eosinophil clusters, explaining the dense eosinophilic staining of the initial core structure. This cannot be prevented or healed by the emerging cellular response, which carries on around this central core. This challenges the existing idea that necrosis in the guinea pig is caused by excessive DTH. Smith believed that eventual breakdown and reactivation of lung lesions was caused by some sort of immunosuppressive event. This may indeed be true in some humans, but in the guinea pig we propose that it is simply a consequence of the mineralization process getting so large that it just physically forces the exterior layers of the granuloma out through the walls of surrounding large vessels. We know that the remaining acid fast bacilli are on the edges of the necrosis and in the foamy macrophages, so these would be released by this action out into the surrounding vessels, allowing rapid disseminated disease. Establishing a clinical trial to directly compare a new vaccine against BCG is unlikely for the obvious ethical issues. Because of this we have argued for some time that BCG should not be abandoned but instead we should try to find ways to improve it. Examples of this now include rBCG over-expressing the key immunogen Ag85A, and rBCG secreting the listeriolysin molecule. A third example is simply administration of BCG with another vaccine in a prime/boost format. Using this latter strategy we have had excellent and exciting results with the Mtb72F fusion protein produced by the Corixa Corporation. The production of this molecule is described by Skeiky elsewhere. When co-administered with BCG, either as protein or DNA, the mixture substantially increased the survival time of infected guinea pigs compared to BCG alone, with the majority of animals living well over 100 weeks. The pathology results from the surviving animals are highly provocative and we have not yet been able to fully explain them. In animals receiving BCG plus Mtb72F protein, most of the lung tissues were completely clear, with granulomatous tissues mostly very small and associated with airways. In animals given BCG plus DNA, lesions were still very obvious, but instead of necrosis, lesions were fibrosed with airways growing through this tissue (airway re-establishment). Thus, in both cases, it appears that adding Mtb72F to BCG prevents the progressive consolidating lymphocytic pathology seen in guinea pigs given BCG alone, and instead promotes lesion healing and reabsorption. This work was supported by NIH Grants AI-75320 and AI-45707. I thank my many colleagues in the MRL at CSU, and our outstanding collaborators.