This paper is an experimental research about the mechanical effects on Ti-6Al-4V surfaces treated with an ultrasonic vibration-assisted ball burnishing process. Its aim is to define the process parameters to achieve the best surface integrity on the target workpiece, as well as identifying the effects caused by the introduction of vibrations as a means of assistance. A Taguchi orthogonal array including five factors (preload, number of passes, feed velocity, strategy and original surface texture) was applied to perform the process on ball-end milled surfaces. A comprehensive analysis of the effects was performed, by considering in depth three different facets of surface integrity, namely, topology, residual stress and hardness. Hence the extensive result datasets presented in this paper, which deliver an exhaustive description of the process effects by combining a triple approach in the results analysis section. The effect of vibrations is proved positive to enhance the texture as long as the original surface is not characterized by Sq >2 μm. Furthermore, only the preload and number of passes influence the results. In terms of residual stress, all parameters are influential in the results, especially the burnishing strategy, through which a specific direction can be reinforced. Finally, the burnishing operation proves to modify the hardness of deep layers down to 0.5 mm, applying the vibration-assisted process. The main conclusion derived from these works is a technical recommendation to treat the Ti-6Al-4 V surface through the process, aiming to find a balanced comprehensive surface integrity enhancement.Metallic parts used in different industrial applications are predominantly shaped from raw materials through machining routines. Although chip removal processes are nowadays highly reliable to obtain parts with proper surface characteristics, surface engineering can still be enhanced by developing alternative finishing methods. Tailor-made surface integrity on workpieces is determinant to optimize product performance, and maximize the longevity and reliability of engineering parts. For instance, about 56% of catastrophic failures in turbine blades are caused by cracks initiated in positively stressed machined surfaces under high-frequency fatigue regimes, which can be prevented with adequate finishing treatments after machining, according to Surface integrity management is remarkably important when special alloys are used to manufacture relevant and complex parts such as turbine blades, landing gears, molds and dies for upsetting operations, etc. This kind of parts are often manufactured through 3 or 5 axis machining with the aid of successive adjacent passes of hemispherical tools, deriving in surfaces formed of periodic repetitions of peaks and valleys. Furthermore, advanced materials such as titanium or nickel alloys pose high difficulty towards preserving surface integrity after machining, as note numerous authors such as Regarding vibration assistance, it has been identified as highly positive in numerous applications, such as machining ( VABB has been previously studied by other researchers. A 2-kHz vibration-assisted tool developed by The VABB process developed in this contribution was protected in Spain by This paper tackles with the surface integrity characterization of Ti-6Al-4 V surfaces finished by adjacent ball-end mill passes, after being treated by an ultrasonic vibration-assisted ball burnishing operation. The results shall be analyzed in terms of surface texture, hardness and residual stress after processing. At sight of the results, different combinations of process parameters shall be proposed to execute the process according to an optimization target. These results are necessary for titanium manufacturers willing to apply the process on that material and conferring their parts with special properties, which can be mastered by the adequate application of the process. The applications are varied, and comprise parts included in the aeronautical, medical and general industrial sectors. The experiments were performed on workpieces of Ti-6Al-4 V alloy ( The VABB tool used in these experiments consists of three attached units, as shows All tests were performed in a HURON KX10 3-axis milling machine equipped with a Kistler 9257B dynamometer, where the workpiece was fixed. The data measured through a Kistler 5019 A amplifier was registered using the DynoWare software, monitoring the applied forces during each test for later analysis. All surfaces were prepared by an initial surfacing operation with a multi-insert front milling tool followed by three different ball-end milling strategies with a TiN-coated hemispherical tool, obtained by changing the lateral offset between passes, i.e. the radial depth of cut Analyzing the effect of VABB on the surface modification of the Ti-6Al-4BV workpiece requires testing different parameters at different levels to attain a general vision of the overall system. To reduce the number of tests, an L27 Taguchi orthogonal array was used to develop the experimental plan, including five different factors at three levels ( These factors were chosen among the most influential ones in the VABB process, namely:      As a consequence of the experimental design, the final L27 Taguchi orthogonal array is represented in The described burnishing patches were studied by measuring different features of their surface integrity, namely: texture, residual hardening and residual stress state. The following subsections explain the descriptors that were chosen to characterize the change of surface integrity, along with the techniques used to measure and calculate them. The evaluation of the topological state of a surface using two-dimensional parameters has been used by many researchers, as presented in the introduction of this paper. However, considering that the effect of VABB is highly anisotropic, as deduced by The referred parameters were calculated on datasets acquired by an ALICONA Infinite Focus device from all VABB and NVABB patches, thus registering their topologies by successive image acquisition along the vertical direction, without contact with the surface. The 10x objective was used to perform this acquisition, delivering to the system a 100 nm vertical resolution. The X-ray diffraction method was applied to evaluate the superficial residual stress after VABB. The technique is based on applying Bragg’s law while quantifying the change of interplanar spacing inside crystals which conserve elastic strain confined inside plastically deformed crystals due to VABB. Albeit the major drawback of this diffraction method is the low depth to which compressive residual stresses measurements are assessed, its technical availability and feasibility makes it proper to evaluate VABB results in this experimental plan. The experimental application was performed with a V-α anode, 360 s of exposition time, and 13 measures. The post-processing method was curve fitting s vs sin²(Ψ). More information about the method can be found at The outcome of the application of the method on all VABB tests was delivered in terms of the residual stress tensor (Eq. 1) The analysis of this tensor’s components shall be included in the discussion the directional effects of the VABB process. A second indicator that shall be included in the analysis is the von Mises stress, Changes in metallography are usually evidenced through a change of the hardness magnitude, as the phases that compose a certain metal have different structures, and consequently pose different behaviors towards indentation tests. For that reason, in addition to visual inspection with a SEM of the microstructure of the Ti-6Al-4 V subsurface layers, Vickers hardness tests with a Buehler 5114 hardness testing machine were performed to evaluate the deep change of hardness of the specimens after VABB and its non-assisted complementary process. The calculation of the Vickers hardness was undertaken according to the ASTM E384 Standard ( As the sampling frequency of the Kistler amplifier is 2 kHz, the registered force signals did not evidence the vibratory component delivered by the piezoelectric. Under this circumstance, the forces acquired during the VABB and the NVABB tests correspond to the quasi-static force excerpted on the material. The surfaces machined on the Ti-6Al-4 V workpiece present the three-dimensional parameters represented in The following subsections include the VABB effects on the considered S parameters. Firstly, a statistical ANOVA considering Derived from this analysis, results were graphically rearranged by grouping tests according to the original surface on which they were performed. The evolution of skewness and kurtosis amplitude descriptors as more plastic strain is performed evidences the change in the height distribution ( The explained effect can be easily identified also in the height histogram representation of each surface. All values of the The direct comparison of the The previous results have evidenced that it is possible to improve the surface texture of Ti-6Al-4 V ball-end milled surfaces by applying the correct ball burnishing parameters. The achievement of textures with minimum Firstly, residual stress was measured on all original surfaces three times through X-ray diffraction. The mean effects of VABB on residual stress results can be analyzed by considering the mean effects of the factors and interactions included in the model, calculated through ANOVA. The ideal parameter sets deduced from this analysis shall be then compared to experimental results. The mean effect graphs are represented in As for The mean effects of the original surface on the results is also inverted from In mean terms, the combination 350N–5passes is the best to maximize The residual stress results have shown that there is not a single combination of parameters able to improve all directions simultaneously. However, common trends have been identified. 5 passes and 350 N should be in general applied, whereas the velocity is not an influential parameter. The strategy should be adequately selected to maximize the desired direction of the workpiece, according to the expected main direction of cyclic loads, to prevent crack growth originated by those. Checking on the actual tests performed on the workpieces, allowing to confirm these observations, The previous section has shown that, although not all aspects of surface integrity can be simultaneously improved, a certain optimal set can be established to find a balanced solution for all of them. In this section, a third aspect of surface integrity is tackled to complete the assessment of the impact of VABB. To perform the study, not all Taguchi combinations have been executed. On the contrary, the preload, number of passes, and feed have been fixed ( Four different patches were therefore performed, and were cut along the two directions of the space, generating eight different specimens, on which several Vickers microindentation tests were performed in progressively deeper layers, separated 50 μm and 100 μm, until a 600-μm depth, as shows  SEM observations of the Ti-6Al-4 V surface and sub-surface layers reveals that the effect of ball burnishing can be distinguished by the orientation of the α phase along the burnishing direction, by effect of the plastic deformation ( The experimental results have proved to deliver valuable information about the impact of vibration-assistance on the ball burnishing process on Ti-6Al-4 V surfaces. The conclusions can be stated as follows: The combination of 350 N, 5 passes and 900 mm/min has been found as the best processing parameter set to obtain enhanced surface features after ball burnishing on Ti-6Al-4 V surfaces. Vibration-assistance must be recommended to enhance ball burnishing results, as it has proved to be advantageous in terms of residual hardness and topology. However, these positive results are subjected to the Vibration assistance is not influential in terms of residual stress, as results are essentially the same. In this sense, the most important factor is selecting the burnishing strategy according to the direction that wants to be reinforced. This study was supported by the