The Authors set out to determine the particle-size distribution, the fiber and bark content, and the heating value of a wide sample of wood chips, collected from 60 commercial biomass terminals active in Northern Italy. This sample was meant to represent a cross-section of the Italian fuel chip market, and focused on four main feedstock types: sawmill residues, logging residues, small trees and short rotation coppice (SRC). Overall, the Authors collected 300 samples, each weighing approximately 1kg. Particle-size distribution was determined with an automatic screening device on 210 samples, according to European Standard CEN/TS 15149-1. All samples were also manually separated into the following main components: fiber, bark, twigs, leaves, dust and other. The higher heating value (HHV) was determined on 56 one-gram subsamples using an adiabatic bomb calorimeter. Sawmill residues and small trees offered the best quality, with high fiber content (85–90%) and favorable particle-size distribution. On the contrary, both logging residues and SRC presented a high bark content (⩾20%) and occasionally a mediocre particle-size distribution, being often too rich in fines (⩾10%). These problems were especially serious with fuel derived from 1-year old SRC sprouts. There is a need for reducing the supply cost of small trees, and improving the quality of SRC biomass.The versatile nature of wood biomass fuels is a main asset and a significant obstacle at the same time. On one hand, wood biomass is available in many forms and in all parts of the world, allowing the deployment of bioenergy almost everywhere, once the main sources have been identified and assessed The authors sampled 60 different chipping terminals in Northern Italy, collecting five samples from each, for a total of 300 samples. Each sample consisted of approximately 1 The samples were analysed for (a) component breakdown, (b) particle-size distribution and (c) higher heating value (HHV). For economy, most work was devoted to component breakdown, which was the most original element of the study. Determination of particle-size distribution and HHV was conducted respectively on 210 and 56 samples, randomly extracted from the larger pool of original samples. Component breakdown was determined on 100 Particle-size distribution was determined on 500 Higher heating value (HHV) was determined on one-gram subsamples Data were analyzed with the Statview advanced statistics software, in order to check the statistical significance of the eventual differences between treatments with ANOVA techniques. Post-hoc tests were conducted with Scheffe’s method, which is considered the most robust against possible violations of the normality assumption   The results of the calorimetric tests are reported in Finally, Particle-size distribution is a function of different variables, and is significantly affected by chipper type Bark content is also higher in logging residues – both conifer and broadleaved. Logging residues consist of tops and branches, which have a higher surface to volume ratio compared to stem wood. On the contrary, sawmill residues are generally represented by slabs and offcuts, often obtained after the logs have been debarked. Hence their high fiber content, which makes them the current wood fuel reference in the Alps Short rotation wood crops established on surplus agricultural land offer a very effective way to produce biomass for industrial and energy uses The higher heating value of conifer wood is well attested in the literature The Italian fuel chip market taps four main sources, namely: sawmill residues, logging residues, small trees and SRC. Sawmill residues (slovens and offcuts) are the current reference feedstock, offering the best combination of good product quality and low supply cost. Such favorable characteristics are not matched by the other feedstock types. Logging residues such as tops and branches can be obtained at a low cost, but cannot match the same quality specifications; small trees obtained from thinning operation and from the harvesting of traditional coppice stands offer good product quality, but are still too expensive to get; current SRC plantations miss both the quality and the cost The authors gratefully acknowledge the technical and financial support of the Provincia Autonoma di Trento, received within the scope of the research project SOFIE and the Post-Doc project “Pibasem 2006”.