Traumatic patellar fractures following total knee arthroplasty (TKA), in the absence of patella resurfacing, are uncommon but debilitating injuries. Open reduction and internal fixation is associated with significant complications, thus conservative management is often preferred. We report the first known publication of the fixation of a comminuted periprosthetic patellar fracture using suture anchors, with good results at 34-week postoperative follow-up. The suture anchor technique offers an alternative option in the management of traumatic periprosthetic fractures of the unresurfaced patella, where tension band and cerclage wiring are not possible due to fracture comminution and poor bone quality.A 60-year-old woman underwent cruciate-retaining total knee arthroplasty (TKA) for lateral and patello-femoral compartment osteoarthritis of the right knee, using Triathlon Total Knee prostheses (Stryker Inc., Kalamazoo, Michigan, USA). The patella was not resurfaced, although a lateral retinacular release was performed (using monopolar diathermy) to address abnormal patellar tracking during intraoperative assessment. Following this, patellar tracking was observed to be normal. Postoperative recovery was unremarkable, and by 18 months the patient was mobilising freely and able to achieve 110° of active knee flexion. Accordingly, she was discharged from routine follow-up. Three years postoperatively, the patient was brought in by ambulance to the Emergency Department with a right knee injury. The patient described falling heavily onto her right knee, with a subsequent inability to weight bear. Physical examination revealed significant anterior right knee swelling, with no external wound. The knee was diffusely tender, particularly on palpation of the patella, and assessment of range of movement (including extension and straight-leg raise) was severely limited by pain. There was no distal neurovascular deficit. Anteroposterior and lateral radiographs were performed and are shown in Anteroposterior and lateral radiographs demonstrated a comminuted fracture (consisting of 3 main fragments and multiple small fragments) of the proximal pole of the right patella, displaced from the distal portion by 20 On the basis of the radiological and intraoperative findings, the fracture was deemed to be unreconstructible using a tension-band or cerclage wiring. Thus, 3 suture anchors (G-II QuickAnchor Plus; DePuy Mitek Inc., Raynham, Massachusetts, USA) were introduced into the distal patellar fragment, and one suture was introduced into the largest of the fracture fragments. A further 2 sutures were also introduced into the largest fragments of the superior pole of the patella. Using a 2.5 The patient was kept non-weight-bearing through her right lower limb, and her right knee remained immobilised for 6 weeks postoperatively. Thereafter, she was placed into a hinged knee brace (with flexion restricted to 0°–20°) and advised to mobilise fully weight-bearing. At 10 and 12 weeks, the parameters of the hinged knee brace were extended to 0°–60° and 0°–90°, respectively. The patient underwent regular outpatient review out to 34 weeks, at which point she was mobilising normally, with no antalgic gait, and could achieve 0°–90° of active knee flexion ( Periprosthetic patellar fractures after TKA are relatively uncommon, occurring in 1.19% of cases overall. The aetiology of periprosthetic fractures of the resurfaced patella includes mechanical weakness (due to residual patellar thickness of less than 15 Where extensor mechanism disruption and significant fracture displacement exist, most authors advocate operative intervention. Maniar et al. describe repair of a spontaneous transverse periprosthetic patella fracture using anchor sutures, in which the patella had been resurfaced with polythene during the initial TKA. Unresurfaced patellae may respond better to operative intervention than resurfaced patellae – perhaps due to less pronounced devascularisation and less thinning of patellar bone at the time of arthroplasty – and the high complication rates in published literature should not deter surgeons from attempting open reduction and internal fixation. This report demonstrates use of suture anchors as a means of achieving long-term fracture reduction and union in traumatic patellar fracture overlying a TKA, even where the fracture is highly comminuted and involves bone of poor quality. The procedure is straightforward, avoiding the technical difficulty and complications of tension-band The suture anchor technique therefore offers an alternative option in the management of traumatic periprosthetic fractures of the unresurfaced patella, where tension band and cerclage wiring are not possible due to fracture comminution and poor bone quality. All authors have none to declare. The authors would like to thank the subject of this case report, for her informed consent and contribution to its creation.