Polyaniline (PANI) coatings on carbon steel (CS) substrate were electrodeposited from two different mediums such as oxalic acid (H2C2O4) and sodium salicylate (C7H5NaO3). In oxalic acid, the importance of the passivation of the carbon steel surface prior to PANI electrodeposition was investigated by linear potentiodynamic test. It showed below 0.3M oxalic acid concentration PANI film formation was not complete. The extent of passivation of the carbon steel was found to depend on the strength of the oxalic acid, which determined the formation and the nature of the PANI film. Whereas, deposition from the sodium salicylate solution did not show any passivation peak, but resulted in the formation of a transparent, uniform, compact and adherent PANI coating. The formation, morphology and characteristics of the coatings were compared by cyclic voltammetry, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and Raman spectroscopy.Conducting polymers are an important class of materials used for various applications. Application areas include sensors The most efficient way to synthesize conducting polymers is by electrochemical polymerization. Electrochemical polymerization method has minimum processability issues and offers good control on the thickness and morphology of the coatings by controlling potential and current density. Besides, electropolymerization is a very economical process. However, electrodeposition of conducting polymer on an active metal surface (such as carbon steel) is challenging. The oxidation potential of active metals are more negative than the oxidation potential of the monomer, leading to metal dissolution before the formation of polymer coating When deposited from organic acids, the formation of a PANI layer on active metals depends on several parameters. Such factors as the composition of the solution, the concentration of the monomer, pH, and applied potentials can affect the nature of the PANI film. Choice and application of various electrochemical methods for polymerization have a strong influence on the nature of the film. The simplest means of inducing the polymerization process is to apply a sufficiently positive constant potential. The potential chosen will influence the rate of oxidation and, therefore, polymerization. If the rate of polymerization is too slow, oxidation of the monomer may occur without deposition of a continuous film because the critical chain length, necessary for nucleation, growth and propagation, may not be reached. Surface passivation of active metal would depend on the oxidizing power of the oxalic acid, which can influence the degree and the continuity of the PANI film. Also, the nature of the doping ion (oxalate or salicylate) can influence the nature of the film formed. Therefore, a comparison of the quality of coating generated from these solutions is necessary. In this report, polyaniline (PANI) coatings on carbon steel (CS) substrate were deposited by electropolymerization (by cyclic voltammetry) from two different solutions such as oxalic acid and sodium salicylate. The influence of the oxalic acid concentration on the passive film formation on the CS and its influence on the PANI film formation was investigated. The nature of the PANI films formed from the two different solutions was characterized by cyclic voltammetry, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and Raman spectroscopy. All the chemicals were obtained from Sigma–Aldrich. The monomer, aniline and electrolytes, oxalic acid (H The chemical composition of the steel used was: 0.07% C, 0.3% Mn, 0.03% Si, 0.03% S, 0.009% P, 0.02% Al, 0.003% N, and rest Fe. The sample of 1 The electrochemical synthesis was carried out by cyclic voltammetry (CV) on SP300 (BioLogic SAS) potentiostat/galvanostat using EC Lab v10.2x analysis software. The three-electrode configuration was used for all the electrochemical experiments. CS (1 The Raman spectra were recorded with Ramnor H-2S Spectrometer, Jobin-Yvon, France by using 514.5 The electrodeposition of polymer on a steel surface takes place in three stages The, the formation of the passive film becomes easier for concentrations above 0.3 Accordingly, electrodeposition of polyaniline carried from 0.3 However, the CV deposition curve in 0.3 The SEM micrographs ( After the first cycle ( In For comparison, the PANI film was also deposited at 50 Electropolymerization of PANI was carried out from two different solutions with varying concentrations of monomer, such as 0.3 From  The gradual growth of the PANI film in thickness was studied by taking SEM after different cycles such as after 5th, 40th and 80th scan ( The thickness of the PANI film was also determined electrochemically. The thickness ( The adhesion test was performed to determine the bonding of the coating to the substrate according to the ASTM standard D3359 cross hatch. The adhesion confirms to ASTM adhesion standard 5B, i.e. a negligible percentage of the area was removed during the test. The adhesion test confirms the formation of an adherent coating. Raman spectroscopy further confirmed the formation of the PANI film from the salicylate medium. Electrodeposition of PANI coatings from different electrolyte mediums was studied. The film formation on an active metal like CS was found to be medium dependent. Linear potentiodynamic test in oxalic acid showed that at 0.3 The authors acknowledge financial support from IRCC seed grant,