A novel process for the recovery of manganese by EDTA/EDTA–2Na leaching and the recovery of silver by thiosulfate leaching with resultant EDTA–Mn as the catalyst from manganese–silver ores was developed in this study. Initially, insoluble manganese(IV) was reductively leached by EDTA/EDTA–2Na in an aqueous medium, and then silver was extracted by thiosulfate with EDTA–Mn(II/III) as the catalyst that was produced in situ in the manganese leaching stage, instead of a copper(II) and ammonia catalytic system. The EDTA–S2O3
                     2− leaching system gave higher manganese and silver leaching efficiencies with lower solution pH of 5–6. And the EDTA–2Na–S2O3
                     2− leaching system, a relatively moderate solution with pH of 7–8, presented less consumption of thiosulfate in the leaching of silver. In total, 97.5% of manganese and 92.6% of silver were leached in the EDTA–S2O3
                     2− leaching system, and 93.7% of manganese and 91.2% of silver were leached in the EDTA–2Na–S2O3
                     2− leaching system under the most suitable conditions. Moreover, most of EDTA/EDTA–2Na can be recovered by acidification, and the consumption of S2O3
                     2− can be reduced in the presence of EDTA complex. This new process can be used to recover manganese and silver from manganese–silver ores effectively and interoperably.Manganese–silver ores, recognised as refractory ores with non-negligible reserves, have been found in many parts of the world ( Bacteria catalysed reduction of manganese oxides ( For the treatment of silver, thiosulfate leaching with the advantages of low toxicity, high leaching efficiency, and fast leaching rate were regarded as the most favourable substitution of cyanidation ( EDTA, as a hexadentate ligand, can form coordination complexes with most multivalent heavy metal ions. As reported by The manganese–silver ore was obtained from Fujian province of China, 80% of which could pass 200-mesh (75 μm) sieve. The chemical composition analysis was performed by the digestion of the ores, and then determined by ICP–OES (ICP–OES, Blue SOP, Spectro). The result is shown in EDTA leaching behaviours for the common metal oxides in manganese–silver ores were investigated with analytical-grade reagents. The leaching experiment for the manganese–silver ores was mainly divided into two stages: (1) the reductive leaching of manganese; (2) the thiosulfate leaching of silver with EDTA–Mn(II/III) generated in the manganese leaching stage. Agitation leaching tests were performed in a 250-ml round bottom flask with a mechanical stirring paddle. The stirring rate was fixed at 400 rpm for each trial. A constant temperature water bath was used to control the temperature of each reaction. Ten grams of crushed and ground ore were used in each trial. In the stage of reductive leaching of manganese, the ground ores, water, and EDTA/EDTA–2Na were added into the flask. After the reaction, the volume and temperature of the slurry were adjusted to be appropriate for the subsequent leaching of silver. And then required amount of ammonium thiosulfate was added into the slurry. Silver was leached by ammonium thiosulfate with EDTA–Mn(II/III). EDTA–Mn(II/III) acted as a catalyst in the thiosulfate leaching stage. The concentrations of metals in solutions were analysed using an atomic absorption spectrometer (AAS, TAS–990 Super, Persee). The content of S Before studying the leaching of manganese from manganese–silver ores, the leaching behaviours of pure MnO Due to the poor/limited water-solubility of EDTA /EDTA–2Na before reacting with metals, the concentrations of leaching reagents were expressed in the form of mole ratio of EDTA/EDTA–2Na to metals. The leaching temperature, time, and liquid to solid ratio (v/w) were fixed at 95 °C, 1 h, and 5:1, respectively. As shown in The leaching conditions were fixed at mole ratio of EDTA or EDTA–2Na to metals of 1:1, liquid to solid ratio of 5:1, 95 °C, and 1 h, and the pH of the solution adjusted using H High valence manganese(IV) in manganese oxide ores is reduced and leached by EDTA/EDTA–2Na in an aqueous medium, forming corresponding coordination complexes, containing EDTA–Mn(II) and EDTA–Mn(III), which can be learnt from some reported literatures ( As reported by The mole ratio of EDTA/EDTA–2Na to manganese was varied between 0.5:1 and 1.1:1 for leaching by EDTA and between 1:1 and 1.5:1 for leaching by EDTA–2Na to examine its effect. The results shown in Considering the different solubilities of EDTA, EDTA–2Na, and EDTA–Mn(II/III), the reductive leaching L/S ratio played an important role in the leaching of manganese. As an important factor, temperature presented a significant effect on the leaching of manganese. As shown in To obtain the reaction equilibrium, the effect of the reductive leaching time was investigated in the range of 30–180 min and the results are shown in The leaching efficiencies of other main elements in the optimised EDTA/EDTA–2Na leaching system are presented in After leaching of manganese, thiosulfate leaching of silver with EDTA–Mn(II/III) as the catalyst was conducted. The oxidation-reduction energetics and kinetics of Mn(III) in aqueous solutions depended strongly on the coordination states of Mn(II) and Mn(III). EDTA–Mn(III) could serve as an electron acceptor and EDTA–Mn(II) acted as an electron donor. Therefore, EDTA–Mn(II/III) could be used as a catalyst for the oxidative leaching of silver with the manganese circulation between the II and III states. The reaction mechanism could be deduced in Eqs. (6) and (7). Silver would be leached as silver thiosulfate, because EDTA–Ag (lgK The effect of S As shown in The effect of the thiosulfate leaching temperature was examined in the range of 30–95 °C. When the L/S ratio was fixed at 10:1, the concentration of EDTA–Mn(II/III) was 0.3 mol/L. The results are shown in The complexation of silver with S To study the effect of EDTA–Mn(II/III) concentration, EDTA–Mn(II/III) leach liquor produced in manganese leaching stage can be filtrated before silver leaching. Subsequently, partial EDTA–Mn(II/III) liquor was transferred to the silver leaching stage. Its effects on the recovery of silver and the consumption of S EDTA can be substituted using a strong acid ( Less than 30% of EDTA/EDTA–2Na may be oxidised and consumed by reducing manganese(IV) to manganese(II/III). This consumption may be further reduced when some other reduction reagents were used with EDTA synergically. The rest of EDTA can be recovered in the form of solid EDTA from the solution by mixing with stoichiometric H This paper primarily involved the technologies of reductive leaching of manganese from manganese–silver ores in EDTA/EDTA–2Na leaching system and thiosulfate leaching of silver with EDTA–Mn(II/III) as the catalyst which was produced in situ. 97.5% and 93.7% of manganese can be leached in EDTA and EDTA–2Na leaching systems under the following conditions: for EDTA: mole ratio of EDTA to manganese of 1:1, reductive leaching L/S ratio of 3:1, temperature of 70 °C, and time of 60 min; for EDTA–2Na: mole ratio of EDTA to manganese of 1.4:1, reductive leaching L/S ratio of 3:1, temperature of 95 °C, and time of 90 min. More consumption of lixiviant and higher temperature for leaching by EDTA–Na were required when compared with leaching by EDTA 92.6% and 91.2% of silver were recovered in the EDTA system and EDTA–2Na system respectively with S Over 70% of EDTA/EDTA–2Na can be recovered in the form of EDTA solid by mixing with stoichiometric H High leaching efficiencies of manganese and silver can be obtained in this novel process, and the consumption of S This work was supported by the