Fracture dislocations of the knee involving the proximal tibia are difficult to treat because of the operative approach that maybe required and the instability of the construct. This paper evaluates the use of a two-incision approach with a medial double-plating technique. The clinical results of a case series of 42 patients collected prospectively are presented. At final follow-up 37 out of 42 (88%) had satisfactory reduction of the articular surface and 41 (98%) had satisfactory alignment. At one year postoperation there was no loss in reduction or alignment. The mean HSS score was 90.9 (s.d. 3.35, range 83 to 97). There were no superficial or deep infections, however four cases (10%) had a sanguinous effusion for more than one week postoperatively. It was concluded that the medial double-plating operation is an effective way of managing fracture dislocations involving the proximal tibia.Fracture dislocations involving the proximal tibia were first described by Moore who recognized its great instability The fracture corresponds to a Schatzker type IV and an AO classification 41B2/B3. However some of the fractures do not fit in to either of the above, especially when there is a fracture line in the coronal plane In this paper we report the clinical results using a double-plating technique on the medial side through the two incisions, as well as the operative management of the fracture dislocation of the proximal tibia. From May 2003 to November 2005, 553 cases of tibial plateau fractures were operated on in our centre. Among these there were 56 cases diagnosed as “fracture dislocation” and all were followed up for this study. Of these 14 were excluded. Eight because they could not be contacted following changing their address, four had open fractures and two were polytrauma (ISS On admission all patients underwent standard radiological protocol of X-rays and CT scans. Postoperatively A-P X-rays were taken of the knee in the immediate period of 6 weeks, 12 weeks and very 6 to 8 weeks until bony union occurred and then 1 year after the index operation. Tibial plateau angle (TPA), the femorotibial angle (FTA) and the medial posterior slop angle (PA) were measured by one surgeon (RJ) on a digital X-ray marked with a scale (see Soft tissue injury was graded according to Tscherne classification for closed fractures The patient was placed supine on a radiolucent table. The knee was held slightly flexed by a pillow. A high thigh tourniquet was routinely used. The first midline incision was made from the distal end of the patella to 5 cm distal to the tibial tubercle. The pes anserinus was elevated by blunt dissection. The fracture site was debrided through a fracture window on the anteromedial side of the proximal tibia. No soft tissue dissection was done on the lateral side of this incision. The depressed articular surface was elevated and the subsequent bony defect filled with bone substitute. Autograft was not used. If the meniscus was found trapped in the joint, it was repositioned and repaired using outside-in technique. No patients underwent a meniscectomy. An avulsion of the ACL insertion was fixed using a #1 non-absorbable Ethibond suture or a steel wire. A second incision was made along the posteromedial edge of the proximal tibia, with the incision never being less than 7 cm from the first incision. The fracture site was exposed dorsally through the pes anserinus. A rigid plate (usually 3.5 mm LCDCP (AO)) was used as a buttress to reduce to the large posteromedial fragment. The knee was then put in extension applying traction during the reduction and fixation. Since the posteromedial fragment is quite unstable in this injury pattern an additional 6.5 mm lag screw may be placed from anterior to posterior as necessary. Finally the anteromedial proximal tibia was plated, usually with a 4.5 mm T-shaped tibial plateau plate. If a longer plate was required usually this was done with a minimal invasive technique. Closure involved repairing the pes anserinus with heavy absorbable sutures and draining both incisions. Postoperatively continuous passive motion was used and active knee flexion begun at 48 h. A hinged brace was used if the ACL was injured, for 12–16 weeks. Statistical analysis was done using the SPSS 11.0 (SPSS Inc, Chicago IL) program. Descriptive statistics were used to determine the ranges, the means and the standard deviations. The paired The surgical details are presented in Postoperative imaging showed the mean FTA was 177° Bony union occurred at a mean of 13 weeks (a range 12–18 weeks) after the operation (see The mean time to full weight-bearing was 17 weeks (range 13–24 weeks). At the final clinical follow-up no patients showed knee instability; none had undergone a further operation for meniscus symptoms, although there were 12 cases (29 %) that underwent meniscus repair postoperatively ( There were four patients (9.5%) who had a sanguinous ooze from the wound one week after the operation. Culture was negative in all four cases. The ooze stopped over 3 to 5 weeks with local wound care only. No superficial or deep infections were found in any of the patients in this series. Medial tibial plateau fracture dislocation is a very unstable condition The most commonly used approach to treat this fracture dislocation is fixation of the medial plateau with an anterior-medial buttress plate combined with anterior–posterior lag screws through a medial parapatellar incision Anatomical reduction of the articular surface and full restoration of the alignment of the proximal tibia. This is especially correcting the varus and the retroversion deformity. Stable fixation that maintains the reduction and alignment. This is undertaken using a medial double-plating technique. Poor results accrue because of late instability following tibial plateau fracture. This instability is considered the most important indication for surgical treatment Using the double-plating medial technique 41 out of 42 (98%) patients had satisfactory restoration of alignment, this was maintained over time, and the knee remained stable. This has led to improved clinical results in the treatment of this difficult fracture dislocation.  Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at