The influence of colloidal nanosilica addition on an ultrafine cement have been studied in terms of physicomechanical and microstructure properties. Primarily, experiments were carried out to produce an ultrafine cement (UF) with a Blaine specific surface area greater than 10.500cm2/g. Nanosilica was added in amounts of 2% and 4% on UF cement basis. All cements were tested for initial and final setting times, consistency of standard paste, flow of normal mortar and compressive strengths after 1, 2, 7 and 28days. The hydration products were determined by X-ray diffraction analysis and by Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy, at 1, 2, 7 and 28days. The microstructure of the hardened cement pastes and their morphological characteristics were examined by scanning electron microscopy, whereas porosity and pore size distribution were evaluated by mercury intrusion porosimetry.The production of special and custom-made cements is becoming one of the powerful trends of a modern market. Ultra-High Performance Concretes (UHPCs) is a type of building material with very high strength and durability. Its high strength and ductility make it suitable for bridge decks, thin shell structures, nuclear power plants and defensive facilities that may experience impact loads The performance of an ordinary Portland cement is a direct consequence of the clinker chemistry and mineralogy. However, it is well known that the properties of cement are also affected by its fineness and particle size distribution. During grinding, the clinker particles are substantially reduced in size to generate a certain level of fineness as this has a direct influence on several performance characteristics of the final product, such as rate of hydration, water demand and strength development. Micro or ultrafine cements have been proposed to be used in oil well cementing technology Siliceous mineral admixtures all contain mostly SiO Colloidal silica (CS) denotes small particles consisting of an amorphous SiO The nano-scale size of particles can result in dramatically improved properties from conventional grain-size materials of the same chemical composition. Nanosilica is commonly used for reinforcement of polymer to increase the hardness, modulus, weatherability and flammability The performance enhancing properties of nanosilica are achieved through two mechanisms. The ultrafine particles are able to fill the microscopic voids between the cement particles improving “packing” and creating a less permeable structure. In the curing process, the nanosilica also reacts with the Ca(OH) Although, there are few reports on mixing nano-particles in cement-based building materials, the so far published literature has given little attention to the influence of nano-SiO The influence of nano-SiO Today, nanosilica, because of its high cost, is applied in high performance concretes and self compacting concretes mainly as an anti-bleeding agent. It is also added to increase the cohesiveness of concrete and to reduce the segregation tendency. The aim of the present research work was the evaluation of the influence of colloidal silica addition in a ultrafine cement (with a specific surface area greater than 10,500 Preliminary experiments were carried out in order to produce an ultrafine (UF) cement with a Blaine specific surface area greater than 10,000 Grinding was carried out in a laboratory rotating ball mill, using steel balls as grinding medium. Grinding was stopped at predefined time intervals to determine the specific surface area, according to the Blaine air permeability method Colloidal nanosilica (NS) was commercially available as an aqueous dispersion. It contained about 40% SiO The standard consistency and the setting times of the cement pastes were determined according to the European Standard EN 196-3 The study of the hydrated products was carried out on cement pastes rather than on mortars. Cement pastes were prepared with a water to binder (cement and dry silica) ratio equal to 0.4 by mixing 300 In order to get an idea of their morphology, the hydration products were also examined by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) using a Jeol 6380 LV Scanning Electron Microscope. Experimental conditions involved 15 The chemical compositions of the as received CEM I 42.5N and UF cements are given in The particle size distribution data of the CEM I 42.5N is compared with the corresponding of the UF cement, as it is shown in  The consistency of cement depends on the type and its fineness. As the nanosilica is finer than the cement, the specific surface increases as the NS content increases. When fineness increases, the surface area contacting with water increases and the rate of hydration reactions accelerates, since the hydration reaction occurs at the interface with water. The standard consistency of the ultra fine cement paste was 45.31%, while at 4% NS, the consistency was 52.4%. The flow tests confirmed the above results and showed that for a given The mortars were tested for compressive strengths after 1, 2, 7 and 28 Although, the compressive strengths were enhanced in mortars containing nano-SiO On the other hand, the addition of nanosilica slightly increases the strength value of the UF cement at the early ages, mainly because of the packing effect. It actually acted as filler material, which filled into the interstitial spaces and pores, inside the matrix of hardened cement paste, increasing its density as well as its strength XRD patterns of the hydration products of the examined cements shown after 1 In case of UF-NS cements, the amount of portlandite increases continuously at the first days of hydration due to the hydration acceleration of the finest cement. However, after 28 The FT-IR spectra of the CEM I 42.5N, UF and UF-NS All samples indicated characteristic bands at 1643–1645 The The progress of hydration was evident by the polymerization of the SiO The characteristic bands of calcium carbonate could be found in the range of 1424–1430  Ca In case of UF-NS The typical microstructures (SEM) of fracture surfaces of UF and UF-NS The presence of colloidal nanosilica, which is dispersed among cement fine grains, seems to act as “nucleus” for the hydration products development Nano-SiO The pozzolanic reaction led to the consumption of portlandite from nano-SiO The results of total cumulative pore volume and specific surface area are summarized in After 24 The addition of colloidal nanosilica led to the decrease in total porosity, as well as to the decrease in the average pore diameter. As the hydration proceeded, the larger pores were converted into smaller ones. They gradually fill with secondary calcium–silicate hydration products, due to the portlandite–nanosilica reaction. The transformation of large pores into finer pores, i.e., pore size refinement as a result of pozzalanic reaction led to the enhancement of compressive strengths. The presence of nanosilica cement caused considerable reduction in the volume of large pores at all ages and is therefore instrumental in enhancing the compressive strength. In case of UF cement, the larger pores are located in radius range of 30–100 The addition of colloidal nano-SiO Nano-SiO Both the total porosity and the average pore diameter, deducted by mercury intrusion porosimetry also confirm a denser microstructure for the hardened cement paste with nanosilica. The pore size refinement at later ages, as a result of the pozzalanic reaction, also led to a significant enhancement of the compressive strengths. This work was done in cooperation with technical support of EKET – Central Laboratory of Heracles GCC. The authors express their warmest thanks to Mr. J. Marinos, Director in Quality Assurance and R&D Manager of Heracles GCC for his constant advice.