Purpose
                  There is controversy over the outcomes and complications of volar and dorsal plating for the treatment of intra-articular fracture distal radius.
               
                  Methods
                  From 2008 to 2010, 81 patients with intra-articular fracture distal radius of AO type C1–C3 treated with distal radius locking plates via volar or dorsal approaches were reviewed in our institute. The clinical, radiological, and functional outcomes were evaluated at 6 months after operation.
               
                  Results
                  The volar approach group showed a significantly better flexion range, flexion-extension arc as well as Green and O'Brien functional score than dorsal approach group. Volar tilting of the distal radius was significantly better in the dorsal group, but that did not contribute to better palmar–flexion range or grip strength. Overall complication rate was similar in both groups.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The volar approach group demonstrated better range of motion and functional score. The complication rates were similar between the two groups. The volar surgical approach should be adopted in most operative cases of AO type C intra-articular fracture distal radius while the dorsal approach should be reserved for intra-articular fracture with dorsal comminuted fragments.Fracture distal radius is one of the commonest injuries in orthopaedic practice. Anatomical reduction is closely related to the functional outcomes. There is to date no conclusion as to which approach yields better functional outcome. Rein et al In view of the controversial results, we aim at throwing more light on this by evaluating the clinical and radiological outcomes on our patients with AO type C intra-articular fracture of the distal radius treated operatively via either volar or dorsal approaches. From 2008 to 2010, all patients with AO type C intra-articular distal radius fractures in our trauma centre treated with dorsal or volar plating were reviewed. Data were retrieved from electronic patient records, outpatient clinic records, and physiotherapy and occupational therapy progress records. Classification of fracture pattern was defined according to the Müller AO Classification of fracture distal radius. The patients had first been treated by closed reduction and temporary immobilization with a cast or slab. They were then scheduled for operations later. During operation, the fractures were screened under general or regional anaesthesia for alignment and their characteristics. The decision of surgical approach was subject to: (1) preoperative radiography and/or computed tomography CT scan assessment; (2) fracture alignment after closed reduction; (3) irreducible dorsal comminution; and (4) surgeon preference ( A total of 81 patients were recruited with a mean age of 49.2 years. Fifty patients were male and 31 patients were female. The average length of follow-up was 6.34 months. There were 60 cases of AO type C1 fractures, 17 C2 fractures, and four C3 fractures. Among them, 39 patients were treated via volar the approach by applying either a 2.4-mm or 3.5-mm fixed angle locking compression plate (Synthes, Switzerland) depending on the size of fragments and feasibility. Forty-two patients were treated via the dorsal approach using a 2.4-mm two-column fixed angle locking compression plate. The preoperative radiographs were reviewed for fracture classification and associated injuries were recorded. The postoperative radiographs at the time of maximal medical improvement were reviewed for articular congruity, palmer–dorsal tilting, and ulnar variance. The clinical outcomes were assessed at the time of maximal medical improvement. Objective assessment includes the range of wrist motion and grip strength with the comparison of contralateral noninjured side. The functional outcomes were evaluated using the modified Green and O'Brien score. In the volar plating group ( In the dorsal plating group ( In both groups after the plate was applied, radiographs were obtained to confirm the appropriate position of the plate, screw length, adequacy of fracture reduction, and joint congruity. A tilted lateral view at 22° was obtained to confirm absence of intra-articular screw penetration. Postoperatively, the patients were allowed to have free active mobilization of their fingers and wrist. Stitches were taken off on postoperative Days 10–14. The patients then started to have physiotherapy and/or occupational therapy until they reached maximal medical improvement. The variables were evaluated using Chi-square test and Mann–Whitney Concerning the demographic data ( The clinical results are shown in The functional results are shown in The complications are shown in In the volar group: four patients were reported to have hypertrophic scar; three patients were noted to have median neuropathy and they were treated successfully with conservative management; one patient was found to have numbness along the dorsal cutaneous branch of the ulna nerve confirmed by nerve conduction test; one patient was noted to have intra-articular screw penetration requiring removal of the implant; one case with dorsal comminuted fragment was noted to have early loss of reduction 2 months postoperatively; and one patient had ulna impaction with positive ulna variance of 4.3 mm. Ulna shortening osteotomy was done after the fracture had healed with good improvement of ulna wrist pain and range of movement. In the dorsal group: one patient was reported to have hypertrophic scar and two median neuropathy; two patients were noted to have reflex sympathetic dystrophy; two patients were found to have delayed extensor pollicis longus rupture (extensor indicis tendon transfer was done in 1 patient and the other patient was treated conservatively); and rotational stiffness was noted in one patient who had Sauve Kapandji procedure done later. Wound complication and reflex sympathetic dystrophy are thought to be independent of surgical approaches. Median neuropathy in the dorsal group was probably a sequela of the fracture itself rather than the dorsal approach. The rate of complications in both groups was similar. According to McKay classification, The results of this study showed that the volar group demonstrated better outcomes than the dorsal group, while complications were comparable in both groups. The volar approach was advocated because of satisfactory reduction, good functional outcomes, and less risk of extensor tendon complication. Median nerve neuropathy has been postulated to be the result of scarring in the forearm surgical wound or retractor injury during surgery. Different causes of carpal tunnel syndrome have been postulated such as local oedema, fracture hematoma, closed reduction, and manipulation. There has been controversy over prophylactic carpal tunnel release at the time of volar plating. Fuller et al In the dorsal group, there were two cases of median neuropathy. We believe that the cases were the sequela of fracture displacement or pressure from haematoma rather than the result of dorsal surgical approach. There were two cases of extensor pollicis longus tendon (EPL) rupture. EPL rupture is a well-known complication of fracture distal radius even without the operation. The incidence ranged from 0.2% to 5%, The dorsal approach enables surgeons to visualize directly the articular surface for reduction, In this study, the volar group demonstrated a shorter operative time, and better range of motion and functional outcomes compared with the dorsal group. The complications were comparable between the two groups. We would suggest adopting the volar approach in treating AO type C intra-articular fracture of the distal radius without dorsally comminuted and displaced fragments. However, fear of extensor tendon complication should not prohibit one from using the dorsal approach, which is valuable in reducing the dorsal comminuted fragment. We believe that extensor tendon complications can be prevented with dedicated extensor retinaculum coverage. There were limitations in this study because it was a retrospective study with data collected from patient's records only. Some patients were excluded due to inadequate data. A prospective randomised study with detailed data collection would provide a thorough assessment and evaluation of outcomes. Another weakness was lack of long-term follow-up evaluation, although maximal medical improvement as determined by physiotherapist and occupational therapist have been achieved. Long-term functional results and subsequent post-traumatic osteoarthritic evaluation were not available. Finally, the operations were done by different surgeons, so interpersonal variation could not be excluded. The authors declare that they have no financial or non-financial conflicts of interest related to the subject matter or materials discussed in the manuscript.