Copper nanoparticles with size of 51nm and R.S.D.dia of 10% can be obtained by modulation potential electrodeposition: first, a −0.8V×120ms potential step was used to nucleate copper particles on highly oriented pyrolytic graphite (HOPG) electrode surface, where nuclei with a supercritical size were formed, secondly, a 0.082V×80ms strip peak potential (E
                     s) was used to strip smaller metal nuclei partly, at last, a growth potential, −0.28V was applied to grow the nearly identical size slowly. Mechanism of copper electrodeposition on HOPG electrode from a solution of 1mM CuSO4 and 1.0M H2SO4 has been studied using cyclic voltammogram and chronoamperometry. In copper electrodeposition the charge-transfer step is fast and the rate of growth is controlled by the rate of mass transfer of copper ions to the growing centers. Reduction of Cu(II) ions did not undergo underpotential deposition. The initial deposition kinetics of Cu electrocrystallization corresponds to a model including progressive nucleation and diffusion controlled growth.In recent years, nanosized metal particles have attracted much attention because their unusual physical and chemical properties, which are quite different from those of the bulk materials In comparison, electrochemical deposition is generally inexpensive, can be used to deposit a wide range of nanoparticle materials. Potentiostatic step method, a classical electrochemical technique, has been developed by Penner's group to prepare silver Electrochemical setup was a conventional three-electrode cell with a platinum plate as counter-electrode and a saturated calomel electrode (SCE) as reference electrode. All potentials are quoted with respect to the SCE electrode. The working electrode (0.25 Electrochemical experiments were carried out using Princeton Applied Research Multichannel Potentiostat (VMP2) under a computerized control. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images were obtained using a Sirion TM (FEI COMPANY) and an accelerating voltage of 25  To obtain nucleation and growth potential of Cu deposition, it is essential to measure cyclic voltammograms for copper electrodeposition at slow scan rate.  Chronoamperometry was used as a technique suitable for electrochemical nucleation mechanisms studies. Current-time transients curves were measured with chronoamperometry in a solution of 1.0  The continuous lines correspond to instantaneous (1) and progressive (2) nucleation, respectively. The circle presents experimental dot. The shape of these experimental transients suggests that they may be analyzed according to the theoretical models proposed by Hills and Scharifker Instantaneous nucleation  Previous research indicated that dispersion of particle size is relative to nuclei number density on electrode or interparticle distance around individual particle In the initial stages of growth of the nuclei it can be assumed that nuclei grow independently of each other. However, in the succeeding stages it is necessary to consider the effect of the overlap between diffusion fields around growing nuclei. The result of this overlap is the development of local concentration and overpotential distribution in the neighborhood of the growing nuclei (clusters). Overlap area are zones of reduced concentration and reduced nucleation rate. Growing nuclei cannot grow freely in all directions since they will impinge on each other. The dispersity of particles on electrode surface is dependent on nuclei distribution formed in nucleation potential step, according to the results of cyclic voltammograms and chronoamperometry, we may select deposition parameters and discuss effect of these parameters on dispersity of Cu nanoparticles. The influence of the nucleation overpotential It is known that electrocrystallization of metal includes formation and growth of nuclei on electrode surface, nuclei number density is related to nucleation overpotential and time. To explore the effect of stripping potential and time on dispersity of particles on HOPG electrode, we devise follow several experiments. In high nucleation density, the interparticle distance may be enlarged by applying strip potential, thus, diffusional particle coupling is minimized. A relatively homogeneous particle distribution may be obtained due to the size distributions of particle is dependent on nuclei size distribution formed in first potential step. Copper start to deposit on a freshly HOPG electrode surface at potential lower than −0.4 Modulation potential electrodeposition is an effective means for eliminating interparticle diffusional coupling because internuclei distance is enlarged in high nucleation density, using modulation potential electrodeposition, it is possible to obtain monodispersion metal copper nanoparticles. The mean particle diameter of copper nanoparticles prepared by modulation potential electrodeposition is 51.0 One of the authors, Ling Huang, thanks Korea Institute S&T Evaluation and Planning (KISTEP) for the award of visiting scientist.