In order to achieve deeper understanding of rare earth elements (REEs) behaviors during phosphate rock processing with H3PO4. The solubility of REEs in Ca(H2PO4)2
                     H3PO4 solutions with various concentrations of Ca(H2PO4)2 at different temperatures were tested. The results demonstrate that REEs solubility decreases sharply with the increasing concentration of Ca(H2PO4)2. Equations between [REE3+] and [H+], [H+] and [Ca2+] in Ca(H2PO4)2
                     H3PO4 solutions were built based on the precipitation-dissolution equilibrium of rare earth phosphates and the ionization equilibrium of H3PO4. According to the equations, the decreasing mechanism of REEs solubility caused by elevated concentration of Ca(H2PO4)2 was determined. The mechanism can be illustrated as that the elevated concentration of [H2PO4
                     –] decreases the concentration of hydrogen ion by retarding the ionization process of H3PO4 and directly promotes the precipitation of rare earth phosphates. Furthermore, it can be easy deduced that similar effect would be caused by the other cation impurities (Fe3+, Al3+, etc.) on REEs solubility based on the mechanism. In addition, superimposed reduction effect on REEs solubility caused by the elevated concentration of Ca(H2PO4)2 and the elevated temperature is found. This superimposed effect leads to a super low solubility of REEs in Ca(H2PO4)2
                     H3PO4 solution. On the basis of the experimental study, outlooks and suggestions for further development of REEs recovery method are given.REEs have critical applications in many high technologies, especially in green energy and new materials. However, the shrinking traditional major resources may not be able to satisfy the sharply increased demand from green energy and new materials, etc. Recovery methods of REEs from phosphate rock have been widely investigated in H In fact, in industrial practice, solution systems in phosphate rock processing generally involve many kinds of impurities thanks to the complex composition of phosphate rock. For these impurities, calcium is the richest in content, and all the calcium will enter leaching solution once phosphate rock is completely decomposited. For phosphate rock processing with H Therefore, in order to discover the effect and the effect mechanism of monocalcium phosphate on the solubility of REEs in Ca(H Kinetic method A series of mixture solutions with various concentrations of Ca(H Then, rare earth carbonates particle was added into the tube via many batches, and the addition of solid for each batch was controlled in a very small amount to guarantee the complete dissolution of rare earth carbonates. Until new particle was generated which means the supersaturated concentration of rare earth ions was reached. The prepared supersaturated solutions were then kept in a shaker with 180 r/min rotation at constant 25 °C for 15 d (20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90 °C for temperature experiments). During this period of time, several parallel samples were tested to examine the equilibrium time of precipitation-dissolution (representative is shown in After being shook for 15 d, the equilibrium solutions were centrifuged to obtain the clear solutions for test (by ICP-OES). The solid particles remained in centrifuge tube were collected, filtrated, washed, dissolved (by diluted HNO Concentrations of REEs and total P were determined by inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES, Perkin Elmer–Optima 8300). An analysis method was built for the concentration determination of REEs and total P. The correlation coefficients of the calibration curves were better than 0.999, the recoveries are in the range between 95% and 105%. The analytical precision for ICP-OES in terms of the relative standard deviation (RSD) of replicate analyses was better than 2.1% for P, 1.2% for La, 0.9% for Nd, and 1.1% for Y. Samples of equilibrium solution were diluted (10 × , 50 × , 100 × , 500 × , 1000 × , 5000 × ) for element determination (La, Nd, Y, and P). In our previous study, the solubility of REEs in phosphoric acid solution has been systematically investigated. In Ca(H Then, Eq. The total phosphorus concentration ([P]) in Ca(H Then, through combining Eq. As pointed out before, in this study, the pH of Ca(H On the other hand, for the ionization processes of H On the basis of Assumption 2, the concentration of hydrogen ion in mixture solution can be calculated by the aid of Eq. In mixture solution of Ca(H As demonstrated in According to the conservation of charge in mixture solution, the concentration of H By merging Eqs. By the aid of inverse function, the [H According to Eqs. The equilibrium concentrations of La (10 In order to discover the decreasing mechanism of REEs solubility in Ca(H According to Eqs. As shown in In addition, increasing concentration of Ca(H In conclusion, the decreasing mechanism of REEs solubility in phosphoric acid solution by introduction of Ca(H As our previous research has demonstrated that the solubility of REEs in phosphoric acid solution decreased with increasing temperature, which can be attributed to the elevated Gibbs free energy of rare earth phosphates dissolution and the restraint of ionization process of H As shown in figures above, the solubility of REEs in Ca(H The solubility of La, Nd and Y in Ca(H On the basis of experimental results above, the supper low solubility of REEs in Ca(H