Cosserat continuum modelling of crack propagation in particulate materials with microrotations and in layered materials with sliding requires the analysis of the Cosserat characteristic lengths in their relation with the characteristic length of the material microstructure. The Cosserat lengths that are of the order of the microstructural characteristic length should be set to zero to derive the main asymptotic terms. When all Cosserat characteristic lengths are of the microscopic length the obtained continuum is termed the Small scale Cosserat continuum. Cracks of Modes I, II, III have conventional stress singularity, as well as the moment stress singularity. Moment stresses can cause bending failure of the bonds connecting the grains in the particulate material or layers in the layered material. Cases are identified when the bending stress induced by moment stress singularity exceeds tensile stresses induced by the conventional stress singularity by an order of magnitude. Then the main mechanism of crack propagation is bending failure produced by the moment stress, which explains, in a unified fashion the often-observed in-plane propagation of cracks of the classical modes. Another interesting case is when some Cosserat characteristic lengths are large. This gives what we term the Intermediate scale Cosserat continuum. An example is given by layered material with sliding layers that keep full contact during sliding. In this case the crack normal to the layering also propagates by bending failure produced by the moment stress singularity.The analysis and modelling of crack growth in heterogeneous materials presents a considerable challenge as the heterogeneities change the stress state in front of the crack tip and thus can locally change the direction of crack propagation especially when the material contains pre-existing cracks (e.g., A large body of references exists that treat the crack propagation using generalised continua (e.g., The use of either classical or generalised continua for modelling heterogeneous materials is based on the hypothesis of separation of scales (e.g., When continuum modelling of fracture is employed the criteria of crack propagation are formulated on the basis of stress distribution in an immediate vicinity of the crack tip (contour). At the crack tip, the elastic solution gives the square root stress singularity, which is of course unphysical. Subsequently the main drive of Linear Elastic Fracture Mechanics is to develop methods of bypassing that unphysical singularity, either by introducing fracture energy or fracture toughness or the fracture process zone aimed at decoding the singularity. However, the elastic stress singularity is unphysical not only because of infinite stress at the crack tip, but because it is gauged at the distances from the crack tip potentially smaller than the microscopic material length, that is smaller than the RVE size. At such distances the continuum modelling is not applicable, that is the state variables obtained in the continuum cannot be interpreted in terms of the original heterogeneous material, Pasternak and Mühlhaus This conclusion is in stark contrast with the conventional understanding of fracture mechanics, where the singularity is obtained from the limiting transition In this paper we examine the possible types of relationship between the material characteristic lengths (e.g., grain size or layer thickness) and the characteristic lengths of the generalised continuum employed. To this end we extend the approach proposed in our previous papers to the Cosserat continua in which not all the characteristic lengths are commensurate with the microscopic characteristic length of the material. For the sake of simplicity only the static case is considered. Section Continuum macroscopic modelling of heterogeneous materials is based on the introduction of a representative volume element (RVE) whose size satisfies the hypothesis of separation of scales (e.g., These conditions – the RVE being both representative and infinitesimal – correspond to the following double asymptotics: Here the first limiting transition ensures that the volume element is asymptotically representative, while the second limiting transition stipulates that the RVE is asymptotically infinitesimal. The application of this concept to the crack problems is illustrated in A rigorous implementation of the above consideration can be accomplished on the basis of double asymptotics We concentrate on the cases when at least some of the Cosserat characteristic lengths are of the order of microscopic length The following two sections will consider the consequences of the use of the outer limit of the inner asymptotics in the Cosserat continuum in more detail. The Cosserat continuum has 6 degrees of freedom, 3 translational and three rotational. Thus in a Cartesian co-ordinate frame ( Stress (force over area) These equations are to be complemented by the Cosserat constitutive equation to produce the equations of equilibrium in displacements and rotations. The Cosserat constitutive equations produce sets of Cosserat characteristic lengths – different types of constitutive equations deliver different sets of characteristic lengths and hence different types of asymptotics of separation of scales. In the following section the case of isotropic Cosserat continuum with commensurate characteristic lengths will be considered. The following section will present the cases when the characteristic lengths are markedly different. If the Cosserat continuum is isotropic, the constitutive equations read From these moduli one can form 9 characteristic lengths, We now apply asymptotics The assumption that all Cosserat characteristic lengths are of the same order of magnitude implies that Cosserat shear modulus α is of the same order as the Lamé constants and hence Since the Cosserat lengths are of the same order of magnitude, Application of asymptotics This system is remarkable as it corresponds to the Cosserat continuum with constrained rotations (the couple stress continuum). It should be noted though that the second equation of Consider now another extreme case when amongst all Cosserat characteristic lengths two groups containing the largest Assume that the hypothesis of separation of scales can be applied to Here we allow for the possibility that In the asymptotic form Now, repeating the arguments from the previous section one obtains that the main asymptotic terms satisfy the equations where all lengths from First consider isotropic Cosserat continuum whose Cosserat shear modulus is very small: α ≪ μ, λ. In this case Now we have a decoupled system. The first equation is again the conventional equilibrium equation for the classical elastic continuum in terms of displacements, while the second equation has the same form, but in terms of rotations and with a different structure of moduli. Therefore, stresses and moment stresses are independent and thus determined independently by using the corresponding boundary conditions. In a particular case of ε = 0 both equations formally coincide such that the solution of the moment stress problem can be obtained from the corresponding stress solution by replacing the Lamé constants with β and γ. It also needs to be noted that under only classical boundary conditions, i.e. when the rotations or moment stresses vanish the second equation will not produce any curvature twists and moment stresses, hence the effects of rotations will not be seen in the main term of this asymptotics. As a second example we consider a layered material whose layers have the same thickness The constitutive equations read Here  This model has five Cosserat characteristic lengths, which are: The distribution of Cosserat characteristic lengths depends upon assumptions made about the interface stiffnesses. Now assume that the layers have very low stiffnesses such that One can see that while in the limit of Therefore lengths In these limits the main asymptotic terms are derived from the following limiting constitutive equations Now, in the absence of shear stiffness the Cosserat modulus It should be noted that the constitutive law More interesting is another extreme case, Again, in the absence of shear stiffness the Cosserat modulus The Cosserat characteristic lengths read Subsequently the separation of scales condition reads Thus according to the proposed classification, the continua with constitutive Eqs. The equations of equilibrium in displacements and rotation for the second case, The asymptotics As explained in the previous section the elastic problems with classical boundary conditions, i.e. boundary conditions specified in terms of tractions and/or displacements, while the boundaries are free from the corresponding moment stress components can be solved as the classical elastic problems. After that the rotations are determined using the second equation in Given that the stress singularity at any crack with smooth contour can be represented as a superposition of three classical fracture modes, we consider Mode I and II cracks – the corresponding elastic problems correspond to plane stress or plane strain deformation – and Mode III crack corresponding to anti-plane deformation. These solutions are well known (e.g., Consider the stress state in front of the crack tip on the Here It is seen that the moment stress has singularity of the order of −3/2, which is stronger than the conventional stress singularity and even non-integrable. Nevertheless, as shown by Dyskin et al. This result is not surprising since the cracks are loaded by conventional means (i.e. without the application of moment stresses) hence the energy supplied by the loading device should be the same as for conventional cracks. While the As an example of a crack in the Intermediate scale Cosserat continuum consider a semi-infinite crack in layered material with sliding layers, following Pasternak and Dyskin The main singular term of the moment stress produced by this crack (called “bending crack”) reads (e.g., It is seen that in this case the moment stress singularity is weaker than in the isotropic case (see the previous section). The examples above showed that the crack produces moment stress singularity which may be different from the stress singularity. This suggests that the action of moment stresses should be taken into account when the criteria of crack propagation are considered. In order to formulate criteria of crack propagation, one strictly speaking needs to consider the details of fracturing and the non-linear deformation at the crack tip and match the stress distribution with the obtained singular stresses and moment stresses, for instance by introducing a fracture process zone. However, here a simplified criterion proposed by Dyskin Consider a particulate material consisting of grains connected by elastic bonds. In this case the Small scale Cosserat continuum can be used, Dyskin and Pasternak Both stress and moment stress singularities act in front of a Mode I crack tip. Assuming that in tension the bond breaks when the stress reaches microscopic strength σ Here From these equations one can determine the critical stress intensity factors to enable the crack growth by tensile bond failure ( It is seen that Therefore when  One can see that the moment stress mechanism of crack propagation exhibits some universality: whenever it dominates it allows to describe in-plane propagation in a unified form for such different crack types as Mode I cracks and anti-cracks, Mode II and III shear cracks and the bending crack in layered materials ( We identified a special group of materials with microrotations that can be characterised by Cosserat continua with all characteristic lengths being of the same order of magnitude as the microscopic characteristic length of the material. This group of materials include isotropic particulate materials consisting of grains connected by binder/cement of a sort. It is shown that the main terms of asymptotics of separation of scales correspond to a classical elastic continuum with the Cosserat effect manifesting itself in the existence of non-uniform moment stress distribution obtained from the classical rotation field. The deformation of such materials is indistinguishable in the first approximation from the deformation of classical materials, which might be a reason for considerable difficulties the experimentalists meet trying to detect the Cosserat effects reported in the literature (e.g., In the models of layered material considered it was assumed that the layers have the same thickness, and the normal and shear stiffnesses characterising the interfaces are constants as well. The obtained results are equally applicable to the case of variable thickness and stiffnesses as long as the variations consist of fluctuations around mean values, which we associate with The proposed methodology is applicable to any generalised continuum whose characteristic lengths or at least some of them are of the order of the characteristic lengths of the microstructure. When using the generalised continua (e.g., Cosserat continuum) for modelling heterogeneous materials one needs to be mindful that some of the characteristic lengths associated with the constitutive law can be of the order of the characteristic length of the microstructure and therefore are beyond the resolution of the continuum. (No characteristic lengths exist in the classical elastic continuum.) Therefore, modelling crack propagation using generalised continua requires the correct choice of the asymptotics of small distances from the crack tip. The fundamentals of continuum modelling require the asymptotics of this kind to be achieved in two stages: (1) asymptotics of small characteristic lengths of the material microstructure and the characteristic lengths of the generalised (e.g., Cosserat) continuum which commensurate to the microstructure lengths; this corresponds to the outer asymptotics; (2) asymptotics of small distances from the crack tip as compared to the crack length or any other appropriate macroscopic characteristic length (e.g., the distance between the crack tip and the point of application of the load). In this way the stress singularity can be obtained that is relevant to the heterogeneous material being modelled. A nice bonus of this asymptotic analysis is that the main asymptotic term can be obtained setting these small Cosserat lengths to zero, thus leading to a considerable simplification. In particular, when all Cosserat characteristic lengths are small, the elastic problems, i.e. crack problems, under the classical boundary conditions can be solved in the main asymptotic terms by considering the classical elastic continuum, finding the displacement field and the corresponding field of rotations and then determining the curvature twist tensor and the moment stress. This asymptotics is called the Application of this algorithm to the crack problems leads to the conventional stress singularity and the moment stress singularity of the order of −3/2. The moment stress singularity in such cracks does not however contribute to the energy release rate; the latter is still controlled by the Another situation arises when some of the Cosserat characteristic lengths are of the order of the characteristic length of the material microstructure, while some other Cosserat characteristic lengths are much larger such that they can be regarded as macroscopic compared to the characteristic length of the material microstructure. In this case the main asymptotic terms are obtained by setting these small Cosserat characteristic lengths to zero; what is obtained is termed the Based on all examples considered one can conclude that the moment stress mechanism of crack propagation has a degree of universality and can explain the ubiquitous observations of in-plane propagation of cracks of different modes in heterogeneous and layered materials. Further research is needed to verify (in experiments or computer simulations) the existence of the moment stress mechanism of crack propagation and identify the situations when it is dominant. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 