The blends of high styrene rubber (HSR) and natural rubber (NR) with E-glass fiber was prepared using a blending technique in presence of different types of carbon black. The effect of filler on morphological and wear characteristics was studied. ISAF type of carbon black showed a significant effect on optimum cure time, cure rate index and mechanical properties by reacting at the interface between HSR and NR matrix. All the samples show only one melting peak on the DSC curve; this is attributed to the same backbone structure of the matrix and the carbon black reinforcement. The rate of degradation was almost the same up to 90% degradation for all the samples except NSF-1 and NSF-4, may be due to the mixing of N110 and N774 type of carbon black. Blends containing ISAF type of carbon black showed high abrasion resistant properties against Du-Pont abrader, DIN abrader and different mining rock surfaces and also is found to be the toughest rubber against all types of rock.Polymer blends are being used extensively in numerous applications; this statement is also true with rubber blends, especially in tire manufacture. Apart from blends of common rubbers, specialty rubber is also being utilized, depending on service demands and components of the tire There are several types of damage occurred in the dump-truck tire such as tread detachment, sidewall cuts, impact ruptures, and bead damage The wear of rubber is a complex phenomenon and dependent on a combination of processes such as Mechanical, Mechano-Chemical and Thermo-Chemical. Schallamach The effort towards improving the efficiency of such transportation system is essential for reduce running costs and cutting down the end cost figures by using the HSR and NR rubber blends. In this study, the cure characteristics, dynamic, morphological and mechanical properties of carbon black filled blends of NR and high styrene rubber (HSR) were investigated. These rubber compounds were examined in a specially fabricated experimental set-up for evaluating their wear resistance properties when abraded against various rock types. The parameters such as influence of composition of rubber vulcanizates on wear characteristics and the mechanism of wear of these compounds against different rocks are reported. A literature search shows a lack of studies about HSR with NR blends alone. With this work, we pretend to partially fill this gap. SBR with a higher bounded styrene content of 63% bonded in polymer named as high styrene rubber, grade: KER® 1904 was supplied from M/s Firma Chemiczna Dwory SA, Poland. Natural rubber (NR - RMA1X) was supplied by the Rubber Board, Kottayam, Kerala. E-glass fiber was supplied by JK Tyre, India. Zinc oxide, stearic acid, N-cyclohexyl-2-benzothiazyl sulfonamide (CBS) and anti oxidant (IPPD) was supplied by Bayer (India) Ltd. Carbon black was supplied by Birla Carbon. Standard rubber grade process oil (Elasto 710), wax were purchased from the local market. The compounding formulation for the HSR and NR blends with its various ingredients were mixed in a two roll mill at a friction ratio of 1:2 following standard mixing sequence. Compounding formulations based on changing of the high styrene rubber (HSR), E-glass fiber and natural rubber (NR) contents are shown in The cure characteristics of the rubber compound were studied with the help of a Monsanto Oscillating Disc Rheometer (ODR – 100s) at 150 The crosslink density was determined by immersing a small amount (known mass) of sample in 100 Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy was performed using a NEXUS 870 FT-IR (Thermo Nicolet) instrument in dry air at room temperature. Spectra were taken in the range 4000–500 Vulcanized slabs were prepared by compression molding, and the dumb-bell shaped specimens were punched out from a molded sheet by using ASTM Die C. The tests were done by means of a universal tensile testing machine (Hounsfield H10KS) under ambient condition (25 Five samples were tested for each set of conditions, at the same elongation rate. The values of the tensile strength, modulus at 100%, and 300% elongation and elongation at break were averaged. The relative error was below 5%. The hardness was measured by Shore A hardness tester. DSC measurements were carried out using a Perkin-Elmer PYRIS Diamond DSC instrument. The samples (⩽10 TGA studies were carried out Shimadzu-DT-40 instrument in presence of air at a rate of 10 Compression set test (ASTM D395-03) was performed on a standard test specimen of cylindrical shape 20 Heat buildup study was carried out using Goodrich Flexometer for the selective compounds having higher tensile strength. The test pieces were prepared in cylindrical shape having diameter 17.8 The tensile fracture surface of the samples were studied in a scanning electron microscope (JSM-5800 of JEOL Co.; Acceleration voltage: 20 DIN abrasion test was done by the DIN abrasion tester for determining the abrasion resistance of compounds of vulcanized rubber recommended by the Indian Standards Institution vide IS:3400 (Part 3) – 1987. Du-Pont abrasion test was done by the Du-Pont Craydon type of abrasion tester for determining the abrasion resistance of compounds of vulcanized rubber recommended by the Indian Standards Institution vide IS:3400 (Part-III) – 1965. The indigenous experimental set-up was specially fabricated in our lab and the full arrangement of the experimental set-up, preparation of rubber specimen and rock sample are already discussed in our earlier literature Total weight of 450 The optimum cure time for NSF-1, NSF-3 rubber sample is higher than other rubber vulcanizates is shown in The IR Spectra of the different samples are shown in Similarly, a distinct peak at frequency 1644 Tensile strength, modulus, elongation at break, tear strength for all the compounds were shown in DSC experiments performed for investigating the miscibility of NR/HSR blends clearly revealed only a single and composition-dependent High temperature TGA (50–650 The compression set of the rubber compounds are shown in The values of heat buildup are shown in The tensile fracture samples were scanned after gold coating, and are represented in But for NSF-1, and NSF-2, it clearly observed fatigue type of failure from the figure. Also some cavitations are found in these figures. In the literature, a common idea on the cavitation phenomenon was generally related to the existence of gas bubbles trapped in the material during the production stage and the growth of the cavities would then be the result of the growth of the gas bubble. The unstable failure mechanism at the end of cavitation is also not well known The mass loss of rubber against Du-Pont abrader is given in  Based on Din abrader and Du-Pont abrader test results,  Since the low thermal conductivity of rubbers can result in a very high temperature at the interface, it is important to investigate the effects of frictional heating on the sliding friction of rubbers E-glass fiber incorporated in NR-HSR blends in presence of various types of carbon blacks had been analyzed. Faster scorch time, cure time had been observed for the compounds containing ISAF type of carbon black. In addition, they show increase in maximum torque, which correlates with the cross-link density results. The improvement is due to the addition of ISAF type of carbon black in both the compounds. The overall mechanical properties increased for the compounds NSF-6 containing NR/HSR/E-glass fiber in presence of ISAF N231 type carbon blacks. Apart from the addition of SRF N774 in SAF N110, the property decreased may be due to the dormant character of SRF N774 type of carbon black over the blends. Higher thermal stability is found for the composites containing SAF N110 with SRF N774 type of carbon black. This proves that SRF carbon black content is responsible for the increase in thermal stability. The compounds containing SAF N110 in NR-HSR have higher barrier properties compared to other blends. NSF-1 has showed the lower value in compression set study may be due to the increased formation of effective network chains due to higher reinforcing efficiency of the carbon black in the rubber matrix. SIAF N231 type of carbon black with NR/HSR has showed higher abrasion resistance property against Du-Pont abrader and DIN abrader. Out of all types of rocks the coal has been identified as the major abrader for almost all types of rubber compounds in the experimental setup. The rubber compound containing NR/HSR with SRF N234 are found to be the toughest rubber against all rock types under the present study due to its high structure in nature. Sample containing ISAF N234 type of carbon black, temperature generation is higher at the time of abrasion against rock surfaces. The authors are deeply grateful to Coal India Limited, Kolkata for financial assistance. Authors wish to thank the tire retreading companies for their immense support and supply of raw retreading compounds. Also, special thanks to the members of the Project and key laboratory of Materials Science Centre and Central Research Facility at IIT, Kharagpur.