Depletion of high-grade ores and presence of significant quantities of metals in low-grade oxide ores has enforced to utilize the overburdens (COB) and wastes (low-grade ores) generated during mining operations. The impact of ore mineralogy and mineral–microbe interaction during bioleaching could not be ignored. Seeking to the need, a systematic study was performed to establish the reaction mechanism involved for recovery of nickel and cobalt from chromite overburden (COB), Sukinda, Orissa using pure culture of Aspergillus niger. Mineralogical analysis reveals a complete conversion of goethite into hematite phase leading to exposure of nickel particles into the micro-pores and cracks developed in the matrix which was initially found to be intertwined in the goethite lattice. As a result, it became more susceptible to attack by the fungal bio acids which in turn accelerate the dissolution rate. Organic acids like oxalic and citric acids were detected in the culture filtrate using HPLC. TEM analysis of the leached samples shows that nickel dissolute into the solution leaving a porous space in the matrix of the hematite by forming nickel oxalate or nickel citrate. Kinetics of the nickel bioleaching was studied to support the mechanism of the reaction. It was observed that the initial rate of reaction follows the chemical control dissolution reaction where as the later part fits to shrinking core model. 18% of nickel and 37.8% of cobalt was recovered from pre-treated COB at 2.5% pulp-density with 10% (v/v) fungal inoculum at 30 °C within 25 days in shake flask while 32.5% of nickel and 86% of cobalt was recovered in bioreactor.Laterites are oxidic ores widely distributed in the tropical regions, formed due to laterization, a weathering process of ultramafic rocks favoured by warm climate and abundant rainfall. Sulphides and laterites are two forms of nickel ore occur in nature, of which the sulphides are the major source for nickel extraction. In India, lateritic chromite overburdens are generated at Sukinda mines near Jajpur, Orissa located at 20°58′0″N 85°55′0″E occupying an important geographical position in mineralogical map of India. However, it has been estimated that the lateritic ores constitute around 85% of known nickel reserves, a significant future source of nickel ( The existing hydrometallurgical processes for leaching of nickel laterite such as high pressure acid leaching, Caron process, ferronickel and nickel matte smelting techniques are energy intensive and the operational costs are high ( Literature survey shows extraction of nickel from lateritic ore using microbial processes ( Impact of mineralogy on bioleaching cannot be ignored. In the lateritic ore, nickel occurs in an absorbed state within the goethite matrix along with other mineral phases. Due to low solubility and complex structure extraction of nickel from the goethite matrix is very difficult. To overcome from this problem the COB was subjected to pre-treatment process at 600 °C under normal atmospheric conditions. As a result of thermal activation, phase transformation occurs by dehydroxylation of goethite matrix in the raw COB ( Addressing the need, the present study deals with enhancement and establishment of reaction mechanism for nickel and cobalt recovery through pre-treatment of COB using pure strain of Samples were collected from Sukinda Mines, Orissa, India. The samples were crushed and sieved to obtain a particle size of −75 μm. The samples were air dried and the metal concentrations were determined in atomic absorption spectrophotometer (AAS) after digesting in concentrated HCl. Mineralogical analysis of the original and leached samples were carried out by means of Phillips Diffractometer (PW3710) with a radiation operating at 40 kV and 30 mA to identify major and minor minerals. Experiments were performed using two different forms of the COB, designated as raw and pre-treated COB. The pre-treatment of COB was done in a muffle furnace operated at 600 °C for 5 h under normal atmospheric conditions. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was carried out on raw and pre-treated COB samples with a size range of 5 × 5 × 5 mm with ultra thin film of gold coating using an ion sputter JFC- 1100 and studied under a Japanese make electron microscope (JEOL-JXA-8100). The working height was maintained at 15 mm with a voltage ranging from 10 kV to 25 kV. Polished samples obtained prior and after completion of the experiments, were vacuum dried using a vacuum coater. The samples for the transmission electron microscope (TEM) investigations were imaged in (FEI, TECNAI G Pure culture of Culture filtrates were collected before, after and during bioleaching process and were analyzed by HPLC to quantify the amount of organic acids produced. For analysis, Model Agilent-1100, Agilent technologies, Waldbronn Analytical Division, Germany) containing Zorbax Eclipse XDB-C18 column (150 × 4.6 mm, i.d) was used. Two mobile phases (A & B) were involved in the HPLC analysis. The mobile phase used was methanol: water (30:70 v/v) with a flow rate of 1.2 ml/min with a quaternary pump (Model No -G1311A) operated at 60 °C with thermo start (Model No -G1316A). Solvent A was methanol (HPLC grade) and solvent B was Millipore water containing 0.01 mol/l of KH Two set of leaching experiments were carried out at 2.5% pulp-density (w/v) using raw and pre-treated COB in 250 ml Erlenmeyer flasks containing 100 ml of Bromofield medium. Initial pH of the medium was 6.8. Each flask was inoculated with 10 ml (10 Experiments were conducted in a 40 L single-stage stainless steel (SS-316) bioreactor equipped with stirrer and air sparger. The schematic diagram of the bioreactor is shown in ( The experiment was performed with pre-treated COB at pulp-density of 2.5% (w/v), with an initial pH of 6.8 at 30 °C, agitation speed-150 rpm, flow rate-2 l/min and inoculum concentration-10 The detail chemical analysis of COB shows that, the raw COB contains 0.99% nickel, 0.03% cobalt, 48.88% iron, 2.59% chromium and 0.21% manganese, whereas after pre-treatment of COB 1.02% nickel, 0.04% cobalt, 50.85% iron, 3.65% chromium and 0.35% manganese were detected. The composition map of COB sample shows that nickel occurs in an absorbed state within the goethite matrix ( The isolate was identified as TEM analyses were carried out with the samples collected before and after leaching. It was observed that due to surface diffusion, appearances of circular crystals with rounded ends occur containing hematite ( Organic acids such as oxalic acid, citric acid, gluconic acid etc are excreted into the medium as metabolic products and subsequently dissolve heavy metals by forming salts and chelates ( Acid production: As reported, heterotrophic micro organisms are able to mobilize metals by (i) formation of organic acid (ii) oxidation–reduction reactions (iii) extraction by complexity agents (iv) chelate formation. Bioleaching processes are mediated due to the chemical attack by the excreted organic acids by the micro organisms on to the ore. Therefore acid production by fungus will be helpful in leaching of metals from ores. The acids usually have dual effect of increasing metal dissolution by lowering the pH and increasing the load of soluble metals by complexing/chelating into soluble organo-metallic complexes ( Similarly, citric acid contains three carboxyl groups. When it is fully dissociated, so the possible complexes of nickel cation with citrate anion are expressed as: Previous literature on the subject suggested that the leaching efficiency of heterotrophic micro organisms depends on the extent of the production of organic metabolites, which are excreted in to the culture medium and lower the pH of medium. This induces the dissolution of metals into the solution. This fact also hold true with our findings where  It was observed that during progressive leaching, pH of the medium decreases from 6.8 to 3.6 ( Bioreactor leaching consists of three phases such as solid phase, an aqueous phase and a gaseous phase which is a mixture of oxygen and carbon dioxide. Residence time, flow rate and recirculation time of the slurry can be adjusted and controlled. Thorough mixing of the three phases is essential for the effective encounter of solid particles with the micro organisms as well as chemically active molecules thus helps in the extraction process. Hence, experiments were conducted at 2.5% (w/v) pulp density with 10% (v/v) fungal inoculum pH- 6.8 at 150 rpm with flow rate of 2 l/min.  Biomass generated was 22 g/100 ml. As describe earlier in Section Organic acids are chelators which can form complexes with metals. Such complexation is dependent on the relative concentrations of anions and metals in solution, the pH and the stability constant of the various complexes ( The mineralogical analysis reveals that the nickel was associated with the goethite iron matrix of COB. Nickel solubilizes due to the attack of fungal bio acids from the iron matrix of COB. Kinetics of the bioleaching process has been studied to support the mechanism of the reaction. Various kinetic models such as chemical, diffusion and mixed control were tested. If the rate of metal extraction is controlled by the chemical dissolution of the ore particles by bio-acids generated during fungal bioleaching, then the following rate equation is generally applicable, by assuming spherical shape of the ore particle ( However, if the nickel diffusion is very fast the kinetics of leaching usually obey three dimensional diffusion equation of the following type. Interpretation of the data obtained from bioreactor leaching shows that there was tremendous rise in the leaching percentage up to 9th day due to the consumption of sucrose by the fungal strain. Detail explanation was given in Section Chemical analysis of raw and pre-treated COB reveals that 0.99% of nickel and 0.03% of cobalt in raw and 1.02% of nickel and 0.04% of cobalt contains in pre-treated COB respectively. The XRD analysis of chromite overburden showed nickel present in absorbed state within the goethite matrix whereas in pre-treated COB revealed conversion of goethite to hematite due to thermal pre-treatment at 600 °C under normal atmospheric conditions takes places. This result in increased leach-ability might be due to increased porosity, increased surface area and change in reactivity of the ore due to extensive dehydration and dehydroxylation of various hydrated oxide minerals. Efficiency for production of organic acid of The authors acknowledge Orissa Mining Corporation for providing the samples. One of the authors would like to thanks CSIR for awarding Senior Research Fellowship.