Sodium oleate (NaOL) is an important surfactant chemical used in the separation of oxide minerals by the froth flotation process. The adsorption capacity and the adsorption mechanism of NaOL on the mineral surface are important for understanding flotation behaviour. In this study, a simple, nontoxic and rapid quantitative analysis method of High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) for residual sodium oleate concentration was proposed and verified. The NaOL was identified in chromatogram by comparison with standard oleic acid. A linear range from 10 to 100 mg/l was observed, and the precision, accuracy, LOD and LOQ were evaluated.Sodium oleate (NaOL), a common mineral flotation reagent, is extensively used in flotation separation of oxide and silicate minerals, such as scheelite ( Many analytical methods have been used to determine NaOL adsorption amounts, e.g. differential thermal analysis (DTA) ( High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) is widely used in analytical chemistry qualitative or quantitative analysis such as environmental field ( In this work, a simple and rapid HPLC method of quantitative analysis for NaOL concentration is proposed and verified. This method also provides detection and analysis of other fatty acid collectors by the presence of characteristic UV peaks in the HPLC mobile phase. Sodium oleate (NaOL, analytical reagent, 98%), standard oleic acid (purity 99.5%, manufacturer: TMstandard), methanol (HPLC grade), acetonitrile (HPLC grade), and phosphoric acid (HPLC grade), were used. Deionized water with a resistivity of over 17 MΩ × cm was used in the experiments. HPLC was performed on a Shimadzu LC-20A system equipped with a UV detector (monitoring at 208 nm). A C18 HPLC column (InerSustain® C18 250 mm × 4.6 mm i.d., 5 μm) was used. The mobile phase was A (5% phosphoric acid aqueous solution) and B (methanol: acetonitrile = 6:3, v/v) in a ratio of 1:9. The column temperature was 25◦C, and the flow rate was 1.0 ml/min. The injection volume was 20 μl. In order to distinguish NaOL from other impurities, the chromatogram of NaOL was compared with standard oleic acid. A 60 mg/L standard oleic acid solution was obtained by dissolving standard oleic acid in the mobile phase. A 60 mg/l NaOL solution was prepared as follows: First, using DI water as the solvent, AR NaOL was dissolved to obtain 300 mg/L aqueous solution with a volume of 200 μl. Then 10 μl of concentrated phosphoric acid was added, and shaken for 30 s, ensuring that the oleate ion was completely hydrolyzed into oleic acid. Finally, the volume was increased with mobile phase to 1000 μl. Through these steps, 300 mg/L was diluted five times to 60 mg/l. Then chromatograms of NaOL and oleic acid were obtained. A standard stock aqueous solution of AR NaOL at a concentration of 1000 mg/L was prepared. Then dilute the standard stock aqueous solution with DI water to six concentrations (50, 150, 250, 350, 450, 500 mg/l). Calibration concentrations were prepared by diluting the six aqueous solutions (each 200 μl) of AR NaOL with mobile phase (A:B = 1:9, v/v) to six concentrations (10, 30, 50, 70, 90, 100 mg/l), making each solvent to 1000 μl, adding 10 μl concentrated phosphoric acid in the meantime and shaking for 30 s. The following method is used to treat flotation test samples: First, the coarse grains in the pulp are removed by sedimentation at a suitable time (depending on sedimentation height and particle size; e.g. 30 s for 5 cm and >38 μm). Extremely fine particles are difficult to be removed from solution, so it is recommended to use 38–75 μm particles. then, the test sample is treated in the same way as mentioned above (adding concentrated phosphoric acid, diluting with mobile phase to a certain volume); Last, the mineral particles larger than 0.2 µm are removed by high-speed centrifugation before injection. The standard calibration curve (peak area vs concentration) was determined using six calibration levels of AR NaOL. The precision and accuracy (described by relative standard deviation (%R.S.D) and recovery respectively) were determined by performing injections of NaOL solution 21.00 mg/l and standard oleic acid solution 81.00 mg/l (i.e. 87.31 mg/l NaOL, converted by the ratio of relative molecular weight of oleic acid to sodium oleate.). Then the %R.S.D. and recovery of concentration was checked. Three injections were performed for each solution. The limit of detection (LOD) and limit of quantification (LOQ) (  Compared with the retention time and peak shape of standard oleic acid, the retention time of sodium oleate is about 15 min, which can be used for further quantitative analysis. The calibration curve was established by plotting the concentration of each standard NaOL solution against the corresponding peak area. The regression equation (including expanded uncertainty of slope and intercept, 95% confidence interval (CI)), correlation coefficient (r Ordinarily, the solid-liquid separation methods of minerals pulp before quantitatively analysing regents are filtration and centrifugation, during which fine particles and NaOL form the flocs. In addition, the UV–Vis absorbance of oleic acid in aqueous varies sharply with concentration and pH. As shown in To avoid the influence of flocs and pH, two critical treatments of the sample in this HPLC method are used: adding concentrated phosphoric acid and dilution with organic mobile phase, by which all of the NaOL exists in organic solution in the form of a homogeneous dispersion of oleic acid. So centrifugation has no effect on homogeneity. We used the HPLC method to measure the sodium oleate adsorption on calcite surface in ambient pressure and vacuum flotation ( The linear range as mentioned above could satisfy most situation and could be expanded. The concentration of NaOL, commonly used in flotation, is ranged for 5 × 10 The HPLC method provides a relatively simple method of determining sodium oleate flotation reagent concentration in oxide minerals flotation systems. The mobile phase methanol and acetonitrile used in HPLC were chosen as background liquor for separating oleic acid, and concentrated phosphoric acid was used as pH regulator. In the preparation of sample solution, sodium oleate was transferred to the form of oleic acid in organic solvent, overcoming the heterogeneity of species derived from sodium oleate. It is nontoxic, rapid, and sensitive; the linear correlation coefficient is 0.9992. Lastly, using common HPLC devices, the kinetics of adsorption and adsorption model of NaOL could be studied accurately with the method proposed. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of this research by