Hypothesis
                  This study aimed to evaluate the safety and efficacy of the fixation of Dubberley type B capitellar and trochlear fractures using dorsolateral anatomic plates with support of the distal humerus (DAPSDHs).
               
                  Methods
                  Fifteen patients with Dubberley type B capitellar and trochlear fractures (two type 1B, five type 2B, and eight type 3B) were treated through the extended lateral approach, and fixation was achieved with DAPSDHs. Radiographic evaluation was performed, and range of motion of the elbow and forearm was recorded. Functional outcomes were assessed using the Mayo Elbow Performance Score and Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand score.
               
                  Results
                  The mean follow-up period was 32.5 months (range, 24-54 months). Fracture union was achieved in all cases. At the final follow-up, range of motion was as follows: flexion, 123.7° ± 8.1° (range, 110°-135°); lack of extension, 11.0° ± 7.1° (range, 5°-30°); pronation, 81.7° ± 5.6° (range, 70°-90°); and supination, 78.7° ± 5.2° (range, 70°-85°). At the final follow-up, the mean Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand score was 11.9 ± 4.0 (range, 4.2-20.8) and the mean Mayo Elbow Performance Score was 89.0 ± 7.1 (range, 70-95). The outcome was rated as excellent in 12 patients (80.0%), good in 2 (13.3%), and fair in 1 (6.7%). Avascular necrosis of the capitellum developed in 1 patient. One patient had implant irritation. Heterotopic ossification developed in 1 patient. Ten patients returned to their previous activity levels.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Capitellar and trochlear fractures with posterior comminution are safely and effectively treated through the extended lateral approach using DAPSDHs, resulting in good radiographic and functional outcomes.Coronal fractures of the distal humerus may involve the capitellum and/or trochlea. These fractures are rare and challenging to manage. The mechanism of injury usually involves falling on an outstretched arm, which causes direct axial compression that is transmitted across the joint, resulting in coronal shear fracture of the capitellum and trochlea. In their study, Dubberley et al The aim of this study was to evaluate the safety and efficacy of the fixation of Dubberley type B capitellar and trochlear fractures with dorsolateral anatomic plates with support of the distal humerus (DAPSDHs). We hypothesized that fixation with DAPSDHs through the Kocher extended lateral approach would be safe and effective and would result in good functional and radiographic outcomes. The study cohort included all patients treated at our center between 2011 and 2015. The patients were included in a prospectively collected database of all trauma patients. The inclusion criteria were Dubberley type B capitellar and trochlear fractures and fixation with a DAPSDH. The exclusion criteria were patients younger than 18 years and Dubberley type A fractures. Plain radiographs and computed tomography scans were obtained preoperatively to assess the fracture pattern according to the classification system described by Dubberley et al. All operations were performed by the same surgeon (Y.Z.). The patient was placed in the supine position, and the arm was positioned on a radiolucent arm table. A tourniquet was applied. The Kocher extended lateral approach A prophylactic antibiotic (cefazolin) was given preoperatively and 24 hours postoperatively. Patients were prescribed 25 mg of indomethacin 3 times daily for 6 weeks after the operation to prevent heterotopic ossification (HO). Postoperatively, the arm was immobilized with a long arm splint with the elbow in 90° of flexion and neutral forearm rotation for 1 week. At 1 week postoperatively, the splint was removed, and active and active-assisted range of motion of the elbow and forearm pronation-supination were started. Strengthening exercises were started at 3 months postoperatively. Follow-up evaluations were performed at 4, 8, and 12 weeks and then every 6 months. Radiographs were obtained at each follow-up. The range of motion of the elbow and forearm, the Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand (DASH) questionnaire score, and the Mayo Elbow Performance Score (MEPS) The Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS, version 19; IBM, Armonk, NY, USA) was used for analysis. Data were presented as mean and standard deviation. Comparisons between groups were performed using the Student The study included 15 patients with a mean age of 44.3 years (range, 22-71 years). On the basis of the Dubberley classification, the fractures were classified as type 1B in 2 patients, type 2B in 5, and type 3B in 8. None of the patients sustained neurovascular injuries. The average time from injury to surgery was 5.7 ± 3.3 days. The patients were evaluated at a mean follow-up of 32.5 months (range, 24-54 months). All fractures were healed. None of the patients had loss of reduction at the final follow-up. At the final follow-up, range of motion was as follows: flexion, 123.7° ± 8.1° (range, 110°-135°); lack of extension, 11.0° ± 7.1° (range, 5°-30°); pronation, 81.7° ± 5.6° (range, 70°-90°); and supination, 78.7° ± 5.2° (range, 70°-85°). The mean MEPS was 89.0 ± 7.1 (range, 70-95). The outcome was rated as excellent in 12 patients (80.0%), good in 2 (13.3%), and fair in 1 (6.7%). The mean DASH score was 11.2 ± 4.0 (range, 4.2-20.8). One patient had avascular necrosis (AVN) of the capitellum. One patient had implant irritation. One patient had HO. One patient had grade 1 arthritic changes as described by Broberg and Morrey. When patients with type 3B were compared with patients with types 1B and 2B combined, elbow flexion was significantly less in the type 3B group ( Partial articular fractures in the coronal plane of the distal humerus involving the capitellum and trochlea account for 1% of all elbow fractures and 6% of distal humeral fractures. The treatment of capitellar and trochlear fractures includes closed reduction, In our study, Dubberley type B capitellar and trochlear fractures were safely and effectively treated with DAPSDHs. Fracture union was achieved in all patients without loss of reduction or failure of fixation. No wound complications or neurovascular injury occurred. One patient with a type 2B fracture had osteonecrosis of the capitellum. This may be because of the severity of the injury or the surgical dissection. Compared with the group with types 1B and 2B combined, the type 3B group had worse flexion ( Surgical approaches described for the treatment of capitellar and trochlear fractures include the extended lateral approach, posterior transolecranon approach, anterolateral approach, and 2-incision approach. As expected, the clinical outcomes evaluated by the MEPS and DASH score were better when no complications occurred. In addition, the outcomes were better when the patients underwent surgical treatment within a week. The good results of our study for these complex injuries may be related to multiple factors including the approach, fixation method, or timing of surgical treatment or a combination of these factors. This study comprises one of the largest studies focusing on Dubberley type B fractures of the capitellum and trochlea with midterm follow-up ( Dubberley type B capitellar and trochlear fractures are rare injuries. Posterior comminution is the source of the challenge to achieve stable fixation and maintain it until bony union. These fractures are safely and effectively treated with DAPSDHs, resulting in good radiographic and functional outcomes. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following is the supplementary data to this article: