Fly ash is generated as a solid residue in the power plant using crude oil and petroleum coke as fuels, and contains significant amount of vanadium. To utilize the industrial wastes, a better processing route is to convert environmentally hazardous wastes that have no or limited market value into products or intermediate products with added market value. In the present study a recipe-based concept is introduced and metal recovery from a selected waste mixture is investigated in the lab-scale experiments. Two waste ash residues of BOF steelmaking flue dust and petroleum fly ash are used as raw materials, and the residue carbon from the fly ash is used as reducing agent. The ferrovanadium with about 20wt.% vanadium is obtained. This proves that a recipe-based waste processing can be a sustainable option for the future waste management.Production of FeV is normally based on metallothermic reduction of V For a comprehensive valorisation of the industrial waste resources, it would be more beneficial to develop a recipe-based processing route, which is a designed process based on the combined treatment of more than one waste streams generating market acceptable metal and slag products. According to the characteristics and compositions of the wastes, a maximum utilization of the available components in the waste material could be obtained. So far, no prior research is found in the literature in this combined waste processing technology for FeV production. In the present study, a prospective investigation is conducted to recover the metal values for FeV production from two industrial waste resources – the petroleum fly ash and BOF steelmaking flue dust. The high temperature behaviour of the fly ash and flue dust is examined with a combined approach of chemical, thermal and off-gas analyses. Metal recovery and the control of sulphur and carbon in the system are discussed according to the pyro-metallurgical smelting tests. Petroleum fly ash (PFA) and BOF steelmaking flue dusts in both coarse fraction (BOF-CF) and fine fraction (BOF-FF) as received were first dried and analyzed with LECO, XRF and XRD for elemental compositions and crystalline phase identification. The drying test was conducted at 105  Thermal behaviour of PFA and BOF flue dusts was investigated with a Netzsch STA 409C thermal balance under argon atmosphere with a flow rate of 3 The off-gas analysis during smelting tests was carried out in a horizontal tube furnace under nitrogen atmosphere. A quartz tube containing an Alsint boat crucible with the ash sample was placed in the Alsint furnace tube. The CO, CO A vertical tube furnace was used for the smelting tests to identify the reduction performance in the high temperature reaction system. For the reduction with the residual carbon in the petroleum fly ash, the ashes consisting of PFA and BOF-CF were mixed with quartz powder as a slagging agent and charged in an Alsint crucible. The charging ratio of PFA to BOF-CF was calculated based on the requirement of carbon for reduction of the stoichiometric compositions of the oxides in the ash mixture. It includes FeO Thermal gravity analyses (TGA) were carried out separately for the ash samples of PFA, BOF-CF and BOF-FF. A significant weight loss with PFA is due to the dehydration and the graduate decomposition of the sulphates, volatilization, evaporation, and even the reduction of the oxides with the inherent carbon residue. The total weight loss of PFA is more than 60%, which is much higher than about 11% for BOF-CF and about 6% for BOF-FF. At about 400 To understand the reduction kinetics, the off-gas evolution originated from various reactions was analyzed continuously on-line in a horizontal tube furnace. The test was conducted with a mixture of 2.83 Smelting experiments were performed using the residue carbon in PFA to reduce the oxides in the ash mixture for FeV production. The experimental conditions and the results are given in In the obtained alloy, the vanadium contents are in the range of 18–23 Based on the laboratory-scale experimental results, the carbon residue in the petroleum fly ash can be used as reductant for reduction of iron oxides in BOF steelmaking flue dust and the vanadium oxides in the petroleum fly ash. A ferrovanadium alloy with about 20 Utilizing the secondary vanadium resource is important not only for saving the raw materials resource, but also for closing the vanadium cycle, thus reducing the environmental impact. The major factors to be considered in the future will be the design of a low cost process with a high-valuable product and a well designed close-loop processing with no or less harmful environmental foot prints. Effect of mixing and briquetting on the reactivity and the effect of additive, reductant, and slagging/fluxing component need to be systematically studied. A recipe-based smart processing can be a sustainable and economical option for waste management, if a market valuable metal product can be produced. The benefits are both resource saving and better environmental solutions.