This paper presents a new approach to investigate the static response of horizontal and inclined suspended cables with deformable cross-section, made of general linear or nonlinear elastic materials, and subjected to vertical concentrated and distributed loads. The proposed technique also includes large sag and extensibility effects, and is based on an original finite difference scheme combined to a nonlinear least squares numerical solution. The mathematical formulation is developed for various loading cases, and an innovative computational strategy is used to transform the resulting nonlinear system of equations into a scaled nonlinear least squares problem. The numerical scheme is programmed and its application illustrated through examples highlighting the effects of coupling between the tension in a cable and the deformation of its cross-section as well as the use of cables made of neo-Hookean materials. The results obtained are in excellent agreement with analytical solutions when available. The proposed technique can be easily programmed and constitutes a valuable tool for large deflection analysis of suspended cables made of nonlinear elastic materials.Cables are widely used as structural components and the investigation of their structural response has attracted numerous researchers for many centuries The objective of this work is to develop an original and practical finite difference scheme to investigate the static response of horizontal and inclined suspended cables with deformable cross-section, made of general linear or nonlinear elastic materials, and subjected to most common loads of gravitational type, generally originating from self-weight, ice accumulation or various attachments. The proposed formulation also includes large sag and extensibility effects that were shown sufficiently important to include in the analysis of cables when large spans and/or significant loads are involved such as for applications described in In this section, we derive the Cartesian equations expressing the static profile of a suspended cable hanging under its self-weight as illustrated in  Using Eq. A finite difference scheme will be used to solve Eq. The suspended cable is then discretized into Eq. We note that the strained arc-length of the cable can be expressed as Eqs. Classical Newton–Raphson or shooting method algorithms can be used to solve Eqs. The proposed procedure consisting of transforming cable equations to a NLS problem and solving it numerically by applying a Gauss–Newton algorithm is more effective than the Newton–Raphson technique since only first-order derivatives are needed to construct the Jacobian matrix  We also introduce the nondimensional parameter We show that the nonlinear equations resulting from finite difference discretization can now be expressed at each interior node Eqs. Eqs. The developed mathematical formulations and finite difference schemes described above were programmed using MATLAB® The starting guess solution of an iterative numerical scheme is generally based on a reasonable estimate of the solution by the analyst. Non-dimensionalizing the problem as described previously not only addresses bad-scaling effects due to widely differing magnitudes of the variables and their derivatives, but it also confines the solutions and therefore the starting initial guess around relatively small values corresponding to commonly encountered deflections normalized by cable span To illustrate the application of the methodology and the important aspects of the proposed computational model, the following examples investigate the nonlinear static response of horizontal and inclined suspended cables subjected to self-weight and to vertical concentrated and uniformly distributed loads. The results obtained are validated against analytical solutions when available. The analysis of suspended cables is generally conducted assuming that their cross-section remains rigid and therefore neglecting the effect of cross-sectional deformations on the cable’s deflected profile and tension. Some authors waived this assumption by including the contraction of cable’s cross-section due to Poisson’s effect For illustration purposes, we apply the proposed finite difference model to the example presented by Huddleston and Ham As mentioned previously, most formulations in the literature focused on the behavior of cables made of Hookean materials, while cables made of nonlinear elastic materials such as rubber and rubber-like materials were rarely studied. To illustrate the versatility of the proposed method, we apply it next to study the response of suspended cables made of a neo-Hookean material, one of the most common constitutive models for rubber. In this case, we show that cable tension can be expressed as The proposed technique is applied to examples presented by Valiente An original and practical formulation and finite difference scheme were developed to investigate the static response of horizontal and inclined cables with deformable cross-section, made of general linear or nonlinear elastic materials, and subjected to vertical concentrated and distributed loads. The proposed formulation also includes large sag and extensibility effects. Considering various loading cases, we showed that the resulting nonlinear system of equations can be transformed into a nonlinear least squares problem that can be solved efficiently to determine the nonlinear static response of suspended cables made of nonlinear elastic materials. The proposed technique was programmed and its application was illustrated through examples highlighting the effects of coupling between the tension in a cable and the deformation of its cross-section as well as the use of a neo-Hookean material. The obtained results were successfully validated against analytical solutions when available. The proposed technique can be easily programmed and presents a valuable and effective alternative to finite element analysis when implementation of general constitutive nonlinear elastic material models is not straightforward and recourse to cumbersome 3D cable modeling using solid finite elements is to be avoided. The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support of the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC). In this appendix, we propose analytical expressions to determine the non-zero elements of the Jacobian matrix In this appendix, we propose analytical expressions to determine the non-zero elements of the Jacobian matrix