In this work, a two-way displacing Cu-Al-Ni/Polyimide shape memory alloy bi-morph without any post processing has been developed. The forward stroke was achieved with shape memory effect and the return stroke was due to the influence of flexible polyimide substrate. A custom made setup with electrical heating was developed to investigate the life cycle of the bi-morph at different voltages, ranging from 2V to 3V. The austenite transformation temperatures of the bi-morph, was found to be As
                     =215°C and Af
                     =240°C. Shape recovery ratio was calculated and the shape memory alloy deposited on 75μm thick polyimide sheet exhibited better recoverability than 50μm thick sheets. Further, maximum displacement of 19mm was observed from the edge of the bi-morph through plate heating. The effect of substrate thickness on the life cycle behavior of the bi-morph was investigated. The bi-morph showed minor signs of deformation when actuated at 0.5Hz after 500 cycles. In addition the structural, morphological and thermal behavior of the SMA bi-morph has been investigated in detail.Shape memory alloys (SMA’s) are smart material which can recover its original geometry on the application of heat. Twinning is an important microstructural process responsible for the shape memory effect. The SMA’s can remember up to three different shapes while transforming from low temperature martensite phase to high temperature austenite phase Silicon wafers are widely used for developing thin films, where the film is peeled off after deposition process. Recently Kapton Polyimide (PI) substrates are considered for the development of thin composite structures, where the substrate acts along with the deposited material. SMA/Polyimide composite-film actuators are flexible films, which has SMA on one face and the polyimide substrate on the other. These bi-morph structures are more suitable for the development of SMA thin films, as the return stroke during the thermomechanical cycle is accomplished by the bias force of the flexible substrate. Further the flexible substrates can be obtained in several other shapes according to the requirement, thus avoiding the training performed after deposition. Cantilever made out of SMA/PI bi-morphs developed through sputtering was studied in detail Cu-Al-Ni can be an attractive and cost effective solution and it has the potential to replace the conventionally used NiTi In this work, an attempt has been made to develop Cu-Al-Ni/Polyimide bi-morph at different substrate thickness and investigate its life cycle behavior at different actuation conditions. The influence of substrate thickness on thermal properties and the fatigue life of the composite film have been studied in detail and the suitability to use the as developed bi-morph as micro-actuator has been explored. Wires of Copper, Aluminum and Nickel were precisely measured using a precision balance and made into 100  To probe the suitability of the developed bi-morph in MEMS micro-actuator application, electrical actuation setup was utilized as shown in  The thickness of the deposited film was found to be 300   In order to investigate the shape recovery ratio and maximum displacement from the edge of the bi-morph a test bench with substrate heating was designed to heat and cool the bi-morph. A 7   To investigate the cyclic behavior and the fatigue life of the developed structures, electrical actuation was employed. Three different voltages of 2 The bi-morph was tested for its fatigue life at 0.5 The stiffness of 50 As it can be observed from the life cycle analysis, 50 From the above discussion, it can be concluded that Cu-Al-Ni/polyimide bi-morphs developed through thermal evaporation showed cyclic repeatability. The results are summarized as The adhesion between Cu-Al-Ni and polyimide was tested using scotch tape analysis and there was no removal of the deposited SMA film. XRD results a high intensity peak corresponding to β (220) and the crystallite size was found to be 6.67 SEM images showed a continuous film with a grain size of approximately 100 The thermal decomposition of the Cu-Al-Ni/Polyimide bi-morph was rapid when compared to bare polyimide sheet as confirmed by TGA analysis. The austenite transformation temperature was found to be A The bi-morph structures without any post-processing and training, showed maximum displacement of 19 The shape recovery ratio was calculated and it was found that 75 The cyclic behavior was studied using an electrical actuation and the bi-morph was tested for 500 cycles and the bi-morph showed minor signs of deviation from the average displacement. 75 The as developed structures are suitable to be used as high temperature actuators such as a bi-morph in electrical circuit breaker as shown in The authors would like to thank Mr. Mayank Modak from heat Transfer Lab IIT Indore and Mr. Shivendra K Pandey from Phase Change Memory Lab IIT Indore for helping us with our characterization. We would also like the thank Molecular and Nano-Electronics Research Group (MNRG) from IIT Indore for their valuable support during the work. The authors are grateful for the continuous support from Sophisticated Instrumentation Centre of IIT Indore.