The interferences of Ca and Mg as matrix elements in dolomite and gypsum on Ag, Cd, Cr, Mn, Tl and Zn absorbances during their electrothermal atomic absorption spectrometric (ETAAS) determination are investigated. The results reveal that Ca and Mg do not interfere on Zn and Mn, tend to decrease absorbances of Ag, Cd and Cr, while Tl suffers the most significant influence. A flotation separation method is proposed to eliminate matrix interferences. Hydrated iron(III) oxide, Fe2O3·xH2O, and iron(III) hexamethylenedithiocarbamate, Fe(HMDTC)3, are applied as flotation collectors. The influence of hydrophobic dithiocarbamate anion, HMDTC, on flotation recoveries of each analyte is studied. The most suitable concentrations of dolomite and gypsum solutions for flotation are determined. To avoid flotation suppression due to the reaction of Ca2+ and Mg2+ with surfactant ions, a fit foaming agent was selected. The elements present in dolomite and gypsum as traces have been analyzed by ETAAS. Their ETAAS limits of detection following flotation are found to be 0.021 μg·g−1 for Ag, 0.019 μg·g−1 for Cd, 0.014 μg·g−1 for Cr and 0.11 μg·g−1 for Tl. The determination of Mn and Zn can be performed by flame AAS (FAAS). The limit of detection for Mn is 1.5 μg·g−1, while for Zn 0.8 μg·g−1.The knowledge of the type and amount of trace elements incorporated in the structure of a natural mineral could help to answer many questions about mineral deposit formation, its physical and chemical properties, crystalline deformations, etc. Because trace elements present in the natural structure basically change the primary physical and chemical characteristics of the minerals, they may limit its application for many useful purposes. Therefore, development of appropriate methods for determination of trace elements in mineral matrices is of great importance. Atomic absorption spectrometry (AAS) is one of the most frequently used methods for determination of trace elements in mineral samples Flotation started to be used for selective separation of valuable substances from ores and minerals a hundred years ago. Step by step, except for mining aims, this technique has found applications in other fields of chemical engineering for removal of harmful substances, microorganisms, suspended solids, etc., from waste, industrial, sea and drinking waters. Gradually, flotation has received an interest in analytical chemistry, also A Perkin-Elmer 1100 B spectrometer (Norwalk, USA) equipped with a graphite furnace HGA-700 and Ag, Ca, Cd, Cr, Mg, Mn, Tl and Zn hollow cathode lamps was used for AAS measurements. Instrumental parameters for flame atomic absorption spectrometry (FAAS), as well as for electrothermal atomic absorption spectrometry (ETAAS) were established by extensive testing (Table 1 Stock solutions of Ag, Ca, Cd, Cr, Mg, Mn, Tl and Zn nitrates were prepared at a concentration of 1 g·l To obtain a solution of the natural mineral, 1 g of powdered dolomite or gypsum sample was dissolved in a mixture of 20 ml of concentrated HCl and 5 ml of concentrated HNO A combined glass electrode was immersed into 1 l of dolomite or gypsum solution. After adding 6 ml of saturated KNO To check the influence of Ca and Mg on the absorbance of trace elements present in the minerals as impurities, series of solutions with the constant concentration of Ag, Cd, Cr, Mn, Tl and Zn and different concentration of Ca and Mg were prepared. The amounts of these analytes, as well as the mass ratios calcium/analyte, To ensure the effective incorporation of trace elements in the precipitate mixture of Fe The influence of HMDTC The results show that the increase of The addition of foaming agents is very advantageous, because they transform the hydrophilic surface of the species floating in hydrophobic, and so they facilitate the separation of the solid from the liquid phase of the system. To select properly an appropriate surfactant for procedure, several foaming reagents was tested at pH 6.0 and It was found that the cationic surfactants BTC and CTAB, as well as non-ionic tenside TX-100, were inadequate (Table 2 Among anionic surfactants singly tested (NaDDS, NaOL, NaPL and NaST) and in pairs (NaDDS/NaOL, NaPL/NaOL and NaST/NaOL), NaDDS was the most helpful (Table 2), achieving the highest recovery values of 94.8–100.0% for Ag, Cd, Cr, Tl, Zn and 90.8–91.5% for Mn. The results obtained by the pair NaDDS/NaOL were also satisfactory, but this combination of reagents formed too much scum, which was very difficult to decompose by acid. When NaDDS was used as a single reagent, the dissolution of the froth precipitate was easier and faster. Therefore NaDDS was selected for the procedure. Because calcium and magnesium salts of NaDDS are soluble in water, this detergent foams very well in aqueous media. Nevertheless, in the case of flotation of dolomite and gypsum solutions, NaDDS must be added into a system with very high concentrations of alkaline-earth metals. Ca For this purpose, a series of solutions (1 l) containing different masses of dolomite and gypsum (5.0, 4.0, 3.0, 2.0 and 1.0 g) were treated by the recommended flotation procedure under previously optimized conditions (pH 6, The solutions of dolomite and gypsum, prepared as 1 g l To find out what happened with calcium and magnesium as macro elements during the process of separation, their concentrations in the final solutions concentrated by flotation were determined by FAAS and the recoveries were estimated. The data of these investigations showed that the recoveries of Ca (0.83, 0.99%) and of Mg (0.95%) were minor. It is obvious that these macro elements could not be separated from the aqueous solutions under conditions recommended for all other analytes (Table 3 Ten blanks were floated by the adopted procedure and concentrations of Mn and Zn were determined by FAAS, while Ag, Cd, Cr, and Tl concentrations by ETAAS. The detection limit (LOD) of the method for each element was estimated as three values of the standard deviation ( The developed method was applied to determine the concentrations of Ag, Cd, Cr, Mn, Tl and Zn present as impurities in dolomite and gypsum. After flotation under optimized conditions, Mn and Zn were determined by FAAS, and Ag, Cd, Cr and Tl by ETAAS. The concentrations were calculated using external calibration curves. To verify the validity of the results, standard addition method was also applied. To aliquots of 1 g l This study has affirmed our earlier conclusions about the possibility of direct analysis of Zn and Mn in acidic aqueous solutions of dolomite