We read with great interest the article “Treatment of low subcondylar fractures—A 5-year retrospective study”, by Leiser et al. First, the HCTM approach was originally published by Meyer et al. of the University of Besançon, France, in 2006 Second, the reduction in the length of the skin incision and the sub- and retroangular incision may minimize the aesthetic sequelae of surgery. In summary, the authors perform a ‘mixture’ of the original HCTM and the classical retromandibular approach. Nevertheless, in our experience, the scars resulting from the original technique (a 5-cm curved incision 1 Third, the HCTM approach is very safe with regard to the facial nerve (especially the marginal branch). We noted that the authors did not observe any facial palsy in the 10 patients who underwent surgery. Our experience is the same, in more than 100 patients operated on to date. However we believe that deep infiltration of the fracture site and the incision area with adrenalized anaesthetic creates a theoretical risk of facial nerve injury because of a potential perioperative block of the nerve due to the diffusion of the local anaesthetic. Hence monitoring of the facial nerve would not be effective and a nerve injury could occur. For this reason we recommend that the adrenalized anaesthetic approach is avoided. In practice we use only a small quantity of local anaesthetic in the incision area (less than 1 Fourth, and in contrast to the statement of the authors, we believe that the HCTM approach is an easy and reproducible procedure, feasible when undertaken by an experienced resident in oral and maxillofacial surgery. There is sometimes difficulty in the reduction of the fracture in its anatomical position due to the morphology of the patient (obesity, thick masseter muscle), or to a certain degree of comminution of the fracture line. With this in mind we aim to evaluate the feasibility of the complementary use of endoscopy to facilitate visualization of the fracture and the osteosynthesis in the correct position, or the use of perioperative computed tomography imaging. We believe that the HCTM approach is a good technique for ORIF of mandibular subcondylar fractures. Leiser's modifications to our procedure are appreciated and we were very pleased to read how a technique learnt in our department in France has been the subject of further development. Once again, I would like to thank the authors for sharing their valuable experience in the surgery of mandibular condyle fractures. None. None declared. No required. Not required.