The bonding configuration and structural evolution of Si and Ge incorporated amorphous carbon (a-C:Si
                        x
                      and a-C:Ge
                        x
                     ) films were studied. The incorporation of Si and Ge to amorphous carbon (a-C) has the advantageous effect of promoting sp
                     3 hybridized bond formation due to smaller energy difference between s and p orbital in Si and Ge than C. The C 1s NEXAFS spectra of Si or Ge incorporated a-C films, the formation of Si (or Ge)–C bond is observed, i.e., the formation of a-SiC or a-GeC networks by the incorporation of Si (or Ge) in sp
                     2 hybridized site and bonding with carbon atoms to generate sp
                     3 hybridization. The important role of the incorporated Si and Ge in modifying the bonding configuration of a-C is revealed by using UV Raman spectroscopy to open up the ring structure of sp
                     2 hybridized bonded C atoms and formation of sp
                     3 hybridized bond with high efficiency.Various structures and properties of amorphous carbon (a-C) have been mostly influenced by hybridized bonding state of carbonization, i.e., hybridization ratio of In the present work, the local bonding configuration and structural analyses of a-C:Si a-C:Si Deposition rate was measured by cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Hitachi s-4700) and ellipsometry (Spectra Thick 2000-deluxe). The NEXAFS measurements were performed at the 2B1 beam line in the Pohang Accelerator Laboratory. All X-ray absorption spectra were collected at a photon incidence angle of 55° (magic angle) to eliminate the dependence of π* and σ* resonance on the horizontal polarization of photon source. The UV Raman spectra were collected using 244 nm line of an intracavity frequency-doubled Ar From quantum theory, the amount of s–p mixing to generate  The C 1 The corresponding UV Raman spectrum of a-C is shown in With 18 at.% of Si and 15 at.% of Ge incorporated a-C films, both  The effect of Si and Ge incorporation on the bonding configuration and structural properties of amorphous carbon (a-C) films has been characterized. The C 1 The authors would like to thank I.R. Mendieta and D.A. Smith of University of Leeds for their kind help in UV Raman spectroscopic measurement. We are also indebted to the financial support from KISTEP (Program No. M1-0214-00-0228).