Drought has major impacts on microbial decomposition and net N- and P-release in peat. The separate effects of aeration (oxygen intrusion) during moderate drought and desiccation (oxygen intrusion plus water deficiency) during severe drought are, however, poorly understood. This information is vital to understand the biogeochemical and ecological effects of different gradations of drought in peatlands. In addition, effects may differ between rich fen peat and Sphagnum-dominated poor fen peat. We therefore conducted a controlled incubation experiment involving both soil types to quantify the rates of decomposition, net N-mineralization, net P-release, denitrification, and the partitioning of C, N and P in soils and microbial biomass under three different incubation conditions. Soils were incubated under (1) anaerobic, waterlogged conditions, (2) aerobic, moist conditions, characteristic for moderate drought in which oxygen intrusion takes place, and (3) aerobic, desiccated conditions to simulate severe drought.
                  Our results show that under anaerobic, waterlogged conditions, net N-mineralization rates per mass dry peat soil and per microbial C mass were much higher (on average 10 times) in the Sphagnum-peat than in peat from rich fens, probably caused by higher microbial N-demand and N-immobilization in rich fens. The response upon aeration differed greatly between rich fen peat and Sphagnum-peat. Whereas aeration led to increased carbon loss and net N-mineralization rates in the rich fen peat, these rates did not change for Sphagnum-peat. The absence of aeration effects in Sphagnum-dominated fens suggests that decomposition rates are more strongly determined by litter quality than by oxygen intrusion. Upon further desiccation, both net P-release and DOC production, which remained unchanged upon aeration, increased significantly in both fen types. This may be due to microbial mortality and/or a change in microbial composition. The low anaerobic net N-mineralization rates and the strong response to aeration in rich fens compared to Sphagnum-fens, as well as the strong increase in P-availability upon further desiccation in both fen types, have important implications for peatland management in relation to drought.Acidification and eutrophication are considered a threat to nitrogen- and phosphorus-limited, minerotrophic base-rich fens, which are generally called ‘rich fens’ ( As undisturbed wetlands are generally characterized by high water levels, the decomposition of organic matter is mainly carried out by microorganisms that require electron acceptors other than O Decomposition and mineralization may also be affected by the acid neutralizing capacity (ANC) of a peatland ( The main objective of this study was to gain insight into the effects of aeration (increased oxygen intrusion) and desiccation (oxygen intrusion plus water shortage) on decomposition rates and net release rates of nutrients upon water level drawdown in fens, and to investigate whether these responses are affected by ANC of the peat. Therefore, we conducted a laboratory incubation experiment involving soils from both rich fens and Peat soil samples were collected from three locations in the Netherlands ( Peat samples were collected in November 2011 and kept at field moisture content. From each of the three locations, five samples were collected from a mineral-rich, brown moss-dominated site, and five from an ombrotrophic, In Stobbenribben and Binnenpolder Tienhoven, rich fen samples were collected from sites dominated by Three different conditions were simulated during incubation: (1) anaerobic (moist) incubation for 69 days, (2) aerobic (moist) incubation for 62 days and (3) aerobic (dry) incubation for 90 days. For logistical reasons, incubation periods differed, but the results have been corrected for these differences in incubation time. For all treatments, fresh samples were homogenized by hand, placed into petri dishes with a diameter of 15 cm, and stored in the dark at 20 °C. Rich fen and Before starting the incubation, initial soil characteristics of the soil samples were measured. Total C and N contents of dry peat soil were measured using a CHNS analyzer (Elementar, Vario EL Cube). Furthermore, portions of 250 mg dry peat soil were digested for 50 min in a microwave (Perkin–Elmer, Multiwave) with 4.0 ml HNO Rates of CO Before and after incubation pH values of the soil samples were determined in water extracts. After 2 h of shaking, pH was measured with a Consort C831 pH meter, using a solid(g):liquid(g) ratio of 1:10. Also gravimetric moisture content, expressed as a percentage of the sample's dry weight, was determined for all fresh samples before incubation and for the samples that were incubated under dry aerobic conditions, by drying the soil samples for 24 h at 105 °C. Concentrations of extractable inorganic N (NH Microbial C and N were determined by chloroform fumigation extraction ( In order to explain differences in net N-mineralization between treatments, several aspects of microbial growth and nutrient efficiency were calculated ( All statistical analyses were performed using SPSS 20.0 for Windows (IBM Inc., 2011). Significance was accepted at a confidence level of The initial soil characteristics before incubation clearly differed between both fen types for many variables ( Anaerobic CO All outcomes of statistical analyses of the incubation results are shown in During incubation, the overall effect of fen type and treatment on the CO Especially under anaerobic conditions, net N-mineralization rates per kg dry peat soil and per microbial C mass were much higher (on average 10 times) in the Treatment had a significant effect on net N-mineralization when expressed per kg dry peat soil, per microbial C mass, and per volume peat soil ( The three rich fen locations responded differently with respect to their net N-mineralization rates upon treatments ( The overall effect of treatment on net P-release was significant ( One of the main questions with regard to water level drawdown is whether stimulation of aerobic oxidation processes leads to severe acidification and subsequently to vegetation changes. Lowering of pH as a result of water level drawdown is assumed to be temporary. When the water level is increased again, most of the protons produced will most likely be consumed due to the anaerobic reduction of alternative electron acceptors ( Anaerobic respiration rates per kg dry peat soil did not differ between rich fens and The respiration rate per microbial biomass C in rich fens was lower than in The negative CH Carbon respiration generally increases upon aeration of peat soils (e.g. Rates of DOC production did not follow the clear pattern as observed for CO Upon total desiccation however, DOC production increased considerably. This may suggest an increase in overall decomposition, as documented in previous work ( For the connection to plant production in relation to nutrient availability for roots, nutrient mineralization rates per unit volume are most important. This study clearly showed higher net N-mineralization rates per unit volume under anaerobic conditions in These differences in anaerobic net N-mineralization rates between both fen types cannot be related to denitrification, because anaerobic denitrification rates in all fens were relatively low compared to the high net N-mineralization rates as measured in The higher anaerobic net N-mineralization per kg dry peat, per microbial C mass en per volume peat soil in Aeration in wetlands due to drought is generally assumed to result in an increase of net N-mineralization rates per kg peat ( The impact of aeration and desiccation on processes concerning net P-release is rather complicated, because apart from mineralization processes, there are redox-sensitive processes of chemical P-binding. For P it has been shown by In contrast to aeration, full desiccation led to an enormous increase of the net P-release. These results are in contrast with a potential decrease due to redox sensitive Fe–P complexation. Microbial mortality resulting from drought, as supported by the reduced microbial biomass C upon desiccation, may have resulted in a net increase of extractable PO Water level drawdown initially leads to an increase in oxygen availability. Due to aerobic oxidation processes, pH values decreased after aeration and further desiccation. Although the pH will probably increase again during subsequent rising of the water level ( Severe desiccation should be avoided in any case from a management perspective, because this not only leads to increased net N-mineralization, but also to considerable net P-release and net DOC production per volume peat soil in the root zone. High concentrations of P are obviously a threat to nutrient-poor and predominantly P-limited rich fen habitats, and increased net DOC production can have negative chemical and ecological consequences, as it alters acid-base chemistry and P and N availability, and leads to lower carbon sequestration rates ( With regard to the conservation of However, it is important to emphasize that the laboratory conditions in this study are not completely identical to the field situation, since capillary action in peat often leads to relatively wet soils even if drought leads to lowering of the water table ( This experiment not only showed how net N- and P-mineralization rates are influenced by microbial immobilization, but also showed that these processes highly depend on the ANC of the peat. In order to get a more detailed understanding of microbial immobilization, stable isotope studies are suggested, which should focus on microbial growth and the C and N pathways in the microbial biomass of both rich fen soils and Our results show that under anaerobic conditions, net N-mineralization rates are lower in rich fens than in The authors wish to thank IBED-colleagues Bert de Leeuw, Leen de Lange, Richard van Heck and Leo Hoitinga for their analytical assistance. This research was financially supported by the National Program Kennisnetwerk Ontwikkeling en Beheer Natuurkwaliteit (O + BN, Bosschap) of the  Supplementary data related to this article can be found at