The structural changes in Ti(C,N)-W-Al mechanically alloyed (MA) binders and the sintering mechanism of PcBN were investigated by XRD, SEM and TEM techniques. The elastic properties of PcBN compacted were determined by ultrasound technique. Tungsten was efficiently dissolved in Ti(C,N) by mechanical alloying, forming homogeneous binders during sintering. Opposite strain effects were induced in the binders than in PcBN particles. Dissolution of W in Ti(C,N) enhanced the fracturing of the cBN particles and the formation of the nanostructured binder pools by increasing the hardness of binder particles. Poisson's ratios and Young's moduli of the new PcBN products were higher than the reference product. Micro-Vickers hardness of sintered products increased with milling time of the binder powder. Slightly higher hardness values were achieved when Al powder was mechanically alloyed with Ti(C,N) and W powders than when it was attrition milled with MA Ti(C,N)-W.Aluminum, silicon and other rare earths are used as binders in polycrystalline cubic boron nitride, PcBN. Contamination from diverse origins and oxygen sensitivity due to increased specific surface are the main drawbacks of the mechanical alloying processing of powders. D’ Evelyn and Zgonc Low cBN compacts contain 45–65% cBN, with sub-micron cBN grain size and a Ti(C Here, the efficacy of the mechanically alloyed binders used in sintering PcBN was investigated and compared to the traditional binders, because it would be advantageous to eliminate the pre-reaction stage of binder constituents with Al above 1050 Two mechanical alloying route variants were applied in this study for the addition of Al into the binder materials. In one route, Ti(C In the other route Ti(C  The PcBN compacts sintered with MA Ti(C The XRD patterns of the mixtures of Ti(C The microstructures of a commercial low cBN PcBN sintered with a Ti(C,N)-Al attrition milled binder and three products prepared with the MA binders described here are shown in The crystals in the core of the binder particles were smaller than 200 Elemental mapping in STEM-HAADF mode of Ti(C Traces of Fe contamination from the milling media were limited to the rims, whereas the cores of the binder particles were contamination-free. Higher intensity of Fe was localised in areas of lower intensities of Al, suggesting that Al atoms substituted to Fe in the Ti(W,Fe) rims formed during milling. The thickness of the rims varied between 50 The crystals formed inside the binder pools Alternatively binders were prepared by mechanically alloying 55%Ti(C,N)–35%W–10%Al in a high energy ball mill machine. Typical microstructures of sintered low cBN PcBN compacts thus obtained are shown in The oxygen content in the PcBN compacts was 2 The sintering mechanism can be determined from the geometry of the binder/matrix particle interfaces. The microfaceted interfaces are formed by the dissolution-precipitation and re-arrangement of atoms during liquid phase sintering, whereas smooth interfaces are indicative of a solid state sintering by diffusion of surface atoms. Part of the mechanical energy input during powder pressing is consumed to deform the particles of soft binders, e.g. Ti(C,N): Al mixtures used in industrial PcBN sintering. The dissolution of W in Ti(C,N) by mechanical alloying resulted in enhanced fracturing of the cBN particles and the formation of the nanostructured binder pools by increasing the hardness of binder particles. The particle size distribution determined by SEM indicated that 90 High strength and good mechanical performance were expected of PcBN compacts sintered with binders containing refractory metals such as Hf, Ta and W. Seven variants of PcBN as defined in Micro-Vickers hardnesses of sintered products increased with milling time used in mechanical alloying of the binder constituents, and the increase was ascribed to the dissolution of W in Ti(C,N) during milling. Slightly higher hardness were achieved when Al was directly mechanically alloyed with Ti(C,N) and W powders in the binder than when attrition milled with MA Ti(C,N)-W powders. The increase in hardness was attributed to the formation of Ti(Al,W)(C,N) compounds in the binder products. The effect of milling time and the type of Ti(C,N) on the elastic properties was therefore attributed to the type and number of chemical bonds formed during milling and subsequent sintering treatment of the products. The XRD results showed that the phases formed during mechanical alloying of Ti(C,N)-W-Al remained stable upon HPHT sintering, thus MA parameters were determinant in the structure on the binder in the sintered PcBN products. The potential use of MA alloyed Ti(C Core-rim structures were developed in binder particles milled for 12 The crystal lattice strain in the PcBN phase increased on HPHT sintering, whereas a decrease was observed in the binder phase. The observed lattice strains were higher in the sintered materials prepared with Ti(C Finer microstructures than in the commercial PcBN were achieved by sintering with hard W-containing alloyed binders. The HPHT sintering did not prevent the thermal decomposition of the Ti(C