Background
                  Little is known about the causes and mechanisms underlying periprosthetic fractures around femoral components particularly in relation to the stem design. In an in vitro study 20 pairs of fresh cadaveric femora were loaded to fracture axially and transversally.
               
                  Findings
                  When proximal femoral strain was measured at the time of impaction of cementless stems the load transfer was determined by the underlying anatomy rather than by the shape of the stem, so that the so-called “load transfer” properties - proximal or distal - ascribed to stem designs are a myth. The axial-load and the transverse-load model were then exposed to loads to failure (fracture) and showed a biphasic pattern throughout independent of the impact direction. In the second phase, the fracture phase proper, the bone behaved like a brittle solid. Failure occurred very rapidly within less than 5 milliseconds. The forces to failure were between 2 and 11 kN. Most of the fractures (82.5%) occurred above the stem tip.
               
                  Interpretation
                  Note that the study was confined to early preosteointegration fractures. Neither the stem design nor the impact direction, i.e. on the knee or on the side of the hip, was related to the fracture morphology.Periprosthetic femoral fractures with hip endoprostheses in situ are likely to become more common in the near future ( The causes and mechanisms underlying periprosthetic fractures and the potential predisposing factors are still poorly understood. This prompted us to simulate the postoperative stage after primary THA in a cadaveric femur model in order to shed light on the following questions: (1) Can radial strains of the femur during stem placement be measured and are these related to the stem design? (2) Does the choice of implant (proximal-load or distal-load) activate factors at the time of implantation, which predispose to fractures? (3) Where, under which conditions and at which force levels do periprosthetic fractures occur? (4) Does the fracture morphology correlate with the implant design? (5) Which anatomical conditions promote the occurrence of periprosthetic fractures? These questions were addressed by studying fresh cadaveric femora ( The aim of this study is to evaluate if there is a specific fracture pattern with regard to hip stem design or impact of fracture direction (proximal versus distal). Various fracture classifications have been reported, for the purposes of this study the classification by Johannson was used, which is commonly employed in clinical routine ( Two stems were investigated: the PPF stem by Biomet-Merck exemplifying proximal-load stems and the Alloclassic Zweymüller SL stem by Centerpulse Orthopedics Ltd. exemplifying distal-load stems ( Fourty cadaveric femora were used in the study. Of six donors, no history data were available. Based on the available data the mean age of the donors at the time of death was 81 years (57 to 93 years), there were 43% male and 57% female donors. To evaluate the bone structure radiographs were obtained and unsuited specimen pairs (osteoporosis) were eliminated. The study was approved by the local ethical committee (Nr 13/476) and there is no conflict of interest. Ten pairs of fresh cadaveric femora were stripped of soft tissue and divided in 2 groups. In group 1 the right femora were implanted with PPF stems and the left femora with Alloclassic stems. In group 2 the order was reversed with PPF stems in the left femora and Alloclassic stems in the right ( To mimic surgical conditions as realistically as possible, the bone pairs were radiographed and stems of suitable size were selected with the help of X-ray templates accounting for the absence of soft tissue and the resultant difference in the distance between the bone and the film and radiation source. Using radiopaque wire tags four sites were marked for the strain gauges: The proximal gauges were placed at the level of the lesser trochanter in the frontal plane anteriorly and in the sagittal plane laterally. The distal gauges were also placed anteriorly in the frontal plane to measure radial strain and laterally for measurements in the sagittal plane at a distance of 20 mm proximal to the implant tip. This roughly coincides with the level at which the cortical bone – to – implant contact ends and the stem tapers towards the tip ( The paired femora were then mounted in a jig and the femoral necks were osteotomised as usual. Four strain gauges (LY 16-6/120, HBM, Darmstadt, Germany) were bonded to the specimens with cyanoacrylate (Z70, HBM, Darmstadt, Germany) after degreasing the specimen surfaces with alcohol and freon (RMS 1, Darmstadt, Germany) ( During broaching the radial strain was continually measured and recorded. Then stems of appropriate size were impacted with an impactor as usual. During impaction the strain was again measured proximally and distally at the sites described above. Once the stems were impacted, standard metal ball heads (28 mm) were mounted on them and the specimens were embedded in epoxy resin from their distal ends to roughly 10 cm proximal to the joint space of the knee joint. When the epoxy resin had set, the femora were exposed to an axial load (fall on the knee) ( Axial loads were applied with an electro-mechanical testing machine (Schenck-Trebel RM 250, Carl Schenck AG, Darmstadt, Germany) at a rate of 200 mm/min to failure. The axial force introduced into the bone was determined with a single-point load cell (C2, HBM, Darmstadt, Germany) along the axis of load introduction and plotted in a path – time – force plot. As in the first set, another 10 pairs of fresh cadaveric femora were implanted with stems under identical conditions. In view of the conclusive strain data from the first set of experiments, strain gauging was omitted in the second set. The specimens were loaded to failure transversally relative to the functional femoral axis (fall on the hip) ( Like in the first set of experiments, loads were applied at a rate of 200 mm/min and path – time – force plots were recorded. All experiments were documented on photographs and video film and the fractures were classified according to Johannson ( An analysis of the broaching and impaction data showed the bone in the area of interest to behave like elastic tissue. After calibration and stem impaction strains of up to 5000 μm/m were seen proximally on the anterior aspect, i.e. in the frontal plane of the femora. For the PPF stems the mean strain was 1116 ± 1470 μm/m; on the lateral aspect of the femora a mean strain of 747 ± 709 μm|m was recorded. For the Alloclassic stems mean strains were 613 ± 583 μm/m anteriorly and 576 ± 728 μm/m laterally. Radial strains at the distal gauge sites were less pronounced for both stem designs. These were 80 ± 117 μm/m anteriorly and no more than 74 ± 92 μm/m laterally for the PPF stems versus 147 ± 102 μm/m anteriorly and 131 ± 77 μm/m laterally for the Alloclassic stems ( With both stem designs the bone underwent elastic deformation throughout. When the broach was pulled out of the medullary canal, the strain values reverted to zero, i.e. the bone morphology returned to baseline. This was seen at all gauge sites ( On axial loading the forces to failure were 2030 N to 10,370 N (mean 7000 ± 2381 N) for the PPF stems versus 3390 N to 11,320 N (mean 7160 ± 2068 N) for the Alloclassic stems. On horizontal loading the forces to failure were 1500 N to 5750 N (mean 3400 ± 1635 N) for the Alloclassic stems versus 1700 N to 7380 N (mean 3360 ± 1635 N) for the PPF stems ( In terms of the classification by Johannson ( Bone tissue is very adaptive. Apparently the adaptive responses of bone to changes in loading conditions are not only attributable to growth processes (stress shielding, remodelling). Rather, bone also responds to external forces by changing its shape in purely physical terms ( Elasticity was more pronounced proximally, where the cortical bone is thin and cancellous bone accounts for most of the bone volume. With increasing cortical thickness elasticity decreased, while stiffness increased ( Proximally, the femora were much more elastic in the medio-lateral than in the antero-posterior direction. Distally, as the femora became more and more tubular, the hoop strain was radial irrespective of the direction ( The strain data recorded from the cadaveric femora we investigated failed to show a clear-cut relation between the load transfer and the stem design. Therefore, proximal- or distal-load properties cannot be unequivocally assigned to a certain stem design. As a consequence, the fracture morphology equally does not correlate with a specific stem design. The concept of proximal or distal load transfer was derived from clinical observations (stress shielding, radiological signs of loosening) and from recording micromovements between the stem and the bone stock ( The strain data we recorded from cadaveric femora also raise doubts about the validity of the term “proximal or distal load transfer”, in as much as the pattern of load transfer was not determined by the stem design in our experiments, but rather by the anatomy of the femur ( Based on the data collected, no recommendations can thus be made about proximal- or distal-load designs. For the immediate post-operative period the optimum design would seem to be one that uniformly distributes compressive and tensile forces along the entire shaft thus matching the distribution in normal non-implanted femora ( What falls cause fractures of the non-implanted proximal femur, i.e. those impacting the hip or those impacting the knee, is still a matter of controversy. Some authors that falls on the hip or more precisely the greater trochanter are causative, whereas others suggest that mere stumbling exposes the proximal femur to a critical load, which may result in a fracture ( These findings suggest that it is impossible, particularly in retrospective, to decide whether a fracture was caused by stumbling before falling on the side or by the fall itself. The fracture location and the fracture force depend on the anatomy, which is key for the fit of the implant, rather than on the direction of the impact. Anatomically, the determinants of a fracture include the strength of the calcar femorale, the width of the medullary canal, particularly at the level of the lesser trochanter, and the orientation of the ovoid entry into the medullary canal ( Despite mechanical manipulations by broaching, the orientation of the ovoid medullary canal ultimately dictates the inclination angle of the stem. The larger the angle, the higher the torque on the femoral neck bone in the case of a fall. The stress caused by a combination of axial and/or transverse loads plus the additional torque produces a multiple of the stresses caused by axial or transverse loads alone. It should be remembered in this context that, disregarding the cancellous bone, the cortical bone is capable of absorbing large-surface tensile stresses of up to 200 MPa longitudinally and 80 MPa radially ( The video recordings, some of them made with a high-speed camera (1000 frames/s), were quite revealing. Analysed frame by frame, these initially showed no evidence of a fracture. On the third frame a full-blown fracture was present. This implies that failure of the bone substance and the resultant periprosthetic fracture occurred in less than 3 milliseconds ( In our experiments all fractures were preceded by stem subsidence, no matter whether a cancellous seam was present and no matter what the direction of the external load was (axial or transverse). This was associated with rotation of the stem relative to the femur as a function of the torsion angle. The larger the angle, the earlier the rotation occurred. Postoperative periprosthetic fractures apparently follow a biphasic pattern: Phase 1 is characterized by positional changes of the stem (subsidence, tilting, rotation relative to the femur). This is followed by material failure (the fracture proper), which occurs within less than a few milliseconds (phase 2). This suggests that pre-existent loosening of an osteointegrated stem is an important factor predisposing to fractures. In the postoperative period (prior to osteointegration) this means that every fracture is associated with fall-related subsidence of the stem. At excessive loads stem subsidence initialises a fracture, but need not in itself result in gross fracturing ( While stem subsidence apparently is a prerequisite of fractures, it is not entirely clear, whether every periprosthetic fracture automatically necessitates surgical revision and stem replacement ( This study was supported by “