Comminution of materials is an energy intensive and inefficient process where predetermination of energy consumption for the production of a mineral powder may require lengthy and costly testing. This investigation was conducted to asses an unanticipated correlation between Vickers Hardness (VH) values for crystalline minerals and their comminution energy requirements as expressed by the Bond Work Index (BWI).
                  Based on preliminary investigations, hardness values of crystalline minerals as measured by the VH test are interpreted to be affected by their elasticity. A tentative mathematical relation with a high correlation between the VH of liberated, mono-crystalline minerals and their BWI is presented. This relation probably predicts the maximum comminution energy requirements as mineral products for grinding are usually constituted by particles relatively free of extraneous planes of weakness.
                  The VH test is proposed as a potential, rapid alternative method for determination of BWI values for the grinding of minerals. It may also potentially assist in the assessment of energy losses due to excessive grinding of mineral ores.Considerable research has and continues to be conducted into the prediction of mill power consumption or production rates for the comminution of ores/rocks and minerals. Comminution of materials, especially of mineral resources and products is reported to be energy inefficient and requiring significant capital investment. Much of the published research that has been conducted has been oriented to the modelling of energy consumption in fragmentation and methods for the determination of the grinding energy requirements for comminution of specific materials. There is a large demand for ground mineral powders in many industrial applications and manufacturing processes. This is especially so in the case of producing fine to very fine mineral powders such as fillers for industrial applications where the associated high energy consumption is a major cost factor in the production process and as such requires the evaluation of the grindability of specific mineral products. The selection of a mineral product to produce a powder is frequently not dependant on a specific source or exact composition. As such, there may be significant differences in the grindability of one mineral product relative to others that can constitute a critical factor in the final production cost of a powder. Despite this, methods for the prediction of comminution power consumption for such operations are probably the least developed of the methods for predicting comminution energy requirements. Testing of a specific mineral or blend of minerals to determine the required energy consumption for fine grinding is presently based on lengthy laboratory sample or preliminary industrial scale batch tests. Determination of specific grinding energy consumption for the production of mineral powders from new mineral sources developed or when new mineral powder products are to be produced is essential for determining operating costs. This is especially so in the case of contract grinding operations where a contractor is not familiar with the operational costs for the grinding of a mineral or when a type of mineral product is available from different sources. The results of investigations presented here were conducted with the objective of ascertaining if an observed indication of a correlation between the Vickers Hardness (VH) and the Bond Work Index (BWI) could be a valid tool for predicting mineral BWI values. This possible relation was originally observed during analysis of test results of an investigation conducted by the authors including six mineral abrasives ( On initial consideration it was originally thought improbable that the VH should be indicative of the BWI of minerals. The work required to generate a fracture in a material is directly proportional to its Young's modulus or “modulus of elasticity.” The BWI relates power consumption required in crushing and grinding operations to the feed and product size distribution. It was originally developed assuming that the material being ground is non-ductile and is a measure of its brittleness or impact strength and its elasticity. It can be considered a measure of a materials susceptibility to plastic deformation. The power consumption for the grinding of materials based on the BWI value is normally presented as The measurement of the VH of a material is obtained by driving an indentor under a predefined load for a specified period of time in the surface of the sample being tested and then measuring the area of the indentation deformation formed. The deformation of the particle produces is supposedly due to ductile deformation resulting in the formation of an impression conforming to the shape of the indenter. A number of different theories have been expounded on the energy required for the reduction in particle size of a material, none is universally applicable. The most widely accepted models as proposed by Hukki The BWI test was originally developed for the application in the determination of power requirements in dry and wet ball and rod mill grinding of mineral ores based on extensive industrial tests. It is an empirically determined relation to grinding energy consumption. Despite a number of reported deficiencies including difficulties in reproducing BWI values Determination of the BWI for a specific material The BWI test is extensively used factor in designing grinding processes and evaluating grinding conditions. A large number of BWI values for the comminution of different ores are available but can vary widely for the same type of ore and generally are not reported for specific minerals. Berry and Bruce There are a number of other models used or promoted to assess energy requirements for the industrial comminution of a material. They include the: Bond Pendulum test The results of studies reporting BWI values are almost invariably for ores or rocks rather than to grinding of specific minerals. The resistance to comminution of rock or mineral particles depends on the materials the presence of planes of weakness such as tectonic or thermally induced stresses and joints; and/or petrographic features such as mineral foliation, minerals grain sizes, form of contacts between grain boundaries; and/or mineralogical properties such as inclusions within grains, cleavage plains and the crystal lattice properties. The significance of these features on the energy required to fragment a particle usually varies with its original size, the size of the new particles to be produced and the nature of the materials present. It is reasonable to suppose that in most instances, the degree of energy required to fragment particles along planes should increase progressively from 1) tectonic or thermally induced stresses, compression or cooling joints to 2) mineral foliation and strong mineral cleavage planes, 3) mineral grain boundaries, inclusions within grains and weak cleavage plains and 4) through non-cleavage plane crystal lattice structures (i.e. fragmentation of the atomic or molecular structure). The comminution of materials into small fragments consists of the breakage of particles through contact with other particles and/or with the grinding media, and/or a resistant surface, and/or with solid mill walls. Modelling of this process is further complicated by the random nature of the grinding process where any new surfaces generated are from random impacting of the grinding media or device with a random selection of the particles of varying sizes. In addition, the force and/or angle of impact relative to any particle plane of weakness are also random. It is evident that as the size of particles is reduced, the probability increases that the new particle surfaces produced being derived from the fragmentation of crystal lattices. Since the fragmentation of none ductile, mineral crystal lattices should in general be the most energy intensive of the comminution process, this should account at least in part for the observation of various authors of a the dependence of the BWI value on the product size (e.g. In the comminution of ores and rocks, their resistance to fragmentation in materials of the same composition can vary substantially with the fineness to which they must be ground, the extent or abundance of different types of planes of weakness, sizes of crystals of different types present, their presence or lack of strong cleavage planes. Mineral products to be ground for industrial applications such as filler requires that they are relatively pure and as such must be liberated and separated from extraneous material in their initial production. Mineral products for grinding should have undergone comminution processes to facilitate their concentration and should be free of most planes of weakness associated with ores. The preponderance of the energy required for their comminution should be more directly related to the properties of their crystal structure. It has been shown A review of the literature shows that studies relating mineral hardness to required comminution energy for grinding of specific minerals are limited and contradictory. None relates the VH values to grindability or to the BWI. Kulu et al. However, considerable work has been reported relating particle hardness to grinding or fracture toughness properties of ceramics, glasses and thin films. This has been conducted in the field of tribology where a nano-indenter similar to that of the VH indenter is used. Interest in the measurement of hardness and elastic modulus by load and displacement sensing indentation techniques was initiated by publications (e.g. Most subsequent work has been related to the characterization of ultra-thin films but such a relation is also observed for the grinding of pharmaceutical powders. It is reported It is reported Of the original samples evaluated for AWC applications, only the GMA 80 and Zircon samples were composed of a single mono-crystalline mineral species. The remaining samples consisted of a mixture of minerals. Sample PRC#3 is a beach sand with the grains being essentially mono-crystalline. The three TC samples were produced from crushed rock and only the hessonite fraction is poly-crystalline. The higher BWI and lower VH values of the TC-K1 sample as compared to those of the TC-CI sample is attributed it having a 31% greater poly-crystalline (compression resistant) content. To derive an indicative measure of the VH values of the samples tested, sets of VH values were obtained for each of the samples using suites of grains imbedded and polished in an epoxy resin at a 10 Combined BWI and VH values published for specific, mono-mineral samples are extremely limited to none existent and since the determination of the BWI values for a significant suite of mineral samples is impractical, additional in-house data for fluorite and zircon were supplemented with data from the large amount published in the literature. The vast proportion of BWI values reported are for ores which were discarded as constituting a blend of minerals in unknown proportions. Only those reported values which based on their nomenclature appear to be of a single mineral type were compiled. Data for samples described as or whose nomenclature implies them to be ores or rocks (e.g. chromite ore, iron ore, limestone, quartzite, etcetera) were ignored whereas those described as minerals were included. Those values corresponding to a mineral but with highly anomalous values such as corresponding to weathered or altered minerals were also not included. The values for those minerals for which a range of values was available are listed in The data presented in this table corresponds to minerals with a particularly wide range of BWI and VH values. They include minerals with strong crystal cleavages (e.g. corundum, feldspar and fluorite) and others with none to poorly developed crystal cleavages (e.g. quartz and zircon). Analysis of the trends of both the maximum and minimum VH and BWI sets of values for these minerals ( These correlations between BWI and VH values indicate that there is a definite but poorly defined physical relation between them. It is suggested that the use of these maximum and minimum values is inadequate for defining the precise extent of this relationship but does provide a basis for defining the extremes of BWI values that might be anticipated based on a minerals VH value. It is suggested that Based on consideration of the reliability of the reported values to represent specific minerals and on the tendency for clustering of similar values where there was no basis for assessing whether or not they are representative, a series of the most probably representative VH and BWI values for specific minerals ( As indicated in All of the halide carbonate and sulphate as well as most of the silicate minerals used for this investigation are characterised as having cleavage planes. If only the oxide minerals (n Similar relations can be derived for the halide, carbonate and sulphate (n   The high degree of correlation between VH and BWI indicates that a definite relation between VH and BWI values exists. As these results were derived from data for only a few mineral products as described in a number of different sources, the equations presented should be only considered as indicative or an approximation of this relation. A substantially larger controlled data sets are needed to confirm and refine the interpretations presented here. Most mineral products that are processed by fine grinding consist of minerals that have been liberated by fragmentation from other minerals. The basis for the observed relation between VH and BWI values is beyond the scope of this investigation but it is speculated that minerals subjected to fine grinding are usually formed of individual crystal fragments (i.e. are mono-crystalline) and any further size reduction implies fragmentation at an atomic or molecular level. It is suspected that the VH test when applied to crystallised minerals produces permanent elastic deformation at an atomic level. It is speculated that at least part of the observed relation may be due to attrition (fragmentation by shearing) which is an important factor in many grinding processes and the deformation of the indenter used in the VH test might in part be related to the shear modulus of materials tested. Due care in the use of BWI values is recommended. The BWI is a value used to predict energy consumption in comminution processes (typically ball mills but it is also used a reference in a number of other grinding processes). It does not represent the energy consumed solely in the fragmentation of particles as only a small portion (frequently VH testing using automated testers is a particularly rapid method to obtain statistically valid results. However, as with any test procedure it can be subject to errors and due precaution in its use is recommended. It is suggested that: calibration be conducted at the intervals recommended by the manufacturer, a minimum of twenty reliable VH values be determined per mineral (forty or more measurements may be required for samples of mixed minerals or of particularly fine particles e.g. < It is recommended that if tests are conducted to investigate this reported correlation between VH and BWI values, that minerals derived from alluvial sands may be the most suitable for such tests. Alluvial sands are a source for a wide variety of minerals and the particles have undergone extensive fragmentation and attrition such that virtually all are mono-crystalline, none crystallographic planes of weakness are not present and the presence of inclusions is much more limited as compared to those produced from other types of deposits. Hardness values of crystalline minerals as measured by the VH test are interpreted to be affected by their elasticity. There is a strong correlation between the VH of these minerals and the energy consumption for their comminution as expressed as related to BWI values. The relation between such values as presented here are based on limited data and should only be considered as a first order approximation for the prediction of the energy consumption required for comminution of a mineral based on its VH. Mineral species comminution energy requirements correspond to the specific mineral chemistry and crystallographic properties. It is suggested that the VH test constitutes a potential, rapid alternative as an initial assessment of the probable BWI for the grinding of minerals. The precise basis for the observed relation between VH and BWI values is uncertain but it is speculated that if the observed relation is developed, it may also form the basis for the eventual capacity to calculate the energy requirements for the grinding of mineral blends. It could also contribute towards understanding of energy consumption in mineral ore grinding and energy loss due to over grinding of ores.