Cobalt is the most common binder in cemented carbides industry. However, there are some interests in use of alternatives. The similarity in properties has made nickel the first choice. In the present work, the effect of initial composition on modern hardmetals containing transition metal carbides/carbonitrides that are called “cemented carbonitrides” with nickel as binder was investigated. Change in quantity of additive carbides and tungsten to carbon (C/W) weight ratio through applying metallic tungsten powder in primary powder mixture had some effects on final hardness, transverse rupture strength, and microstructure of studied alloys. Addition of vanadium carbide not more than 0.2wt.%, increased the final hardness. Application of (Ta,Nb)C solid solution carbide cancelled the grain refinement effect of VC. Formation of eta (η) phase was observed in SEM micrographs as a result of increase in W/C weight ratio. Surface modified layers with thicknesses ranging from 55 to 65μm called Cubic Free Layer (CFL) was observed in vacuum sintered specimens. DICTRA® module from Thermo-Calc® software package was applied for simulation of CFL formation process in studied alloys. Formation of eta phase and consumption of metallic binder was predicted using calculations of Thermo-Calc® ver. P software. A state of the art technique was developed to prove linear relationship between Labyrinth factor (λ) and binder phase volume fraction (f).High hardness, toughness, oxidation, and thermal shock resistance are unique set of properties gathered in cemented carbides Crystal structure of nickel is similar to cobalt. For instance, the lattice parameter of Other than grain refinement effects, addition of Ti(C,N) together with vacuum sintering produces a new generation of hardmetals under the name of Functionally Graded Cemented Carbonitrides (FGCCs). The surface modified layer of these grades is formed through a diffusion process based on chemical affinity to nitrogen. In vacuum sintered cemented carbonitrides, a layer rich in binder and free of cubic structured carbonitride phase called CFL is formed Thermodynamic calculations that are carried out by Thermo-Calc® software, prepare useful phase diagrams and thermodynamic data necessary for advanced materials design. DICTRA® module of Thermo-Calc® software package is a practical means to simulate formation of surface layers in FGCCs Composition profile of carbonitride phase in Ti(C,N)/TiN/WC/Co system that was heat treated in nitrogen pressure at solid state as a function of nitrogen activity was calculated. The thermodynamic calculations have been carried out using ver. Initial powders including WC, nickel, Ti(C WC and Nickel had mean particle size of 2.5 and 3 A carbonitride grade with nominal composition of WC/2.5Ti(C Transverse rupture strength tests were carried out on HIP sintered samples using a Zwick-1465 series machine. After magnetic saturation test (ASTM B886 standard), samples were cut, mounted in resin and polished. Vickers hardness tests were performed using a Wolpert-MC110 instrument. Hardness and transverse rupture strength tests were carried out according to ASTM B294 and ASTM B406-96 standards, respectively. Murakami solution (1/2 K Thermodynamic calculations were conducted using Ver. VC doped cemented carbides have more homogenous microstructure and resistance to grain growth at different sintering temperatures. VC is also was proven to be the most effective grain growth inhibitor additive carbide among others (i.e. Cr A typical microstructure of cemented carbonitrides consists of three major phases; facetted WC (α), binder (β), and rounded Hardness values for alloys with different VC contents were used to plot Addition of (Ta In order for grain growth inhibition to take place, the additive carbide has to be solved in the liquid binder phase and effectively reduce the WC–liquid binder interface energy. It has been proved that VC has the ability to alter interface energy to fewer quantities more effectively than other additive carbides. However, to make an effect, VC should become dissolved in the binder phase. Thermodynamic calculations ( W/C weight ratio has a vital effect on final microstructure of cemented carbides as well as mechanical and magnetic properties. There is always a safe rang for W/C (wt.%/wt.%) that leads to a sound product (e.g. no unfavorable phases such as free graphite and eta phase) Thermodynamic calculations ( Morphology of η phase in cemented carbides with nickel as binder is the matter of interest because it has not been revealed until SEM observations ( A surface modified layer based on diffusion was observed in microstructure of vacuum sintered specimens. This phenomenon is due to nitrogen depletion of surface DICTRA® simulation was conducted for a system similar to studied conditions. Mobilities of all elements in the system have been considered as the same in liquid phase Formation of a surface layer (in a gradient regime) rich in binder phase was predicted in DICTRA® simulations ( The optical microscopy observations revealed development of CFLs with 60 Diffusion phenomenon is based on the fact that atoms in sites with high activity tend to move to places with fewer activities. During the CFL formation process, carbonitride phase former elements mostly Ti, leave the surface area through diffusion. In this case, diffusion direction is perpendicular to surface. If the corner be considered, Atoms from both surfaces move to the same place which results in a pile up of elements at the corner. This refers to an increase in concentration of diffusing elements at the corner ( For alloys with eta phase formed with sacrificing binder (e.g. alloys No. 8–10), the CFL thicknesses were reduced. There is a linear relationship between mass percent of binder phase and measured magnetic saturation The relation between B Formation of CFL follows the parabolic law  The predominant assumption is; Merging all previous equations to one gives; There are same process time and temperature for simultaneous sintering of all specimens. This means constant Square of CFL thicknesses versus magnetic saturation showed a linear relationship with coefficient of determination (R Cemented carbonitrides with a base chemical composition of WC/2.5Ti(C Addition of VC up to 0.2 (Ta,Nb)C-doped alloys had more homogenous distribution of carbonitride phase with sacrificing final hardness. Increase in W/C weight ration reduced the total quantity of binder phase as a direct result of eta phase formation. Development of a surface modified layer rich in binder and free of carbonitride phase was observed in all vacuum sintered studied specimens. Thermodynamic calculations and kinetic simulations were in agreement with general trends of practical investigations. A linear relationship between labyrinth factor (λ) and binder phase volume fraction The authors are grateful for financial support and instrument supply of Mr. Reza Rahimi (