Room temperature compressive tests have been carried out on three metal matrix composites (MMCs), all based on the Al alloy CW67 and on monolithic material. The composites, CW67 alloy reinforced with homogeneously distributed SiC particles in three nominal sizes 0.7, 15 and 33 μm, were produced by hot pressing up to the theoretical density. The addition of the SiC particles increased the yield strength and elastic modulus while decreasing the ultimate compressive strength and ductility of the CW67 alloy in both the peak-aged and under-aged conditions. The greatest strengthening effects were achieved with the CW67–15 μm SiC composite material. Both the presence of agglomerations of small (0.7 μm) SiC particles and the cracking of large (33 μm) SiC particles had detrimental effects on CW67 alloy strengthening. The higher compressive strength and lower ductility were achieved with the peak-aged matrix compared with the under-aged matrix. The presence of SiC particles causes the aging process to be accelerated due to an increase in dislocation density, which provides more sites for the nucleation of precipitates.Metal matrix composites (MMCs) are engineering materials in which a hard ceramic component is dispersed in a ductile metal matrix in order to obtain characteristics that are superior to those of the conventional monolithic metallic alloys. MMCs provide improved strength and stiffness, weight savings and resistance to higher operating temperatures. In the last 10 years, a number of MMCs have appeared, which use SiC or TiC (particulate, whiskers and fiber) as reinforcement in pure aluminum or an aluminum alloy. The properties of the composite depend upon the particular constituents and volume fraction used. The greatest improvements in mechanical properties are generally obtained by reinforcement with continuous fibers. However, such composites have two disadvantages: they have anisotropic properties, and they are very costly to produce because they cannot be formed by conventional mechanical processing Recent investigations of the mechanical properties of DRA materials have focused mainly on the determination of tensile characteristics. The performance of these materials under compressive loading has received only minor attention, in spite of the fact that these materials have great potential in fields such as aviation and automotive components (e.g., for engine pistons), where knowledge of the compressive characteristics is essential. The aim of the present work focuses on the influence of SiC particle size on the compressive characteristics of CW67 matrix strengthening at room temperature. Both dispersion and precipitation hardening during aging have been investigated. The composites examined in this study were consolidated via powder metallurgy processing. The matrix material was formed from powdered Al alloy CW67 (8.25 wt.% Zn–2.23 wt.% Mg–1.22 wt.% Cu) Hot pressing of the pure metal powder was performed at 723 K for 2 h and that for composite mixture at 743 K for 5 h, both under a constant pressure of 35 MPa in an argon atmosphere. The higher temperature and longer time used for the composites were necessary in order to ensure a successful densification process. Prior to compressive testing, all hot-pressed materials were subjected to two heat treatments, under-aging and peak-aging. Initially, all the samples were first homogenized by a solution treatment (1 h at 748 K) followed by water quenching to room temperature. The under-aged condition resulted from holding for 1 h at 393 K, while the peak-aged condition was obtained by holding for 24 h at 393 K The microstructures of the hot-pressed samples were examined by light optical microscope (OM) and by scanning electron microscope (SEM). The SEM was also used to examine the topography of the fracture surfaces of the mechanically tested samples. The composite matrix was prepared from pre-alloyed, atomized aluminum powder of size of the order of 50 μm  The microstructures of the different hot-pressed samples are shown in The influence of SiC particle sizes on the yield strength ( The values of the yield strength (measured at 0.2% offset strain) and the elastic modulus for all composites, irrespective of heat treatment, are higher than those of the unreinforced material. On the other hand, the ultimate strength and ductility values of the composite samples are lower than those obtained from the unreinforced alloy, again irrespective of the heat treatment condition. It might also be noted that 0.2% offset strain occurred at a much higher fraction of the total strain-to-failure in the composite than it did with the unreinforced alloy. The main reason for such behavior could lie in the influence of SiC particle sizes, their nature and agglomerate formation. Also, this would suggest that fewer particles are damaged when the applied stress on the composite reaches the yield stress. Damage will continue to accumulate after yielding, leading to rapid failure and low ultimate strength and ductility. Analysis of the results indicates that the samples submitted to peak aging generally exhibited higher yield strength, elastic modulus and ultimate strength values, but lower ductility values when compared with those of the under-aged samples. The highest compressive property values were obtained for the composite reinforced with 15 μm SiC particles. It is worth noting, at this juncture, that the lowest values obtained with a composite material came from the 0.7-μm SiC composite. This is unexpected in that normally decreasing particle sizes are associated with improved mechanical characteristics of the particulate-reinforced MMCs. Generally, the mechanical behavior of a composite is affected by the presence of reinforcement particles dispersed in matrix material. When considering the yielding behavior of these materials, it is important to recognize that the stress at which a composite will yield is determined by the yield strength of the matrix material. This yield stress may not occur at the same nominal stress as that measured for monolithic material processed and heat-treated in a similar manner There are several factors affecting the local stress experienced by the matrix. First of all, there is a tensile residual stress field in the matrix because aluminum has a greater coefficient of thermal expansion (CTE) than SiC. Partial relief of this stress can result in an increase in the dislocation density In order to obtain a true picture of the influence of SiC particle size on the compressive properties of the composite, a comparison was made between the changes in the various properties of the three composites for both the under-aged and peak-aged conditions. These comparisons are visualized in the bar charts of The composite sample with 0.7 μm SiC particles exhibited the smallest improvement in yield strength, presumably due to the presence of agglomerations in the structure of this composite The composites reinforced with 15 and 33 μm SiC particles are generally both stronger and more ductile than the material reinforced with 0.7 μm particles. Of the two, the composite containing 15 μm SiC particles had the highest percent increase in yield strength and elastic modulus, and the lowest percent decrease in ultimate compressive strength and ductility for both aged conditions. This indicates that the 15-μm particles had a greater influence on the matrix strengthening than the 33-μm particles. One possible reason may lie in the fact that a damaged 33 μm particle produces a higher microvoid concentration than a damaged 15 μm particle. Hence, the increase in stress on the remaining material when one 33 μm particle becomes damaged is greater than when one 15 μm particle becomes damaged. Consequently, the accumulation of internal damage will often begin at lower applied stresses in the material reinforced with 33 μm particles. It should be pointed out that the SiC particles used in this study are commercial grinding media that were made by comminution then sized. Thus, they would be expected to have significant surface flaws. This observation has been attributed to the increased likelihood that the larger (33 μm) SiC particles are more likely to contain a defect of the critical size to cause fracture at a given stress level. Also, in the case of larger particle size and larger interparticle spacing, the contribution of residual thermal stresses is likely to be relatively low, as is any strengthening due to increased dislocation density The presence of SiC particles can be detrimental to the ultimate compressive strength of the composite materials because of the addition to the possible failure mechanisms of unreinforced aluminum alloy of particle cracking, particle matrix debonding and particle agglomerate decohesion As mentioned above, the smaller (15 μm) particles are much less likely to fracture at a given applied stress than the larger (33 μm) ones. This could be seen in the fracture surfaces of the composites Solution treatment causes significant softening of the CW67 alloy as a result of recovery and partial recrystallization of the matrix as well as solution of precipitates. The large difference in the CTE between the aluminum matrix and the SiC reinforcement causes differential straining at the SiC particle/matrix interface during quenching, with plastic relaxation leading to the generation of dislocations and numerous loops The presence of SiC particles significantly influences the heterogeneous nucleation of the strengthening phases  CW67 alloy reinforced with homogeneously distributed SiC particles has been produced by hot pressing up to theoretical density. The presence of SiC particles increases the yield strength and elastic modulus, but decreases the ultimate compressive strength and ductility of the CW67 alloy in both the peak-aged and under-aged conditions. The greatest strengthening effects have been achieved in the CW67–15 μm SiC composite material. The presence of agglomerations of 0.7 μm SiC particles and cracking of large (33 μm) SiC particles have detrimental effects on the strength of CW67 alloy. Higher compressive strength and lower ductility have been achieved in the matrix submitted to peak aging in comparison to the under aging. The presence of SiC particles causes the aging process to be accelerated due to the increased dislocation density, which provides more sites for the nucleation of precipitates.