A linear single variable model for describing precipitation heat treated Al-Zn-Mg-Cu aluminium alloy hardness and yield strength based on precipitate compositions was proposed. A concept composition model was developed based on the major alloying elements and the strengthening precipitate compositions, for the precipitation heat treatment condition. A Refined composition model was subsequently developed to account for the effect of minor alloying (Mn) and impurity elements (Fe, Si). Macro segregation of alloying elements had a significant effect on the results of the Refined composition model. Mechanical properties varied according to a simple linear relationship with the atomic fraction of the strengthening precipitate. The T6 and T73 hardness, and T6 yield strength were algebraically expressed, with linear relationships. The model describes existing yield strength data for Al-Zn-Mg-Cu aluminium alloys. The Refined composition model was also valid for predicting yield strengths of Al-Zn-Mg-Cu-Zr aluminium alloys in the T6 condition.The development of Al-Zn-Mg-Cu aluminium alloys, the 7xxx series, and processing treatments is complex and has been studied for over 50 Research on modelling of Al-Zn-Mg-Cu alloy mechanical properties are very scarce. Starink and Wang The composition modelling component of the yield strength of Al-Zn-Mg-Cu alloys A reason for few mechanical property models as a function of composition could be the difficulty in commercially obtaining sufficient alloys with varying composition for comparison, due to the wrought process being expensive and involving complex production routes. The precipitation properties of heat treatable alloys, such as Al-Zn-Mg-Cu aluminium alloys, determine the application. The shape, crystallography, and orientation of precipitates The precipitate composition was measured by Sha et al. The aim of this study was to derive an algorithm describing hardness and yield strength of Al-Zn-Mg-Cu alloys in the peak (T6) and overaged (T73) conditions using the chemical composition of the alloy. Such a relationship would greatly impact on future alloy design. The rationale for the model was that the atomic fraction of the strengthening precipitate in the heat treated condition determines the measured hardness and yield strength. The atomic fraction of the strengthening precipitate, which contains Zn, Mg and Cu Castings were produced by using the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research's rheo-high pressure die casting (CSIR R-HPDC) technology Five Al-Zn-Mg-Cu alloys (Alloys A to E) were produced with widely differing compositions, of which the melt compositions are given in After casting, Alloys A to E were homogenised at 470 Subsequent T6 artificial ageing was performed, without natural ageing, at 120 AT73 artificial ageing heat treatment was also performed on the T6 samples by solution heat treatment, first at 470 Samples sections were taken as shown in The intention was to improve the correlation between the composition analysis and the hardness evaluation by using facing sides of the cross sections cut for different measurements. The polished side of the cut was preserved for microhardness measurements (Future-Tech FM-700 microhardness tester and 500 Cylindrical tensile samples were machined with 120 The η′-precipitate compositions measured by Sha et al. Measured alloy composition results from the OES were converted from weight% to atomic%. The atomic fractions of the precipitate were calculated individually for each of the main alloying elements (Zn, Mg and Cu) according to Eq where  Surface liquid segregation is a recognised phenomenon during R-HPDC  Alloy compositions measured in the area of the gauge section of tensile specimens are shown in    The attempt with the Concept composition model seemed to be promising for a straight line relationship with relatively good linear fits to the data. The next aim was to evaluate whether the model could be improved by taking into account reactions of other alloying elements with the alloying elements of the strengthening precipitate. Such reactions will reduce the amount of alloying elements for precipitation strengthening and hence the amount of precipitates. Secondary phases were found in the heat treated alloys under the SEM. Alloy C did not contain any other impurity elements besides Fe and Si. Two phases were visible for Alloy C, small needle-like and dark spherical phases. EDX analysis of the bright needle-like phase ( The irregular-shaped phase in Alloy D ( The ratios of the elements in Alloys C and E, with Fe-containing intermetallic phases, had an Fe:Cu ratio of ~ Alloy C had an intermetallic phase that seemed to contain Mg-Si-O, with a ratio of ~ The secondary phases in Alloys A to E, did not dissolve during the homogenisation heat treatment and were stable at the homogenisation temperature The minor alloying and impurity elements were then taken into account by subtracting the amount of major alloying elements that formed secondary phases with impurity elements. There were no reactions of Zn with impurity elements, thus: For Mg reacting with Si to form Mg For Cu reacting with Fe and Mn to form Al where at The atomic fractions of the precipitates were calculated similar to the Concept model, but took into account the effect of impurity elements. The precipitate atomic fractions were again calculated individually for each of the main alloying elements (Zn, Mg and Cu) according to Eq where  The line fit to the T6 hardness as a function of melt composition improved to R In It could be argued that the hardness of a material is the sum of the deformation resistance of two major components, strengthening precipitates and intra-granular dispersoid particles (can't be dissolved be solution heat treatment), both restricting dislocation movement. Solid solution strengthening could also be considered, but it decreases as precipitation strengthening progresses. The contributor with the highest deformation resistance contributes the most if there are two contributors present. The dispersoid particles and precipitates were both present in both the T6 and T73 conditions, implying the same amount of deformation resistance by the Al The line in The relationships of hardness and yield strengths to the precipitate atomic fractions, including minor and impurity element reactions, are straight lines. The T6 condition hardness and yield strength (including minor and impurity element reactions) are expressed by where HV The T6 yield strength can be expressed as a function of the T6 hardness when where YS The T73 condition hardness as a function of the T73 precipitate atomic fraction (including the effects of minor and impurity element reactions) is expressed by Eq. where HV It is tempting to directly compare the T73 condition hardness relationship with the T6 condition hardness relationship, but they are not equivalent since the precipitate compositions differ. The Refined composition model was applied to other yield strength data for validation ( A data set for Al-Zn-Mg-Cu-Zr aluminium alloy compositions and associated yield strengths in the T6 condition (artificially aged at 120 where YS(Zr) The Zr-containing alloy relationship was further validated by plotting the point for extruded 7068 which also contains Zr in The developed model indicates that the level of alloying plays a significant role in determining the mechanical properties. One might consider that hardness and/or yield strength are functions of the microstructure, especially grain size. However, a grain size relationship, such as the Hall-Petch relationship   Compositions measured near where the mechanical property samples were taken described properties more accurately than melt compositions. The Concept composition model was based on the major alloying elements (Zn, Mg and Cu) and did not take into account the reactions of minor alloying or impurity elements. Silicon reacted with Mg to form Mg The mechanical properties-composition model developed was dependent on the compositions of the strengthening precipitates. The T6 heat treatment yield strength can be expressed as a function of the T6 heat treatment condition hardness. The Refined composition model was validated using yield strengths of two Al-Zn-Mg-Cu alloys, as well as yield strengths of Al-Zn-Mg-Cu-Zr aluminium alloys in the T6 heat treatment condition. Hardness and yield strength improved as the amount of strengthening precipitate increased. Funding for this project was provided by the