Interest in and use of external fixators has waxed and waned over the years. The mechanics and anatomic landmarks for the application of various fixator devices have been well defined. The features of hinged external fixators prompt their use in trauma and reconstructive circumstances. Specific indications for hinged fixator use include ankylosis or elbow contracture, acute or chronic elbow instability, or arthritis. In many traumatic circumstances, the goal is to neutralize the forces across the joint to allow articular and soft tissue healing while elbow motion is maintained. The fixator can be applied acutely as an adjunct to operative repair or as a secondary measure in case of reduction failure. The specific indications for dynamic external fixators of the elbow in acute trauma include (1) instability, (2) articular injury, and (3) residual or recurrent subluxation. Elbow dislocation with extensive soft tissue injury typically results in gross instability, even after reduction or repair of involved structures. This category includes instability with fractures of the radial head, Residual or recurrent subluxation after simple or complex fracture–dislocation is the third indication for use of a fixator. The same basic goals are associated with the use of the fixator after reconstructive interventions: allow motion, protect soft tissue healing, and neutralize joint forces. With arthrolysis for posttraumatic joint stiffness, release of the collateral ligament is sometimes necessary, as well as excision of capsular and bone restraints. Our technique releases the lateral ulnar collateral ligament (LUCL) for exposure. to protect the interposed tissue from compression and shear forces while it heals to the humerus to provide motion during the healing phase and prevent contracture to allow the released or reconstructed ligament(s) to heal without tension  Local sepsis, especially at the pin site. Obviously, the external fixation pins must not be placed through infected bone or skin, and no pin should be left intraarticular. In trauma, pins are placed outside of the zone of injury and ideally should be located away from areas of anticipated hardware or prosthesis placement. The fixators can be used to stabilize a septic joint, but the pins must be placed outside the infected field. Altered anatomy. When uncertainty exists regarding the anatomic location of the neurovascular structures due to posttraumatic or postoperative disturbance of the anatomy, a careful dissection with protection of the vulnerable nerves (usually the ulnar and radial) must be made when fixator placement is necessary. The presence of fracture fixation devices making pin placement impossible. (There is some flexibility for pin placement, so the presence of an internal fixation is not an absolute contraindication). Inexperience with the use of external fixation devices. Inability of the patient to accept the device or to comply with pin site care or the rehabilitation program. A number of devices are currently available ( Distraction. Experiments have shown that distraction across the joint does not markedly lessen the effectiveness of the half-pin fixator. Configuration. The critical study of Kamineni et al. Axis pin placement. Increased energy is needed to move the elbow if a nonoptimum application of the articulated external fixator occurs. Although there are a number of dynamic external fixators currently available, only the Dynamic Joint Distractor (DJD II) is described here. The principles for application of other devices are the same and the details are well described in the respective technique manuals. The author receives no financial compensation from the sale of the DJD II device. Once the elbow has been exposed and the pathologic condition addressed, the external fixator is applied. Although several possible configurations are available today, virtually all devices employ a half-pin configuration, which is supported by both clinical and investigative data. The external landmarks of the flexion axis are identified. Laterally, the lateral tubercle represents the geometric center of curvature of the capitellum and is the anatomic origin of the collateral ligament (see If this anatomic feature has been altered by pathology, then the center of curvature of the reconstructed lateral joint is employed as the lateral locus of the axis of rotation ( Medially, the axis of rotation lies just anterior and inferior to the medial epicondyle. This corresponds to the center of curvature of the medial contour of the trochlea and is the locus of the humeral origin of the medial ulnar collateral ligament.  The humeral axis target guide is placed on the medial side, with the cannulated stylus guide placed laterally. The reference stylus is tapped in place through to the lateral cannula of the target device ( The DJD II frame is placed on the reference pin and aligned with the anterior humeral cortex ( Special care is taken to avoid the radial nerve. Kamineni et al. A cannulated trochar is used to allow the pin to safely engage the lateral humeral cortex. The proximal humeral self-drilling/self-tapping 4-mm (or 3-mm for small bones) pin is advanced through the trochar and through the lateral humerus and penetrates the medial cortex. The proximal pin is fixed to the humeral rod with a universal coupler. Similarly, the second more distal 4-mm (or 3-mm) self-drilling/self-tapping pin is inserted through the pin guide and fixed to the humeral rod. The humeral pins need not be parallel. The distal pin is fixed to the humeral rod with a pin-to-rod coupling. The axis stylus is removed.  In an identical fashion, the ulnar 3-mm self-drilling/self-tapping pin is inserted through the trochar, through the lateral cortex, and pierces the medial ulnar cortex. The distal pin is fixed to the ulnar rod, and the second ulnar pin is placed with the identical technique (  The amount of separation is determined by the pathology and may be estimated from the calibrations on the distraction unit ( For some acute or subacute fractures, the elbow remains unstable after the initial treatment. In these cases, the dynamic joint distractor may be applied percutaneously under fluoroscopy to neutralize displacement forces ( The patient is placed in a continuous motion machine for 21 hours per day (see After reconstructive procedures, the device is removed in 3 weeks. If used to protect articular fractures, the fixator is maintained for 6 weeks if possible. Regardless, when removed, the elbow is examined under general anesthesia (see For joint stiffness, static adjustable splints are employed at the time of fixator removal. The program is individualized as described in On occasion, usually with acute injury with open wounds or tenuous fixation, it is desirable to employ the fixator in a stable, rigid configuration. Under these circumstances we prefer to use the DJD II as the external fixator and render it as a static application with a crossbar. The bar is removed when appropriate, and motion is begun with the protection of the dynamic fixator ( A summary of the literature organized by indications is shown in Elbows treated for ankylosis or contracture respond well to release, with mean flexion arc gains of 40 to 80 degrees. External fixators have also been employed in the treatment of complex instability with approximately 80% success. For posttraumatic or inflammatory elbow arthritis, the fixator was used in conjunction with capsular release or interposition arthroplasty. The important point is that when treating patients with complex problems the outcome is predicated on many variables, not just the use of a dynamic fixator. We are, however, convinced of its value in the circumstances described herein. Cheung et al. reviewed the Mayo experience with 100 consecutive applications of 80 DJD II and 20 Compass fixators ( Soft tissue pin site infection or irritation is readily treated by pin removal. In the Mayo experience with 433 pins in 100 patients, 11 pins loosened (2.5%) and 13 pin sites resulted in deep (not osseous) infection (3%). The incidence of neural injury relates to the underlying pathologic condition, the surgical approach, the specific device, and the surgeon's skill and experience. Posterior interosseous nerve palsy has been reported. The dynamic external fixator is a useful adjunct in a variety of pathologic conditions. Although a low rate of significant pin site complications has been reported, meticulous technique and appropriate monitoring of pin sites is essential to achieving safe, successful results from an external fixator. It remains a valuable adjunct in the author's practice.