Heap leaching is a widely used extraction method for low-grade minerals, including copper, gold, silver, and uranium. This method has new applications in nonmetallic minerals such as saltpeter and soil remediation. Although a number of experimental studies have been carried out as well as modeling, which allows better understanding of the phenomena and its operation, few studies have been carried out with the objective of optimizing the process. Most of the studies which consider optimization, either experimentally or through the use of models, have been done from a technical perspective. The aim of this work is to develop a methodology for the design and planning of the heap leaching circuit. A superstructure which includes a number of alternative circuits is proposed. Then a mathematical model is developed that represents the constraints of the system and maximizes the profits. An example is considered to validate the proposed methodology. The results show that the current mode of operation of these systems can be improved using this methodology.Heap leaching (HL) is a process to extract low-grade minerals from ore, including copper, precious metals, nickel and uranium. This method has new applications including non-metallic minerals such as saltpeter ( In this section, a MINLP model to optimize the planning and design of the heap leaching system is presented. The problem consists on designing (usually the heap height) and planning (leaching time) of a heap leaching system for the maximization of economic benefits. The strategy of solution consists on using mathematical programming based on a superstructure of the heap leaching system. The heap system consists of heap leach units and solution purification/metal extraction (SPME) units. The superstructure of the heap leaching system is built including a mixer in the input and a divider in the output of each heap leach unit and each SPME unit as shown in The mass balance in each heap leaching unit j, is given by Where In the event that the process unit corresponds to a solution purification/metal extraction (SPME) unit, the material balance is given by The cycle time correspond to The objective function corresponds to the maximization of the following function, where I is the income from sales and C to the design and operation costs. Also, w represents the weights of the revenue and cost functions. The model is completed with the mass balances in the mixers and splitters, variables upper and lower bounds, assignments of concentrations and flow rates at the outlet of the SPME units, cost and income functions, and McCormick relaxation for bilinear expressions. The resulting model corresponds to an MINLP problem. This section presents the application of the model to an example which corresponds to a heap leaching system with one heap and one SPME unit. The heap leaching unit corresponds to a copper ore heap of 456,000 m A total of eight disjunctions were considered, including two levels of heap heights (6 and 9 m) and four time ranges (from 6 to 180 days) (see The problem was solved using GAMS-BARON using an Intel Core i7 CPU 2.67 GHz in 0.16 s. The results are shown in Moreover, copper recoveries were between 83% and 55%. If the copper grade in the ore is reduced to 1%, the heap height was 9 m for all the copper prices, but the leaching times decreased (and also the recoveries) as the metal price increased. This simple example shows that there are clear ways to improve the design and planning, in order to maximize profits in heap leaching systems. A MINLP model has been developed for the process design and planning of heap leaching systems. The results show that the heap leaching design and planning are sensitive to the metal price. The results also show that the design (height of the heap) and the operation (leaching time) are problems coupled from the economic perspective, and thus the search for optimal conditions, from the economic perspective, must be included as well as other variables. This coupling is due to the fact that these variables affect both the recovery and the capacity of the heap leaching operation. It can be observed that the optimum, from the economic perspective, does not necessarily represent the maximum recovery. The application to more complex systems, such as systems with several heaps and SPME units, and production of various metals, relates to future work. Moreover, as used in this work, the disjunctions from a nonlinear recovery equation can lead to a bit error in the computations of the profits. This can lead to study estimations of the error involved in this approximation, just for theoretical reasons, mainly because, there are other operational variables that can lead to errors in the computations. Finally, as the price of copper is not completely predictable, and as the big mining operations are constantly building new heap systems, this approach can be used online with the economical variables that can affect the profits. The authors wish to thank CONICYT for its support through Fondecyt Project 1090406.