In this paper, research works on Ba-ferrite (BaM) thin films achieved during the last two decades have been introduced. Magnetic properties of BaM/AlN films were studied. Grain size of BaM layer with an AlN underlayer was suppressed to 50–80nm. A non-magnetic layer was formed between BaM and AlN layers due to the diffusion of Al. The H
                     C⊥ for BaM/AlN films with c-axis orientation was 4.9kOe at T
                     S of about 600°C.The increase in recent area density of HDD knows no bounds and the density is increasing by almost 100%/yr. New technology has suggested the possibility of the densities higher than 100 Hexagonal Ba-ferrite (BaM) thin film is one of the candidates for high-density perpendicular or longitudinal recording media because of its high anisotropy field, moderate hard magnetic properties, chemical stability and mechanical strength If The saturation magnetization and coercivity of BaM are easily adjusted by substituting Fe cations with Co and Ti Naoe et al. have reported that BaM thin film, with   In this study, a In this study, FTS system was used to prepare thin films. BaM thin films were deposited on an AlN underlayer with After evacuating the chamber to a pressure below 8×10  It was found that AlN film with the Thickness of the BaM layer on each underlayer is 120  The  To understand the reason for low The thickness of magnetic layer is one of the most important factors for high-density magnetic recording. In order to clarify the effects of the thickness of BaM layer on their properties, BaM layers with the thickness in a range of 25–150     From these results, it is found that a BaM layer thinner than 50 Research works on BaM thin films achieved during the last two decades have been introduced. In this study, It was found that grain growth of BaM layer can be suppressed by an AlN underlayer and grain size was in the range from 50 to 80 Magnetic interaction between the grains was not mentioned here, but all of the films prepared in this study showed a small negative peak in The authors have already demonstrated The grain growth of BaM layer can be suppressed by using an AlN underlayer, while retaining a high coercivity. The grain sizes must be reduced furthermore for high-density recording medium. It seems to be difficult to prepare the BaM film with grain size smaller than 10 This work was supported in part Grants-in-Aid for Scientific Research (B) from JSPS.