This paper reports an investigation on human osteoblast-like cells (SaOs-2) seeded onto pure hydroxyapatite (HA) and silicon-substituted HA (SiHA) tablets under static and dynamic culture conditions. The biological characterizations were conducted in classical static conditions in multi-wells plates, and in a perfusion bioreactor that permits continuous circulation of culture medium at 2mL/h. The morphology, proliferation and differentiation of osteoblastic cells were examined for the two types of samples in the both culture conditions after 1, 3 and 8 days. Under dynamic conditions, cells cultured on SiHA surfaces showed a faster adhesion process and the formation of longer and thinner focal adhesions than in static conditions. The number of cells grown onto both ceramic surfaces was higher in dynamic conditions when compared with static conditions. Moreover, a higher activity of alkaline phosphatase was found for cells seeded under dynamic conditions. Our findings suggest that the application of perfusion culture system on cells cultured on dense substrates is valuable for predicting in vivo behaviour of cells on biomaterials.Synthetic hydroxyapatite (HA, Ca Actually, bone mineral is essentially a non-stoichiometric hydroxyapatite, with various ion substitutions in the anionic sites: OH Silicon, in particular, is known as an essential element for normal bone and cartilage formation as it is found in areas of calcification. Silicon has also a structural role as component of all glycosaminoglycans and polyuronides: chondroitin sulphate, dermatan sulphate, keratan sulphate, heparan sulphate. The hyaluronic acid is also enriched in silicon. Finally, it was found a correlation between the amount of Si in the diet and the mineralization level of young bones of rat and chicken Results of  In order to understand the influence of immersion conditions (static/dynamic) on ceramic surface transformation, we have recently proposed a new biomimetic approach based on the use of a bioreactor for dynamic immersion of ceramics under constant physiologic flow. Also, to be more close to the The human osteoblasts are classically used to investigate The goal of this study was to investigate the effect of dynamic culture conditions on human osteoblast SaOs-2 cells activity, cultured on HA and SiHA tablets. Basic osteoblast reactions were investigated on these surfaces by determination of the cytoskeleton organization, focal adhesion formation, cell proliferation and cell differentiation. The results obtained for dynamic conditions were compared to those obtained in 24-wells plates, the classical static incubation conditions. Stoichiometric hydroxyapatite (HA – Ca Atomic force microscopy (AFM) was used to characterize surface roughness by measuring the average roughness (Ra). Images were taken from five different regions using the tapping mode in a Multimode Nanoscope IV AFM (Veeco (DI), United States). The present study used the human osteosarcoma cell line SaOs-2. The cells were cultured in McCoy's 5A medium (Eurobio, France) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Eurobio, France) and 100 After trypsinisation, 4.0 Dynamic cell culture was performed inside the Minucells Before each experiment, the system was sterilized at 105 After a fixed time point, the cells were fixed with 2% paraformaldehyde for 30 After rinsing, 200 The length and the aspect ratio (length/width) of vinculin-labelled focal adhesion clusters were measured on digital images using Global Lab Image J (ref. 1.42q) software. The analysis of focal adhesion clusters was obtained from at least 10 The cells were incubated with FITC-phalloidin (0.4 The cells were monitored after 1, 3, and 8 days in culture. At each time point, the samples were slightly rinsed with PBS solution to remove nonadhered cells. 1000 Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity was assessed by the hydrolysis of The statistical significance of the obtained data was assessed using one-way ANOVA variance analysis and the Tukey test. Level of significance was set at     After 1 day, a larger size of cells was observed on both surfaces under dynamic condition (  In our study, ALP was investigated at 8 days of culture. At this time point, ALP level on HA was lower than on SiHA samples, in both static and dynamic conditions, as shown in The goal of this study was to investigate the effect of dynamic culture conditions on human osteoblast-like SaOS-2 cells activity on HA and SiHA dense samples. Silicon substitution has been shown as an essential element for bone formation and development as Si is found in areas of calcification, even, until now, the precise underlying mechanism is uncertain. To investigate basic osteoblast reactions on these surfaces, cytoskeleton organization, focal adhesion formation, cell proliferation and cell differentiation were determined. The results obtained in dynamic culture conditions were compared to those obtained in classical static incubation conditions in 24-wells plates. After sintering, tablets of both ceramics exhibited different grain size, due to Si incorporation in apatite structure. Surface roughness of these surfaces was also different, roughness of HA being higher than the one of SiHA samples ( The bone, like all organs, is continuously perfused by interstitial fluid because of both vascular pressure and mechanical loading. When an implant, like HA, will replace a damaged bone zone, it will be in contact with the complex composition of bone interstitial liquid that circulates at 2 The bioreactor that we proposed to use in this study perfused constantly fresh medium. So, the osteoblasts on HA and SiHA samples received constant nutrition and the metabolic waste products were removed swiftly. During cell spreading, specific adhesion structures between cell and substratum are formed and the cellular skeleton is reorganized to change and maintain the shape of cells. Cell membrane receptors, like integrins, and many kinds of cytoskeleton proteins (vinculin, talin, paxillin, etc.) are involved in this process. The vinculin and other cytoskeleton proteins locate at the cytoplasmic face of focal adhesions and are involved in linking actin filaments to the membrane at these sites. Studies developed by Tsuruta and Jones indicate that the size of focal adhesion is related to shear stress applied on cells. Under shear stress, size of focal adhesions increases leading to stronger cell-surface linkages The cells on both ceramics seemed to be larger for 1 day under dynamic culture than for static, which suggests that the continuous nutrition of cells speed their spreading during the first 24 As MTT assays showed, both ceramics are not toxic. After 3 days in culture, it was noted a significant increase of cell number in dynamic condition. This is probably due to the constant renewal of the medium and higher mass transferring, which favours the cell proliferation as it was observed also previously by other authors Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) is an ectoenzyme, produced by active osteoblasts involved in the early initiation of mineralization of newly formed bone tissue. Therefore, ALP is a useful marker for osteoblast activity Under both static and dynamic conditions, ALP activity strengthened rapidly for cells seeded onto SiHA surface, compared with those seeded onto HA. The reason for this could be the presence of Si in hydroxyapatite structure. Indeed, silicon is essential for normal bone growth and development, because collagen and proteoglycans are cross-linked by this element. Moreover, silicon has also been shown to act directly in the bone mineralization process This study demonstrates the interest of dynamic culture conditions as an alternative to standard methods for studying the response of cells to biomaterials. Effectively, the culture under dynamic conditions exacerbates the differences in cell behaviour in function of surface chemistry observed in static culture. For instance, under dynamic conditions, cells cultured on SiHA surface showed a faster adhesion process and the formation of longer and thinner focal adhesions than in static conditions. Finally, it is likely that the results given by an This research is part of the SWE/Dsc program of CNPq Brazilian research agency. The authors acknowledge the financial support given by CNPq/Brazil, CAPES/Brazil, FAPERJ/Brazil, COFECUB/France and CNRS/France. They also thank CBPF/Brazil.