Fractures of the distal humerus account for 5% of osteoporotic fractures in subjects older than 60 years. A history of osteoporosis, co-morbidities, and joint comminution make their management difficult. The therapeutic options are limited to functional treatments, osteosynthesis, or either partial or total arthroplasty. Functional treatment of distal humerus fractures in the elderly subject provide inconsistent results, often with persistence of pain with a stiff or unstable elbow. Osteosynthesis remains the reference treatment for these fractures, following the principle of stable and rigid osteosynthesis allowing early mobilization. However, joint comminution and a history of osteoporosis occasionally make it impossible to meet this objective, with a considerable rate of complications and surgical revisions. Total elbow arthroplasty remains an alternative to osteosynthesis with very satisfactory immediate results restoring a painless, stable, and functional elbow. These results seem reproducible and sustainable over time. The complication rate is not uncommon with an approximately 10% surgical revision rate. Elbow hemiarthroplasty remains to be validated in this indication.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  V.The goal of an elderly patient presenting distal humerus fracture is to rapidly recover a painless, stable, and functional elbow so as to resume daily activities and maintain autonomy. However, treatment of these fractures is often difficult and compromised by poor bone quality and periarticular tissue involvement The goal of treatment is to restore the elbow's rotational axis while providing joint stability despite loss of bone stock and mediocre bone quality. Unlinked implants have been used in this situation, but linked implants and semi-constrained implants make it possible to obtain better joint stability. Different linked implants exist, but the most widely used implant is the Coonrad-Morrey In a traumatology patient, total elbow arthroplasty should not be performed in an emergency setting. The skin should be in good condition, and if dermabrasions or hematomas are present, it is preferable to wait a few days before performing surgery. The patient must understand the type of surgery to be performed and its demands, as well as the postoperative protocol. Indications for total elbow arthroplasty in traumatology: fracture that cannot be fixed; osteoporosis; inflammatory rheumatism; patient older than 70 years; sedentary. Contraindications for total elbow arthroplasty in traumatology: infection; cutaneous lesions; neurological involvement; noncompliant patient; dementia. Total elbow arthroplasty is reserved for patients with osteoporosis who are older than 70 years, presenting a distal humerus fracture. However, in presence of inflammatory rheumatism, severe osteoporosis, or reduced life expectancy, the prosthesis can be proposed to younger patients if the fracture cannot be fixed. The mechanism of injury is generally a fall. The patient presents an edematous, painful, and disabled elbow. Mobilization of the elbow exacerbates pain. The clinical examination includes an evaluation of the cutaneous cover and the neurovascular status. The standard radiographic work-up is essential to classify the fracture. However, it minimizes the degree of comminution. A CT work-up with 3D reconstruction can provide a more accurate assessment of the fracture, its degree of comminution, and the joint injury, allowing a more reliable therapeutic decision. The functional treatment of fractures of the distal humerus in elderly subjects gives inconsistent results often with persistence of pain on a stiff or unstable elbow. Although this treatment can be acceptable in debilitated patients, Lecestre et al. showed that this therapeutic option provides satisfactory results in less than 40% of cases Osteosynthesis remains the reference treatment in these fractures, based on the principle of stable and rigid osteosynthesis to allow early mobilization. However, joint comminution and osteoporosis do not always allow for a stable fixation, requiring additional interventions that are a source of elbow stiffness. Lecestre et al. demonstrated that osteosynthesis provided satisfactory results in 61% of cases The patient is installed in the dorsal decubitus position with the forearm placed on the abdomen. An 18-cm posterior incision is made slightly laterally in relation to the summit of the olecranon ( Preparation of the humerus is simple. The fractured fragments are excised ( The ulna is then prepared with the adapted rasps. To facilitate this preparation, the summit of the olecranon must be resected, which also provides direct access to the axis of the ulna's medullary canal. The top of the coronoid process must be resected to prevent any impingement in flexion with the anterior flange of the humeral implant. The fracture is then reduced with the trial implants. An obturator is usually inserted at the medullary canal of the humerus and a bony fragment at the medullary canal of the ulna for better cement pressurization. After washing and drying the canals, low-viscosity cement with antibiotics is injected with an adapted injector gun first in the humeral canal and then in the ulnar canal ( If the triceps have remained inserted on the olecranon, the extensors are sutured on the lateral edge of the triceps and the flexors on the medial edge. If the triceps were detached from the olecranon, it is reinserted using transosseous sutures of no. 5 nonresorbable suture ( Postoperatively, an anterior splint is placed to keep the elbow in extension. The limb is raised for 48 The Coonrad-Morrey implant is for the moment the choice implant for treating fractures of the distal humerus in the elderly. McKee et al. demonstrated that with this prosthesis, excision of the humeral condyles had no consequence on the strength of the forearm, the wrist, and the hand, and no effect on the MEPS The intrinsic stability induced by the hinge can compensate the loss of bone stock. If the fracture does not extend beyond the roof of the olecranon, a standard 4-in. (10-cm) implant is used. If the fracture extends proximally above the fossa, shortening the humerus as much as 2 cm is not detrimental and can be compensated by the implant. However, if bone stock loss exceeds the roof of the olecranon fossa by more than 2 cm, a 6-in. (15-cm) implant must be used with a lengthened anterior flange When an olecranon fracture is associated with the distal humerus fracture, the olecranon must be osteosynthesized after the ulnar implant has been sealed. If the fracture extends distally beyond the olecranon, an ulnar implant with a long stem must be used. Marra et al. demonstrated that a functional range of motion as well as a satisfactory clinical result could be expected despite fibrous union of the olecranon fracture Total elbow arthroplasty for the treatment of fractures of the distal humerus in elderly subjects was initially proposed by Cobb and Morrey in 1997 Five other studies confirmed these preliminary results In 2004, the SOFCOT conducted a multicenter study assessing the results of total elbow arthroplasty in traumatology. Thirty-one elbows were analyzed with a mean follow-up of 17.4 months. The complication rate was evaluated at 16% with a 10% revision rate, with no implant revisions In 2012, at the SOFCOT symposium, Mansat et al. reported the largest study in the literature evaluating the results of 87 total elbow arthroplasty procedures for fractures of the distal humerus in patients older than 65 years (mean age, 79 years) Unlinked implants have been proposed by certain authors to treat these fractures. In 2001, Ikävalko and Letho reported their experience with the Souter implant to treat fractures of the distal humerus in patients with rheumatoid arthritis The literature also seems to show that the results of first-line total elbow arthroplasty to treat a distal humeral fracture are better than those obtained after material failure ( Frankle et al. were the first to report better results after total elbow arthroplasty compared to internal fixation The option of hemiarthroplasty has been recently proposed. The only studies published to date had short follow-up times (10 months) Osteosynthesis is the treatment of choice for AO type C fractures of the distal humerus. However, in patients older than 65 years, presenting a comminuted fracture on osteoporotic bone, osteosynthesis fixation can be compromised. In these cases, linked total elbow arthroplasty is a treatment alternative that allows rapid recuperation of a painless, stable, and functional elbow. The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest concerning this article.