Purpose
                  To prospectively evaluate preliminary results of the Discovery Elbow System (DES) used for acute distal humerus fractures and posttraumatic conditions.
               
                  Methods
                  We analyzed 24 patients (9 men and 15 women), with a mean age of 69 years (range, 45–89 y). Ten had comminuted distal humerus fractures (group I), and 14 had severe post-traumatic arthritis, chronic instability, or nonunion (group II). Clinical and radiographic evaluations were performed. The preoperative (group II) and postoperative (both groups) evaluations were assessed with the Mayo Elbow Performance Score and Mayo Elbow Performance Index, the Quick Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder, and Hand score, and the modified American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons score. Patient satisfaction was evaluated on a 4-point scale.
               
                  Results
                  Mean follow-up was 41 months (range, 29–63 mo). At the last evaluation, average flexion, extension, pronation, and supination were 136°, 17°, 80°, and 83°, respectively. The average Mayo Elbow Performance Score, Quick Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder, and Hand score, and the modified American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons score were 96, 20, and 84, respectively, and without significant intergroup differences. According to the Mayo Elbow Performance Index, there were 20 excellent, 3 good, and 1 fair result. Twenty patients were very satisfied or satisfied with the outcome. A significant increase in the functional scores was observed in group II compared with preoperative results. Radiological evaluation showed 1 patient with progressive radiolucency and 1 with a nonprogressive radiolucency at the final follow-up. No mechanical failures were observed. Two transient ulnar neuropathies, 1 wound infection, and 1 epicondyle fracture were observed.
               
                  Conclusions
                  The DES yielded promising 2- to 5-year results in the treatment of acute fractures and posttraumatic conditions regarding pain relief, functional improvement, and patient satisfaction, achieving excellent results in most cases. The DES may represent an effective linked-implant option for total elbow replacement in such patients. However, long-term studies are needed.
               
                  Type of study/level of evidence
                  Therapeutic IV.