Calcium phosphate layers, which are widely applied on the surface of biomaterials, are important for improving tissue regeneration performance. The composition of layers formed on the surface of biomaterials differs depending on the soaking fluid. Herein, revised simulated blood fluid and fast calcification solution were investigated as immersing solutions for the mineralization of hydroxyapatite ceramics. The morphology of the hydroxyapatite particles and precipitate formation on the hydroxyapatite ceramics surface were characterized by transmission electron microscopy. Furthermore, scanning electron microscopy was used to examine the morphology of the bioactive ceramics surface. The structure of the layers was determined by selected-area electron diffraction. The prepared hydroxyapatite powders were characterized by powder X-ray diffraction. The results showed that hydroxyapatite was preferentially formed on the hydroxyapatite ceramics surface in revised simulated blood fluid and octacalcium phosphate precipitated in fast calcification solution. Additionally, the content of 
                        
                           
                              HCO
                           
                           
                              3
                           
                           
                              -
                           
                        
                      in the mineralization fluid strongly influenced the crystal phase composition and morphology of the calcium phosphate layers on the bio-ceramics materials studied herein.Hydroxyapatite (HA) and octacalcium phosphate (OCP) are widely employed as bones or dental substitutions in clinical orthopedic and dentistry because of their high bioactivity and biocompatibility. HA is the major inorganic component of human hard bone tissue, and is the most thermodynamically stable phase of calcium phosphate. OCP is mainly distributed in enamel and early bone In the growth and development of human bone, calcium phosphate ions and other inorganic ions are first deposited into the amorphous calcium phosphate (ACP), then gradually transformed into the metastable phase OCP, and finally converted into a thermodynamically stable phase HA. Currently, the shift mechanism is not clear, and pending inquiry The bone mineralization in vitro and in vivo is similar. The composition and structure of mineralization layers are different under different mineralization stages and environmental conditions. Revised simulated body fluid (r-SBF) is widely used as an immersion solution for biomaterials, because the concentration of the ions constituting SBF is consistent with that in the blood Until now, three main conclusions were reached to illustrate the formation mechanism of layers mineralized in vitro solutions. Lu et al. believe that OCP forms in mineralization solutions rather than transforming into HA with the immersing time increasing The aim of this study is to investigate the phase structure and composition of crystals formed in FCS and SBF. The effect of ions concentration, solution saturation on the composition and structure of crystals mineralized in different solutions was comparatively studied. Classical thermodynamic and kinetic models of crystal heterogeneous nucleation and growth theories were additionally applied to determine differences in the formation behaviors. Moreover, transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and selected area electron diffraction (SAED) methods were employed to characterize the morphology and structure of layer growing on the surface. Nano HA powders were prepared by a hydrothermal method, as previously described The obtained powders were shaped using a mold with a diameter of 20 The phase composition of the obtained nano HA powders was characterized by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD, D8 Advance, Bruker, Germany) with monochromatic Cu Kα radiation. Data were collected over a 2 TEM was used to assess the morphology of the synthesized powders and crystals growing on the surface of the bio-ceramics on a transmission electron microscope (JEM-2010 The morphology of the sintered ceramics surface was investigated using scanning electron microscopy (SEM; Navo NanoSEM 430, FEI). The immersion test was performed in two types of mineralization solutions, i.e, r-SBF and FCS. The concentration of the ions in the solutions is listed in To assess the morphology and structure of the crystals growing on the surface of the HA bio-ceramics in different mineralization solutions, two types of experiments were conducted. A group of HA bio-ceramics was vertically placed in 30-mL transparent plastic vials containing 15 The phase compositions of the HA powders synthesized by hydrothermal method and HA bio-ceramics sintered at 1200 the non-sintered HA powers ( The TEM image showing the morphology of the non-sintered particles is shown in The mineralization behavior of the HA bio-ceramic was investigated in vitro by immersing in FCS and r-SBF solutions. As observed, the sintered HA bio-ceramic was very dense, and no pores were detected on the surface ( In comparison, the HA surface appeared to be completely covered by a newly formed flake-like layer following immersion of the HA sample in FCS fluid for 5 days ( For further confirming the structure of flake-like layer formation on the HA surface, the following step was to determine the electron beam direction. Based on the SAED standard cards for OCP (ICSD Card No. 65347), the angle between the (200) and (001) planes is 87.27°. In contrast, the angle between the (–110) and (001) planes is 90.3°. Herein, the measured angle was 91.63°, which is more comparable with the latter value. The small difference between the measured and the theoretical values could be due to errors associated with measurement. Thus, we believe that crystal mineralization is associated with OCP and that the electron beam is along [110] direction. In contrast, following immersion of the HA bio-ceramic sample in r-SBF for 5 days, a mud-like thick precipitate layer was obtained ( TEM and SAED analyses showed that the mineralized mud-like layers in r-SBF fluid were composed of many crystalline sheets ( The formation mechanism of OCP in FCS and HA in SBF can be described by the following equations: Classical nucleation theory was used to determine the mechanism of OCP or HA mineralization in supersaturated calcium phosphorus solutions. The thermodynamic driving force for Ca–P precipitation was calculated based on the classical equation of free energy change in supersaturated solutions as follows Lu and Leng Lu and Leng studied the effect of calcium phosphate ion concentration on Δ In our study, we believe that the calcium phosphate ion concentration in the mineralization solution is one of the most important factors that determine the phase composition of Ca–P precipitate. The calcium phosphate ion concentration in FCS was higher than that in r-SBF as listed in Aside from the calcium phosphate ion concentration factor, the effect of carbonate ion on Ca–P precipitate phase composition is very important. Many researchers studied the Ca–P precipitate formation mechanism in the presence of carbonate ions The current findings illustrated that the phase compositions of apatite precipitation on HA bioactive ceramics surface are different in different solutions. HA formed in lower saturated r-SBF solution, whereas OCP formed in higher saturated FCS solution. The composition of the apatite was controlled by adjusting the saturation of the mineralization solution. In fast calcification solution, even the thermodynamic driving force for HA formation was higher, and the nucleation rate was lower than OCP precipitation; OCP precipitated in FCS. Additionally, This work was financially supported by the