This article presents an overview of guar technology: after a brief description of guar seed morphology and composition, guar chemical structure and molecular weights are discussed and their impact on guar physicochemical properties is explained. Comparisons with other galactomannans and polysaccharides are used to highlight the unique features of guars. Then the diversity of the applications of guar and guar derivatives is illustrated with examples of well-known applications (e.g., oil field and cosmetics) and examples of recent successful developments (e.g., pharmacy and agrochemicals). Finally, the challenges the guar industry is facing today are discussed, as well as the corresponding opportunities. Guar, or guar gum, is a biopolymer extracted from the seeds of Worldwide production of guar gum was estimated at ∼200 India is the largest exporter of guar gum in the world, while the USA is the largest consumer of guar gum with an annual consumption of ∼45 Guar pods contain five to nine seeds. The seeds are made of a hull, a germ, and an endosperm (also called ‘guar split’) surrounding the germ ( The endosperm is actually an assembly of individual cells. Microscopic studies showed that guar chains are essentially located inside these cells ( The guar beans are harvested yearly. The process to isolate the endosperm from the seeds involves two major steps: the extraction of the seed germ, and the removal of the seed hull. The resulting guar splits are either directly milled, yielding native guar flour, or chemically modified, washed, and finally milled, yielding in this case derivatized guar powders. Fragments of cell walls are still present in the native guar flour as well as in the derivatized guar powders. They are often referred to as ‘insolubles’ and, depending on the applications, may impact guar properties and performances. There is no detailed study on the composition of guar cell walls but papers published on primary cell walls of other dicotyledons describe the cell walls as composites made of cellulose fibrils in a matrix consisting of hemicelluloses, pectins, and proteins (including enzymes). Guar belongs to the family of polygalactomannans. Most of the polygalactomannans are extracted from the seeds of leguminous plants. They generally have a linear backbone of 1,4-linked β- mannose/galactose ratio (Man/Gal) which typically varies from 1 to 6; microstructure (distribution of galactose units): statistical, ordered, or blocky; and molecular weights (MWs). The reader is invited to refer to the comprehensive review written by Kapoor and Srivastava, Examples of galactomannans are listed in For comparison, the structure of cellulose is also reported in Not only is guar soluble in cold water, but is also characterized by very high MWs (absolute MWs > Guar, like other high-MW polysaccharides, provides shear-thinning solutions and formulations. Guar has another common feature with most polysaccharides (with a few exceptions such as xanthan and succinoglycans): guar does not confer yield to water solutions. However, the Guar chains develop hydrogen bonds with other polymers in solution and especially with biopolymers such as xanthan. They also develop hydrogen bonds with hydrated mineral surfaces and organic surfaces, acting as a flocculant if present at low concentrations or as a dispersing agent if present at higher concentrations. Guar solutions form flexible films upon drying, which are solvent resistant but easily redissolve in water or aqueous solutions. The diversity of guar properties is reflected in the diversity of guar applications: today guar and guar derivatives are used in markets such as oil field, cosmetics, agrochemicals, food, paper coating, textile, and explosives. In addition, because guar is a renewable abundant raw material, guar and guar derivatives often constitute an attractive green alternative to polyacrylamides and other synthetic polymers. Generally speaking, the following terminology is used to describe guar derivatives:  The DS is measured using various methods,  The MS is usually measured by NMR or other techniques depending on grafts’ nature and extent of grafting.  First of all, the most straightforward guar derivatives are depolymerized guars. Indeed, like most of the polysaccharides, guars can be depolymerized. For instance, the acetal linkage between mannose units makes the acid-catalyzed depolymerization very efficient. Guars can also be depolymerized with oxidizing reagents (e.g., peroxides) on the whole range of pH. The use of radiation has also been described to depolymerize guars (e.g., e-beam and gamma). Finally, enzymes can be used as well: β-exo-mannanases unzip the backbone from its end and β-endo-mannanases actually depolymerize it into polymannose fragments. Next, α-galactosidases selectively remove galactose side-chains. When the extent of degalactosylation is controlled, locust bean gum can theoretically be produced from guar. This could be a way to produce a grade of locust bean gum much cheaper than the original locust bean gum extracted from the fruits of the carob tree, which take 5 years to ripen and are difficult to harvest. Finally, guars can also be chemically modified. In theory, many reactions can be performed on guar hydroxyl groups, but in practice both guar solubility and MWs restrict the field of derivatizations to the ones which are compatible with water or aqueous mixtures. Indeed, in spite of the fact that a few solvents beyond water dissolve guars (DMSO, ionic liquids, etc.), nonetheless water is still the solvent of choice to perform reactions: water is cheaper, easier to remove when needed, and safer than these solvents. Water is usually used to swell the guar splits, not to fully dissolve the guar chains which would generate a nonmanageable gel; this is the ‘split’ process. The second solvent of choice is water/alcohol mixtures which allow for the dispersion of guar powder in the reaction medium and its subsequent derivatization. The water/alcohol ratio is selected to swell the suspended powder, not to fully dissolve it – which would again result in a nonmanageable gel. The major guar derivatives that are industrially available today are (depicted in HPGs, CMGs, sodium salts; carboxymethyl hydroxypropyl guars, sodium salts (CMHPGs); trimethylammoniumhydroxypropyl guars, chloride salts; trimethylammoniumhydroxypropyl hydroxypropyl guars, chloride salts. Many other derivatives have been described in articles and patents, for example, sulfonated guars, Today Rhodia is the leading producer of guar derivatives (Jaguar As underlined above, guar and guar derivatives are used in a wide range of applications. Their key features (MWs, ionic charge, and DS or MS) govern their properties (solubility profile, rheological profile, and interaction with formulation ingredients or substrates) which in turn govern their performances in application. This is illustrated by the following guidelines: Thickening and gelling are usually achieved with high-MW guars and derivatives at low dosage, whereas depolymerized grades are recommended when dispersion is desired. If formulations contain a high concentration of salts or a significant amount of nonaqueous solvents, high-MS HPGs, more salt-tolerant and lypophilic, are recommended. When interactions with charged molecules or substrates are required, guars carrying the opposite charge are preferred; for example, cationic guars are widely used to flocculate anionic species. Today, the major applications of guar and guar derivatives are oil field and cosmetics, volume-wise. However, guars are still present in industrial applications (e.g., mining, textile, fire-fighting formulations, paper industry, and building industry) as well as in food, and their use has recently been extended to nutraceuticals and pharmacy-related applications (dry eye care), water management, and agrochemicals. In India and Pakistan, guar beans have been part of people’s diet for centuries. Guar started to be used in pharmacy as binding and disintegrating agents in tablets years ago. Later on, HPGs were introduced as gelling agents for artificial tears (eye drops Actually, boric acid and borates are common excipients in pharmaceutical formulations, where they are used to buffer at physiological pH. Upon instillation into the eye, there is an increase in pH and ionic strength, turning the borate into a cross-linker and the fluid formulation into a soft gel-like layer over the eye’s surface. This gelification is said to result in a more stable tear layer, enhanced moisture retention, and a smooth protective coating that shields eye tissues from the effects of drying ( Recent articles compare the performance of eye drop formulations containing HPGs to the performances of formulations containing other polymers, especially cellulosics. More recently, the use of guar to provide gels (containing the active as well as auxiliary substances) has also been described. Explosives and blasting agents are used in the mining industry (surface coal mining and metal mining), in civil engineering, as well as in military applications. Ammonium nitrate fuel oil (ANFO) is by far the most popular blasting agent in use today: ammonium nitrate is mixed with fuel oil when needed. Dry guar is used to protect cartridges containing explosive powders, preventing water from entering in to the cartridge. Upon contact with water, the guar present at the surface forms a strong gel, while the inner layers of guar remain intact, that is, not hydrated. More generally speaking, nonderivatized guars and HPGs are used to thicken nitrate solutions of two types of commercial explosives: water gels and slurries. For water gels, guars are cross-linked with standard cross-linkers (boron and antimony), which prevent the diffusion of water. Guars are used in explosives in the mining industry (primary ore extraction), as detailed above. However, guars and other organic polymers are also used for subsequent mining operations such as the ore froth flotation. Actually, froth flotation is one of the most widely used separation processes for treating fine-size ores and is economically viable to extract low-grade and complex ores that would have otherwise been classed as worthless. Most copper, lead, zinc, and silver minerals are recovered from ores by froth flotation today. The flotation process aims at separating the valuable material from undesired products such as metal oxides and ‘gangue minerals’ (talc, calcite, apatite, pyrite, etc.). The ore is first crushed and then wet ground to release the valuable minerals from the gangue or worthless minerals. The resulting suspension (‘flotation pulp’) is stirred in a tank sparged with air in the presence of additives to generate a foam and stabilize it. The undesired materials are made hydrophilic so that they stay in the bath. The valuable mineral is made hydrophobic, and as a result it interacts with the air bubbles and floats to the top of the tank. Additives introduced to remove the undesired products are called ‘suppressants’ and their action is defined as ‘depression’. In particular, guar is used as a suppressant for talceous gangue minerals in the flotation of nickel- and platinum-bearing ores. Guar performances stem from its ability to adsorb on the particles to be removed. Guar and guar derivatives (mainly CMGs) are used in the textile industry as sizing agents. They form films that protect fibers during weaving and which are then easily rinsed off with water. However, guar and guar derivatives are mostly used today as thickeners for printing pastes. They provide a good control of the paste (stable viscosity under high shear, good penetration of the textile by the paste) and facilitate the separation between the textile and the screen, yielding a neat printed pattern. In addition, their hydration kinetics and solubility in cold water facilitate the preparation of the paste, as well as their removal after the dye fixation. As paste thickeners, guars compete on a worldwide basis with more expensive polysaccharides (such as alginates whose market shares are declining due to their cost) and with cheaper cold water-soluble starch derivatives. They also compete with synthetic polymers based on acrylic acid. In the USA, nonderivatized guars were in 2006 the predominant dye thickeners for carpets (guars are rarely used in other segments of the US textile industry). The total US consumption of guars was approaching 3000 tons in 2006 and is expected to remain constant. In Europe, volumes are higher (8000 tons in 2006) but the trend on volumes is the same. In Asia, the demand for textile chemicals, including thickeners for printing pastes, is declining in some countries such as Japan but is expected to pursue its rapid growth in China (7% yearly growth in the coming years). The purpose of water treatment is to purify water before its use, during its use, or before its disposal. The nature of pollutants is usually well known: minerals, metals, organics, or bacteria. For drinking water, the removal of toxic pollutants (bacteria, microbes, natural organic matter, hydrocarbons, metals, among others) is key. For boilers, cooling towers, oil field production wells, and so on, it is the removal of minerals which is critical, because minerals pose corrosion issues (calcium carbonate, calcium sulfate, etc.). Guars are also described for the treatment of industrial effluents, for example, to remove dyes from textile dyeing effluents. The performances of guars and guar derivatives in particular depend on the MW of the polymer as well as on its functionality (cationic and anionic). High-MW guars or guar microgels have been described for the production of drinking water: cationic guar derivatives, removing natural organic matter, anionic guar derivatives, removing metal ions (copper, etc.). Today, the most widely used polymers are synthetic: ion exchange resins and polyacrylamide and derivatives. However, polysaccharides have started being used as flocculants, especially chitosan in Asia. As far as low-MW guars are concerned, depolymerized CMGs have been reported to perform as biodegradable antiscale. Their performances are illustrated with scales encountered in oil production but these new guar derivatives are expected to also deliver antiscale benefits in other applications where scale control is key. High-MW HPGs are sold as antidrift and antibounce additives for agrochemical formulations. Even a light wind can make fine droplets drift and land far from the targeted crop, depending on the nozzle (100 When the droplets land on the leaves to be treated, they splash or bounce off and land on the ground. The addition of HPGs into typical agrochemical water-based formulations allows farmers to fight against both drift and bounce: even at low dosage (a few hundreds of parts per million), HPGs significantly increase the size of the droplets ( Less formulation losses means savings for farmers, but actually keeping the drift under control presents other advantages: it helps prevent damage to sensitive adjacent crops or contamination of organic crops and water streams by actives such as herbicides and insecticides. The antidrift and antibounce properties are not specific to hydroxypropyl guars: other water-soluble high-molecular polymers, especially polyacrylamides and polyethylene oxides, increase droplet particle sizes and confer extensional viscosities to these droplets. Guar and guar derivatives are used in cosmetics to thicken formulations, provide a film-forming effect, and provide moisturizing benefits (e.g., body lotions and hand sanitizers). Body lotions usually contain nonderivatized high-MW guars, cationic (hydroxypropyl) guars, or HPGs with low to moderate MS, while HPGs with higher MS are used to thicken sanitizers that contain not only water but a significant amount of co-solvent (ethanol and isopropanol) or no water at all. However, the major end-use of guars in cosmetics is shampoos. Shampoos usually contain cationic polymers The major parameters governing the performances are MW and charge density in the case of cationic guars, as well as the content in hydroxypropyl moieties in the case of cationic HPGs. Recently, sensorial benefits imparted by these polymers have become key differentiation attributes in the highly competitive shampoo market. Thus slightly depolymerized cationic guars have been designed to help formulators to create shampoos that deliver effective conditioning, while providing a differentiating sensorial experience compared to that offered by conventional conditioning polymers, such as high-MW cationic guars and cationic hydroxyethyl cellulose. Guars are essentially used in fracturing to enhance the production of oil (or gas) from low yielding formations. To stimulate the production of oil, fractures are created in the formation surrounding the production well. This is achieved by injecting under pressure a fracturing fluid containing a proppant (usually sand) into the formation, to deposit the proppant in the fractures as they are being made and keep them opened afterwards. To properly convey the proppant into the fractures, the fracturing fluid is typically thickened with guar or guar derivatives which are cross-linked with standard reversible cross-linkers such as boron hydroxides or other metallic complexes (Zr, Al, etc.). The resulting gel suspends the proppant and transports it in the fractures formed under pressure. The fracturing fluids usually contain a breaker, for example, an enzyme, which depolymerizes the guar when the fracturing operation is complete: the breaker degrades the gel of guar, which can then be removed, leaving behind the proppant in the fractures. CMGs, CMHPGs, and HPGs are used with water-based fracturing fluids, whereas methanol-based fracturing fluids require the use of organo-soluble high-MS hydroxypropyl guars. To summarize, guar gum, extracted from the seeds of guar plant, is today the most abundant among polygalactomannan gums. Its structure (high-MW linear polysaccharide with galactose/mannose Water-soluble synthetic polymers (e.g., polyacrylamides) as well as concentrated surfactant systems (VES – viscoelastic surfactants, SSL – structured liquid surfactants) are often used in the same fields as guars and guar derivatives. Compared to surfactant-based systems, one of the advantages of guars is that guars usually provide the desired benefits at much lower dosage (typically below 0.5% in cosmetics and oil field). Compared to synthetic water-soluble polymers, guars offer several advantages: as an annual crop, guar is by definition a renewable resource. In addition, guar gum is readily biodegradable and low-DS guar derivatives are readily or inherently biodegradable (according to OECD guidelines). That being said, there are several opportunities for improvements in the guar industry. For example, major guar plants consume significant volumes of water and energy today. This is because most of the guar derivatives are produced with the so-called ‘split process’. One positive aspect about it is the use of water as an exclusive solvent but at the same time it creates challenges: just like for cellulose, starch, and other polysaccharides, the derivatization of guar in water is not quantitative. Indeed, part of the reagent is usually hydrolyzed into by-products. In order to remove these by-products and produce high-quality guar derivatives, the resulting splits need to be washed with an excess of water before the splits can be processed through the last step, drying and milling. As a consequence, the challenge the guar industry is facing today consists of further increasing reaction yields and to consume less water for the washing step and speed up the drying step. Application-wise, the challenges the guar industry is facing are well known. Here are some examples: In oil field, the challenge in fracturing fluids is to produce guar gels which withstand high temperatures (400 Unlike Jaguar Each of these challenges represents an opportunity to improve the technology and performances in today’s applications of guars. New processes will be developed, new guar derivatives will be commercialized, and this will certainly be the occasion to extend the use of guars beyond the current fields.