Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) is an essential biomarker of osteoblastic activity. Currently, ALP activity has been used to study bone mineralization mechanisms and osteoactive biomaterials among others. The ALP quantification is usually performed by destructive methods either on growing cells or cells lysate in which the osteoconductive biomaterial is being assessed. This work addresses the evaluation of a non-destructive colorimetric approach for the determination of ALP activity on osteoblast-derived exosomes from culture supernatants. The efficiency of the method was evaluated on osteoconductive electrospun scaffolds of PCL compounded with ZnO as a reference biomaterial. The results demonstrated that the osteoblast cell line mineralization induced by osteoconductive scaffolds can be monitorized over time by the non-destructive measurement of ALP activity on osteoblast derived exosomes. Consequently, this non-destructive approach suggested to be a reliable alternative technique for the quantification of biomaterials osteoconductivity or even evaluation of osteoblastic response at stem cells.Alkaline phosphatases (ALP; orthophosphoric monoester phosphohydrolase EC3.1.3.1) are a family of metalloenzymes which catalyze at high pH [ According to the source of isolation, the human ALP is particularly classified into four isoenzymes identified as placental, intestinal, germ cell and tissue-nonspecific ALP. The latter is ubiquitously expressed in many tissues and organs including liver, bone and kidney and therefore is also referred as liver/bone/kidney type [ As it was shown by Epstein Both for clinical determination of ALP activity at human serum or during Therefore, this work addresses the evaluation of a non-destructive colorimetric approach based on SSCC clinical recommendations for For cell culture, human fetal osteoblast cell line (hFOB 1.19) was purchased from the Eucellbank (Barcelona, Spain). For cell culture, Dulbecco's Modified Eagle's Medium (DMEM), F-12, Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS) and hFOB 1.19 (henceforth named hFOB) cells were seeded at 25.000 cell/ml on T75 and T150 flasks (Nunc™, ThermoFisher Sci) using DMEM/F-12 (1:1) supplemented with 10% of FBS, 1% of Penicillin-Streptomycin, 2.5 mM of Supernatants cultures were directly obtained from the respective flasks used to culture hFOBs cells after every medium refresh once cells reached 80–90% of confluence. Later, every sample was individually stored in eppendorfs at −20 °C until analysis. For ALP activity determination of culture supernatants, 50 μl of each sample was mixed with 250 μl of 10 mM p-NPP dissolved in buffer DEA. Immediately after, the reaction was followed by measuring the absorbance at 405 nm every 30 s using a microplate reader (Infinit Pro200, Tecan, Austria). Finally, ALP activity was calculated according to the following equation: Two widely recognized methods were used for the determination of ALP as gold standards in this study, these are For For cell culture lysis determination, hFOB cultures were first washed twice with sterile PBS. Subsequently, 150 μl of Tris-HCl lysis buffer (containing 0.2% of Triton X-100) was added and plates were thereafter incubated for 30 min at 4 °C under orbital shaking. The lysates, centrifuged at 3000 Sequential centrifugation assays were performed on supernatants obtained from hFOB cultures in T150 culture flasks, which were initially seeded at 25.000 cells/ml and whose growth were followed by optical microscopy. Briefly, hFOB cells were cultured until ~80% of confluence following the protocol described in In order to quantify EV concentrates avoiding serum interference, EV were isolated following the standard method described by Théry Briefly, hFOB cultures at day 16 were refreshed with serum-free medium and subsequently incubated at 37 °C for 24 h. Serum-free supernatants (sf-SN) were collected and further subjected to a sequential centrifugation process of 1000 Moreover, transmission electron cryomicroscopy was used to observe EV suspension. Aliquots of 10 μl were placed on Formvar-Carbon EM grills and frozen in ethanol. Samples were examined with a Jeol JEM 2011 electronic transmission microscope at an accelerating voltage of 200 kV. Exosomes were kept at −182 °C with liquid nitrogen throughout the process. Osteoconductive composite scaffolds were fabricated by electrospinning as stated by Felice et al. [ As a first approach of the exosome-based non-destructive method efficacy analyzed in this work, ALP activity was determined Moreover, in order to study the evolution of hFOB cultures, calcium deposits were quantified by Alizarin Red S (ARS) at day 14 and cell proliferation by MTT assay (3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide) at day 3, 7 and 14, were performed on the samples according to Felice et al. [ Results are shown as mean ± standard deviation. Variance analysis in all cases was done through Levene test with a significance level of 0.05. Direct comparison of two populations was performed through Student's ALP activity is an essential At a first stage, ALP activity at hFOB cultures was quantified according to the protocols for ALP As it was explained in the Experimental Section, the ALP First, it must be noted that although ALP activity was determined at days 3, 7 and 14 of culture with all methods, it would have been feasible to quantify the ALP activity using the SN technique after every medium refresh, given the non-destructiveness of such approach. Nevertheless, for comparability of results, measurements were restricted to the aforementioned periods. As expected, it is noticeable that both gold standard measurements result in ALP activity values with similar intensities. For exosome-based non-destructive method, the ALP intensities measured in SN are one order of magnitude less than for the gold standards determinations, however it must be highlighted that the SN method certainly reflects the same hFOB response than both Recently it has been proposed that some forms of ALP might be exocytosed in EV, some of them also known as exosomes, in addition to other insoluble and soluble forms of the enzyme present in human serum [ Sequential centrifugation, as described in It is known that low-speed centrifugation removes cells and apoptotic debris, higher speed spin to eliminate larger vesicles and finally ultracentrifugation is used to precipitate exosomes. According to the literature, sequential centrifugation with a final step of ultracentrifugation at 100,000 The results presented here suggest that the ALP at Medium+10%FBS is predominantly found in a soluble form whereas the ALP at SN hFOB is primarily found in an insoluble form, which may involve micro- and nano-EV. According to Anh As the centrifugation speed is increased, smaller particles are pelleted. After 100,000 Considering the negligible ALP activity at EV concentrates from Medium+10%FBS as well as the significant ALP activity at EV from SN hFOB, the results clearly confirm that ALP at culture supernatants of hFOB is primarily released in micro-EV and nano-EV (insoluble form), whereas the ALP from FBS is mostly found in a soluble form in addition to a significantly smaller proportion of ALP at micro-EV. Furthermore, a quantitative and qualitative evaluation was performed to EV isolated from SN-hFOB. Firstly, the concentration and size distribution of the exosomes produced were quantified, in a liquid suspension, by means of Nanoparticle Tracking Analysis (NTA). EV produced by hFOB cells were further observed by TEM and a micrograph is shown in Nanofibrous scaffolds obtained through electrospinning have been extensively used for regeneration of bone tissue primarily due to their biomimetic morphology in addition to the osteoactive effect exerted by the ZnO [ The non-destructive method of ALP activity assessment by means of activity determination at culture supernatants might be an effective tool for Both types of scaffolds present a nanofibrous architecture that resembles the randomly organized collagen fibers at immature bone extracellular matrix. Fiber diameters of 0.58 ± 0.28 μm and 0.57 ± 0.23 μm for PCL and PCL + ZnO, respectively, were observed (see  Additionally Moreover, ARS results showed that PCL + ZnO scaffolds clearly induce higher amounts of mineral deposits than TCP and PCL samples (See Fig. S2-1a in Section S2 under SI). However, in contrast to these results, cell proliferation on the concerning samples shows a different behavior. Whereas the hFOB proliferation constantly increases between days 3 and 14 of culture on TCP and PCL scaffolds, on PCL + ZnO scaffolds the number of cells under proliferation remains low and approximately constant for the same period (see Fig. S2-1b in Section S2 under SI). Given that ZnO is not cytotoxic to osteoblastic cells according to several authors, the lack of proliferation on PCL + ZnO scaffolds is likely to be caused by ongoing mineralization processes [ According to several authors, a constant cell proliferation in parallel with exponential increase of ALP activity are reported indicators of ongoing mineralization process [ Considering as well, the suitability of PCL + ZnO scaffolds to accelerate bone tissue regeneration, which was demonstrated in previous work [ In summary, we have presented an alternative non-destructive approach to monitor osteoblast differentiation of hFOB cells induced by osteoinductive biomaterials. Cells maturity was assessed using the most common ALP activity assays and following SSCC clinical recommendations. The activity of hFOB cells on TCP wells and biomaterials was compared with the results obtained in culture supernatants. The origin of ALP enzyme released to the supernatants was found to be in an insoluble form, in accordance with previous experiments on human osteoblasts reported in the literature. Further characterization of ALP insoluble fraction was also presented. Despite that the sensitivity of the propose method is lower than the traditional ALP activity assays, ALP activity in supernatants could be assessed as an alternative non-destructive option for the evaluation of osteoblast maturity in  Authors declare no conflict of interest with the results published in the manuscript. The authors would like to thank the members of Lab of Cell Immunology at the Institut de Biotecnologia i Biomedicina for their support during cell culture experiments. Research conduction of this study was financed by  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at