The current study focuses on the effect of titanium carbide particles that are used as a reinforcement in Cu/graphite composite fabricated successfully through flake powder metallurgy technique. The reinforced titanium carbide particles were added in 1, 3 and 5% by weight in the Cu/5wt%Gr matrix. Microstructural analysis of the composites was conducted using scanning electron microscopy and optical microscopy. The mechanical properties such as hardness and density of the composites were assessed. SEM analysis shows formation of flake particles. The hardness is optimum for Cu-5Gr with 5 wt% TiC but the relative density reduces to 74.01% for 5 wt% TiC composite due to increase in porosity at higher percentages of TiC.Copper (Cu) and its alloys have been widely used as a key constituent for the production of metal matrix composites for many years. They have been used in many engineering applications. The Cu/graphite (Gr) composites are utilized as carbon bushes, in electrical sliding contacts such as pantograph strip due to their improved tribological properties than that of the pure copper The inclusion of graphite into copper exhibits a composite with superior tribological properties along with reasonable mechanical properties. But the graphite addition deteriorates the hardness and strength of the composite which can be compensated by adding a ceramic material like titanium carbide. Introduction of hard ceramic titanium carbide (TiC) particles in a copper ductile matrix improves the hardness, wear, high temperature stability of the composite In the present work, copper matrix composite having 5 wt% graphite and varying wt % (1, 3 and 5) of TiC particles is synthesized through Flake powder metallurgy route. The microstructural characterization of composite powders and composite specimen is done using optical micrograph and SEM. Hardness and density is also calculated. Commercial electrolytic copper (purity 99.7%) having 25 µm average particle diameters was used as the matrix, Graphite (average particle size 45 µm, 99% purity) and TiC (average particle diameter 3 µm) were used as reinforcements. The composites were synthesized as: Cu with 5 wt% graphite (referred as Cu-5Gr) and Cu-5Gr reinforced with 1, 3 and 5 wt% TiC particles (referred as Cu-5Gr-1TiC, Cu-5Gr-3TiC and Cu-5Gr-5TiC respectively). The mechanical alloying of powders is achieved in a planetary type ball mill (RETSCH-PM400) for 5 h. The dry ball milling of powders was performed in a hardened steel vial with 10 mm zirconia balls. The ball to powder ratio was 10:1. The powders were then compacted in 12 mm diameter single acting compaction die at a pressure of 700 MPa The optical microscopy of composite samples was investigated. The samples of 12 mm diameter and 10 mm height were taken. The emery paper grinding with a 400–2000 grit size was performed on the samples. Then cloth alumina polishing was performed on a rotating polishing machine. The etchant solution was prepared using 5 g ferric chloride, 25 ml HCl and 100 ml ethanol and the composite samples were etched in it and further rinsed in distilled water. The optical microstructure of composite samples is shown in The NOVA Nano SEM is used for Scanning Electron microscopy of the composite powders at 1 h, 3 h, 5 h to see flake formation of the composite powders. Energy dispersive X-ray analysis (EDX) spectrum of composite powders reveal the existence of copper coated graphite and TiC is shown in The sintered densities of the composites were calculated by Archimedes principle with an accurate balance machine. The average of five values were taken for the different sample set. The Vickers hardness test was done on the composite samples (diameter 12 mm and 10 mm height) under the load of 300 g for 15 s using a Vickers hardness tester. In the present experimental work, composites with varying content of TiC particles in Cu/Gr were successfully prepared through Flake PM process. Microstructural and mechanical properties were studied. Based on the above results following conclusions are made: The optical micrograph confirms homogeneous dispersion of reinforcing particles in the composites. From SEM analysis of composite powder, it is seen that round flake morphology of the powders is achieved after 5 h of milling. The sintered density of the composites decreases with the addition of the TiC particles. Maximum and minimum relative density are 83.25% and 74.01% for Cu-5Gr and Cu-5Gr-TiC respectively. At higher contents of TiC, the obstruction in compaction causes rise in porosity and hence low density. The Vickers hardness is maximum for Cu-5Gr-5TiC and the hardness value is 62VHN. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.