A two-phase flow unified pipe network method is developed to simulate CO2 evolution in fractured saline aquifers. Fractures are explicitly represented in the proposed method. The two-phase flow in both rock matrix and fractures is considered by using different equivalent pipe flow models respectively, namely the two-phase matrix pipe flow model and the two-phase fracture pipe flow model. The equivalent flow coefficients of the pipe flow models are derived based on flow rate equivalence. The coupling of the fracture pipe flow and matrix pipe flow is treated by applying the extended capillary pressure conditions. Brooks-Corey relative permeability model and capillary model are adopted to simulate CO2 (non-wetting phase) invasion into the brine (wetting phase) saturated formation, which is a typical drainage process. Accurate Equations of State for calculating density and viscosity of CO2 are incorporated to reflect its change in hydraulic characteristics during the injection processes. The proposed method is simple yet robust and not sensitive to the mesh quality. The complex geological and topological features of fracture networks can, therefore, be well retained in the proposed method. The anisotropy and heterogeneity characteristics of the fractured rock mass caused by the fracture networks can be accurately represented. The proposed method is verified by comparing to other numerical methods. Both 2D and 3D models with complex fracture networks are presented to demonstrate the feasibility of proposed method. Numerical examples show that fractures can significantly affect the distribution and evolution of CO2 in aquifers and the differences of entry capillary pressures for fractures and matrix rock should be accurately simulated.The emission rate of carbon dioxide (CO Complex physical processes are involved in the storage of CO Analytical and numerical studies have been carried out to obtain better understanding of the injection scenarios. There are a few discrete models being reported, which include discrete fracture network (DFN) models and discontinuous hybrid models that simulate CO The discrete models are effective tools providing insight into the evolution of CO The numerical simulation of multiphase flow in discrete-fractured media can be challenging. Most of the reported numerical methods for multiphase flow based on discrete models involve complicated mathematical calculations, such as the FEM, In this paper, 2D and 3D two-phase flow discontinuous hybrid models are developed using the unified pipe network method (UPM). Fractures are represented explicitly by fracture pipes, and rock matrix is equivalent to matrix pipes. The CO Although the geological storage of CO Darcy's law is generally assumed to be valid for two-phase flow in a fractured porous medium which can be decomposed of flow in the matrix subdomain The intrinsic permeability of a fracture can be calculated based on parallel plates model, Apart from the mass conservation equations and constitutive equations described in Eqs. The proposed UPM is conceptually straightforward and it treats fracture flow and matrix flow in the same framework, i.e. virtual pipe flow. The conceptualization of fractured rock is illustrated in For the numerical stability, the evaluation of the relative permeability is based on the upwind scheme. At each node The nodal mass accumulation is calculated by The governing equations of the UPM can be obtained by instituting Eq. To derive the equivalent conductance coefficients of pipes and facilitate the coupling of fractures in matrix, unstructured triangular mesh and tetrahedron mesh are adopted for 2D domain (such as matrix rock in 2D models and 2D fractures in 3D models) and 3D domain respectively. Taking a 2D fractured rock mass shown in By comparison, the equivalent conductance coefficient of a 1D fracture pipe in 2D domain is For the triangular rock matrix in 2D domain, each edge of a triangle is treated as a flow pipe. In order to derive the equivalent conductance coefficients of the matrix pipes, different inner points such as the circumcenter or the incenter of the triangle are employed as partition points, through which three perpendicular line segments associated with the three edges of the triangle can be obtained as shown in The fluid flow between each part within the triangle is equivalent to flow in corresponding matrix pipes. For example, pipe A 3D matrix domain can be reconstructed and discretized using tetrahedrons as illustrated in A detailed derivation can be found at As noticed from the derivation, the equivalent conductance coefficients of pipes can be expressed uniformly as It is noted that the pipe equivalence of UPM becomes the traditional two-point flux approximation (TPFA) After the domain reconstruction, the fractured porous medium is discretized by nodes connected by different virtual pipes with their individual flow properties. Fluid transfer from one node to another is through the connected pipe. In the porous media, the two adjacent nodes are connected only by the matrix pipes. However, at the interface, every two adjacent interface nodes are connected by matrix pipes and fracture pipes, as shown in Based on the extended capillary pressure conditions, if the saturation of the wetting phase in the fracture pipe If the Brooks-Corey capillary model is used, the In our model, the wetting phase pressure In order to solve the coupled equations, the initial conditions and the boundary conditions should be given. The initial conditions are Iteration is required to obtain results that is correct enough in each time step due to the implementation of the implicit time scheme. During each time step, iteration stops when results achieve certain termination criteria. In the proposed method, iteration stops whenever iteration number is larger than an iteration limit or results become stable, which is judged by the following condition, In this Section, 2D and 3D numerical examples are presented to demonstrate the capability of the UPM in modelling two-phase compressible fluid flow in fractured porous media. The first example is a gas injection problem in a water saturated fractured porous medium, the geometry of which is illustrated in The initial conditions for the whole domain are The simulation results at different times are illustrated in The computational efficiency also has been tested in this case. The model with 3594 elements, 1870 nodes are used in this test. The simulations are run on a laptop computer with Intel core i7 processor and 16 A 2D multiple-fracture medium, which is illustrated in As seen in Not only two-phase flow in 2D models can be simulated by UPM, two-phase flow problems in 3D multiple-fracture porous medium can also be modelled by UPM. A 3D two-phase flow example is presented to demonstrate the capability of UPM in simulating the 3D two-phase flow. The configuration of the fractures and their mesh are illustrated in Normally the CO For the density-pressure-temperature relationship, the Span-Wagner EOS A rectangular saline aquifer with the size of The CO In this paper, a two-phase flow unified pipe network method has been developed to simulate CO The two-phase flow feature in UPM is reflected by relative permeability of each phase which is a function of phase saturation. It is calculated based on upwind scheme for numerical stability. In addition, the capillary pressure discontinuities and saturation discontinuities that are important characteristics of CO The limitations of current method are that firstly, the discretization of complex fractured domains requires conforming mesh, which is a tough task. However, with the development of meshing methods, high-quality mesh of domains with complex fracture networks is no longer unavailable. Actually, we have developed an effective conforming mesh method for domains with complex fracture networks, which will be published soon. The second and third limitations are about fracturing and stress coupling, which are two of our main targets in the future. These have not been incorporated in the current study yet. We are currently trying to couple the flow mode with deformation and damage model. Numerical examples revealed that the presence of fractures in the reservoir rock increases the advancing speed of CO This research was supported by the Assuming unit thickness for the 2D porous medium, the fluid flow through face If the pressures of three nodes are known as The linear shape function The pressure gradient in the triangular domain is calculated as, The fluid flow through the face The right term The fluid flow The fluid flow The equivalent conductance coefficients for pipes Similar to the derivation of the equivalent coefficient of a 2D triangular porous medium, an FEM-like linear shape function is adopted to approximate the distribution of the pressure. The pressure Then the pressure gradient in the tetrahedral domain can be estimated as, Here, The fluid flow through pipe By substituting Eqs. Therefore, the equivalent conductance coefficient of pipe The equivalent conductance coefficients for pipes