Considerable changes in atomic distribution, Ni atomic ordering and elimination of inhomogeneity in distribution of carbon atoms in the α-martensite occurred after high-dose electronic irradiation and subsequent deep cooling of parent Fe–22.4at.%Ni–5.13at.%C austenite in liquid nitrogen. These atomistic changes resulted from the electronic irradiation caused a huge increase of the 160°C peak of internal friction in the α-martensite. Discussion regarding this phenomenon brings to a conclusion on the behavior of the 160°C peak, fitting in the best way for a certain Snoek-like relaxation in Fe–Ni–C martensite.Fe–Ni–C steels that have the low martensitic start temperatures ( With regard to the relaxation mechanism, Gavriljuk et al. The Fe–22.4 The transformation temperatures and magnetic behaviors were measured through the magnetic susceptibility method. The atomic distribution was examined by using a standard Mössbauer spectrometer MS1101E with The appearance of the doublet in the Mössbauer spectrum of austenite corresponds to the resonant Fe atoms with C interstitials as the nearest neighborhood. The high relative part of doublet square ( In the magnetic susceptibility curves as shown in Considerable decrease of Zeeman sextet squares in the Mössbauer spectra of the α-martensite in the irradiated alloy as compared with those for the non-irradiated alloy ( The atomic distribution in the parent austenite is fundamentally inherited for the subsequent martensitic transformation. When considering the relief of inhomogeneity in distribution of C atoms due to the electronic irradiation in the parent austenite, the significant increase of the 160 It should be noted that the Snoek-like interpretation Tetragonal distortions in the fcc lattice increase due to short-range ordering of Ni atoms and magnetostriction at The more homogeneous distribution of C atoms in the irradiated alloy causes increase of the number of substitutional–interstitial relaxation dipoles. The Snoek-like interpretation conforms to a suppression of the 160  The high-dose electronic irradiation caused relief of inhomogeneity in distribution of C atoms and short-range ordering of Ni atoms in Fe–22.4 The significant increase of the 160 The Snoek-like interpretation for the 160 This research was supported by a grant from the Center for Advanced Materials Processing (CAMP) of the 21st Century Frontier R&D Program funded by the Ministry of Science and Technology, Korea. Authors extend their heartfelt thanks to Professor V.G. Gavriljuk of G.V. Kurdjumov Institute for Metal Physics for beneficial discussion on this work.