When a slope consists of a horizontal weak rock or soil overlaid by some vertical strong slender rock columns, the slope is prone to a secondary toppling failure which is known as “toppling-slumping” failure. In the slope, rock columns impose pressure on the lower continuous weak rock or soil mass which leads to a differential settlement at the base of each rock column or a circular shear failure in the continuous mass. If the differential settlements reach a special threshold, rock column overturn and toppling-slumping will happen. However, the circular shear failure of the soil or weak rock mass which is a well-recognized failure mechanism will occur when shear stress in the slope exceeds its shear strength. In this paper, an attempt has been made to better understanding of the “toppling-slumping” failure mechanism through developing an analytical solution. For this purpose, first an Airy stress function is acquired for the lower continuous soil mass and its stress distribution and displacement are accordingly determined analytically due to the overlaid rock columns loads. Then, differential settlements at the base of all rock columns and shear stresses in the soil or weak rock mass are computed and compared with the toppling and shear failure criteria to assess slope failure. Finally, several design-charts are developed that determine the stability of a slope against toppling-slumping failure mechanism based on geometric characteristics of the slope and shear strength of its constituent material. Also, a Mathematica package code was developed to evaluate the stress distribution within the slope, and the safety factor. The results show that the vertical stress distribution plays a significant role in the settlement of the rock columns. Results also manifested that at a certain distance from the slope crest, the set of rock columns will act like a single column on a half-plane. The shear or toppling failure of the slope not only depends on the material's strength but also on the geometry and the normalized column distance. In civil and mining projects, engineers encounter serious problems associated with rock and soil slopes. Instability of these slopes can cause significant economic, safety and social impacts as well as physical damage. In order to mitigate these losses, understanding the type and mechanism of slope instability is of great importance. One of the common types of slope instability is toppling of rock blocks. In 1976, Goodman and Bray presented a comprehensive category of all types of toppling failures for the first time, as presented in To be more precise, toppling-slumping failure is dominant when a weak horizontal layer of rock or soil is overlaid by several vertical stronger rock columns. In this case, the weaker layer settles or slides due to the above rock column's weight. Because of differential settlement or shear failure in the weak layer, the rock column can be toppled. The mechanism of this settlement or shear failure is strongly related to stress distribution in the weak rock/soil layer. Unlike the horizontal ground surface or half-plane, stress distribution under rock columns near the slope crest is asymmetrical. Therefore, the stress distributed inside the weak layer under the rock columns and the two sides of the rock columns is not equal. The non-equality of stress on both sides of a column causes a non-uniform settlement and, consequently, leads to a toppling failure which is known as toppling-slumping. Stress distribution due to external loading on the top of the half-plane is well-known in geotechnical engineering. However, this is not clearly understood when an external load is applied on the above surface of a slope. The present paper aims to introduce an analytic approach for toppling-slumping slope failure. Indeed, analytical solutiones give an understanding of how final solutions are influenced by various parameters ( Furthermore, the rock cliffs are assumed as vertical columns which apply uniform pressure into the slope. The effect of water table and slope saturation are not considered in this work. To make this investigation, first stress distribution in a slope caused by the upper surface load will be examined by means of the theory of elasticity. Second the corresponding displacement and shear failure will be discussed. One of the most widely used methods in the theory of elasticity is the use of the Airy stress function to solve the plane strain/stress problem. In the Airy stress function, the general formulation is reduced to a governing equation by an unknown variable and the governing equation is solved by mathematical methods ( By solving Eqn Consider the wedge of Using the Mellin Transform, Tranter proposed an Airy stress function in the transformed space and calculated the stress distribution in a situation where the angle In this equation, Φ ( In Eqn Tranter solved the problem for a situation where the angle 2α is 180 degrees (half-plane) and a symmetric pressure is applied to the edge of the wedge, as follows ( In Eqn The boundary conditions for such a model can be expressed as Eqn It should be noted that any form of load such as linear, trapezoidal, parabolic etc. can be implemented in the Eq. Tranter pointed out that when If Eq. With twice integration by parts on the left side of Eq. As mentioned, when r tends to infinity, it is assumed that the stress function is such that all of the values in Eq. Therefore: By setting the values of Eqs. Therefore, the parameters of the Airy stress function are obtained in the transformed state for the boundary conditions shown in An important element in complex analysis, such as calculation of integrals of Eq. By performing mathematical operations, the stresses are obtained as Eqn In Eq. The integrals of All the parameters are defined in Appendix D as ​Eqn As is clear, in the numerical solution, the integral boundary should be finite because the replacing series cannot be summed up to a point at infinity. Therefore, the upper boundary of the integral should be considered as a finite value. Here, the upper boundary is considered as a point after which the integral value is equal to a small value. Since these integrals represent the stress associated with the distribution of external loads in the slope, the value of the upper boundary is considered to be such that the integral after that point is maximally equal to 0.01. This is stated in In the integral shown in Eq. The loading on the slope can be due to rock columns that are spaced apart with certain distance. To achieve such a case, consider the schematic loading as shown in To model the loading shown in Suppose that the spacing between the three rock columns is equal to the width of the columns in Eq. With respect to Eq. Assuming that the load is applied from the point Therefore, using ​Eqn In Eq. Goodman and Brown presented the Eq. Based on the proposed analytical method in To evaluate the validity of the analytical model results, three slopes at 30, 60 and 90 degree slope angles are considered. Suppose a rock column, as in Stress distribution caused by a single rock column in different points of the slope is shown in Accordingly, the analytical model has a high accuracy in predicting the stress distribution in the slopes. The highest relative error is about 4%. However, by increasing the model dimension in the numerical model and decreasing the mesh size simultaneously, the numerical model solution tends to the analytical model and the relative error will decrease. As stated previously, gravitational loading has not been considered in this model, so stress distribution is solely due to the presence of external force at the top of the slope. In In the previous sections assessing the stress distribution in the slope was discussed. To evaluate the toppling-slumping and shear failure, two distinct criteria were used. Displacement criterion was used for evaluating the toppling, and stress-based criterion was used for assessing the shear failure. These two criteria will be discussed in the next section. According to In Eq. Based on Eq. It is known that toppling occurs when Eq. In Eq. Therefore, the toppling condition based on the displacement difference will be ( The probability of toppling failure can be determined by above-mentioned procedure. The question that can be posed here is whether the slope slides before or at the same time as toppling. To investigate the safety of the slope against shear sliding, the Mohr-Coulomb behavioral model was considered first for the slope. The effective parameters of the slope stability against sliding in this behavioral model are cohesion, friction angle, and stress state in the slope. Eqn In the above equations By determining the stresses at any points of the slope, and according to Eq. In this equation, the strength and stress values were calculated using the Eqs. In order to investigate the toppling-slumping or shear failure in a slope by proposed analytical model, a typical example is studied. The configuration of loading is shown in In this model, 5 rock columns are spaced at 1% of the width of each column. It should be noted that as shown in The load applied by these rock columns to the slope depends on the dimensions of the columns. The height of these columns can be very high (for example, more than 100 m ( In According to As can be seen in In all models, at a/x with values of − 0.5 and − 0.4, the displacement difference of the second column is greater than the third one. By increasing the value of a/x, this difference decreases and at positive values of a/x, the displacement difference of the second column will be less than the third column. This is because at a/x values of −0.5 and − 0.4, the induced vertical stress under the second column is affected by the stress distribution caused by the first column. By increasing the a/x, the induced stress under the rock columns is such that the row of columns can be considered as a single column. Accordingly, by increasing the value of a/x, the stress distribution becomes more symmetrical under the row of rock columns. At a higher a/x, which represents greater distance from the edge of the slope, the stress distribution is completely symmetric indicating that the rows of columns act like a single column on a horizontal ground surface. In fact, by increasing a/x, the effect of the slope geometry is removed and behavior similar to the stress distribution of a column on a half-plane will occur. By decreasing the slope angle, this behavior (the change in the stress distribution under the columns, as in the stress distribution under a single column on a half plane) will occur at a lower a/x. In general, the displacement difference in column 1 strongly depends on the slope angle and by moving to the end columns, the stress distribution under the columns will not be a function of the slope angle. This is shown in As shown in Therefore, the toppling of the row of columns depends on the displacement difference of the first and last columns. Here are two possible scenarios. In the first case, the first and the last columns are both tilted to the left, if the value of their displacement difference satisfied Eq. As noted before, the displacement in a slope is related to the Young's modulus and the Poisson's ratio of the weak rock/soil layer in the lower part of the slope. In order to reduce the computational time, the Poisson's ratio is considered as 0.3 for all the models and the Young's modulus is assumed to be variable. According to Considering the graph of the Young's modulus of 500 MPa, It was found that with the Young's modulus, the slope angle and a/x ratio are effective parameters on the toppling of the rock columns, and in a critical composition, the columns located on the top of the slope are toppled. As shown in Section 6.1, the stress distribution in the slope is a function of the slope angle and the a/x ratio. Therefore, in order to investigate the slope stability against sliding, the slopes with different cohesion, friction angle, a/x ratio and angles were considered. The specifications of the developed analytical models are shown in  As can be seen, by decreasing the slope angle the induced stress in the slope decreased. Also, it is clear that by increasing the slope angle, the warm color contour represents the higher induced stress, moves from the beneath of the rock column to the slope face. This paper addresses the stability analysis of rock slopes prone to toppling-slumping failure mode. This failure mode occurs when a weak horizontal layer of soil or rock is overlaid by vertical rock columns. The slope failure can occur due to the shear failure of the weak horizontal soil/rock layer or as a result of differential settlement of the vertical rock columns within the continuous horizontal soil/rock layer or as a combination of the two mechanisms. In this study, the stress distribution in a slope was obtained through the theory of elasticity, and subsequently the displacement under the individual vertical rock columns was calculated. The results indicate that the vertical stress distribution plays an important role in the settlement of the rock columns. It was also found that by increasing the normalized column distance, a/x, and decreasing slope angle, the stress distribution under the rock columns is more symmetrical, and at a certain distance from the slope crest, the set of rock columns will act like a single column on a horizontal ground surface. Therefore, stress distribution and displacement will be similar to the stress distribution and displacement on a half plane. Also, it was shown that the differential settlement of the first column strongly depends on the slope angle, while, by moving to the end column, the stress distribution under the column is not depend on the slope angle. It was shown that differential settlement could lead to the toppling of rock columns in a slope. In addition, the a/x and slope angle play a significant role on the toppling of the vertical rock columns. Weathered rock or soil slopes are susceptible to the toppling due to differential settlement. In this research, it was assumed that the slope is homogeneous and isotropic; therefore, Young's modulus and Poisson's ratio were remained the same for all points of the slope. As stated by The stress based criterion was also proposed and the probability of shear sliding of the slope was investigated. Based on the proposed displacement and stress criterion, several design charts were developed to determine the boundary between the toppling, shearing and stability conditions of the slope according to the geometric characteristics and shear strength parameters of the slope. The results indicate that the shear or toppling failure of the slope not only depends on the material's strength but also on the geometry and the normalized column distance (i.e. a/x). It can be concluded that considering the normalized column distance in slope stability is of great importance. The authors have no affiliation with any organization with a direct or indirect financial interest in the subject matter discussed in the manuscript. Parameters A to D in Airy stress function: In the positive part of the imaginary axis: In the negative part of the imaginary axis: Values of R, T, K, and L related to  