The adsorption of cadmium ions on granular activated carbon treated with nitric acid (NGAC), and untreated regular granulated activated carbon (RGAC) is reported in the absence and presence of mixtures of anionic (sodium dodecyl sulfate, SDS) and nonionic (Triton X-100, TX100) surfactants. In the absence of surfactants, NGAC adsorbed 8.7 times more Cd (0.165 mmol/g) than did RGAC (0.019 mmol/g). In RGAC suspensions, the amount of Cd sorbed increased significantly with increasing dose of SDS, to a maximum of 0.112 mmol/g. This increase was due to increased binding of Cd with sorbed SDS. However, in NGAC suspension, the amount of Cd sorbed was not increased further by the addition of SDS. It suggested that addition of SDS blocked the availability of surface functional groups in the microporous structure of NGAC.Numerous processes have been used to remove heavy metals from wastewaters and contaminated soil washed solutions using chemical precipitation, ion exchange, cementation, coagulation and flocculation, complexation, biosorption, adsorption, and membrane processes ( In our previous study, impregnation of anionic surfactant was able to enhance the adsorption capacity of activated carbon for cadmium ( Therefore in this study, all adsorption experiments are conducted at pH 6.0 in order to prevent precipitation and maximize cadmium sorption onto activated carbon. The presence of both nonionic and anionic surfactant mixtures and individual surfactants is also examined. Additionally, acid pre-treatment is used to improve activated carbon performance and investigate if there are any synergistic effects of acid pre-treatment and anionic surfactants. We suggest a mechanism of cadmium adsorption on the acid-treated surface of activated carbon in the surfactant mixture. A cadmium solution was prepared from analytical grade CdCl Granular activated carbon (Darco 20–40 mesh) was purchased from Sigma. Unmodified regular granulated activated carbon (RGAC) was washed with deionized water several times, and then dried in an oven at 60 °C for several days. Chemical modification using concentrated nitric acid (69% HNO The specific surface areas of RGAC and NGAC were determined from the N Surface charges of the activated carbons were measured using a zeta-potential analyzer (ELS-8000; Photal, Otsuka Elec., Japan). For this measurement, the activated carbons were milled with a mortar, and their surface charges were measured at several pH values from 2.0 to 12.5. The capacities of RGAC and NGAC to adsorb Cd were quantified by measuring the initial and final concentrations of Cd in a batch system. Experiments were conducted in 250-mL Erlenmeyer flasks with a working volume of 100 mL. The flasks were shaken at 100 rpm at 20 °C for 24 h. To examine the capacities of these activated carbons to adsorb Cd, 0.1 g of RGAC or NGAC was added to 100 mL of each surfactant solution. The Freundlich and Langmuir isotherms and constants were calculated for Cd on RGAC and NGAC in the absence of surfactant. The Freundlich isotherm is expressed as The Langmuir isotherm is expressed as These two isotherms for Cd on RGAC and NGAC were determined at 20 °C over a range of Cd concentrations (0.0–4.45 The capacity of activated carbons to adsorb Cd may be reduced if they have been previously exposed to Cd or surfactants, because these solutes may occupy (pre-load) adsorption sites on the activated carbon surface. To quantify the effects of pre-loading, experiments were conducted in which activated carbon was first pre-loaded with Cd, TX100 or SDS, then their capacities to adsorb Cd and surfactants were compared. Pre-loaded activated carbons were prepared by adding 1 g/L of activated carbon to single-component solutions of Cd (4.45 For the second adsorption test, surfactant solutions were prepared by adding 10 mmol/L of TX100 or SDS to deionized water. Activated carbons and 4.45 TX100 concentrations in the surfactant solution were quantified using high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC; Dionex, USA) using an ultraviolet detector at 230 nm. The analytical column was a reversed-phase SUPELCOSIL LC-PAH column (150 mm SDS concentrations in the surfactant solutions were quantified using modified methylene blue colorimetry ( Cadmium concentrations were determined using an atomic absorption spectrophotometer (SpectrAA-800, Varian) at a wavelength of 228.8 nm. The physic-chemical properties of RGAC and NGAC differed ( Zeta potential analysis revealed that pH The The amounts of surfactants adsorbed to activated carbon in anionic–nonionic surfactant mixtures were measured in the presence of Cd ( The amount of Cd sorbed on RGAC increased significantly as the sorbed amount of SDS increased, indicating that SDS is important in cadmium adsorption. It appears that the negatively charged sulfate group of the SDS molecules sorbed onto activated carbon provides active sites capable of binding with Cd ( For NGAC, however, the sorbed amount of Cd remained nearly constant (~ To evaluate the effect of sorbed SDS on Cd adsorption in the surfactant mixture, we calculated the molar adsorptive ratio ( For RGAC, For NGAC, The lower-than-expected capacity of NGAC to adsorb Cd in the presence of SDS could be due to adsorption SDS onto NGAC (pre-loading) or to formation of an SDS-Cd complex in the liquid phase, or to a combination of these mechanisms. The following sections discuss these possibilities. Pre-loading NGAC with TX100 did not significantly reduce the sorption of Cd ( Pre-loading NGAC with SDS had almost no effect on the amount of Cd sorbed ( On the other hand, in case of Cd pre-loading, the sorbed amount of Cd in the second adsorption step for SDS/Cd system (0.122 mmol/g) was higher than the other Cd pre-loading systems (0.071 mmol/g for Cd only and 0.087 mmol/g for TX100/Cd). This result also indicated that sorbed SDS provided additional adsorption sites for Cd. Tests were conducted to compare the rate of adsorption of Cd in the presence and absence of SDS. The rate of Cd adsorption was faster when SDS was absent than when it was present, particularly at the beginning of the test ( Therefore it can be concluded that the cadmium adsorption on NGAC in presence of SDS consists of 1) rapid complexation of Cd with SDS in the liquid phase and subsequent hydrophobic adsorption of this complex onto the hydrophobic surface of NGAC, 2) rapid adsorption of SDS onto the hydrophobic surface of NGAC and subsequent binding of Cd to anionic moieties of the sorbed SDS, and 3) binding of Cd with remaining exposed functional groups on the NGAC surface. The first and second mechanisms would occur very rapidly and simultaneously. Cadmium removal using untreated and acid-treated activated carbon was investigated in solutions of a nonionic surfactant (TX100), of an anionic surfactant (SDS) and of both TX100 and SDS. The presence of TX100 did not affect the sorption of Cd regardless of acid treatment of the activated carbon. When using untreated activated carbon (RGAC), the sorption of Cd significantly increased with increasing SDS concentration in TX100:SDS solutions. However, when using acid-treated activated carbon (NGAC) the sorption of Cd was not increased by the presence of SDS. Thus, the functionalized activated carbon surface obtained by acid treatment was partially blocked by the adsorbed SDS and not completely available for Cd binding. These results suggest that activated carbon adsorption may be a good method for heavy metal removal in wastewater containing anionic surfactants, such as that produced in a soil washing process, but that further enhancing the removal efficiency by acid treatment of activated carbon may be difficult. This research was supported by