Analysis of a population of dilational faults within a densely welded ignimbrite layer reveals fault zone geometries that vary greatly within a single fault and between faults, but does not correlate with displacement. Within an individual fault the thickness of the fault core can differ by up to an order of magnitude along dip. Similarly, joint density adjacent to faults varies along fault dip but does not increase with displacement. A correlation does exist however, between joint density and the degree of ignimbrite welding, which can vary vertically within an ignimbrite layer. Previous work has shown that welding increases ignimbrite strength: non-welded ignimbrites form deformation bands and densely welded ignimbrites form discrete fractures. We observe zones of densely welded ignimbrite with high joint density, while less-welded zones have lower joint density. In turn, high joint densities correlate with narrow fault cores and low joint densities with wide fault cores. We propose a joint based model for dilational fault initiation and growth. Faults initiate on precursory joints and grow by entraining joint bound slabs, hence the correlation between high and low joint density (thin and thick slabs) and narrow and wide fault cores respectively. Ultimately joint density and consequently fault zone architecture are controlled by subtle variations in mechanical strength within the ignimbrite layer.Detailed characterisation of fault zone structure is crucial for predicting fault permeability and developing accurate flow models for hydrocarbon production, CO Qualitative and quantitative characterisation of fault zone structure requires an understanding of the deformation process active during faulting in a given litho-tectonic setting. The deformation processes by which faults initiate and grow depend on a variety of factors including host rock strength ( In this paper we present a detailed study of subvertical dilational normal faults and joints formed within a densely welded pyroclastic flow layer on the volcanic island of Gran Canaria, Spain. Dilational faults have a component of opening perpendicular to the fault surface as well as shear parallel to the fault surface ( Caldera collapse initiated on Gran Canaria at 14 Ma, generating a caldera 20 km in diameter ( We have examined an exceptionally well exposed fault population within a single ignimbrite unit, called Ignimbrite B ( Ignimbrite B is ash and lapilli rich, and densely welded ( Post-depositional cooling of welded ignimbrites forms columnar cooling joints typically with pentagonal or hexagonal patterns in plan-view ( Fault populations in Ignimbrite B with displacements ranging from centimetres to 10's of metres were observed in vertical and near-vertical section at two different locations – Montana Cedro and Barranco de Tauro ( Faults are labelled according to their location and the amount of throw recorded at the base of Ignimbrite B. At Barranco de Tauro (T) fault T2.5 has 2.5 m throw, at Montana Cedro (C) Ignimbrite B is cut by C5 (5 m throw), C15 (15 m throw) and C22 (22 m throw) ( The studied faults are composed of two fault walls bounding a core of breccia. The fault walls in T2.5 ( The faults are surrounded by intensely jointed rock exposed in vertical and sub-vertical sections that are perpendicular to the fault walls (e.g. The degree of welding was quantified by using Image J freeware to record the geometrical properties (e.g. aspect ratio, area) of each fiamma within 25 cm Data are plotted on box and whisker plots as this plot type best illustrates the spread and distribution of the data. Each box represents 50% of the data, the line across the box is the median value and the box ends represent the extent of the data lying 25% above (upper quartile) and 25% below (lower quartile) the median. Thus the length of the box represents the spread of data around the median. The inter-quartile range is the difference between the upper and lower quartiles. The whiskers represent data lying 1.5 × inter-quartile range away from the upper and lower quartiles. Values outside the whiskers, shown by open circles, are outliers. Complete vertical sections through Ignimbrite B are exposed at all three sites and are accessible from base to top at Montana Cedro ( For each fault examined the extent of exposure and accessibility varies. At Barranco de Tauro, T2.5 is well exposed but, due to the steepness of the section, only the lower 2 m are accessible. The lower sections of faults C5 and C15 are well exposed immediately above the unit base but not further up in the ignimbrite. In the case of C22 the upper 12 m of the fault cross-section in ignimbrite B is well exposed and accessible. Below this the fault core is screen covered and only a small section is partially exposed 4 m above the unit base ( The degree of welding (fiamme aspect ratio) at Los Frailes varies vertically through the unit ( Ignimbrite B is pervasively cut by decimetre- to decametre long vertical joints ( At Barranco de Tauro there are two distinct joint sets, orthogonal to each other and oriented concentric and radially to the caldera margin; which at this point trends WNW–ESE ( From the above joint attribute data it is not possible to determine whether joint sets are cooling or tectonic in origin. However, the coincidence at each site between joint orientation and the relative section of caldera perimeter suggests joint formation is linked to caldera movement. During periods of caldera deflation joints form concentric to the caldera perimeter ( Background joint density measured at Los Frailes ranges from 0.6 to 3.2 joints per metre ( The more intense areas of jointing at both faulted and unfaulted sites correlate with higher degrees of welding i.e. larger fiamme aspect ratios ( In each of the faults the fault wall orientation in ignimbrite B is similar to the orientation of joints in the adjacent rock ( At Barranco de Tauro there is clear evidence of fault dilation. A normal fault with 2 m throw, juxtaposes ignimbrite B against the underlying orange brown, moderately welded, ignimbrite A. The fault is not accessible where it cuts ignimbrite B. Where A is juxtaposed against A, however, the 18 cm wide fault core is composed entirely of clasts of ignimbrite B, indicating that clasts fell into an open structure. This evidence of fault dilation together with the steep fault wall dips is consistent with what would be expected of a fault formed by hybrid failure. Although fault wall dip is relatively constant within each fault, ranging from 81° to 90°, each fault shows order-of-magnitude vertical variations in fault core width ( The differences in fault core width correlate with different levels of adjacent joint density ( Within the fault cores, clast aspect ratio and size is relatively uniform between all the faults ( Our field data show fault core width is governed by adjacent joint density. Joint density in turn is controlled by welding density. Therefore we propose a joint-based model for dilational fault initiation and evolution in ignimbrites ( We interpret initial minor movement to have occurred on a number of joints within a precursory joint zone ( The coincidence between fault wall and joint orientation supports the hypothesis of fault growth by slab incorporation from joints. In this scenario, precursory joints are linked by cross-joints, either stepping along or being deflected by fiamme, to define slabs of rock. At the onset of faulting, dilation of precursory joints produces a fissure, into which joint-bound fragments fall ( To date, work on brittle deformation in ignimbrites has focused on deformation band and fracture formation in non-welded and welded ignimbrites respectively ( Our observations strongly suggest that the normal faults in this study are dilational normal faults. The faults clearly accommodated significant opening producing fissures into which fault wall-derived material fell. Zones of high joint density surround the faults, the joints parallel fault walls and neither joint density nor fault core width are proportional to displacement. These features are similar to dilational faults in fissure swarms in basalt ( Our conceptual model of dilational fault initiation and growth is a joint based model. Faults propagate along precursory joints and the spacing of these joints controls fault growth. As stated previously joint density adjacent to the faults is greater than background joint density but does not increase with displacement. We suggest the joints adjacent to the faults are actually precursory joints formed ahead of a propagating fault tip. Slip localised on some of the joints and eventually a through going fault formed. The remaining precursory joints became the damage zone adjacent to the fault. Dilation of the fault during subsequent slip events may generate a stress shadow along the fault ( A similar fault growth mechanism is proposed for shear normal faults ( We have presented data that demonstrate a relationship between the degree of welding or rock mechanical strength, joint density and fault core width. At both Los Frailes and Montana Cedro the highest joint densities correspond with the most densely welded zones within the ignimbrite layer studied ( Further possible support for a joint based fault growth model and the predominance of rock mechanical properties on fault deformation, is suggested by fault core clast geometry. Clast size and shape are largely uniform between the studied faults ( Mechanical stratigraphic controls on joint spacing are well established in sedimentary sequences (  The dilational faults described at Yucca Mountain are similar to those documented in this study. Initial failure is interpreted to have occurred on pre-existing joints, fault core width varies significantly but not consistently along dip, and joints developed perpendicular to the eutaxitic foliation, defining slabs and forming angular clasts ( Mechanical stratigraphy controls fault architecture in sedimentary sequences ( The dilational normal faults documented in ignimbrites of Gran Canaria initiated and grew on precursory joints. The development and density of the joints was controlled by spatial variations in mechanical strength within a given ignimbrite layer. More densely welded (higher strength) regions of a given ignimbrite have higher joints densities than less welded parts. Thus the zone of precursory joints at the tip of a fault propagating into a highly welded section, will be closely spaced compared to precursory joint zones in less welded sections. We propose that the dilational faults of Gran Canaria grow by entraining joint-bound slabs from the fault walls into the fault core. Consequently, closely spaced joints forming thin slabs will lead to thin fault cores, whereas thick slabs formed by widely spaced joints generate wide fault cores. Subtle mechanical heterogeneity within a given layer is responsible for variable fault core width and joint density along fault dip. AMS was supported by a