This work presents a study for the leaching kinetics of pure sphalerite crystals in acidic ferric chloride under conventional- and microwave-heated conditions. The effects of stirring speed, particle size, ferric chloride concentration and temperature were investigated. The shrinking core model was applied to the results of experiments. It was found that the reaction is controlled by chemical reaction with an activation energy of 44.8kJ/mol. The order of reaction with respect to the ferric chloride concentration was found to be 0.62.
                  The effect of microwaves on the leaching of sphalerite in acidic ferric chloride was also investigated. An enhancement on the zinc recovery was observed which was more apparent at stagnant conditions (rather than stirred) when compared to conventional leaching. It is suggested that this enhancement is due to the higher heating rates in the leaching solution at the walls of the leaching vessel.Sphalerite (ZnS) is considered to be the most important zinc sulphide mineral. It is normally associated with other sulphide minerals such as chalcopyrite (CuFeS About 80% of the primary production of zinc originates from the roast-leach-electrolysis process, whereas, zinc produced by pyrometallurgical operations is in continuous decline due to associated environmental problems. The roast-leach process also suffers from the generation of SO Therefore, it is environmentally advantageous to eliminate the roasting step which increases the importance of hydrometallurgical processes for zinc extraction. Various investigators have studied hydrometallurgical routes for zinc extraction. An improvement in sphalerite leaching has occurred when using oxygen pressure leaching which has found wide industrial application Atmospheric ferric sulphate and ferric chloride leaching of sphalerite has been given significant attention in recent years Ferric chloride leaching was reported to have advantages over ferric sulphate as the reaction kinetics are more favorable in chloride media The application of microwaves in extractive metallurgy has been reported recently by many authors The aim of this study is to compare and contrast microwave- and conventional-heated systems of sphalerite in acidic ferric chloride. In particular the effects of ferric chloride concentration, particle size, stirring speed and temperature will be investigated for conventional leaching. The effects of particle size and agitation will be compared for both heating techniques. The sphalerite used in this study was a piece of museum grade sphalerite obtained from the mineral dealer Gregory, Bottley and Lloyd, UK. The sample was divided into several size fractions (25–38, 38–53, 53–75 Leaching experiments were carried out in 0.5 Conventional-leaching experiments where carried out in glass vessel which was put in a temperature-controlled water bath. Stirring was carried out using an overhead mechanical stirrer and a glass impeller. Two hundred and fifty milliliters of the leach solution was heated to the desired temperature and then 1 Microwave-leaching experiments were carried out in a CEM MARS 5 Each data set was repeated at least twice and the chemical analysis using ICP-AES for each data point is an average of three repeats. The pooled relative standard deviation for data sets is less than 5%.  Three different size fractions were used to investigate the effect of particle size on the dissolution behavior. The influence of ferric ion concentration on sphalerite dissolution is shown in The effect of temperature on sphalerite dissolution is shown in The kinetics of sphalerite dissolution in acidic ferric chloride have been assessed on the basis of the shrinking core model. This model considers that the leaching process is controlled either by diffusion of reactants through the solution boundary layer or through a solid product layer, or by surface chemical reaction. Previous investigators have found that the dissolution of sphalerite in ferric chloride is governed by chemical reaction The apparent rate constant is given according to the following equations: When Eq. An Arrhenius plot which shows the apparent rate constants obtained from The results on the effect of ferric chloride concentration on the zinc recovery from sphalerite were applied to shrinking core model. From the plot of ln Two factors were investigated in this part of experiment programme; the effect of stirring speed and also particle size on the dissolution behavior of sphalerite under microwave conditions.   It can be seen that microwave heating has had a positive influence on the leaching behavior of sphalerite in ferric chloride media. However, if the bulk temperature of the leaching was similar for both conventional and microwave systems, what would be the nature of the positive microwave influence on the leaching system? Is it due to so-called microwave “microwave non-thermal” To answer these questions it is required to consider both the dielectric properties of the leached materials and temperature measurements within microwave-leaching experiments. It has been reported that sphalerite is a very poor electrical conductor with a conductivity which varies between 10 On the other hand, it is known that water couples very well with microwaves and the addition of salts and acids further enhances this coupling behavior leading to faster heating rates. However, this increase is directly linked to a reduction in the penetration depth leading to heating of a very narrow skin in the solution vessel It is well known that agitation enhances the dissolution rate of solids during leaching process by elimination of the diffusion resistance caused by liquid film layer. As can be seen from With regards to microwave stirred leaching, agitation will reduce the temperature gradient observed. However, agitation will cause the particles to be predominantly thrown against the wall of the leaching vessel where they fall within the microwave penetration depth. Provided that the power level was chosen so that the microwave power was almost continuously applied to the leaching vessel, one would expect a momentary temperature gradient to occur between the wall and the centre of the leach vessel. This temperature gradient is certainly lower than the one generated at stagnant condition. This explains the threefold enhancement in zinc recovery at stagnant microwave-leaching conditions. Based on the above observations it is suggested that that the enhancement in zinc recovery observed under microwave conditions is a result of a shallow penetration depth of microwaves into ferric chloride leaching solution. The penetration depth of a similar solution containing 0.5 In this study, the kinetics of dissolution of sphalerite in ferric chloride were investigated. It was found that the reaction rate increased with an increase in temperature, ferric chloride concentration, stirring speed and a decrease in particle size. A shrinking core model in which the rate-limiting step is chemical reaction can be used to describe sphalerite dissolution in ferric chloride. Under conventionally heated conditions the activation energy of this reaction was found to be 44.8 The influence of microwave heating on the leaching of sphalerite in ferric chloride was also studied. It was found that zinc recovery increased when leaching was carried out under microwave irradiation. An increase in zinc recovery after microwave-assisted leaching was more obvious under stagnant conditions as compared to that in conventionally heated systems. It is suggested that this enhancement is due to skin heating which causes higher temperatures at the walls of the leaching vessel where the particles will be located due to centrifugal forces developed due to stirring.