Purpose
                  This systematic review and meta-analysis was performed to investigate the outcomes of orthogonal plating method and parallel plating method in the treatment of distal humerus fracture from the current literatures.
               
                  Methods
                  The electronic literature database of Pubmed, Embase, and Cochrane library were searched in November 2018. The data operation time, union time, Mayo Elbow Performance Score (MEPS), range of motion (ROM) of elbow, arc of elbow flexion, arc of elbow extension, rate of excellent and good results and complications (including heterotopic ossification, transient ulnar nerve neuropathy and ankylosis) were extracted. Stata 14.0 software was used for our meta-analysis.
               
                  Results
                  A total of 8 studies including 6 RCTs and 2 cohort studies met our inclusion criteria. This meta-analysis showed that there was no significant difference between the two groups regarding operation time, MEPS, ROM of elbow, arc of elbow flexion, arc of elbow extension and rate of excellent and good results at final follow-up (P = 0.50, P = 0.39, P = 0.87, P = 0.18, P = 0.58 and P = 0.59 respectively). However, the present meta-analysis demostrated that parallel plating method had significantly shorter union time than orthogonal plating method (P = 0.018). As for the complications (heterotopic ossification, transient ulnar nerve neuropathy and ankylosis), there was no significant difference between the two groups (P = 0.89, P = 0.08 and P = 0.29 respectively).
               
                  Conclusion
                  Our meta-analysis suggested that both orthogonal plating and parallel plating method could achieve satisfactory outcomes with the similarly low complications in the treatment of distal humerus fracture. More RCTs are required for further research.Distal humeral fractures account for 2%–6% of all fractures and for approximately 30% of all elbow fractures [ Open reduction and internal fixation using plates have demonstrated satisfactory clinical outcomes for the treatment of distal humerus fractures, and various ways of plating methods have been described to achieve firm stabilization [ Recently, several clinical trials have evaluated the outcomes of orthogonal plating method versus parallel plating method in surgical treatment of distal humerus fracture. However, the results in these studies are inconsistent and there was no meta-analysis conducted to test which fixation method is better in surgical treatment of distal humerus fracture. Therefore, we conducted a meta-analysis of some published randomized controlled trials (RCTs) and cohort studies to explore the outcomes of orthogonal plating method versus parallel plating method for distal humerus fracture by comparing their clinical results. The outcomes included clinical outcomes (operation time and union time), functional outcomes, complications (heterotopic ossification, transient ulnar nerve neuropathy and ankylosis). This systematic review and meta-analysis has been reported in line with PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses) [ The electronic databases of PubMed, Embase and Cochrane library were searched from the inception of the database to November 2018, without language restriction. Two independent researchers conducted literature searches using the search strategy of (“distal humerus fracture” or “humeral intercondylar fracture” or “humeral supracondylar fracture”) and (“orthogonal plating method” or “perpendicular plating method”) and (“parallel plating method”). In addition, the reference lists of previously published randomized trials, review articles, and meta-analyses were manually searched for additional eligible studies. Related articles and reference lists were searched to avoid original miss. Included studies were considered eligible if they met the following population, intervention, comparison, outcome and study design (PICOS) criteria: Population: Skeletally mature patients (older than 18 years) with distal humerus fracture; Intervention: Dual plating method fixation; Comparator: Orthogonal plating method or parallel plating method; Outcomes: The primary outcome was range of motion (ROM) of elbow, arc of elbow flexion, arc of elbow extension, Mayo Elbow Performance Score (MEPS) and the rate of excellent and good results. The secondary outcomes included operation time, union time and postoperative complications; Study design: RCTs and cohort studies. We used the PRISMA flow diagram to select the included studies. The results of literature search were imported into the software Endnote X7. Two authors independently assessed the potentially eligible studies. Firstly, the titles and abstracts were screened to exclude the duplicated and apparently irrelevant ones or those that do not meet our inclusion criteria. After then, the remaining potential studies were full-text downloaded and reviewed. Any disagreement between two above authors was sent and discussed with the third independent author. Two reviewers independently extracted data, and the third reviewer checked the consistency between them. A standard form was used; the extracted items included the following: (1) the general study information, for example, the authors, publishing date, study design, case number, age, gender and follow-up term. (2) clinical outcomes, including operation time and union time. (3) Functional outcomes including range of motion (ROM) of elbow, arc of elbow flexion, arc of elbow extension, Mayo Elbow Performance Score (MEPS) and the rate of excellent and good results. (4)complications, including heterotopic ossification, transient ulnar nerve neuropathy and ankylosis. For continuous outcomes, we extracted the mean and standard deviation (SD) and participant number will be extracted. For dichotomous outcomes, we extracted the total numbers and the numbers of events of both groups. The data in other forms was recalculated when possible to enable pooled analysis. Disagreements between two researchers were resolved by discussion. Whenever necessary, we contacted the authors of the studies for the missing data and additional information. Two authors independently performed methodological quality and risk of bias assessment of the included RCTs using Cochrane collaboration's tool [ The data was collected and input into the STATA software (version 12.0; StataCorp, College Station, TX) for meta-analysis. A random-effects model was applied when heterogeneity was detected or the statistical heterogeneity was high (P < 0.05 or I A total 349 potential records were identified through Pubmed (n = 154), Embase (n = 175), and Cochrane library (n = 20). After removal of duplicates, 165 articles were screened for relevance on the basis of the title and abstract. Of the 12 articles that were possibly eligible for inclusion, 4 were excluded for reasons of “the papers were review or without available data” and some other reasons (details were showed in The characteristics of all the 8 included studies were summarized and shown in Three studies reported operation time [ Four studies stated union time [ There were seven studies reporting ROM of elbow at final follow-up [ Five studies [ The results of a pooled statistical analysis of four studies [ Five studies reported MEPS at final follow-up [ There were eight studies reporting rate of excellent and good results at final follow-up [ Complications including heterotopic ossification, transient ulnar nerve neuropathy and ankylosis were reported. The meta-analysis showed that there was no significant difference between the two groups (RR = 0.77, 95% CI = 0.47 to 1.25, P = 0.29, Six articles [ Data extracted from six studies [ Three studies [ Begg's funnel plot and Egger's test ( To determine the infuence of each study on the pooled SMDs for ROM of elbow, elbow flexion and elbow extension at final follow-up and to verify the robustness of our results, sensitivity analysis was performed by omitting one study at a time and calculating the pooled SMDs for the remaining studies. The results of the sensitivity analysis indicated that no signifcant efect on pooled SMDs was observed afer excluding any single study, suggesting that the results of this meta-analysis were relatively robust ( Distal humerus fractures are often both comminuted and intra-articular. This condition in combination with the complex anatomy of the elbow and the limited amount of available subchondral bone makes it difficult to manage such fractures [ Many biomechanical studies have compared the mechanical properties of parallel and perpendicular plating systems for distal humerus fractures [ On the other hand, a large number of studies have reported the functional outcomes of parallel and perpendicular plating systems for distal humerus fractures [ Complications arose regardless of which plating method was used. Postoperative complication rates of up to 48% have been reported for type C distal humerus fractures [ The strengths of this meta-analysis include the clear definition of the research question to reduce bias in the selection of the studies, adherence to an explicit research protocol that was developed prior to the analysis, the comprehensive literature search, consensus between the two reviewers with the entry data elements, and a quality control review of all results. Most of our included studies in this meta-analysis were RCTs, which therefore overcomes the shortcomings of recall or selection bias in non-randomized studies. The methodological quality of included cohort studies was high (1 study scored 8 stars whereas 1 study scored 9 stars) according to the NOS. No publication bias was found in our meta-analysis and sensitivity analysis indicated that the results of this meta-analysis were relatively robust. Nonetheless, some limitations in the present meta-analysis should be recognized. (1) Only articles with small sample size were included in the study, 2 included studies were cohort studies, which might lower the evidence level. (2) The duration of the follow-up of the included studies was variable. (3) Elbow functional score is an important parameter. But the type of elbow functional score was various, which may generate heterogeneity. Therefore we suggest that larger sample sizes and multicentric high-quality randomized controlled trials could be carried out to evaluate the outcomes of orthogonal plating method versus parallel plating method for distal humerus fracture in the future. Despite these limitations, this meta-analysis provides evidence that both orthogonal plating and parallel plating method could achieve satisfactory outcomes with the similarly low complications in the treatment of distal humerus fracture. In conclusion, both orthogonal plating and parallel plating method could achieve satisfactory outcomes with the similarly low complications in the treatment of distal humerus fracture. Meanwhile, parallel plating group had significantly shorter union time than orthogonal plating group. However, taking the heterogenicity and small sample size into consideration, more high-quality RCTs are required to go a step further in demonstrating the benefits of parallel plating fixation in treatment of distal humerus fracture. Not commissioned, externally peer-reviewed. All analyses were based on previous published studies; thus, no ethical approval is required. None. Wenhao Zheng designed the study and Linzhen Xie wrote this manuscript. Linzhen Xie and Jinwu Wang searched database and reviewed studies. Wenhao Zheng and Chunhui Chen collected and analyzed data. All of the authors have read and approved the final manuscript. None. The Unique Identifying Number (UIN) from the Research Registry of the study is reviewregistry631.  Wenhao Zheng. The following is/are the supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at