Aniline aerofloat (AAF) is a biologically persistent flotation collector with potential hazards to aquaic lives and humans. In flotation wastewaters, transition metallic ions usually coexist with residual reagents. Thus, the homogenous catalytic ozonation can be formed while flotation wastewaters are treated by ozone. In this work, the catalytic ozonation of AAF collector was evaluated with transition metallic ions (Fe2+, Fe3+, Cu2+, Pb2+ and Zn2+). Particularly, the effects of Fe2+ dosage, initial pH and O3 dosage on the Fe2+ catalytic ozonation of AAF were studied. The AAF mineralization was evaluated by measuring the TOC, SO4
                     2− and NO3
                     ‒ concentrations. The degradation rate followed the order O3/Fe2+ > O3/Fe3+ > O3/Cu2+ > O3/Pb2+ > O3/Zn2+≈O3-alone. The reduction of EE/O values for AAF degradation reached 4.75–44.15 % by introducing transition metallic ions. For five metallic ions, Fe2+ ions had the highest catalytic activity. At the Fe2+ dosage of 10 mg L‒1, the O3/Fe2+ achieved an increase of 31.15 % for the degradation rate and of 42.26 % for the AAF mineralization compared to O3-alone. The SPE/GC–MS analysis showed that the byproducts generated by O3-alone were quite different from those by O3/Fe2+, and toxic aniline and phenol were not detected in the O3/Fe2+ system. The results indicated that transition metallic ions could well enhance the ozonation of flotation reagents with lower energy consumption.Froth flotation is extensively used in the processing of ore deposits to enrich the concentrations of valuable minerals. The success of mineral flotation is dependent on selective surface adsorption of collectors which convert mineral surfaces from hydrophilic to hydrophobic character. Air bubbles dispersed in the pulps preferentially adhere to hydrophobic particles, carrying them to the surface as froth from where valuable minerals are collected. With the continuous increase of global metal demands, it is estimated that more than 2 billion tons of ores are treated by froth flotation annually [ Residual reagents in flotation wastewaters may cause serious environmental consequences such as groundwater and soil contaminations. Some reagents such as xanthates and dithiophosphates are generally toxic to humans or animals [ Recently, some methods have been developed to remove flotation reagents from aqueous solutions, such as adsorption [ However, the ozonation of flotation reagents reported previously is usually evaluated by using synthesized reagent solutions without considering the practical solution chemistry of flotation wastewaters such as coexisted metallic ions and minerals particles [ Aniline aerofloat (AAF, (C In this work, the AAF is selected as a typical refractory flotation collector. The homogeneous catalytic ozonation of AAF collector is investigated by adding transition metallic ions (Fe The aniline aerofloat (AAF) collector with an industrial grade was purchased from Tieling Flotation Reagents Co. Ltd, China. The molecular structure was given in The ozonation experiments were conducted in a bubble-column reactor (1150 mm in height and 50 mm in diameter). A glass diffuser was fixed at the bottom of the column. Ozone was generated from air in a laboratory ozone generator (SW-004, Qingdao West Electronic Purifiers Co., China), and bubbled through aqueous AAF solution at a gas flow rate of 1.67 L/min. The schematic ozonation apparatus was given in Fig. S1 (Supplementary information). 0.15 g AAF collector and a certain amount of metal chloride were dissolved in 2 L deionized water to prepare a 75 mg L Metallic complex compounds could be generated when transition metallic ions (Fe In this work, the mineralization extents of C, S and N elements in AAF molecule were calculated to fully evaluate the AAF mineralization, respectively. The mineralization extent of C ( In this work, the byproducts generated from AAF collector by O  There are two major mechanisms of homogeneous catalytic ozonation, that is, the decomposition of O As listed in Our previous work has indicated that the AAF is very refractory for the ozonation compared to xanthate and diethyl dithiocarbamate collectors [   However, while the Fe Residual flotation reagents are usually found in flotation wastewaters with the pH of 6.0–12.0 because most of mineral flotation processes are carried out in alkaline pulps [ The O As shown in  To reveal the degradation mechanism of AAF collector, the SPE/GC–MS analysis is employed to identify organic byproducts generated by O As shown in As shown in It should be emphasized here that the coexisting of Fe The transition metallic ions (Fe  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was financially supported by the Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following are Supplementary data to this article: