Establishment of the key contributors to the environmental burden of a bioprocess at the early design stage provides opportunity to inform the holistic optimization of the process. Here, the production of penicillin V sodium salt by Penicillium chrysogenum is analyzed in terms of material and energy flows and associated energy burdens, assessed through life-cycle analysis, to inform the approach to minimize the environmental impact of key bioprocesses. The material and energy flows are estimated using a generic model (CeBER Bioprocess Modeller), developed and implemented in MS-Excel for early stage estimation of material and energy balance calculations of large-scale microbial bioprocesses. Using these outputs, life-cycle assessment (LCA) is used to estimate environmental impacts associated with producing penicillin V product. Three scenarios for production are considered. It was shown that even with a 55% error in inputs to the CeBER Bioprocess Modeller, using this to determine material and energy balance data and then calculating a full LCA, a final difference in LCA scores of only 5% was obtained.
                  Further key findings in the study showed that electrical and agricultural inputs were the dominant contributors to LCA impacts. Poor separation efficiencies in downstream processing result in high operating volumes and large recycle flows within a process. This, in turn, increased electrical and steam requirements of the process, increasing abiotic depletion and greenhouse gas emissions. The approach provides insight into key process steps in which optimization may reduce environmental costs most significantly.In the development of bioprocesses, it is desirable to undertake both economic and environmental analyses of different process options at a very early stage in the design process, before detailed contractors’ studies are merited. Typically, at this early stage, information available is limited to basic laboratory information, such as yields, growth rates, and tentative separation processes. The task facing the process engineer is to define a feasible flowsheet, perform preliminary material and energy balances and carry out an initial sizing of the principal items of equipment. With this information, it is possible to arrive at estimates of operating and capital costs as well as environmental indicators for the process. Information of this nature, early in the process design, enables effective comparison of process options. Testing of process options in terms of environmental impact at this early stage is necessary to enable selection of environmentally responsible flowsheets at a stage where maximum flexibility with respect to decision-making is available. Previous authors have shown a similar interest in the needs for simulation To enable this early design of microbial processes, the authors have developed the CeBER Bioprocess Modeller, a generic model, programmed in a single MS-Excel workbook, to provide early stage material and energy inventory data The modeling package includes a comprehensive database of parameters such as yield coefficients, molecular formulae, specific growth rates, densities and other constants from which default values can be drawn, should the process specific information not be available. Economic modeling is facilitated by the information provided by the model. Similarly, environmental assessment using, This paper describes a case study of the application of the generic flowsheet model (CeBER Bioprocess Modeller) to the production of penicillin V by the batch fermentation of Penicillin forms part of the  This study models penicillin V sodium salt production from Glucose, Pharmamedia (a protein and mineral salt source After penicillin production, the fungal culture was transported to a rotary vacuum filter where the fungal biomass was removed and washed with water ( Sodium acetate, acetone and water were added to the penicillin V solution for its re-extraction into the acetone/water phase and subsequent precipitation as crystals of the sodium salt. These were washed, separated in a basket centrifuge and air-dried in a fluidized bed dryer. The wash solution from the basket centrifuge, as well as the previous centrifugal extraction wastewater, was neutralized with sodium hydroxide before being discharged to effluent treatment. In a more highly optimized system, it may be possible to recycle sodium acetate or acetone and allow for water re-use. Final wastewater treatment is not included in this study as this may vary per site. Key parameters such as biomass growth, yield coefficients and other parameters used in the generic flowsheet were estimated, based on the literature, and are presented in Table S1. Using these, three scenarios have been presented. Scenario 1 used the full list of specific input data available. For many processes, not all inputs are available, hence successive scenarios (Scenario 2 and Scenario 3) assumed that the less accessible inputs (those inputs that might not be as easy to obtain at an early design stage) were missing and default values from the CeBER Bioprocess Modeller were used. These generic parameters were based as per the model development of The three sets of material and energy results obtained as above were then used with the Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) package SimaPro v7.1 While it is understood that other environmental or economic assessments, From the generic flowsheet model, the material and total energy (renewable and non-renewable) requirements calculated are shown in Table S3. For Scenario 1, for each kilogram of the sodium salt of penicillin V produced, 5.18 kg of glucose, 1.30 kg of Pharmamedia and 0.36 kg of phenoxyacetic acid were required. This reflects a product yield of 0.19 kg penicillin/kg glucose feed. Sulfur is incorporated into the penicillin structure; requiring 0.32 kg sulfur (as a sulfate) per kg of penicillin. Outputs of carbon, nitrogen and sulfur raw materials from the process were all low. Despite a 55% reduction in the number of data entries from Scenario 1, Scenario 2 gave similar material balance results to Scenario 1. The material required for Scenario 3 was slightly higher throughout; moreover the water requirement was over 3-fold higher than in Scenario 1. This was owing to the 3-fold lower final biomass concentration estimated from default data in the model in Scenario 3. For a comparison of the material balance results from Scenario 1 with the expected outputs from In scenario 1, for each kilogram of penicillin, 79.1 MJ of electrical energy and 3.3 kg of steam were required. The steam requirement was largely unchanged (4% increase) in Scenario 2 with the electrical energy requirement being slightly higher. In Scenario 3, both the steam and electrical energy requirements were higher, owing to the increased water requirement of Scenario 3 and resulting in a 53% increase in the total energy requirement. The electricity and steam requirements can each be attributed to particular unit operations. These data are presented in Table S4. Most of the electricity was used for the bioreactor agitation (32.8 MJ/kg) and bioreactor cooling (32.1 MJ/kg) requirements. Electrical energy for downstream processing formed less than 2.1% of the total requirement in all three scenarios. The steam and chilled water requirements in downstream processing were less than 10% and 0.3% of total energy requirements. Of the total steam required, 95% was needed for sterilization. Of the total chilled water, 99.7% was required for cooling between gas compression (aeration) and bioreactor cooling. Similar trends were observed in Scenarios 2 and 3. Nominal volumes for individual unit operations needed in order to give 1 kg of final penicillin V sodium crystal product in the 3 scenarios are given in Table S5. As anticipated, successive downstream process volumes were progressively smaller, with exceptions being where chemical additions were made. Scenarios 1 and 2 had similar volumes owing to similar biomass concentration and separation efficiencies assumed. Scenario 3 was characterized by larger volumes as it was based on more conservative assumptions of biomass concentration and efficiency of separations. This higher volume also accounted for the higher steam and electricity requirements since energy requirements were based on a volume treated, hence energy requirement per kilogram of product were greater for less concentrated streams. The Life Cycle Assessment of the different penicillin production models was performed using the software package SimaPro 7.1 Wherever possible, the Ecoinvent v1.3 Using the material and energy balance results from Scenario 1, and the SimaPro LCA software, for 1 kg of penicillin V produced, life cycle impacts of 25.5 kg CO  These results support the valuable contribution attainable from the use of life cycle analysis in early stage process design where first estimates of material and energy inventories only are available. Further, they highlight the importance of process intensification by enhanced concentration and the importance of volume estimation. Six impact categories were further investigated using Scenario 1, to determine the main process contributors to total scores. These have been presented as combined pie and donut charts as in  Abiotic depletion was dominated by the contribution of electricity (75%, most from coal) and smaller portions by phenoxyacetic acid (7.5%), Pharmamedia, acetone and sodium acetate (all 3%). Global warming impacts were made up of similar contributors, although electricity to a lesser extent of 61% as seen in The process contributors to ozone layer depletion score were spread more representatively owing to the contribution from intensive agriculture. Together with electricity (37%), oxygen, Pharmamedia and phenoxyacetic acid each contributed over 10%. In the photochemical oxidation score, electricity (73%) dominated. Glucose (7%), phenoxyacetic acid (5%) and sodium acetate (4%) had little impact as shown in For acidification, the relative contributions of electricity, glucose and phenoxyacetic acid were similar to photochemical oxidation as seen in Scenario 1 used a full a set of input data to calculate material and energy balance data. Scenarios 2 and 3 then used approximately 45% and 30% of the original information respectively. From these inputs, it was seen that the respective material balance calculations provided a total input/output that was 5- and 163% (Scenario 2 and 3 respectively) greater than Scenario 1. On an energy basis, the reduced inputs for Scenarios 2 and 3 required energy inputs that were 5- and 53% greater than when a full set of inputs was used. This showed that even when almost half of the inputs were excluded from the model (Scenario 2), it was possible that the material and energy balance was still relatively similar. When converting these material and energy values to an LCA model, Scenario 2 was only 8% (average) higher than the values obtained in Scenario 1 (range: 6- and 14% across all impact categories). The LCA values found in Scenario 3 were on average 40% higher (range: 25%–62% higher). While an LCA increase of 40% may appear large, given that the error in inputs to the CeBER Bioprocess Modeller was as high as 70%, this LCA error might be acceptable in a first iteration of process modeling and development of an industrial process. The generic MS-Excel model was used to obtain satisfactory material and energy balance data of a flowsheet for the production of penicillin V sodium salt using a limited set of input data typically available at an early stage in process design. The material and energy balance data generated were used to complete a Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) study. The results of the LCA study showed good agreement between the material and energy balances in Scenarios 1 and 2 even though a reduced input data set was used for Scenario 2, illustrating the appropriateness of the flowsheet model in providing early design stage data (55% error in model inputs, but only 5% difference in final LCA scores). Deviations in Scenario 3 showed sensitivity to critical inputs, especially those which affected the system volume. An increase in the bioreactor volume impacted the system with respect to energy and losses throughout. An analysis of the process contributions to environmental burden, targeted electricity provision and the provision for agricultural inputs as key items. Electricity requirements contributed over 60% in each of abiotic depletion, global warming potential and photochemical oxidation, while the next largest process contribution in these categories represented less than 10% of the LCA scores. While the electrical requirements, dominated by bioreactor agitation and cooling, still formed the largest single contribution to LCA scores in ozone layer depletion and eutrophication (37% in each), the combined impacts from agriculture (for the provision of sugar, Pharmamedia and phenoxyacetic acid) were 35.5 and 53% respectively. Thus, decreases in burdens associated with electrical energy and agricultural inputs would have the greatest impact in reducing overall LCA scores while reduction in process volume through intensification of operating concentrations and efficient separation steps is suggested as key for minimizing environmental burden. The paper demonstrates that, using a critical minimum input data set, the CeBER Bioprocess Modeller is able to produce the material and energy balance data to provide appropriate early stage data for use in environmental assessment using LCA. Such early stage environmental analysis can provide significant insight into critical items contributing to environmental burden. The financial support of the National Research Foundation and the DST, South Africa, through the Competitive Industries programme and the SARChI Research Chair in Bioprocess Engineering is gratefully acknowledged. Supplementary material related to this article can be found online at The following is the Supplementary material related to this article.