H2O2 solutions of different concentrations were added to a bituminous coal to obtain samples of different oxidation degrees. Flotation and concentrate screening experiments were conducted. It was found that the yield and ash content of the concentrate both decrease after oxidation and particles finer than 0.074mm are more likely to be oxidized. Grinding flotation experiments were conducted at grinding time of 10, 20 and 30min. The size distribution and Zeta potential of samples after grinding were detected. The results showed that grinding can effectively improve flotation performance. The optimum grinding time increases with the oxidation degree. And the relative extent of external and internal oxidation changes with the oxidation degree.Froth flotation is a method for fine coal separation that depends on the difference of surface hydrophobicity of coal and gangue minerals. Fresh coal particles with hydrophobic surface are easy to float with low flotation reagent dosage but they would become difficult to float when they are oxidized ( Approaches of overcoming the flotation problem of oxidized coal have been investigated extensively. New collectors, regulators and surfactants are concluded as follows. Cationic collectors and collectors with oxygenated functional groups can enhance the flotation performance of oxidized coals. Pretreatments were also raised to enhance the oxidized coal flotation. As Grinding pretreatment to improve the flotation performance of oxidized coal was investigated recently ( The flotation feed from Xingtai coal preparation plant was sampled for this study. The proximate and size analyses are shown in Artificial oxidation methods were applied to obtain oxidized coal samples. H H Dry grinding of the oxidized samples was conducted in a laboratory rod mill at grinding times of 10, 20 and 30  The size analysis of flotation concentrate before grinding is shown in Results of laser particle size measurement of samples after grinding are shown in Results of Zeta potential measurement of samples after grinding are shown in   The yield reduction before and after grinding in H This work was supported by the