This paper reviews the means to evaluate these injuries and reviews the evidence for different management strategies. Monteggia injuries and radial neck fractures are not amongst the most common fractures in children. However, the morbidity associated with a missed or underappreciated injury can be significant. Monteggia injuries are classically associated with a fracture of the ulna but radio-capitellar dislocation can also occur with plastic deformation of the ulna alone. Closed reduction of the ulna is the primary method of management. The reduction is stabilized by application of cast or fixation of the ulna; though uncertainty remains about how aggressive surgeons should be with ulnar fixation. Should a patient present late ulnar osteotomy is often required to allow reduction of the radio-capitellar joint. Radial neck fractures are often associated with other injuries around the elbow. The fracture can result in both angulation and translation. Angulation can be better tolerated and has a higher potential for remodelling. If translation of more than 2–3 mm is present this can result in the fracture healing with a significant cam lesion which impinges on rotation of the forearm. There are several means to try and achieve a closed reduction which are described.Giovanni Monteggia a professor of surgery in Milan described the fracture bearing his name in 1814, The injury pattern occurs in around only 1% of paediatric forearm fractures. When evaluating radiographs for a radial head dislocation or subluxation an anteroposterior (AP) and lateral of the elbow must be obtained. On both radiographs a line drawn down the radial shaft, shown in blue, ( The most common classification in use is the Bado classification ( Plastic deformation of the ulna with a subluxed or dislocated radial head is easily missed and is a common pitfall. A presentation of a seemingly isolated traumatic radial head dislocation in a child is nearly always part of an underappreciated injury pattern. On closer inspection the radial head dislocation without a complete or greenstick fracture is usually associated with plastic deformation of the ulna. The ‘ulnar bow sign’ is described to aid the recognition of this injury pattern. A radial-head dislocation or subluxation should be suspected if the posterior border of the ulna on a true lateral radiograph deviates more than 0.01 mm from a straight. A potential misdiagnosis of Monteggia injury can occur with a first presentation of a congenital radial head dislocation. Congenital dislocations may be noted when a child is examined and investigated following a fall and mistaken for a Monteggia injury. They can be associated with other congenital presentations such as Nail-Patella, Klinefelter, Ehlers-Danlos and Klippel-Feil syndromes, or can occur in isolation. In the majority of cases of congenital dislocation the radial head is behind the capitellum and tends to be bilateral, though not in all cases. Radiographic findings may reveal relative shortening of the ulna or lengthening of the radius, absence or hypoplasia of the capitellum and a dome-shaped radial head. In the management of a Monteggia injury there is no place for conservative management. In order to restore the normal mechanics of the forearm the radial head must be reduced. In the case of plastic deformation, closed reduction alone may be successful, although in our experience this is rare. The force required may complete the fracture, which can lead to an acceptable closed reduction, according the aforementioned prerequisites. In complete fractures reduction can be achieved by manipulation under anaesthesia alone or by open reduction and internal fixation. There is no clear consensus on the optimal management strategy for different types of complete fracture patterns. Walton et al have suggested that proximal ulnar fractures and fractures with ulnar comminution likely to be more unstable, There is no clearly defined best practice and, exerting some pragmatism, the authors' principles of treatment are as follows. The radial head must be reduced congruently onto the capitellum, such that it remains congruent as seen by live fluoroscopy through a full range of pro-supination on both AP and lateral views. In young children, this process may be augmented by arthrography to aid visualization of the cartilaginous radial head. If the radial head is seen to sublux during this assessment, either the fracture is not reduced accurately, or it is not stable enough to withstand this gentle manoeuvre. If the fracture cannot be reduced closed, it must undergo open reduction. If the fracture is unstable it must undergo appropriate fixation. Monteggia fractures should not be managed under conscious sedation if live fluoroscopy is unavailable. All patients should be closely monitored with weekly radiographs for at least 2 weeks (and 3 weeks without internal fixation). In the case of anterior dislocations in which an acceptable closed reduction can be achieved, the elbow should be cast in around 90–100° of flexion, in a supinated position. This position both reduces the pull of the biceps on the proximal radius and of the supinator muscle on the ulna. Less commonly seen lateral and posterior dislocations may require splintage in a more extended position. Missed injuries can be difficult to deal with and the outcome is not always satisfactory. In many cases an ulnar osteotomy with or without annular ligament reconstruction is necessary. A Kocher approach can be used to access the joint and the wound can be extended to access the ulna. Angular correction whilst maintaining length of the ulna should allow for reduction of the radial head, as seen in Radial neck fractures account for around 5–10% of all paediatric elbow fractures. The average age at injury is 8–12 years and there is no difference in incidence between sexes. The most common mechanism is a fall onto an outstretched arm with a concurrent valgus force. About 30–50% of injuries are associated with other injuries around the elbow; which include fractures of the coronoid, olecranon, ulna, distal humerus and elbow dislocations. The most common classification used is the Judet classification, described by Judet and Lefranc in 1962 ( When evaluating AP and lateral radiographs of the elbow, both angulation and translation must be noted. This is important as the annular ligament holds the metaphysis of the radius to the ulna the fracture not only angulates but also translates with the radial head moving laterally relative to the radial metaphysis. Angulation of the radial head on the shaft can be better tolerated than translation. The criteria for recommending optimal treatment are uncertain, however many centres consider that angulation of 30° or less can be accepted and will remodel with satisfactory clinical outcomes. However poorer outcomes have been reported in children over the age of 10. A series of 151 cases published in the Translation causes more of an issue than angulation because if the radial head is not centred on the shaft of the bone it will heal in an eccentric position. When the arm is then pronated and supinated a cam deformity will block normal forearm rotation. Every effort should be made to reduce a radial neck fracture without opening it, in order to prevent stiffness and avascular necrosis (AVN). Simple pronation and supination of the radius whist applying pressure over the radial head can successfully reduce the fracture. Several other techniques have been described which are either closed or minimally open techniques ( The ‘Columbus’ technique involves two surgeons; a varus stress is put on the elbow whilst one surgeon pushes the proximal radial metaphysis laterally and the other pushes the radial head back on the shaft. Another technique utilizes an Esmarch bandage which is wrapped tightly around the arm from distal to proximal and works by forcing the soft tissues to reduce the radial head. ‘Joy-sticking’ of the fracture can be used by percutaneously inserting a blunt tipped K-wire or Steinmann pin and levering the head back onto the shaft. The Métaizeau technique We usually progress stepwise as required from attempts at manipulation, to ‘joy-sticking’ to the Métaizeau technique. Often, ‘joy-sticking’ will result in a near-acceptable reduction, which is then rendered acceptable by the Métaizeau technique. If closed reduction is unsuccessful open reduction is necessary. This can be performed through a Kocher approach with the wrist in a supinated position to protect the posterior interosseous nerve (PIN). The joint is opened laterally and any residual soft tissue connections to the fracture must be assiduously protected so as not to increase the risk of AVN. Once reduced under direct vision the fracture is very likely to be unstable. Our preference is to achieve stability with a retrograde flexible nail, which can then be used to fine-tune reduction. An alternative method of fixation has been described, using a temporary K-wire, passed from proximal to distal; entering lateral to the articular cartilage and engaging in the medial metaphysis. More severe injuries are more often those that require careful open reduction there is an association with a poorer functional outcome caused by stiffness and restricted range of movement. However, this association is not necessarily causal and is perhaps more to do with the severity of injury and not the intervention. In addition to AVN other complications can include heterotopic ossification and synostosis which can be very difficult to manage. Both these complications are more common in open reduction but can occur in injuries managed conservatively. If a retrograde flexible nail has been used follow-up should be frequent and regular, until the nail is removed. This is because penetration of the radial head articular surface is encountered with surprising regularity, necessitating timely implant removal. We have seen this in particular with sharp tipped nails (which we caution against) and in cases that required open reduction, when the subsequent AVN allows the nail tip to sink into the joint.