Pure Cu of 99.98wt.% purity has been processed at room temperature by diverse techniques of severe plastic deformation, namely equal-channel angular pressing (ECAP), high pressure torsion (HPT) and a combination of both in order to find out the evolution on the microstructural homogeneity for each of the processes and their combination. Starting with a grain size of ∼60μm, severe plastic deformation has been introduced to the material while maintaining the sample dimensions unchanged through the processes of ECAP and HPT. A significant decrease in grain size was observed by transmission electronic microscopy (TEM). Microtensile and microhardness tests were carried out on the deformed material in the three processing conditions. A significant improvement of the tensile strength was promoted with admissible penalization on ductility.The processes of severe plastic deformation (SDP) have acquired a great importance in the last decade, not only because of their great potential to inflict significant deformations in alloys and metallic materials but also due to their respective potential in the production of ultrafine-grained microstructures, within the submicrometer and nanometer ranges. Two processes have taken the leadership in the SPD field, namely, equal-channel angular pressing (ECAP, see For the first process, a considerable number of samples having cross-sections of a square, rectangular or circular shape can be deformed without suffering significant changes in the dimensions, enabling large deformations through an unlimited number of passes within a die. The ECAP die contains two channels with an equal cross-section intersecting at an angle that can range typically between 90° and 135° High purity copper (99.98 ECAP was conducted at room temperature using a die having a channel angle of 90° and an angle of 20° for the outer arc of curvature. The samples were pressed for eight passes through route Microstructures were observed using optical microscopy and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) using specimens taken from the discs after HPT or the sliced discs from the ECAP samples but before HPT (dotted line in TEM samples were prepared using a Precision Ion Polishing System (Model 691 PIPS, GATAN Inc.) These samples were observed in a High Resolution TEM (300 Mechanical properties at room temperature were evaluated in every specimen by microindentation (hardness) at positions marked X as shown in The microstructure of the material after annealing but before SPD processing showed an average equiaxed grains size of 60 TEM observations confirmed the presence of grains with highly deformed morphology after eight ECAP passes ( The HPT sample exhibited a well-defined bimodal grain structure ( For the samples subjected to the combination of both SPD processes (ECAP eight passes Several micrographs were taken in the TEM study in order to determine the grain size distribution and an average value for each SPD process. Grain/cells size determination of the ECAPed samples was carried out on TEM images for which the grain size distribution is shown in A similar analysis was applied to the sample processed by HPT (see The grain size distribution of samples subjected to ECAP Vickers microhardness measurements were carried out along the diameter as illustrated in Additional evaluation of mechanical properties of the SPD-processed samples was undertaken by microtensile tests. Yield strength and ultimate tensile strength (listed in  The processes of severe plastic deformation ECAP and HPT are effective for the production of ultrafine-grained microstructures. A significant increase in the mechanical strength has been observed after subjecting the material to both ECAP and HPT. A process of recrystallization appears after subjecting the samples to a high deformation by HPT as well as for the combination of ECAP Rather homogeneous microstructure is obtained by the combined ECAE Thanks are given to the Ministry of Science and Technology of Spain to support the project DPI2005-09324-C02-01. NL thanks the scholarship (BES-2003-2754) granted by the Ministry of Science and Technology of Spain. ZH is grateful for a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology of Japan. D. Patiño is also acknowledged for his support in the sample preparation.