Objective
                  The aim of this study was to evaluate the intra- and interobserver variation of two classification systems for radial head fractures (Mason and Charalambous classifications) using plain radiographs.
               
                  Material and methods
                  Five observers classified 30 radial head fractures as per the two classifications using anteroposterior and lateral elbow radiographs. Assessments were done on two occasions, at least 6 weeks apart.
               
                  Results
                  The interobserver and intraobserver variation of the Mason classification showed fair (mean kappa = 0.33) and moderate agreement (mean kappa = 0.43) respectively. The interobserver and intraobserver variation of the Charalambous classification showed moderate agreement for both (mean kappa = 0.42 and 0.49 respectively). A greater proportion of radial head fractures could be classified using the Charalambous classification compared with the Mason classification (P < 0.001). With the Charalambous classification, the inter-observer variation was better when assessing fracture morphology (4 morphology groups) versus fracture displacement (2 displaced/un-displaced groups) (p = 0.010).
               
                  Conclusions
                  The Mason and Charalambous classifications for radial head fractures confer similar reliability when using plain radiographs, but the latter allows a greater proportion of fractures to be classified. Raters may agree more on fracture morphology as compared to fracture displacement. Our findings also demonstrate the limitations of using plain radiographs in classifying radial head fractures for clinical or research purposes, and suggest that evaluation with more sensitive modalities such as Computed Tomography may be preferable.Radial head fractures account for approximately one third of all elbow fractures with an estimated annual incidence of 2.5–2.8 per 10000 individuals. Classification systems aim to describe the fracture pattern and help guide communication for clinical or research purposes. Classification systems that indicate severity of injury or guide management are preferable in clinical practice. Several classification systems have been used to describe radial head fractures. The Mason classification and its subsequent modifications are commonly utilized. The original Mason classification assigned radial head fractures to three categories based on comminution and displacement ( For any classification system to be reliable it must have good inter- and intraobserver reliability, hence the aim of this study was to evaluate these parameters for two currently utilized radial head fracture classification systems. Plain radiographs were examined as these are commonly used in guiding clinical decision making. Thirty acute adult radial head fractures were identified from hospital records. They were chosen to allow a broad inclusion of the common types of radial head fractures which may be encountered in clinical practice with regards to displacement and configuration. The radiographs had anteroposterior and lateral views. These views were not standardized in terms of exact elbow positioning, but were the ones that had been obtained on the acute presentation, and the ones utilized in guiding fracture management. The radiographs were presented as a power-point presentation to five Orthopedic Surgeons practicing in the United Kingdom (3 senior staff grade orthopaedic surgeons and 2 Specialist trainees) on two occasions, at least six weeks apart. The order of presentation was altered on the two occasions. The observers were not provided with any feedback after the first viewing and the radiographs were not available to any of them between first and second viewings. Prior to their assessment, all observers were given a verbal and written description of the Mason and Charalambous classifications, and printed figures showing the two classifications. Evaluation was done with observers blinded to other examiners’ ratings and patient identity. The study had approval by the Research and Development department of our institution. The interobserver variation of the first readings was initially assessed using Cohen's kappa. A second analysis was performed to assess interobserver variation and this involved an analysis-of-variance approach. The first analysis, using Cohen's kappa, was then repeated but this time we only analyzed agreement between pairs of raters for those radiographs were both raters could classify them. The number of radiographs used for comparison varied for each pair of raters. The results were compared with those produced when we included radiographs which could not be classified for some pairs of raters. Comparisons of the interobserver and intraobserver variation for the two classifications were made using the Independent Samples The interobserver and intraobserver variation for the Mason classification method showed fair (mean kappa = 0.33) and moderate (mean kappa = 0.43) agreement respectively ( A sub-analysis into the ability of raters to classify the radial head fractures using the Charalambous classification solely into the 4 morphology groups or solely into displaced or un-displaced did not show a substantial change in intra-observer variation compared to when utilizing the overall classification ( The second analysis approach, involving the analysis of variance method produced a weighted kappa of 0.32 (fair agreement) for the Mason classification ( When we repeated the first analysis but excluded radiographs where one or both of the raters could not classify the radiograph, the interobserver and intraobserver variation for the Mason classification showed moderate agreement for both (mean kappa = 0.50 and mean kappa = 0.52 respectively). The interobserver and intraobserver variation for the Charalambous classification (8 groups of morphology) also showed moderate agreement for both (mean kappa = 0.48 and mean kappa = 0.53 respectively). When using this analysis the inter-observer variation for the 4 morphology groups of the Charalambous classification improved to good agreement (mean kappa = 0.64) which was significantly higher than that for classifying fractures into displaced or un-displaced (mean kappa = 0.46) (p = 0.021) and was also higher than the agreement for the overall classification (p = 0.005). There were only 9 out of 30 radiographs which could be classified by all five raters using the Mason classification, whereas 23 could be classified by all five raters using the Charalambous classification ( Further examination into the assignment ability of the raters to distinguish which fractures were difficult to classify showed that when using the Mason classification the participants could not classify mostly radial neck fractures, followed by displaced marginal fractures. When using the Charalambous classification the most common type of fractures which could not be classified were un-displaced partial articular fractures. There was less agreement about the rating of radial head fractures in to category 3 when using the Mason classification ( One of the aims of fracture classification system is to provide a reproducible means by which clinicians and researchers communicate. Classification systems graded by fracture severity and ones which can guide treatment are preferable in clinical practice. Our results have shown similar interobserver and intraobserver variation for two current radial head fracture classification systems, the Mason and Charalambous classifications. Our study also showed that clinicians could not classify many of the radiographs when following the original Mason classification. The Mason classification was described in 1954 and subdivided radial head fractures into three types. In our study, the Mason classification showed fair agreement in terms of interobserver variation and moderate agreement in terms of intraobserver variation. However, a large proportion of radial head fractures (21/30) could not be classified by all five raters using the Mason classification. The radiographs which could not be classified were Type II marginal fractures (likely because the original classification refers only to those involving the lateral sector of the radial head) and isolated radial neck fractures (as this type is not included in the original classification). A more recent classification described by Charalambous was based on fracture morphology, comminution and displacement. Our study shows the interobserver reliability of the Charalambous classification was slightly better than with Mason classification in spite that the raters were using this method for the first time, although the difference observed was not statistically significant. Despite the wide use of the Mason classification in describing radial head fractures there is a sparsity of studies evaluating it's inter- and intraobserver reliability. We could only identify one study that evaluated these parameters for the original Mason classification. Morgan et al. Our findings suggest that plain radiographs may have a limited role in classifying radial head fractures for clinical or research purposes; hence more sensitive radiological imaging such as Computed Tomography may be necessary. The study by Rhyou It is of particular interest that the raters in this study when using the Charalambous classification were able to classify the morphological subgroups more reliably as compared to the displaced/un-displaced groups. This may suggest that when using plain radiographs raters are more likely to reliably identify configuration of fracture lines as compared to detecting displacement, particularly when the amount of displacement is not pre-defined. There are certain limitations to this study. Although all raters were given verbal and written description of both classifications, they were more familiar with the Mason classification as they have been using it throughout their clinical practice, compared with the more recently described Charalambous classification. Furthermore, the radiographs used in the study were not absolutely standardized but they were the ones utilized in routine clinical practice. When looking at the agreement of only those fracture patterns that could be classified, only 9 out of the 30 radiographs could be classified using the Mason classification by all 5 raters. Although this limits the weight that can be placed on the results of this sensitivity analysis we looked at each pair of raters individually and so sample sizes varied (being higher than 9 in most cases). In conclusion, the Mason and Charalambous classifications for radial head fractures confer similar reliability when using plain radiographs, but the latter allows a greater proportion of fractures to be classified. Raters may agree more on fracture morphology as compared to fracture displacement. Our findings highlight the limitations of using plain radiographs in classifying radial head fractures for clinical or research purposes. The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at