During gasification two steps take place. The first one is pyrolysis and the second one is gasification of the char that remains back after pyrolysis. The second step is slower than the first one, so this step is the limiting factor in designing fluidized beds. Kinetic data for designing fluidized beds are necessary. The paper describes gravimetric measurements directly applied to fluidized bed with large sample sizes. The samples are char of 6 mm wood pellets and 10–40 mm wood cubes in order to directly measure ”apparent kinetics”. The parameters examined in this paper are particle size, product gases (= hydrogen) in the gasification medium, type of wood and differences in CO2/steam gasification. The results are presented as Arrhenius diagrams and half-value period diagrams. The most important parameters are the temperature and product gases (hydrogen) in the gasification agent. The particle size seems to be less important for large wood particles as the measurements do not show significant differences for gasifying char of wood cubes 10–40 mm. The half-value periods for gasification of char from wood cubes (10 mm - 40 mm) with 100% steam at atmospheric pressure lie between 1000 s at 1023 K and 300 s at 1173 K. For char of 6 mm wood pellets the half-value periods lie between 1900 s at 1023 K and 250 s at 1173 K. The reaction is most likely in pore diffusion regime.preexponential factor [ molar concentration of steam [ reactivity factor[−] diffusivity [ particle diameter [ activation energy [ rate constant [ preexponential factor [ equilibrium constant [−] volumetric rate constant [ mass [ number of measurements [−] pressure [ universal gas constant [ reactivity [ density [ density at temperature [ surface temperature [ time [ half value period [ superficial gas velocity [ superficial gas velocity at [ molar mass fraction [−] effectiveness factor [−] Thiele modulus [−] initial condition industrial conditions (e.g. large sample sizes) labscale conditions (e.g. small sample sizes) at time-point t To be able to use biomass fuels in efficient processes a refinement is necessary. Therefore, gasification is a way to get a gaseous fuel that can be burned in gas engines or gas turbines. There are two kinds of gasification, allothermal and autothermal gasification. The autothermal gasification works with air as gasification agent and thus gets the process heat by partly oxidation of the fuel. In contrast allothermal gasification needs an external energy source for the process, because gasification with the most used gasification agents steam and carbon dioxide is endothermic. For heating of an allothermal gasification reactor, it is possible e.g. to have an external combustion chamber, which includes heat pipes for the transportation of heat into the reactor, like it takes place in the so-called heat pipe reformer As wood is one of the most used biomass fuels this paper focuses on that kind of fuel. For designing new wood gasification reactors it is necessary to know, how fast the reaction takes place. While pyrolysis, with instant gasification of the pyrolysis gases, takes place in comparable short time, the gasification of the residual char needs much more time As reactor concept the fluidized bed has turned out as useful. The fluidized bed concept is based on a reactor that is filled with sand and fluidized with the gasification agent. Most sand materials are inert and do not affect the reaction in any way. An example for an inert material sand is the widely used quartz sand. Olivine sand has a catalytic influence on the reaction When looking at a fluidized bed as reactor concept, it is important to keep in mind that in fluidized beds there are special conditions that do not occure in other types of reactors. This is especially the comminution of wood char particles through forces on the particles by the sand.But not only while gasification of the char, the special conditions of a fluidized bed are important. As literature shows, it is also important, under which conditions the pyrolysis took place before gasification. A fuel that was pyrolyzed with a high heating rate delivers an other char than a low pyrolyzed fuel Reactivities for the wood char gasification process with steam and carbon dioxide have been widely studied in literature (e.g. Refs. Out of these reasons this paper picks up the gasification of wood char in fluidized beds as topic. The aim of this paper is to determine the influences on the gasification kinetics and to present kinetic data that are realistic for industrial fluidized bed gasifiers. As char pyrolyzed at temperatures > 1000 K consists mainly (> 85%) of carbon • Gasification with steam: • Gasification with carbon dioxide: When looking at the gasification products of char gasification with steam, one could assume that also a reaction of hydrogen with carbon could play a role. The reaction is: In gasifiers this reaction takes place of course. However this reaction is not relevant for gasification under atmospheric conditions, as it is slow compared to the reaction in Eq. As gasification of char is a heterogeneous process, the diffusion of the gasification agent to the active cells of the carbon is necessary. So diffusion can be the limiting factor for the gasification of char. When looking at radial conversion profiles presented by Gómez-Barea and Leckner It seems that there is an influence of the pore size or porosity of the char, because measurements in literature show higher reactivity of char that had been pyrolyzed under high heating rates  The models in literature are dividable into different kinds of models: Particle models. Effectiveness factor. (Quasi-)equilibrium models. Numerical models. The first three models should be discussed later on in this paper. The category “numerical models” is excluded from that, because this kind of models are too complex and do include a lot of assumptions with high unsurenesses. There are a lot of different particle models in literature with different complexity. For practical use there is a demand for models with low complexity, so this paper shows just the models that are reasonable for practical application. Gómez-Barea and Leckner “uniform conversion model”: The reaction takes place all over the sample. There is no gradient in conversion degree. “shrinking unreacted particle model”: The reaction takes place just on the surface of the particle. There is no reaction inside the particle. This means there is a high gradient in conversion degree. “progressive model with shrinking (reacting) particle”: This model mixes up the both already mentioned models. However, there is a radial degree in conversion progress, but it is not as sharpen as in the “shrinking unreacted particle model”. The paper of Gómez-Barea and Leckner The particle models until now do not reconsider any detailed structure of the sample. So in addition Umeki “random pore model”: This model assumes randomly arranged pores within the particle. “overlapped grain model”: It models that the grains overlap each other. “percolation model”: The percolation model assumes that active carbon cells are arranged in a grid. A mathematical discussion of these models should not take place here, the mathematical expressions are available in Refs. All particle models need empirical data as input. This approach bases on the definition of an effectiveness factor that describes the relationship between non tranport limited and transport limited samples The advantage of this model is that its mathematical formulation is quite easy: with: The diffusivity can be approximated as follows: So the diffusivity has the following values: at 1023 K: 6.36⋅10 at 1073 K: 6.83⋅10 at 1123 K: 7.32⋅10 at 1173 K: 7.81⋅10 The density of the char particle can be calculated as follows: The raw density of beech wood is measured to be 655 After pyrolysis about 14% of the raw wood mass are left in the temperature area 1023 K–1173 K The shrinkage of the particles while pyrolysis is quite low, because of the high heating rate. So it is possible to assume that the shrinkage is about 25%, or on the other site the volume after pyrolysis is about 75% of the initial raw wood volume. The density is consequently about 120 The additionally necessary rate constant can be calculated from the activation energies and rate constants from experiments by the following way: Calculation of the density reduction rate Converting Calculation of with The equilibrium models use as basis the minimization of gibbs free energy, in order to predict gas composition at the reactor outlet. As allothermal gasification of char is a slow reaction, the equilibrium cannot be used to describe the reactivity, because the gas composition also depends on the char reactivity. In order to fix that problem the equilibrium values are corrected with a reactity factor that is determined experimentally So for water-steam gasification And for the gasification with carbon dioxide In these equations As Alkaline metals, alkaline earth metals and iron increase the reaction rate. Silica, Aluminia and phosphates reduce the reaction rate.  Char from slow pyrolysis is less reactive than char from fast pyrolysis, so there is no need to gasify char from slow pyrolysis for determining fuel reactivity in fluidized bed gasification At low heating rates there are no structural changes of the biomass particle through pyrolysis. The natural porosity is sufficient for gasing out. High heating rates cause a different structure after pyrolysis compared to the raw biomass As already discussed transport phenomena can limit the reaction rate Nevertheless there are some additional factors that influence the reaction rate. So the fragmentation of wood char while gasification is very important. The prediction of the fragmentation is quite difficult and is still imprecise and a research topic Comminution and structure of the particles are important for the reaction rate. The allothermal gasification reactions with steam or carbon dioxide are significant slower than autothermal gasification reactions with air Between carbon dioxide and steam there are also differences. A comparison of the data provided in the review in Ref. As literature data show (e.g. Refs. As explanation for that three hydrogen inhibition mechanisms are summarized in Ref. “Dissociative hydrogen adsorption” “Weak or associative hydrogen adsorption”. “Reverse oxygen exchange”. C(O) is oxygen that is adsorbed to an active carbon site. The mechanisms of Eqs. This paper uses a gravimetrical method for determination of gasification reaction rates. Therefore a fluidized bed is weighed continuously in order to measure the mass loss by gasification in dependence of time. The advantages of this method are: Continues data acquisition instead of just discrete points. No interaction of the measurement method with the reaction. Comparatively simple method. This method does not allow an examination of partially converted particles. This would require fishing of these particles, but fishing particles does just allow to fish particles that are bigger than the size of the sieve mesh size. This means that the small particles are lost. Also it is questionable, if it is possible to check where the reaction takes place, because the history (e.g. when did the particle breakup) of the fished particles is not known, as most particles do not stay intact. The test rig consists of a fluidized bed and a balance. The fluidized bed has an inner tube diameter of 100 mm and is filled with quartz sand. Quartz sand is used, because it is known to be inert. Before the gas enters the reactor, a gas preheater preheats the gas. The gas preheater is below the fluidized bed and is a heated tube (same diameter as fluidized bed) that comes in contact with the gas. In order to reach a gas temperature as high as possible, the gas is injected tangential to the preheating tube. The steam generator is a steam boiler designed for industrial flat irons. Flow measurement of steam takes place by a coriolis flow meter, flow control by a steam control valve. For the other gases the test rig uses mass flow controllers. All external connections are realized as flexible tubes, because the system must be able to move freely. The fluidized bed has a type K thermocouple that is introduced from below of the fluidized bed. A tube protects the thermocouple against abrasion by fluidized bed. The thermocouple is in the middle of the fluidized bed. The fluidized bed sits on a balance with a platform size of 800 × 600 mm. The balance has a weighing range of 150 kg with a reading precision of 0.1 g. The balance is read out electronically by means of a RS232 interface. The samples are introduced from the top. There is no temperature or pressure measurement of the sample itself, because introducing a thermocouple or pressure measurement weakens the sample. Consequently it supports breakup of the sample at the thermocouple position at early conversion progress. Additionally also pressure measurements in the middle of the sample are impossible for reason of sample breakup. All measurements base on the same procedure: Heating of the reactor to the designated temperature (e.g. 1123 K). Taring the balance. Pyrolysis of wood samples under nitrogen atmosphere until a residual char mass of about 25 g is reached. This means that fuel is inserted until the production of 25 g char. Pyrolysis takes place directly in fluidized bed at gasification temperature. Waiting until pyrolysis is completely finished. Switching gas to the gasification agent. Waiting until reaction finishes (noticeable by constant mass). For all measurements the reactor runs as a bubbling fluidized bed. For measurements with 100% steam the mass flow of the steam is constant at 1.5 The fluidization number for the gases (nitrogen and carbon dioxide) is kept constant to about 5 at all temperatures. The fluidization regime changes not significantly in the range between Before gasification measurement starts, pyrolysis reaction is completely finished. So it is ensured that only the measurement of char gasification kinetics takes place. Pyrolysis is done under the same conditions as gasification in order to simulate gasification in industrial gasifiers as realistic as possible. While pyrolysis shrinkage of the samples takes place. For 6 mm wood pellets (see later) the cylindric diameter is reduced to about 5 mm, for the wood cubes there is no constant size reduction, it differs from one cube to another. Also the 6 mm wood pellets usually do not break up while pyrolysis, while some of the wood cubes do. The examination of sample breakup in general is not an aim of this paper. As the number of wood cube char particles and especially of wood pellet char particles is quite high, there should be an averaging effect. The different behavior of the individual wood cube char particles is presumably caused by the varying structure of the raw wood particles as they are a natural product. Wood is mostly gasified in two forms: as pellets and as untreated wood (e.g. wood chips). So this paper uses char from pellets (ca. 80% spruce/20% pine wood) as well as char from untreated wood cubes. The aim of this paper is to test the impact of: Particle size. Wood type. Gasification agent. Hydrogen. Char samples of wood cubes with edge size from 10 mm to 40 mm are gasified in order to investigate the impact of particle sizes. For the second point the measurements use char of wood cubes made of maple, beech and spruce wood. While maple and beech are hardwood, spruce wood is softwood. Also important is point three, because there a two kind of gasification agents usual in literature: CO The gravimetrical measurement method delivers mass losses dependent on time. An example shows For the selection of the suitable particle model it is sufficient to look at the slope of the mass loss curve. The mass loss curve is well describable with a first-order approach as denotes the apparent first-order kinetic of the char gasification. m(t) is the mass at a time t, It is possible to write this equation also in a differential form: In literature the rate constant k is also often called reactivity (e.g. Refs. The mathematical description Eq. This result is in accordance to The reason for the difference in the conversion profiles could be that the gasification reaction is much slower than the combustion reaction and no longer limited by diffusion or heat transfer. As a consequence of that the gasification agent has more time to diffuse into the char In literature usually the Arrhenius equation describes the temperature dependency of the gasification reaction. The Arrhenius equation says that there is an exponential relationship between the temperature and the reaction rate. The reaction rate rises exponentially with temperature. The Arrhenius law is: In this equation k stands for rate constant at temperature T (in K). k The so-called Arrhenius diagram shows ln( In addition to the mathematical treatment this paper shows a simplified method for presenting the results. The method works with comparing the results by their half-value periods. The half-value periods show the times needed for 50% of total mass loss. This approach is not quite common. However, the big advantages of this method are: No calculations are necessary for estimating the time needed for gasification and thus this method meets the needs of practical use. It is possible to compare results that base on completely different models as the calculation of half-value periods is possible for nearly any model in literature. It is possible to calculate the half-value periods by starting with Eq. this yields: and The half-value period for or The Arrhenius diagram (   The diagram shows that there is obviously just one kind of limitation within the investigated temperature range. The possible limitations are: Limitation by chemical reaction rate. Limitation by pore diffusion. Limitation by boundary layer diffusion.  The half-value period diagram ( In order to investigate the impact of particle size, measurements with different particle sizes are performed. The samples are chars from beech wood cubes with an edge size of 10 mm–40 mm. When looking more detailed at The other oberservation, when comparing the measurements for the wood cube char and the pellet char, is the lower activation energy for the gasification of wood cube char. This results probably from the completely different structure of wood cubes and pellets. So it is necessary to treat both kinds of fuel separately. The calculated activation energies and preexponential factors from at least three measurement points per temperature are (calculated between 1023 K and 1173 K): 10 mm: E 20 mm: E 30 mm: E 40 mm: E The preexponential factors and activation energies do not show any correspondance to the wood cube sizes. So one can assume that the fluctuation of the values is within the measurement tolerance.  As there is no significant influence of the particle size it is important to know, whether the measurement results are applicable on chars from any kind of wood. Therefore in the following this paper shows the results of different wood types in form of char from wood cubes of 20 mm edge size. There are two possible explanations: Different porosity of the sample. Catalytic influence of ash constituents. To exclude the effect of the ash, it is useful to look as a first step at the ash constituents of the char. As already discussed An analysis of the ash constituents with the values from that database shows that beech wood ash has more components that decrease the reaction rate and less components that increase the reaction rate than spruce wood. So it is very unlikely that the ash composition is the reason for the different reaction rates.As a result it seems that the porosity between the wood types is the reason for the differences. One large difference between the wood types is the raw density (measured values): beech: 0.655 maple: 0.586 spruce: 0.509 When looking at the densities it is obvious that wood with an higher raw density is more reactive than one with a lower density. So the explanation could be that, if more volatiles have to gas out the char structure changes more than that of wood with lower density. This assumption is also supported by the thesis, that says that gasification in fluidized bed is usually controlled by pore diffusion as proposed in Ref. The activation energies and preexponential factors for the different wood types are (between 1073 K and 1173 K): Beech 20 mm: E Maple 20 mm: E Spruce 20 mm: E The result at 1023 K remains unconsidered as it does not fulfill the Arrhenius equation in any way. An explanation could be the comminution of the samples. This fits to the observation that a lot fine char left the reactor at the exhaust pipe while gasification. The reason why this effect appears especially for samples of this size (20 mm) is unclear. The entrainment of char is an unavoidable effect that also takes place in large gasifiers. Additionally the half-value period diagram (  carbon dioxide: E steam: E The activation energy of the carbon dioxide gasification is about 10% higher than that of the steam gasification. The preexponential factor doubles. This difference in the reactivity is also reflected in the corresponding half-value period diagram ( The reasons for that should not be discussed further as gasification with carbon dioxide and steam are completely different reactions. As already studied in literature the reaction rate reduces, if the gasification agent contains product gases. To examine this, this paper shows the results for gasification kinetics with 5% and 10% hydrogen in steam for gasification of char from wood pellets. The Arrhenius diagram in The kinetic parameters are: 0% H 5% H 10% H  Thus, hydrogen inhibits the reaction significantly. One has also to take into consideration that the measurements are just with a maximum of 10% hydrogen in steam. As the results show, the steam gasification of char is mainly influenced by two factors: temperature and product gases. The type of wood has an influence and should be taken into consideration when designing fluidized bed reactors, but the influence is not as strong as the already mentioned factors. The particle size has no significant influence. It has nearly no impact on the gasification kinetics. Gasification with carbon dioxide takes much more time than the gasification with steam. Surprising is that the particle size has nearly no influence for char of wood cubes in the range of 10 mm–40 mm. This clearly indicates that the gasification reaction is such a slow reaction that the gasification agent has enough time to diffuse into the sample. The impact of the type of wood indicates that the wood structure has an influence on the reaction kinetics. So it seems that the reaction rate depends on the pore structure of the char. This confirms the thesis of The effectiveness factor calculation (chapter 2.3.3) of the values for the char of the wood cubes delivers the following values (kinetic data from experiments of this paper): 10 mm: 1023 K: 1173 K: 20 mm: 1023 K: 1173 K: 30 mm: 1023 K: 1173 K: 40 mm: 1023 K: 1173 K: However, when looking at the effectiveness factors, it can be seen that there is somehow an affection of the reaction rate by diffusion processes even for the 10 mm sample. The effectiveness factor decreases with rising temperature and particle size to 71% at 1173 K for char of 40 mm beech wood cubes. This means that the reaction rate for 40 mm is just a little bit slower than for 10 mm. A comparison of the measured data would be wishable. Therefore a lot of literature data are available in Ref. For the evaluation of the measurement accuracies, it is necessary to look at the approximation inaccuracy of the mass loss curve approximation. The measurements consist of The equation uses the absolute value to avoid negative rate constants that would appear, if the measured mass reaches zero gramms. In general an evaluation of the approximation quality is just possible until the measured mass reaches zero gramms.   With Δ The results of this paper show that the particle size is relatively unimportant for the gasification reactivity, while the gasification agent has a major influence on the reactivity. The kind of wood and the pelletation has also an impact on the kinetics. From this result one can follow that for designing industrial gasifiers, it is important to know, which kind of wood is gasified and which gasification agent. Quite interesting is the point that on the one hand the theoretically calculated effectiveness factor decreases with particle size, but on the other hand the reaction rate is not affected by the particle size. Therefore two reasons are possible. The first one is the comminution of the particles in the fluidized bed and the other one is the large pore size that allows good gas exchange. For the kind of wood it seems that the raw wood density is the key factor that influences the reaction rate. The higher the raw density the higher the reaction rate. So in the authors' opinion the reason for that is, that more volatiles per volume have to leave the particle, which means a higher change in the particle structure. This strongens also the hypothesis of the pore dependence of the reaction. So in conclusion it seems that the reaction limited by pore diffusion.