This paper investigates the global stability of welded singly symmetric I-shaped beams fabricated from Q460GJ steel, a typical high-performance structural steel. Experimental tests and numerical simulations were carried out on a total of eight laterally unrestrained steel beams under a concentrated point load. A special loading system was designed through which the beam could develop lateral deflections at the mid-span. Load-displacement curves and strains of beams were measured during testing. In the finite element model, initial geometric imperfections and residual stresses were considered. The model was verified through comparisons with experimental results, and parametric studies were conducted to investigate the effects of non-dimensional slenderness and height-to-width ratio. Meanwhile, design curves for lateral-torsional buckling of welded singly symmetric beams were calculated from GB50017-2003, GB50017-201X, Eurocode 3 and ANSI/AISC360-10. Comparisons between numerical results and design curves suggested that the design methods in GB50017-2003 and ANSI/AISC360-10 were unsafe for Q460GJ steel beams while GB50017-201X and Eurocode 3 could provide reasonably conservative results for global buckling design of singly symmetric Q460GJ steel beams.GJ steel, a typical high-performance steel, has been widely used in many construction projects in China as a result of its higher strength, better weldability and ductility as compared to conventional structural steel. GJ steel has lower contents of sulphur, phosphorus and carbon. For instance, the sulphur content must be less than 0.015%, and the phosphorus content less than 0.020–0.025%. Moreover, the yield-to-ultimate strength ratio of Q460GJ steel is not more than 0.85. In terms of mechanical properties, the effect of plate thickness on the yield strength of GJ steel is not as significant as conventional steel. The lamellar tearing resistance of GJ steel heavy plates is also superior. To assess its influence on global buckling behaviour of columns, experimental and numerical investigations have been carried out on Q460GJ columns subject to compression [ In practice, singly-symmetric I-sections with thicker compressive flange are often used to avoid local buckling. In the past few years, a large number of theoretical investigations were conducted on lateral-torsional buckling of single symmetric I-beams. El-Mahdy and El-Saadawy [ In this paper, a series of experimental tests was conducted to investigate the global buckling behaviour of singly symmetric I-shaped beams fabricated from Q460GJ steel. Eight specimens with two types of cross section and varied spans were tested in total. The beams were tested under a concentrated point load at the mid-span and a unique test rig was designed to minimise the friction in the loading device. Finite element models were developed for steel beams, in which initial geometric imperfections and residual stresses were incorporated. The model was validated against test results and further used for parametric studies on a wide range of height-to-width ratio and non-dimensional slenderness. Finally, numerical results are compared with GB50017-2003 [ In the experimental programme, a total of eight beams with singly symmetric I-shaped cross-sections were designed and fabricated from Q460GJ structural steel with a nominal yield stress of 460 MPa. In accordance with Chinese design codes for steel structures [  During testing, the out-of-plane rotation of beams at the mid-span was measured by using an inclinometer, attached on the web. The vertical and horizontal displacements were captured through a series of linear variable displacement transducers (LVDTs), as shown in Steel coupons with thicknesses of 8 and 16 mm were extracted from steel plates and tension tests were conducted according to Chinese standard GB/T228.1-2010 [ When subject to three-point bending, all steel beams failed by lateral-torsional buckling.   In order to evaluate the lateral-torsional buckling resistance of Q460GJ steel beams, design values were calculated in accordance with different design codes for steel structures and comparisons were made between design and calculated results, as summarised in To extend the range of non-dimensional slenderness in the study, finite element models were developed by using ABAQUS [ Initial imperfections play a critical role in the lateral-torsional buckling behaviour of steel beams subject to a concentrated point load at the mid-span. In the model, initial geometric imperfections were considered by using the *IMPERFECTION command. The measured initial geometric imperfection was introduced to the model based on eigenvalue analysis. Residual stresses were applied to the beams through the *INITIAL CONDITION command in ABAQUS. All beams were simulated under simply-supported boundary conditions. Both ends of the beams were restrained against vertical displacements, out-of-plane displacements and twists. A roller support was designed for one end of the beams so that longitudinal displacements could be released. A steel plate was modelled on the beam top flange to take account of the effect of loading plates on preventing local buckling of the flange. A concentrated point load was applied to the steel plate. The modified Riks (arc-length) method was employed in the finite element analysis to simulate the lateral-torsional buckling behaviour of steel beams. A series of parametric studies was conducted based on the verified numerical model, in which the effects of non-dimensional slenderness and height-to-width ratio were investigated. In the study, the non-dimensional slenderness ratio ranged from 0.6 to 2.0, and the height-to-width ratio was 1.5, 2.0 and 2.5 for cross sections H270 × 180 × 8 × 16(8), H360 × 180 × 8 × 16(8) and H450 × 180 × 8 × 16(8) corresponding to curves c and d in Eurocode 3 [  This paper presents the experimental and numerical results of singly symmetric I-beams fabricated from high-performance Q460GJ structural steel. The beams were tested under a concentrated point load at the mid-span and expected to fail in a range between elastic and inelastic lateral-torsional buckling. Finite element models were developed to simulate the global buckling behaviour of the beams. The model was validated against test results and used for parametric studies on the effects of non-dimensional slenderness and height-to-width ratio. Comparisons were made with design curves in GB50017-2003 [ All steel beams failed in lateral-torsional buckling except B-360-4.0 which developed a rather high load resistance due to the presence of friction in the loading device. Yielding of the tension flange was not observed prior to failure, and local buckling did not occur in the compression flange. By increasing the beam span, corresponding ultimate load substantially decreased. The height-to-width ratio of steel beams had limited effect on the global buckling resistance. The design curves in GB50017-2003 [ The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support provided by the