This paper studies the linear-quadratic-Gaussian (LQG) problem for sampled-data systems with a stochastic sampling interval obeying a certain probability distribution. An optimal estimator of the system state is presented by the standard Kalman filter, and the Vandermonde matrix and Kronecker product operation are used to calculate the mathematical expectation caused by stochastic sampling in the process of designing the LQG controller. Moreover, it was proved that the controller can ensure the system is exponentially mean square stable. Finally, some simulation results are given to verify the effectiveness and practicability of the proposed controller design method.Sampled-data control theory as a important theory in the control system has received much attention in the past few decades LQG control has been applied in many fields such as linear quantum systems It should be pointed out that the most existing literature are mainly concerned about the aperiodic sampled-data systems, where the sampling value is located within a known bound. Actually, aperiodic sampling always occurs in a random way due to some factors such as clock error drift To solve the aforementioned problems, in this paper, we consider the stochastic LQG control for sampled-data systems under stochastic sampling. The Kalmam filter is introduced to get a state estimate from the available data. By using the matrix theory, the mathematical expectation in the process of designing LQG controller can be calculated. In addition, we prove that the controller can render the sampled-data system under stochastic sampling exponentially mean square stable. Finally, an example is given to show the effectiveness of the method proposed in this paper. The main contribution of this paper is given as follows. In this paper, we consider the sampled-data control problem under stochastic sampling intervals, which has not been fully taken into account in It should be pointed out that the method used in this paper is different from Consider the following linear system In this paper, we make the following assumptions: The information about the initial state is known. The probability distribution function of the sampling interval can be obtained. Statistics of plant noises are independent of the sampling interval. The control input Substituting Integrating the above equation from Defining the sampling interval as As described in the abstract, the sampling interval According to the authors’ knowledge, there are few results in literature to study In this paper, we aim to design an optimal controller by minimizing the following cost function: To reduce the complexity arisen from the stochastic variable ϑ The existence of the stochastic variable ϑ To simplify the question, in this paper, we only consider the system matrix whose eigenvalues are completely different. Consequently, the Vandermonde matrix of system matrix Similar to the work of If the system matrix contains repeated eigenvalues, then the inverse matrix of Base on above discussions, we can calculate the mathematical expectation According to the above description, the following lemma is given.  On the basis of the Actually, it is hard to get the accurate state information due to the existence of the Gaussian white noise. To solve the problem, we should find a method to obtain the estimated value from the signal under the Gaussian white noise. The fact that we can obtain the sampling instants information at time  When we calculate the state estimation Clearly, if the information about the initial state is known, we have According to Define Before moving on, the following two lemmas are introduced.   For When Based on the discussions mentioned above, we summarize the following Theorem.  By repeated use of The initial condition of According to From Using Therefore, we can obtain Substituting Since Since From Using Combing To study the stability of the sampled-data systems, we give the following definition. The discrete-time stochastic system is exponentially mean square stable if for any initial state (  We choose a Lyapunov function From Therefore, Applying the smoothing property Combining Repeating the process, we have Consequently, According to Moreover, From Consider a head-box of a paper machine The nominal sampling value is  We choose the following parameters  We choose the same parameters The state response of a head-box system is presented in For the two cases, we can confirm the effectiveness of our method and our method can be applied when the probability density function of sampling error ϑ In this section, we give a numerical example to show that our method is effective for the case that system matrix contains zero eigenvalues. Consider a DC-motor system It is clear that the eigenvalues of system matrix are 0 and Applying The state response of this system with initial condition The problem of the stochastic LQG control for sampled-data systems has been investigated. The standard Kalman filter has been used to estimate the state. By applying the matrix theory including the The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was supported in part by the