Blasting involves breakage of rock with the use of explosive or chemical energy. It is primarily a rock–explosive interaction process that entails application of pressure generated by detonation of explosives on rock mass, over a few milliseconds. This rock–explosive interaction results in rock breakage and desired heaving of the broken rock mass (muck). During the dynamic process of blasting, a single or few fragments may travel more than the expected distances under the influence of high pressure gases radiating through fractures about the blasthole. Such fragments, popularly known as flyrock, can damage nearby structures, equipment and injure people. In some cases, flyrock may prove to be fatal if it hits personnel within or outside the limits of the mine or open excavation and is thus a safety concern. Extensive literature exists in the internet and published domain (see online database of The flyrock issue has been investigated by several researchers to assess the maximum travel distance of the flyrock fragment. Three approaches viz. maximum travel distance and its size using impact and trajectory physics, empirical methods, and artificial neural network have been used to assess the travel distance in such published studies. The maximum travel distance method Flyrock and throw of broken rock mass or muck are the results of explosive action that manifests in the form of shock and gaseous pressure in the blasthole The concept for arriving at the estimated range of a flyrock is based on the pressure generated in the blasthole, the rock mass properties, and the confinement The blast induced pressure ( A peak stress (stage 1) which can be equated to the primary stress shock generated during explosive detonation and resulting in compressive strain Flat regions in the curve in the In the present study, the pressure–time traces follow similar trends and are believed to represent the actual blast induced pressure history during the rock–explosive interaction in blasting. Since the pressure is monitored across the rock-mass, its attenuation is considered to represent the explosive and rock mass properties in the form of a response function From the above-explained pressure–time relationship, one can arrive at the range of different sizes of flyrock fragments using the basic criterion of trajectory motion. However, flyrock being a random phenomenon can occur at different pressure/time stages ( The distance travelled by a flyrock can be estimated with the help of the following equation for projectile motion: Dimensional analysis of the above model (Eq. The dimensions of different quantities involved in the Eq. Dimensionally balanced, Eq. In order to evaluate Eq. In-hole continuous velocities of detonation ( For measurement of velocity of detonation, a resistance wire of uniform resistance (10.2 Ω⧸m in our case) is fused on one end and inserted in the blast hole before loading the explosive. The wire can be inserted into multiple holes in a continuous manner. The equipment measures the drop in resistance with respect to time as the explosive column detonates and burns the cable with it. The data is recorded by the equipment at predefined recording rate up to 5 The blast induced pressure ( The coupling of the water jacket with the dummy hole was ensured by using a larger diameter jacket and cross checking its contact with the dummy-hole wall after lowering into it by a string attached to the plastic jacket containing the pressure probe. The distance of the pressure probe from the nearby blast holes and their delay sequence was recorded for further use. Varied rock conditions were investigated in this study covering moderately hard-fractured, and massive-hard fractured, varied lithology, varied rock density, and beds with adversely oriented joints. Experiments were carried out in NINE such cases by using suitable choice of explosives and their distribution in blastholes. The blast design variables were kept close to constant, as the entire process is highly sensitive to blast design changes. Details of the tests are given in The details of the tests thus conducted are provided in In order to cross check the initial movement of flyrock a few tests were monitored with high-speed video event that corroborated with the blast induced pressure–time history of the blast. One such case of test 3 is presented in In order to test the Eq. Blast induced pressure measurements were done at approximately one burden distance to estimate the escape pressure at burden distance as the flyrock often emanates from front or top face of the bench. Typically, the burden and stemming values were in the same range, thus, confinement offered due to face and surface are assumed to be the same. However, the site conditions and other constraints like damage of rock mass due to previous blasts resulted in varied distance of the pressure probe than the planned proximity. This was also necessary in order to produce reliable data and prevent the loss of the costly pressure probe. In order to account for the difference, the monitored pressure of the blasts was corrected for the actual burden distance by using pressure-time attenuation equation for the time difference estimated from p-wave velocity ( The dimension, mass, and launch angle of the flyrock(s) monitored during the tests were substituted in Eq. Summary of the results obtained from the above analysis is provided in The flyrock distances for different test blasts obtained from the Eq. A methodology to determine the blast induced pressure–time history of blasts using pressure probe has been detailed in this paper and it has been shown that the same yields better accuracy for prediction of flyrock distance. The methodology once established is expected to provide a scientific means to estimate flyrock distance and to determine the blast danger zone around the mines conducting blasting. The tests are limited in number, conducted on known cases of flyrock and the pressure is determined by placing the probe in a water jacket which might attenuate the pressure and thus requires further investigations in the more cases. The proposed approach, however, is a better method for flyrock distance prediction since several variables pertaining to the blast design are eliminated in the process and the actual response of the rockmass is modelled under the action of explosive-induced dynamic fracturing. Despite of the fact that the tests mentioned in this work are somewhat difficult in nature, these can be conducted to represent one bench with similar lithology. Moreover, any cost on experimentation is worth it keeping in view the potential threat to life from flyrock. The paper forms a part of the Ph.D. thesis of the first author. Thanks are due to the Director CSIR-CIMFR for permitting to publish the paper. Thanks are also due to Ministry of Mines, GOI for funding the research project. Thanks are due to our colleagues for their help.