Three sites with strongly to extremely acidic soils and forest floors dominated by hay-scented fern (Dennstaedtia punctilobula) were divided into 400m2 treatment plots in southwestern Pennsylvania. Soil solution samples were taken bi-weekly using tension lysimeters for three growing seasons from three lysimeters on plots receiving herbicide (H); herbicide, lime, and fertilizer (HLF); and lime and fertilizer (LF) treatments. In addition soil samples were obtained before and after treatment. High magnesium pulverized limestone was applied at a rate of 3600kgha−1 with 1120kgha−1 of 10–20–20 fertilizer. Herbicide treatments were applied at a rate of 0.11kg active ingredient (ai) ha−1 of Oust®, a sulfometuron-methyl herbicide to control hay-scented fern. Two additional plots were used as controls and all plots were fenced to exclude white-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus) and previously shelterwood harvested (within the year) to leave a residual basal area of 0.30–0.55m2
                     ha−1. Seedling regeneration height and residual tree diameters were measured (DBH) and basal area increment (BAI) was calculated. Analysis of variance procedures were used to analyze soil solution and soil data. Mann–Whitney non-parametric tests were used to compare treatment differences for residual tree DBH and BAI. Soil solution and soil data indicated calcium (Ca), magnesium (Mg), potassium (K), pH, and both base cation/aluminum (BC/Al) and Ca/Al ratios increased with the addition of lime and fertilizer. The addition of herbicide alone caused increased Al and H+ concentrations and reduced Ca/Al ratios to critically low levels. Residual red oak (Quercus rubra L.) measurements indicated that under normal moisture conditions trees in the HLF plot had significantly increased radial growth over all other treatments. Soil solution and soil chemistry data indicated rather strongly that sulfometuron-methyl alone increased soil acidity and subsequently reduced regeneration growth relative to a similar treatment with lime and fertilizer added. The combination of sulfometuron-methyl herbicide and dolomitic lime and fertilizer resulted in the tallest, most dense regeneration with the greatest species diversity and is recommended for hardwood shelterwood cuts on strongly to extremely acid soils dominated by hay-scented fern where hardwood regeneration is a management goal.Soil acidity, nutrient deficient soils, lack of light penetration, herbivory, and understory competition are the major obstacles encountered in regenerating hardwoods. Acidification of forest soils has become a major environmental concern in Pennsylvania and in many areas of the world. Soil acidity is a predisposing factor that can lead to forest decline ( Shelterwood harvests are commonly used in forestry and cause the forest canopy to be less dense, allowing more light penetration to the forest floor ( Sulfometuron-methyl herbicides, such as Oust Sulfometuron-methyl herbicides (C A proposed remedy to soil acidification is the fertilization and liming of soils ( The practice of liming and fertilization is not a typical forest management practice in the United States, but has been in use in various countries in Europe for about a century to increase tree production and regeneration (Messmer, 1959, in Based on past research previously discussed, the objectives of this study were to (1) determine the effects of a shelterwood harvest with herbicide application on soil and soil solution chemistry; (2) test the efficacy of liming and fertilization as an acidity remediation treatment; and (3) determine the effects of these treatments on hardwood tree and seedling growth and diversity. Mount Davis, Hickory Flats, and Beam Run, three sites located in the Appalachian Plateau physiographic province in Somerset County, Pennsylvania were chosen for study. All sites were located on the Forbes State Forest and had been recently harvested with a shelterwood cut and fenced to eliminate deer browsing. Shelterwood harvests were completed in 1998 at Mount Davis (residual basal area of 0.30 Four ( No lime, fertilizer or herbicide (control plot) (denoted as C). Herbicide only (denoted as H). Lime and fertilizer only (denoted as LF). Herbicide, lime, and fertilizer (denoted as HLF). Because the entire shelterwood cut at Hickory Flats was previously herbicided, only two plots were established: herbicide only (H) and herbicide, lime and fertilizer (HLF). Treatments were completed and tension lysimeters were installed during the spring/summer of 1999. High magnesium pulverized limestone and commercial 10–20–20 Agri-Gro fertilizers were used on the lime and fertilizer treatment plots. These treatments were not worked into the soil. High magnesium pulverized limestone was applied at a rate of 3360 Herbicide was applied at a rate of 0.11 Soil solution chemistry was collected with tension lysimeters. A total of 30 lysimeters were used in this evaluation. Twelve lysimeters each were installed at the Mount Davis and Beam Run sites and six were located at Hickory Flats. Lysimeters were constructed of 3.8 Soil solution collection began immediately after lysimeter installation and continued throughout August 2001. Sample collection began in April and ended in November of each year. Freezing conditions prevented use of the lysimeters from November through March. After sample collection, a vacuum of 0.6 bar was set on each lysimeter. Samples were collected bi-weekly for three growing seasons. All soil solution samples were collected in 250 Soil samples were obtained before treatments and a few months after treatment except for Hickory Flats, which was herbicided before the study began. Soil samples were taken from the O, A, and B horizons of freshly dug soil pits and placed in plastic, Ziploc A and B horizon pHs were measured using a standard pH electrode in 1:1 H Four regeneration subplots were randomly chosen within each treatment plot. In these subplots, all seedlings within a 1.82 Residual tree diameter at breast height (DBH) was measured in the early fall of 1999, 2000, and 2001, throughout each of the sites. Red oak, red maple ( Normality of data was analyzed using the Anderson–Darling normality test ( Median pH values were consistently lowest in soil solution collected from the herbicide only (H) plots ( Median Ca concentrations were consistently highest in the LF plots over all three growing seasons ( Throughout all three growing seasons, median Mg and K concentrations were also consistently highest within the LF and HLF treatment plots ( During the initial 1999 sampling period, there were no differences in median Al concentrations between treatments ( Median Mn concentrations of the control plot were consistently the highest in soil solution during the second growing season ( Median Ca/Al molar ratios ranged from below 0.1 (H) to above 10 (LF) ( During all three growing seasons, median BC/Al ratios were consistently higher in soil solution from the LF and HLF plots ( During the first growing season, median NO Median soil solution SO After treatment, there were significant increases of mean pH, Ca, Mg, Ca/Al ratios, and BC/Al ratios in the O, A, and B (LF only) horizons. Mean K concentrations significantly increased in the B horizon on the LF and HLF plot after treatment, but did not increase in any other horizon. Mn and Al concentrations significantly decreased after treatment in the O horizon of the LF and HLF plots. There were significant increases of mean Al and decreases in mean Ca/Al and BC/Al ratios in the H plot A horizon. During the first months after treatment, minimal changes occurred in the B horizon due to treatment. The H and HLF plots contained slightly higher concentrations of mean Ca, Mg, and K than the C and LF plots before treatment. These differences were small when compared with differences between plots after treatment. Mean Ca/Al ratios and BC/Al ratios of the H plot A horizon after treatment were significantly lower than all other treatments while Al concentrations were higher than all other treatments. Mean seedling height measurement was highest in the HLF treatment plot ( Woody seedling diversity was much greater on the HLF plot than any other treatment plots. The Shannon–Weaver index reached 0.759 on the HLF plot while the lime and fertilizer plot contained the lowest diversity with a Shannon index at 0.494. The HLF plot contained the highest number of species and contained species not found on other plots, such as aspen ( Diameter growth varied among species and years. Red oak DBH growth and BAI from 1999 to 2000 was significantly higher than all other treatments among trees within the HLF plot and significantly greater for both LF and H treatments over trees in the control plots ( Black cherry growth was only measured in two of the four treatment plots (H and HLF) because black cherry did not occur on the other plots. Although 1999–2000 black cherry diameter growth was higher in the HLF plot, the difference was not significant. There was no difference in 2000–2001. Although soil solution treatment differences were evident, some differences were not statistically significant. This was most likely due to the natural soil solution variability common in soil chemistry research. The soil data provided information on the chemical condition of the soil before any chemical treatments took place (i.e. lime and fertilizer or herbicide). The soil data revealed minimal change in the B horizon due to treatment; however, important improvements were gained in the O and A horizons following lime and fertilizer application. Both soil solution and soil data indicated that even the relatively modest lime and fertilizer application rates used, produced important soil chemistry improvement. Increases and decreases in pH can cause drastic changes in the chemical composition of soil and soil solution. Liming increased pH while plots treated with sulfometuron methyl alone had a lower pH than all other treatments. Ca, Mg, and K are crucially important to soil fertility and seedling vigor. Addition of these elements in the lime and fertilizer treatments resulted in increased concentrations in soil and soil solution, which diminished with time since treatment. Within the first growing season, the control and H plots also had higher concentrations of soil solution Ca, Mg, and K when compared to the two subsequent seasons probably as a result of soil disturbance during the shelterwood harvest. The herbicide treatment Al concentrations were higher than the other treatments for both A horizon soil and soil solution. From the standpoint of establishing vigorous regrowth of the forest following harvest, increased plant available aluminum concentrations are not beneficial. Soil data indicate that the LF and HLF treatments significantly decreased plant available Al concentrations in the O Horizon and for HLF also in the A horizon after treatment. These results were expected following lime addition. Nitrate was expected to increase slightly on the LF and HLF plots due to the addition of nitrogen in the fertilizer and on the plots receiving herbicide due to the removal of the herbaceous understory. Nitrate concentration in soil solution varied seasonally due to microbial activity. Differences between treatments were expected. Nitrate concentrations did not increase consistently in response to herbicide application or nitrogen fertilizer addition, indicating that nitrogen was taken up by vegetation or incorporated in unmineralized organic matter. Although increased N mineralization as a consequence of liming was expected, it appeared to be minimal. Sulfate consistently increased on the LF plot. A similar result was reported by Ca/Al ratios are excellent indicators of the potential effects of soil acidification on plants ( Seedling measurements in 2001 indicated that the HLF plot was the most diverse. This plot also contained the tallest seedlings; in fact, seedlings were as much as 16 times taller than seedlings in the control plots. Species were found on the HLF plot that did not exist on any other treatment plot. The improved soil chemistry and lack of hay-scented competition provided the best conditions for seedling growth. Although the lime and fertilizer treatment improved soil and soil solution chemistry conditions, hay-scented competition appeared to prevent increased diversity on the LF plot. The acidic soil conditions on the herbicide only plot may have excluded some acid sensitive species and limited seedling growth. Although the H plot and HLF plot contained a similar number of represented species (11 and 12, respectively) a large difference existed in the number of seedlings for each species. The majority of seedlings on the H plot were red oak, red maple, or very small black birch. Red maple and black birch are both insensitive to Al toxicity ( Residual hardwood growth varied between growing periods measured. This variation was likely due to drought conditions during the 2000–2001 growing season. Trees on those plots with more vegetation seemed to be most affected by drought conditions, which indicated possibly greater competition for water. During the 1999–2000 growing period red oak and black cherry DBH growth and BAI were highest on the HLF plot. Red maple growth and BAI during this growing period were highest on the H plot. This result appeared to indicate that red oak was sensitive to both competition, and the unfavorable soil chemistry induced by the addition of sulfometuron-methyl herbicide. Red maple trees also appeared to be affected by understory competition, but less so by the acidic soil conditions of the H plot. In fact, the silvicultural practice of shelterwood cutting and herbicide treatment appeared to favor red maple growth. Due to drought conditions throughout the 2001 growing season there were no significant differences in diameter and BAI for red oak or black cherry. For 2001 both diameter growth and BAI for red maple were still significantly highest on the H plot; however, overall growth was significantly lower than the previous year indicating a drought effect. Drought conditions appeared to adversely affect all growth measurements for all species. Sulfometuron-methyl herbicide application by itself lowered Ca/Al and BC/Al ratios well below critical levels implicated in Al toxicity to plants, decreased soil solution pH, and increased plant available Al. These outcomes are counter productive to the establishment of hardwood regeneration following timber harvest. Liming and fertilization ameliorated the soil acidification attendant to sulfometuron-methyl application and resulted in Ca/Al and BC/Al ratios above critical levels and significantly improved plant available Ca and Mg concentrations. Plots receiving herbicide, lime, and fertilizer treatments had the greatest number and most diverse group of woody seedlings. The HLF plot in general had the tallest seedlings. Based on the unfavorable soil chemical changes observed and their amelioration by lime and fertilizer application, sulfometuron-methyl herbicides should not be used to promote northern red oak and other acid sensitive hardwood regeneration on extremely acidic soils without accompanying lime and fertilizer treatment. Use of lime and fertilizer in the absence of hay-scented fern control also produced significant soil chemistry improvements. However, hardwood seedling height growth, species diversity, and seedling number appeared to be reduced by hay-scented fern competition with the exception of pin cherry. Residual red oak diameter growth increased significantly under normal moisture conditions. We would like to thank John Smith, Michael Demchik, Chad Voorhees, Stephanie Odenwald, Pamela Edwards (USFS, Parsons, WV), and Frederica Wood (USFS, Parsons, WV) for their help in the field and the laboratory. The paper was improved by the review comments of B. Swistock, W. Tzilkowski, E. Lotse, W. Hendershot, and two anonymous reviewers. We would also like to thank the Allegheny Foundation for funding this project and the Pennsylvania Bureau of Forestry for in kind support and for providing the lime and fertilizer used in the project at the Mount Davis site.