High weight is a protective factor against osteoporosis and risk of fracture. In obesity, however, where overweight is associated to excess fat, this relationship does not appear to be so clear, excess weight has sometimes been associated to decreased bone mass. Obesity interferes with bone metabolism through mechanical, hormonal, and inflammatory factors. These factors are closely related to weight, body composition, and dietary patterns of these patients. The net beneficial or harmful effect on bone mass or risk of fracture of the different components of this condition is not well known. We need to recognize patients at a greater risk of bone disease related to obesity to start an adequate intervention.Bone is an active organ on which a great number of factors act. Osteoporosis and increased risk of fracture are conditions which have gained relevance in recent years because of gradual aging of the population and their effects on quality of life and financial impact for society as a whole. In 2010, prevalence rates of osteoporosis in population older than 50 years in the European Union were 6.6% in males and 22.1% in females, and 5.5% in the overall population. In the most populated countries (Germany, France, Italy, Spain, and United Kingdom), approximately 21% of females aged 50 to 84 years meet the criteria for osteoporosis. Obesity is the most prevalent metabolic disease in developed countries and one of the main causes of morbidity and mortality. In 2008, the WHO estimated that 1400 The relationship between overweight and bone metabolism is controversial. Increased body weight has been considered a factor that increases bone mass and decreases risk of fracture. The available evidence shows that postmenopausal women with obesity have an increased risk of humeral fractures and osteoporotic fractures of the ankle and lower limb, and a decreased risk of hip, pelvis, and wrist fractures. Fewer studies are available in males, but they have a pattern similar to females. Prevalence of obesity is greatly increasing in recent years, and population is gradually aging. These two circumstances are intrinsically associated to bone health, and this review is therefore intended to: Ascertain the mechanisms that relate obesity to changes in bone metabolism. Detect the factors associated to obesity with a negative impact on bone mineral density and risk of fracture. Determine the intervention required to prevent or improve the impact on bone of these factors related to obesity. A narrative review was carried out. An online search was conducted in the medical databases PUBMED and EMBASE for the following terms: “Obesity” [MESH] AND “Bone metabolism” [MESH]; “Body Composition” [MESH] AND “Bone Metabolism” [MESH]; “Obesity” [MESH] AND “Bone” [MESH]; “Obesity” [MESH] and “Vitamin D” [MESH] or “PTH” [MESH]. Original articles, meta-analyses, systematic reviews, and narrative reviews were considered. The search was done on February 1, 2016, and no limits were established for the publication date. Priority was given to articles with methodology of higher scientific evidence (clinical guideline, meta-analysis, randomized clinical trial, systematic review, original article, and narrative review) published in the last five years. When the concept of obesity is considered, it is very important to assess the contribution of the different components of weight (lean mass, fat mass, and water). Lean mass and fat mass are independent determinants of bone mass, and each of them will therefore have a different influence and will depend on several factors. Increases in lean or fat-free mass are associated to increased bone mass. The reason for this may be an increased mechanical load on bone related to weight and muscle hypertrophy. In this regard, a meta-analysis by Ho-Pham et al. showed that correlation between lean mass and bone mineral density in the femoral neck was greater than that of fat mass ( The positive effect of increased lean mass is attributed to factors related to lifestyle such as exercise and diet, estrogen sufficiency, genetic influences, or a combination of these factors. On the other hand, an increase in muscle mass has an independent effect on risk of fracture by decreasing fragility and falls related to osteoporotic fracture. Although obesity is characterized by a predominant increase in fat mass, there is also an increase in lean mass that may partly account for the beneficial effect of this on bone mineral density. This situation was studied by Neubecker et al., who compared bone mineral density, bone fragility, and risk of fracture in obese patients and patients with anorexia nervosa and found that female obese patients (with greater lean mass) had greater bone mineral density and less bone fragility, which suggests a lower fracture risk. In elderly patients or obese patients with associated severe disease, the so-called Several circumstances occur in this pro-inflammatory condition: (1) preferential mobilization of muscle instead of fat for energy consumption; (2) a high inflammation level that causes a progressive decrease in muscle mass; and (3) an impairment in muscle quality caused by fat deposition in muscle due to increased insulin resistance. This Weight increase in obesity mainly results from fat mass. Fat mass has an impact on bone metabolism mainly through several mechanisms: From the quantitative viewpoint, an increase in total body mass increases From the qualitative viewpoint, increased fat mass is associated to an increase in On the other hand, The systemic influence of adipose tissue through mediators is widely recognized. Action of these mediators (adipokines and inflammatory factors) may have a significant role in bone mass development: Adipocytokines are hormonal mediators produced by adipose tissue. The two main adipocytokines are leptin and adiponectin, having multiple effects on satiety and insulin resistance, among other functions, but their role in bone metabolism is controversial.  Based on this data, it was hypothesized that leptin injection could enhance bone formation and inhibit bone resorption, but when the hormone was injected to a group of patients on a weight loss diet, no effect was seen on bone metabolism.   Ghrelin is an orexigenic peptide secreted by the stomach which, among other functions, stimulates differentiation of preadipocytes into adipocytes and antagonizes lipolysis. Levels of this hormone are inversely related to body mass index and insulin resistance, and are therefore decreased in metabolic syndrome. Obesity is related to low-grade chronic inflammation. Adipose tissue is infiltrated by macrophages that induce chronic production of pro-inflammatory cytokines, increases in acute phase reactants, and activation of inflammatory pathways. These cytokines cause an increase in osteoclast differentiation and, thus, in bone resorption. Long-term maintenance of this situation results in osteopenia and osteoporosis.   Relationship between estrogens and bone metabolism is clear, and is the main reason for age-related bone mass decrease in postmenopausal women. In postmenopausal obese women, circulating estrogens are partially maintained due to peripheral aromatization (related to adipose tissue) of increased androgens in relation to insulin resistance. Increased circulating estrogen levels also stimulate osteoblast production in bone marrow. This situation may lead to a partial increase in bone mass and some protective role against osteoporosis. Distribution of fat mass in the body has been characterized in different compartments in relation to cardiovascular disease, diabetes mellitus, and mortality. It also appears that it could have an effect on bone mineral density. Two types of adipose tissue and obesity are distinguished: Visceral adipose tissue, related to Subcutaneous adipose tissue, related to While no sufficient studies comparing the effect of both types of obesity in the same context are available, it may be concluded that the main factor influencing bone metabolism is the amount of adipose tissue, rather than its distribution. In this regard, in different diseases such as obesity, anorexia nervosa, and type 2 diabetes mellitus, an inverse relationship has been noted between bone marrow fat and bone mineral density. Hypotheses postulated for this increase include presence of a same mesenchymal precursor for osteoblasts and adipocytes. In obese patients, there would be a greater differentiation to adipose tissue with a reduction of bone formation potential. This data is currently difficult to measure, and no adequate evidence to ascertain whether there may be an increased risk of fracture is available yet. To sum up, increased adiposity, associated to a decrease in fat-free mass, has been related to decreased bone mineral density and increased fragility. Obesity is intrinsically related to the concept of insulin resistance and metabolic syndrome. It has been reported that this insulin resistance and its metabolic consequences (increased insulin, amyline, and preptin levels) may be associated to bone metabolism. Elevated insulin levels are positively associated to bone mass increase. This situation may be due to decreased osteoclast activity and increased osteoblast function related to increased estrogen levels as the result of aromatization and an increase in free estrogen fractions due to decreases in sex hormone binding proteins. Amyline is a peptide co-secreted with insulin, a member of the calcitonin family, which is therefore increased in patients with insulin resistance. It appears that this hormone may have effects similar to calcitonin, inducing osteoblast proliferation This peptide is secreted in the same way as the previous ones and has also shown According to these findings, insulin resistance, at least in its early phases, may be related to increased bone formation with decreased bone resorption and, thus, to an increase in bone mass. Osteocalcin is a 49-amino acid peptide synthesized by osteoblasts only and stored in the bone mineral matrix as hydroxyapatite crystals. Because of its characteristics, osteocalcin is used as bone formation marker. Osteocalcin has been seen to stimulate proliferation of beta cells and insulin secretion Based on the available data, it may be hypothesized that osteocalcin could have a central role in the relationship between bone metabolism and insulin resistance. Hyperinsulinism would increase osteoblast and osteocalcin production, which would in turn stimulate insulin production and improve insulin sensitivity through adiponectin. In obesity, characterized by high insulin resistance and a relative decrease in insulin secretion, decreased osteocalcin production may be seen according to different studies. The study recently conducted by Bador et al. found a negative correlation of osteocalcin to glucose and insulin resistance as measured using HOMA-R. In addition, diabetic patients were seen to have lower osteocalcin levels. Effects of vitamin D on bone metabolism are well known: (a) it has an influence on calcium and phosphorus levels, promoting the mineralization process; (b) controls function and differentiation of osteoblasts and osteoclasts, promoting bone formation through inhibition of parathormone (PTH) function. Vitamin D deficiency is highly prevalent in the general population. In a Spanish population (including healthy, middle-aged subjects only), baseline vitamin D deficiency was found, with 27.58% of subjects showing levels less than 20 Vitamin D levels are decreased in obese population, particularly in those with high-grade obesity. Vitamin D deficiency may be associated to impaired bone metabolism and muscle function and increased insulin resistance. Maintenance of adequate vitamin D levels is especially important, but we do not know yet the levels to be reached or the adequate supplementation amount or source. Plasma levels of 25OH vitamin D required to prevent changes secondary to deficiency are above 30 The recommended amounts of vitamin D in the diet are 15 The different guidelines recommend consumption of 1000–1500 Phosphorus consumption in the general Spanish population is very high as compared to dietary recommendations, being similar in both sexes and in different age groups. High phosphorus intake, particularly when associated to low calcium intake, may be related to secondary hyperparathyroidism leading to increased bone resorption, decreased peak bone mass, and increased bone fragility. Similarly, increased serum phosphorus levels may increase acid load which, although partially buffered by the associated increase in protein intake, may also be related to bone damage. Obesity is a pathological condition that changes the body, influencing bone metabolism through mechanical, hormonal, and inflammatory factors. The relationship between obesity and bone mass may be bidirectional ( On the other hand, there is a The net harmful or beneficial effect of obesity on bone mass or of these factors on risk of fracture is not well known yet, and additional observational and interventional studies are needed in this area of knowledge. The authors state that they have no conflicts of interest.