This study investigates thermal expansion and thermal vibration behavior of borides using HT-XRD. In the previous research, it has been known that the vibrational behavior directly expresses the behavior of materials at high temperatures. In this work, the high temperature X-ray diffraction (HT-XRD) measurements of TiB2, W2B4, and CrB2 were conducted at the high temperature ranges; up to 1500 K. From the generated results, the study calculates thermal expansion coefficients, which coincides the previous research. Rather, the study calculates the mean square displacements of borides for evaluating the thermal vibration behaviors at elevated temperatures, demonstrating that: (1) the application of a formula into HT-XRD data could determine Debye-Waller factors of these borides; (2) a term of “agglomeration” could contribute to defining the mean square displacement u
                     2; (3) both the Debye-Waller factor and the thermal expansion may function to design new boride-based materials at the high temperature; and (4) CrB2 has a quick increase in mean square displacement and is remarkably large value at elevated temperatures.Transition metal diborides are expected to be applicable in a wide range of purposes, which stems from their outstanding properties such as high hardness, high wear resistance, chemical stability, and inertness in high temperatures [ Telle et al. [ Mitra et al. [ However, evaluation of their characteristics at high temperatures is difficult due to the anisotropy of the phenomena. The X-ray reflected intensities of a crystal at high temperatures contain information about the thermo physical properties of the materials. In order to understand the reaction mechanism and design the microstructure, it is essential to understand the thermo-physical properties of each boride at elevated temperatures. In previous works, thermal expansion of diborides has been investigated many groups, e.g. Lönnberg [ On the other hand, there are few data available about the thermal vibration behaviors. The vibrational behavior is of special interest, which directly expresses the behavior of materials at high temperatures. In this work, we investigated thermal expansion and thermal vibration behavior of borides using HT-XRD. The starting powders TiB The variation in the lattice constants non-linearly changes depending on the temperature. The second-order polynomials best fit to the experimental data. The linear thermal expansion coefficient is calculated using the following equation: The atoms undergo thermal vibration around their mean positions and the amplitude of this vibration arises as the temperature increases. Thermal agitation decreases the intensity of diffraction [ This Debye-Waller factor The following equation is obtained from these equations The variations in the lattice constants of pure TiB The thermal expansion was fitted to the experimental data using secondary polynomials as a function of temperature ( The thermal expansion coefficients are calculated using Eq. For examining the thermal vibration behavior, we determined the mean square displacement of an atom < However, a different outcome has been recognized. The integrated intensity even increases as the temperature rises, especially at higher temperatures. This phenomenon could occur due to the agglomeration during heating. Regarding this, In order to define the mean square displacement change associated with different temperatures, we used an “agglomeration The resultant differential equation under the condition above can be described as follows: For the calculation of the mean square displacement change with temperatures, we make some assumptions for simplification with the following integrated intensity change formula. The mean square of amplitude < Zero-point motion [ The interplanar spacing From these assumptions (Eq. Combining the two equations (Eq. The integrated intensity is fitted to the experimental data using (Eq. The mean square displacements of a crystal in The significance of (Eq. Due to the high mobility of Cr, it can be speculated that, although AlB The mean square displacement can be associated with diffusion. An atom with large amplitude of thermal vibration occasionally jumps to neighbouring vacancy, which results in diffusion. The larger the mean square displacement an atom has, the more likely it jumps. In the present investigation, CrB We believe that a large diffusivity of CrB In our previous research, we just tested different transition metal diborides to improve the sintering speed of TiB The high temperature X-ray diffraction (HT-XRD) measurements of TiB The Application of a formula into HT-XRD data could determine Debye-Waller factors of these borides. A term of agglomeration could contribute to defining the mean square displacement < Both the Debye-Waller factor and the thermal expansion determine the thermo-physical properties at the measured temperatures. Such characteristic may function to design new boride-based materials at the high temperature. CrB I would like to express my deepest appreciation for Japan Ultra-high Temperature Materials Research Center (JUTEM), a research institute providing the essential facilities and equipment utilized in this study. I particularly thank Mr. Takeshi Shoji who conducted the experiments and provided the data for the research. My appreciation also goes to Kazuki Hata for his efforts to proofreading the draft. Any errors left are all mine.