4-Methylcyclohexanemethanol (4-MCHM) is a saturated higher alicyclic primary alcohol that is used in the froth flotation process for cleaning coal. In early 2014, a large spill of crude chemical (containing primarily 4-MCHM) to the Elk River near Charleston, WV contaminated the local water supply. Carbon filters at the affected water treatment facility quickly became saturated, and the contaminated water was distributed to nearby homes and businesses. Sorption of 4-MCHM to granular activated carbon (GAC) was studied in the laboratory using head space (HS) analysis via gas chromatography with a flame ionization detector (GC-FID). Sorption to raw coal was also investigated, since this material may be of interest as a sorbent in the case of an on-site spill. As expected, sorption to both materials increased with decreased particle size and with increased exposure time; although exposure time proved to be much more important in the case of GAC than for coal. Under similar conditions, GAC sorbed more 4-MCHM than raw coal (e.g., 84.9 vs. 63.1 mg/g, respectively, for 20 × 30 mesh particles exposed to 860 mg/L 4-MCHM solution for 24 h). Desorption from both materials was additionally evaluated. Interestingly, desorption of 4-MCHM on a mass per mass basis was also higher for GAC than for raw coal. Overall, results indicated that GAC readily sorbs 4-MCHM but can also readily release a portion of the chemical, whereas coal sorbs somewhat less 4-MCHM but holds it tightly.Crude MCHM, of which 4-MCHM is major component, is most commonly used as a frothing agent in the flotation process for cleaning fine coal ( 4-MCHM is a saturated higher alicyclic primary alcohol with two isomers ( At the time of the Elk River spill, these few facts, and the lack of more detailed information regarding human and environmental risks, combined to cause widespread panic. The spill site is just upstream of the principal intake for a West Virginia American Water (WVAW) treatment and distribution center, which serves a population of more than 300,000. This facility continued to distribute water for hours after first receiving contaminated water from the intake ( Since the Elk River spill, much has been learned about the fundamental properties of 4-MCHM ( A sample of crude MCHM was donated by a chemical vendor. It consisted of primarily 4-MCHM (i.e., approximately 86% based on reports by others using the same chemical stock ( GAC was obtained from CABOT Norit Americas Inc. CABOT lists this particular GAC as HYDRODARCO A raw coal sample was acquired from a mine in central WV, which was operating in the Upper and Lower Cedar Grove seams. The coal was run-of-mine (i.e., unprocessed) material, and was stored in a five gallon bucket for several weeks before it was crushed using laboratory jaw and roll crushers, and then dried and sized similarly to the GAC. The coal was stored in sealed plastic bags to minimize oxidation; then all experiments were completed within five weeks. Following preparation of the GAC and coal samples, proximate analysis was performed on both materials to determine their oxidizable (i.e., organic) mass fraction. Higher organic fraction should presumably increase organic sorption capacity of these materials ( An initial experiment was carried out to observe the extent to which 4-MCHM is lost due to volatilization under several conditions. Three Erlenmeyer flasks were each filled with a 100 mL of a crude MCHM solution having a concentration of 56 mg/L (or 48 mg/L as 4-MCHM). This solution was made by dissolving the crude MCHM in deionized (DI) water, and the concentration of 4-MCHM was confirmed by gas chromatography with flame ionization detector (GC-FID) using a head space (HS) method as described below. All three flasks were left uncovered; the first was left on the benchtop as a control (room temperature of 23 °C), the second was heated to 50 °C on a hot plate, and the third was vigorously stirred using a magnetic stir bar at room temperature. Aliquots of 10 mL were taken from each flask after a period of 0, 15, 30, and 60 min. These were collected in separate 22 mL vials appropriate for the HS analysis. Next, 4-MCHM sorption and desorption experiments were carried out with both materials. Several test conditions were replicated to confirm reproducibility of results (described below). For the sorption experiments, four representative 1-g subsamples were split from each of the sized GAC and coal samples (i.e., 24 subsamples in total). These were placed in separate flasks. To each flask, 100 mL of a crude MCHM solution was added such that four solution concentrations were tested on each material type and size. The four test concentrations were: 125, 250, 500 and 1000 mg/L (or 108, 215, 430, and 860 mg/L as 4-MCHM). All of these are notably below the expected maximum solubility in DI water at room temperature ( During the sorption experiments, flasks were sealed to minimize losses due to volatilization. They were agitated gently on a shaker table to promote interaction between the solution and solid surfaces. After a period of 1 and 24 h, 10 mL aliquots were taken from each flask. The concentration of 4-MCHM in each aliquot was then measured. Desorption experiments were also carried out using 20 × 30 mesh GAC and raw coal. Again, 1-g subsamples (two of GAC and two of coal) were split from the previously sized materials. Each subsample was exposed to 100 mL of near-saturated crude MCHM solution. The solution was made by vigorously mixing 2 g of crude MCHM with 1 L of DI water for approximately 5 min. Following mixing, some MCHM could still be observed on the solution surface, indicating that the maximum solubility achievable within the mixing time had been met. The insoluble MCHM layer was carefully pipetted off of the solution surface, and then the solution (950 mg/L 4-MCHM) was transferred into clean flasks with GAC and coal subsamples. The flasks were sealed and gently agitated, for either 1 or 24 h. Then, each subsample was rinsed 20 successive times with 30 mL of DI water in each rinse. Rinsing was done via a careful pipette-and-refill protocol: the solution in the flask was removed using a pipette to avoid removal of solids, and then fresh rinse water was added to the flask and gently agitated for 5 min. On rinses 1, 2, 3, 5, 10, 15 and 20, a 10 mL aliquot of the rinse solution was collected and the 4-MCHM concentration was measured in each of these. The volatility of 4-MCHM lends it to quantitation by GC. Here, GC with HS analysis was used with an FID. HS analysis involves measurement of the gaseous portion of 4-MCHM that diffuses into the head space in a capped vial. The GC method details are summarized in Vials containing samples for 4-MCHM quantitation were heated to 80 °C and agitated for 30 min by an HS2000 auto sampler. The sampler made injections with 0.2 mL head space into a Thermo Scientific Finnigan TRACE GC Ultra GC, with a DB-624 column (dimensions in The A calibration curve was established using a stock solution of 100.00 mg/L crude MCHM (or 86.00 mg/L as 4-MCHM) in DI water, which was diluted to concentrations of 1.25, 6.25, 12.50, 25.00 and 50.00 (or 1.08, 5.38, 10.75, 21.50 and 43.00 as 4-MCHM). The curve exhibited very good linearity above the 5.38 mg/L 4-MCHM concentration (see At the outset, it is important to note that the experimental methods and GC-FID with HS analysis were observed yield reproducible results. Reproducibility was implied by running random replicate tests (see The experiment to investigate volatilization of 4-MCHM from aqueous solution confirmed that the dissolved chemical does not readily come out of solution under stagnant conditions at room temperature ( Though both sorbent materials were effective, the GAC sorbed substantially more 4-MCHM than the raw coal when comparing similar particle sizes and exposure times ( With respect to GAC, the highest loading observed here (84.9 mg/g) is double that reported in a prior study (i.e., about 39.3 mg/g) ( The trend of increased sorption with decreased particle size is expected since surface area, and thus availability of sorption sites, increases as particle diameter decreases. Increased sorption with exposure time is also expected – though the time significance was seen to be greater for the GAC than for the coal. To illustrate, comparing all 1 and 24 h tests (i.e. test pairs having the same particle size and initial 4-MCHM concentration), sorption to the GAC increased by 26 ± 9% but sorption to the coal only increased by 4 ± 6%. The relatively quick sorption to coal is consistent with recent findings by Generally speaking, sorption to either material did not appear to be strongly preferential for one isomer versus the other. For the 1-h tests with both materials and the 24 h tests with coal, the In the desorption experiments, the effect of time was again observed. Materials exposed to the crude MCHM solution for 24 h prior to rinsing desorbed more 4-MCHM during the rinsing than did materials that had only been exposed for 1 h ( Interestingly, results from these experiments also revealed that GAC tended to desorb more 4-MCHM than did coal of similar particle size. Anecdotally, this may provide some explanation for the prolonged release of chemical from the WVAW filters affected by the Elk River spill. Conversely, 4-MCHM is not generally found in significant concentrations in process waters associated with fine coal preparation where the chemical is used as a flotation reagent ( Notably, the Though only a limited range of experimental conditions were investigated here, some important observations were made regarding sorption of 4-MCHM (from a crude MCHM chemical stock) to GAC and raw coal particles. Both materials can effectively sorb the chemical, but capacity and sorption kinetics vary – indicating that fundamental sorption mechanisms may vary also. For similar particle sizes, GAC sorbs more 4-MCHM than does coal; and sorption increases appreciably on GAC, but not coal, with increased exposure time (i.e., 24 h versus 1 h). Additionally, 4-MCHM-loaded GAC tends to desorb much more of the chemical than does loaded coal. In general, a near 2:1 ratio between the Further research might be carried out to more definitively determine sorption mechanisms and kinetics for sorbents of interest. For example, experiments with varying 4-MCHM concentrations in flow through columns with sorbent media may provide additional insight related to chemical uptake and holding by studying breakthrough. The authors thank the The following are the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at