Associations between Weber C ankle fractures and pronation external rotation (PER) injuries of the Lauge-Hansen classification have often been incorrectly correlated. The purpose of the present study was to evaluate the Lauge-Hansen designation of Weber C fractures by establishing the proportion of Weber C fractures that are supination external rotation (SER), supination adduction (SA), pronation abduction (PA), PER, and hyperplantarflexion variant fractures. A clinical database of operative ankle fractures treated by the senior author (D.G.L.) was reviewed. The inclusion criteria were patient age older than 16 years, preoperative ankle radiographs, and Weber C fracture designation. A total of 132 patients met the inclusion criteria, and the proportion of PA, PER, SER, SA, and variant fractures among the Weber C fractures was analyzed. PA fractures accounted for 0.8% (n = 1), PER fractures 56.8% (n = 75), SER fractures 35.6% (n = 47), and hyperplantarflexion variant fractures 6.8% (n = 9) of the 132 Weber C fractures. Patients with Weber C-PER fractures were more commonly male (p = .005) and younger (p = .003) and demonstrated a greater fibular fracture height (p < .001) than those with Weber C-SER and Weber C-variant fractures. Our study quantitatively demonstrated that not all Weber C fractures occur secondary to pronation injuries. This distinction is important, because all pronation injuries will demonstrate medial ankle injury, but SER and variant fractures might not. We therefore recommend careful evaluation of the fibular fracture characteristics, including the direction of fracture propagation and the distance from the tibial plafond, when classifying Weber C fractures using the Lauge-Hansen system, because correct classification is vital in preparation for appropriate operative treatment.Weber C fractures are widely encountered in clinical practice and have been reported to account for 14% to 47% of all ankle fractures Proper identification of the Lauge-Hansen fracture pattern is important, because the classification system predicts osseoligamentous ankle injury. Although pronation ankle injuries, including PER and pronation abduction (PA) ankle fractures, and supination external rotation (SER) IV fractures indicate injury to medial ankle structures, injury-free medial structures in lower grade SER fractures (i.e., SER II and SER III) are often seen. Ankle fractures without a medial malleolar fracture or deltoid ligament injury do not necessitate medial ankle exploration. The misdiagnosis of Weber C-SER II or Weber C-SER III fractures as pronation ankle injuries may lead to the formulation of an inappropriate surgical treatment plan involving both medial and lateral structures. Thus, accurate designation of the Lauge-Hansen fracture pattern is needed to formulate and implement an effective surgical treatment plan. The purpose of the present study was to evaluate the Lauge-Hansen designation of Weber C fractures by establishing the proportion of Weber C fractures that are SER, supination adduction (SA), PA, PER, and hyperplantarflexion variant fractures. We hypothesized that SER fractures would account for a proportion of Weber C fractures. The institutional review board approved the present study, and our clinical database of operative ankle fractures treated by the senior author (D.G.L.) from January 1, 2005 to May 31, 2013 was retrospectively reviewed. All 161 Weber C fractures were initially evaluated. The inclusion criteria were patient age older than 16 years, preoperative ankle radiographs, and Weber C fracture designation. Of the 161 patients, 29 were excluded because of inadequate imaging studies. Patient gender and age were evaluated as the demographic data. The ankle injury profile included fracture side (left versus right), Lauge-Hansen classification, fibula fracture height (distance from tibial plafond to inferior most portion of the fibula fracture), geriatric fracture (age 65 years or older), and tibiotalar dislocation. The osseoligamentous injury pattern was determined by a fellowship-trained orthopedic trauma attending physician (D.G.L.) at data entry into the prospective database after examination of the preoperative radiographs, magnetic resonance imaging and/or computed tomography studies, and intraoperative assessment. Any unclassified ankle fractures were re-evaluated by 2 of the authors (R.M.H. and P.C.S.), and a consensus designation was determined. Weber C fractures were defined as suprasyndesmotic fibular fractures. Fracture categorization using the Lauge-Hansen classification system was performed according to the fibular fracture direction and ligamentous injury pattern Descriptive statistics are presented as frequencies and percentages for categorical variables and the mean ± standard deviation for continuous variables. Associations between the categorical variables and the Lauge-Hansen classification were assessed using the chi-square test or Fisher's exact test. Relationships between the continuous variables and the Lauge-Hansen classification were assessed using Kruskal-Wallis tests with Bonferroni-corrected pairwise Mann-Whitney A total of 132 Weber C ankle fractures were included in the present study. Males had incurred 75 of the 132 Weber C fractures (56.8%), and the overall mean age was 47 (range 17 to 91) years. Of the 132 fractures, 1 was PA III, 75 were PER (1 PER III and 74 PER IV), 47 were SER (1 SER II, 2 SER III, and 44 SER IV), and 9 were hyperplantarflexion variant ankle fractures ( The distance from the tibial plafond to the fibular fracture was significantly greater in Weber C-PER fractures than in the Weber C-SER and Weber C-variant fractures (112 mm versus 38 mm and 69 mm, respectively; The purpose of the present study was to evaluate the Lauge-Hansen designation of Weber C fractures by establishing the proportion of Weber C fractures that were SER, SA, PA, PER, and hyperplantarflexion variant fractures. Our hypothesis that SER fractures would account for a proportion of Weber C fractures was supported by our results. Ebraheim et al The misconception that all Weber C fractures will be either PER or PA injuries and that no SER injuries will account for any Weber C fractures is prevalent in published studies The utility of classifying ankle fractures using the Lauge-Hansen classification is the system's ability to predict osseoligamentous ankle injury. Although PA III, PER III, PER IV, and SER IV fractures indicate injury to the medial and lateral ankle structures, SER II, SER III, and hyperplantarflexion variant ankle fractures could demonstrate injury-free medial structures. Therefore, these fractures likely will not require routine medial exploration, medial malleolar osteosynthesis, or deltoid ligament repair. However, an ankle fracture misdiagnosis as a PA or PER injury, owing to their Weber C designation, could lead to implementation of an inappropriate treatment plan involving both the medial and the lateral structures. Thus, correct classification of Weber C fractures using the Lauge-Hansen system is extremely important for preoperative planning. In his 1976 report on Maisonneuve fractures, a subset of Weber C fractures, Pankovich Our results have indicated that measuring the distance from the tibial plafond to the fibular fracture can also aid in classifying Weber C fractures using the Lauge-Hansen system. In our study, the distance from the tibial plafond to the inferior most portion of the fibular fracture was measured on anteroposterior preoperative radiographs. The fibular fracture height in Weber C-PER, Weber C-SER, and Weber C-variant fractures was 112, 38, and 69 mm, respectively, with Weber C-PER fractures demonstrating a significantly greater fibula fracture height. A fibular fracture height of 35 mm demonstrated 95% sensitivity in association with Weber C-PER fractures, and a fibular fracture height of 70 mm demonstrated 91% specificity. We have concluded that Weber C fibular fractures that are less than 35 mm from the tibial plafond are unlikely to be PER injuries. Furthermore, the more proximal the fibular fracture, the more likely the fracture will be a PER injury. We also noted a demographic difference between Weber C-PER fractures and Weber C-SER fractures. Our present study found that males accounted for 69.3% of Weber C-PER fractures but only for 42.6% of Weber C-SER fractures. Additionally, those with a PER injury had a mean age of 42 years at surgery and were the youngest Weber C cohort, excluding the single Weber C-PA fracture, which only occurred in 1 patient. A recent study comparing the operative outcomes of PER IV versus SER IV fractures reported similar results. Schottel et al The present study had limitations. We excluded 29 patients because of inadequate imaging studies. The inclusion of these injuries could have produced somewhat different results; however, this effect would be unlikely to be significant, because our cohort of 132 Weber C fractures was large enough to describe the trends we have presented. Additionally, a single fellowship-trained orthopedic trauma attending surgeon assigned the Lauge-Hansen designations to the Weber C ankle fractures. The use of a single surgeon, regardless of the experience level, could have contributed to bias. We also recognize that standardized use of magnetic resonance imaging and computed tomography might not be common for all surgeons. However, our recommendation for the use of radiographs displaying the fibular fracture characteristics, including the direction of the fibular fracture and distance of the fibular fracture from the tibial plafond, in designating the Lauge-Hansen classification of Weber C fractures is highly generalizable and a major strength of our investigation. In conclusion, our study has presented the proportion of Weber C fractures that were SA, SER, PA, PER, and hyperplantarflexion variant ankle fractures. With SER and hyperplantarflexion variant fractures accounting for 42.4% (56 of 132) of the Weber C fractures, we have quantitatively demonstrated that not all Weber C fractures will occur secondary to PA or PER injuries. This distinction is important, because pronation injuries, by default, will demonstrate medial ankle injury and necessitate surgical treatment. However, SER and hyperplantarflexion variant fractures might not demonstrate a medial malleolus fracture or deltoid ligament rupture and, thus, might not require surgical treatment of the medial ankle. We, therefore, recommend careful evaluation of the fibular fracture characteristics, including the direction of fracture propagation and the distance from tibial plafond, when classifying Weber C fractures using the Lauge-Hansen system, because a correct classification will be vital in the preparation for appropriate operative treatment. The authors would like to thank Jayme Burket, PhD, for her help with the statistical analyses.