Chemical activation as one of the most popular methods of activation has been considered for improving hydraulic properties of slags. This work presents chemical activation of blast-furnace slag-blended Portland cement. For this purpose, a number of different chemical activators and two different quality improvers including Triisopropanolamine (TIPA) and Triethanolamine (TEA) were utilized. At first, initial mixes were prepared using different proportions of slag, Portland cement, and insoluble sulfate-based chemical activator. The optimum mix was then selected based on 28- and 60-day compressive strength results. The results indicated that the optimum mix consisted of 48% Portland cement, 43% slag and 9% insoluble chemical activator. In the next stage, various dosages of TIPA and TEA were added to the optimum mix for improving the strength behavior. Based on the results, the addition of 0.04% TEA leads to 8% enhancement in both 28- and 60-day compressive strengths. To induce more improvement in compressive strengths, chlorine soluble chemical activators were incorporated in the mixes. The results showed that, chlorine activators alone or in combination with TEA as quality improver could induce no more improvement in compressive strength. However, the obtained results revealed a set accelerating behavior for chlorine soluble chemical activators. Studies by scanning electron microscopy coupled with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy analysis and X-ray diffractometry on 60-day cured hardened paste of the activated mixture have revealed that the microstructure is composed of an amorphous matrix in which plate-like Portlandite crystals are embedded. Application of Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy has confirmed the presence of calcium-silicate hydrates as the main binding compound of the material.Cement industry is faced with serious environmental problems. The production of Portland cement (PC) in the cement industry not only consumes raw materials and large amounts of energy, but also as one of the primary industrial producers of carbon dioxide, contributes to the greenhouse effect and causes acid rain. Actually, this industry generates greenhouse gases (GHGs) both directly through the emission of CO2 when clinker is produced and also through the consumption of energy One of the interesting approaches for reducing environmental problems and also gaining technological and economic advantages is the increasing usage of industrial byproducts and wastes Blast furnace slag (BFS) as one of the industrial solid wastes is formed in a molten state simultaneously with iron in a blast furnace. The chemical composition of the slag is originated from silicate and oxide components of the raw materials used in the smelter feed Nevertheless, BFS adversely affects the early-age strength of PC when used at high replacement levels Thermal activation or curing at elevated temperatures can improve strength development Although, it seems at first glance the problem with using chloride chemicals is that chloride brings corrosion to steel bars in reinforced concretes. But there are two very important points about the type of cement and the chlorine limit: 1) Glass and Buenfeld 2) Also, in a recent work, Pacheco and Polder In addition, the blended cements activated by chloride-based admixtures are widely used for construction in cold weather conditions. Besides the chemical activators, organic accelerators or grinding aids, also known as quality improvers, are extensively used because of their considerable effectiveness at very low dosages. The most common organic accelerators are alkanoamines such as triethanolamine (TEA) and triisopropanolamine (TIPA) which are the prevalent grinding aids in the comminution process of Portland cement clinker. TEA and TIPA are usually utilized individually or in combination with chemical activators to enhance the mechanical strengths of concrete by hastening hydration reactions Since most studies have focused on the effects of TEA and TIPA on Portland cement, further experiments are needed to investigate the effects of these two quality improvers on composite cements such as the blended cement considered in this study. Such a study can provide reliable information for the pertinent knowledge. This study deals with the effectiveness of various soluble chlorine chemical activators and quality improvers (TIPA and TEA) on the improvement of hydraulic property of BFS-blended Portland cement after being activated with the so-called sulfate-based insoluble chemical activator. BFS used in this study was supplied from Esfahan steel complex. The BFS was ground until cumulative passing of 98.5% from a 90-μm mesh screen. Type ΙΙ Portland cement (PC2) used in all mix proportions was obtained from Tehran cement plant. X-Ray diffractogram of BFS is illustrated in In order to increase early- and late-age hydraulic properties of BFS-blended Portland cement, insoluble sulfate-based chemical activator in combination with the most effective soluble chlorine chemical activators and quality improvers was used. According to previous research studies TIPA and TEA as quality improvers were added to the blend at the stage of homogenizing PC2 and BFS using a cylindrical laboratory ball mill with the length and diameter of 0.30 and 0.26 m, respectively. The dosages of 0.02, 0.04, 0.06, 0.08, and 0.01 (wt%) were utilized for both TEA and TIPA. Different soluble chlorine chemical activators were used for more effective activation of the BFS. Tests performed were: Water-to-cement ratio (w/c) of the cement pastes was mensurated according to ASTM standard C187 which is a standard test method for measuring the amount of water needed for normal consistency of hydraulic cement paste. Based on the results, a constant w/c of 0.28, giving normal consistency and appropriate workability was determined for all fresh cement pastes. Initial and final setting times (IST and FST) of the cement pastes were determined according to ASTM C191 that is standard test method for time of setting of hydraulic cements by means of Vicat needle. A uniaxial digital hydraulic compression test machine (SCL STD 30) of 300 kN-capacity with ± 1% accuracy and a loading rate of 0.4 MPa/s was employed for the measurement of compressive strength of the cured paste specimens. Three paste specimens were used in each compressive strength measurement and the average of them was recorded as the result. The minimum and maximum values of the standard deviations for the measurements were 0.1 and 1.2 MPa, respectively.  To achieve the optimum proportion of the insoluble chemical activator in PC-BFS paste, 28- and 60-day compressive strengths were measured and the mix containing higher amount of slag and exhibiting the highest compressive strength was selected as the reference mix for the rest of the experiments. In the next stage, the effect of both TEA and TIPA as quality improvers on compressive strength of the reference mix was probed by measuring and comparing 28- and 60-day compressive strengths of the hardened paste specimens cured at the same conditions. The effectiveness of the opted soluble chlorine chemical activators on the enhancement of hydraulic properties of PC-BFS paste after being activated with the so-called sulfate-based insoluble chemical activator was evaluated by comparing the achieved 28- and 60-day compressive strengths as the last stage of the experimentation. Finally, the chosen mixes were characterized by some complementary techniques. In order to conduct mineralogical study, the X-ray diffractograms of the reference mix and the mix representing the highest improvements in compressive strengths were recorded on a Philips Expert diffractometer using CuKα radiation. The tests were run in a 2θ range of 10–90° at a scanning rate of 2°/min, with a deliverance slit of 1°, an anti-scatter slit of 1°, and a receiving slit of 0.01 mm. FTIR spectra of the BFS, reference mix and the mix representing the highest improvements in compressive strengths were provided using a SHIMADZU (IR Spectrophotometer 8400 s) FTIR spectrometer in transmittance mode from 400 to 4000 cm Microstructural studies were also performed on the reference mix and the mix representing the highest improvements in compressive strengths using a TESCAN VEGA II (Czech Republic) Scanning Electron Microscope. The morphology of the microstructure of the paste specimens was investigated using secondary electron (SE) mode of the microscope at an accelerating voltage of 20 kV. For this purpose, a number of paste specimens were cut into 2–3 mm thick slices to expose internal regions. Suitable slices were then dried at 90 °C for 24 h and coated with a gold layer to make them conductive.  As mentioned in As can be deduced from data presented in TEA and TIPA are conventional additives for the purpose of facilitating the grinding process of cement by reducing agglomeration of cement particles and also hindering coating formation on the surface of grinding media. This effect, however, causes effectual homogenization of cement components including clinker, gypsum, BFS, which in turn tailor hydration reactions and compressive strengths. Many researchers have investigated the effects of TEA and TIPA on hydration reactions of cements, mainly plain PCs  Identifying the effective soluble chemical activators, experiments were continued to investigate the combined effects of both effective soluble chemical activators and the most effective quality improver on 28- and 60-day compressive strengths. The compositions designed for the combinations of the effective soluble chemical activators and the best quality improver are listed in The compressive strength values resulted from the combined effect of both chemical activators and quality improver are illustrated in Inasmuch as a 0.04 wt% addition of TEA, is more effective than the examined soluble chlorine activators alone or in combination with TEA, the mix with 0.04 wt% TEA was then selected as the best mix regarding both 28- and 60-day compressive strengths and studied for characterization purposes.  It is evident that inclusion of a relatively high percentage of BFS in PC2 prolongs both IST and FST even if the mix is activated with insoluble sulfate-based chemical activator. In accordance with the results of the current study, it can be stated that the addition of 0.04 wt% TEA to the reference mix slightly enhances the setting times. In plain PCs, TEA accelerates or retards the hydration reactions depending upon its dosage and its different effect on cement phases. However, the effect of TEA on the setting times of BFS-blended cements has not been studied sufficiently. The incorporation of CaCl  Portlandite is consumed in prolonged hydration reactions to form more C-S-H gel and this causes a similar trend with C To identify the chemical bonds in the cementing compounds, FTIR spectroscopy analyses were also performed. The spectrum of BFS indicates bands at wavenumbers of 476, 513, 945 and 3631 cm  Hydraulic activity improvement of slag-blended Portland cement using insoluble chemical activators, soluble chlorine activators and two common quality improvers was investigated within the scope of this work. It was found out that enhancement of the hydraulic activity of slag-blended Portland cements with high replacement level by the concerted influences of non-chlorine insoluble chemical activators and quality improvers is possible and both 28- and 60-day compressive strengths can be tailored if optimum proportions are used. Contribution of chlorine soluble chemical activators induces improvements up to about 12% on both 28- and 60-day compressive strengths. But, the combined effect of chlorine activators and quality improvers not only does not yield considerable improvement in both 28- and 60-days compressive strengths, but also in some cases causes decline in compressive strength. Although the use of chlorine activators for non-reinforced concrete products dose not result in any corrosion risk, for reinforced applications however further experimental research is necessary to ensure that chlorine activators do not bring corrosion to steel bars in reinforced concretes and this can be considered as a future program.