Introduction
                  Comminution of the patellar apex is amenable to internal fixation by standard techniques and usually requires partial patellectomy. In our institution, multifragmentary fractures of the distal pole are treated with the basket plate, which is shaped to fit the geometry of the patellar apex. This implant has been used in our institution for over 25 years. The aim of this study was to evaluate long-term results of internal fixation of comminuted fractures of the patellar apex with the basket plate.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  A total of 142 patients with fracture of the distal pole of the patella were treated with the basket plate between 1988 and 2013. Functional evaluation was conducted using the modified Cincinnati knee rating system. A total of 98 patients were available for late functional evaluation.
               
                  Results
                  There were no infections or implant-related problems during the follow-up period. All fractures healed within 8 to 10 weeks. There were three cases of early revision because of improper use of the implant and incorrect indication. Functional outcome following internal fixation with the basket plate was excellent in 80 patients and good in 18; there were no poor results.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Internal fixation with the basket plate is recommended for management of multifragmentary fractures of the patellar apex because this method enables early, unrestricted knee motion, and provides reliable healing and good functional outcome. This method is an alternative to partial patellectomy and is considered a patella-saving procedure; therefore, the use of the basket plate is strongly recommended for the treatment of distal pole fractures.Fractures of the distal pole of the patella account for 9.3 to 22.4% of all patellar fractures Different techniques such as cerclage and wiring do not usually provide sufficient stability if the patellar apex is comminuted and may be associated with possible loss of reduction and soft tissue irritation due to breakage and migration. All of this may result in restricted knee motion. Partial patellectomy with transosseous pull-out sutures and augmentation with cerclage wire requires immobilisation, which may result in anterior knee pain, abnormal patella height (patella baja) and loss of range of motion Between 1988 and 2013, a total of 142 consecutive patients with distal pole fractures of the patella were treated with the basket plate at our institution, and 98 of these patients were available for late evaluation. Average follow-up was 13.5 years (range 2–25 years). There were 70 male and 28 female patients with an average age of 43.5 years (range 18–69 years). Midline longitudinal incision with full thickness flaps was used for approach to the patella. The fragments were reduced with the aid of the basket plate and two pointed reduction clamps ( At each follow-up examination, patients were evaluated radiographically and clinically using the modified Cincinnati knee rating system for the purpose of functional assessment. Operative time and all complications regarding healing and possible malunion were noted. The procedure took an average of 52.5 Fractures of the distal pole of the patella are rare and are usually the result of direct trauma, with or without quadriceps muscle contraction. Although there are numerous reports of studies on the subject, the choice of treatment for fractures of the distal pole patellar is still controversial. The complexity of the fracture usually precludes reconstruction, hence some surgeons perform partial patellectomy as a last resort; however, partial patellectomy may result in abnormal height of the patella (patella baja) and significant loss of range of motion The main concern in treatment of these fractures is restoration of proper height of the patella. Bonnaig et al. recorded functional impairment after distal pole fractures and showed there was no significant difference between patellectomy and fixation Regardless of these advantages it is interesting to note that the basket plate is still rarely used or is unrecognised in most institutions as a valuable option in the treatment of distal patellar fractures. Based on our extensive experience with the use of this plate and the results of the largest series published so far, we conclude that the basket plate should be used only for distal pole fractures; provides stable fixation that enables immediate, unrestricted knee motion; does not significantly affect patella height and, in most cases, provides excellent functional outcome. None.