Exact knowledge of the content of the various components in a flotation system is critical in both product analysis and process control. In the present work, FT Raman spectroscopy was successfully applied to an industrial fluorite flotation system for quantification of calcium fluoride (CaF2). In a first step, an artificial model system consisting of CaF2, barium sulphate and silica was set up to test feasibility of FT Raman spectroscopy and to generate a calibration curve. An empirical model was developed, which incorporates effects of particle size on Raman shift and peak area, so that a CaF2 quantification is feasible independent of particle size. Conversely, the empirical model provides information about the approximate particle size in the analysed sample. A cross-validation using X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy showed excellent quantification of CaF2 in seven industrial fluorite samples with CaF2 weight fraction in a range from 7% to 98% with absolute differences of less than 5%. In a first laboratory batch-flotation experiment, the CaF2 content of the froth product could be quantified successfully providing additional information about the approximate median particle size of the concentrate, making FT Raman spectroscopy superior to commonly applied X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy.peak area [–] median particle diameter by mass [m] flotation rate constant [s area correction factor [–] mass [kg] ultimate recovery [–] time [s] weight fraction [–] significance level [–] Raman shift [cm barium sulphate calcium fluoride counts per signal detection limit identification limit quantification limit revolutions per minute silica X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy X-ray powder diffraction Flotation is a treatment process of ores and with about two billion tonnes of floated crude ore per year it is one of the most important processes for the enrichment of valuable minerals ( In the present work, FT Raman spectroscopy is introduced as an alternative analysis method for quantification of CaF For set up of an artificial fluorite flotation system calcium fluoride (99%, supplier: Alfa Aesar), barium sulphate (92%, supplier: metallpulver24), and silica (98%, supplier: Quarzwerke GmbH) were used. The industrial fluorite flotation system including seven samples with varying CaF The complete experimental procedure is depicted schematically in The experimental methodology is divided into two main parts: Investigation of an artificial model system and Investigation of a real fluorite system from an industrial production site. In the first part, an artificial fluorite system consisting of high-purity grades was investigated to test feasibility of FT Raman spectroscopy for the given system. In the first step, the influence of the particle size of calcium fluoride on the results of FT Raman spectroscopy was investigated. Therefore, CaF In the next step, the matrix effect on the quantification of calcium fluoride was investigated. For this purpose, five samples with a relatively low CaF Afterwards, 11 samples with varying CaF In the second part of method development, the industrial fluorite flotation system was analysed to quantify the calcium fluoride content. To validate the developed method, seven samples of an industrial fluorite production site with varying CaF Additionally, a first flotation experiment was carried out as proof of concept for application of FT Raman spectroscopy in flotation experiments. 60 g of the crude ore of the industrial fluorite system with a median particle diameter of 63 µm were added to 2 In the first step, high-purity grade CaF A plot of the determined Raman shift All of the above presented results show that calcium fluoride can be identified independently of the median particle diameter and the aperture. For the later analyses an aperture of 30 µm was chosen, as a smaller aperture increases the spatial resolution of obtained Raman spectra ( Five samples containing 30% CaF The 11 samples with different weight fractions of CaF Detection limit w Identification limit w Quantification limit w As the minimum calcium fluoride content is expected to be higher than 50% in the raw material as well as in the flotation product, a quantification is therefore feasible. During the analysis of the crude ore from the industrial flotation plant with FT Raman spectroscopy some complications were encountered. A spectrum of the raw material is presented in An optical investigation with a microscope showed that small fluid inclusions of water and/or gas were present in some particles. As described in literature, this is a natural phenomenon in mineral particles ( To ensure that the constitution of the samples is unchanged by sieving (sieving pass and residue should have nearly the same constitution for a reliable quantification), X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy (XRF) was applied. Samples of the crude ore, the sieve pass as well as the residue were analysed with an XTXRF spectrometer of type S2 PICOFOX (supplier: Bruker). The results for the crude ore as well as the sieving pass and residue are presented in The calibration curve presented in To facilitate determination of the calcium fluoride concentration of varying particle sizes via FT Raman spectroscopy using the developed calibration curve, an empirical model was developed, which incorporates the effect of For determination of the median particle diameter a fit function of Boltzmann type was applied for the relationship between The regression coefficient of this fit is 0.9844. As shown in The conversion factor k The developed equation of the calibration curve (see In Eq. To validate the developed empirical model and test feasibility for a real fluorite system, samples from an industrial flotation site with varying calcium fluoride contents were analysed. The samples were analysed prior in the laboratory of the production site via XRF after comminution to 5–10 µm. The comparison of the results obtained by XRF and FT Raman spectroscopy using the developed empirical model are presented in From the cross-validation results it can be concluded that the developed model is accurate and a quantification of the CaF The flotation experiment was conducted in a laboratory batch-flotation cell with approx. 2 In FT Raman spectroscopy was successfully applied as quantification method in the flotation process of fluorite. The applicability was successfully proven for a model system consisting of high-purity grades of calcium fluoride, barium sulphate, and silica. Furthermore, influences on the Raman results for quantification of calcium fluoride, such as aperture of the spectrometer, median particle size, and concentrations as well as type of matrix substances were investigated. From aforementioned parameters, only the median particle size, related to the crystallinity, had a significant influence, which resulted in a shift of the dominating Raman signal for calcium fluoride as well as in a change of the peak area. A calibration curve was successfully developed and the data was statistically analysed with respect to the process limits. An empirical model based on the calibration curve was developed to facilitate quantification of calcium fluoride regardless of particle size and crystallinity. A cross-validation with industrial fluorite samples with varying calcium fluoride content using XRF showed an excellent agreement with the results obtained by the developed method with absolute differences of less than 5%. A first batch-flotation experiment in a laboratory scale flotation cell of an industrial fluorite flotation system showed as proof of concept that FT Raman spectroscopy in combination with the developed empirical model can successfully be applied for quantification of calcium fluoride in the flotation product. By taking samples every five minutes it was possible to determine the flotation kinetics based on a simple mass balance. Furthermore, using the proposed method the progress of the calcium fluorite content in the fractions could be determined and information about the median particle size in the concentrate was accessible due to the above mentioned relation of the median particle diameter and the shift of the dominating Raman signal. Thus, FT Raman spectroscopy could be established as faster and more convenient analytical method for quantification of calcium fluoride in the fluorite flotation processes, facilitating deeper insights into the process. The presented method can further be optimized with respect to the analysis of calcium fluoride in presence of additional gangue materials, e.g. calcite. A quantification of the gangue materials could also be feasible after carrying out a similar calibration procedure with high-purity grade samples. This would provide a deeper insight into the flotation behaviour of the various materials present in the system in terms of process parameters. Further experiments with respect to the flotation kinetics, the median particle size of the flotation product and the progress of the calcium fluoride enrichment in the froth are planned as part of a design of experiments in the near future. From these results, an extensive insight into the flotation process of fluorite could be feasible. We kindly thank Sachtleben Bergbau GmbH for providing the fluorite flotation system as well as samples including their analysis via XRF for the cross-validation of our method. Additionally, we want to express our gratitude to Mr. Robin Legner for his support during the Raman analysis.