The effect of carbide volume fraction from 13 to 41% on the wear resistance of high chromium cast irons was evaluated by means of ball mill testing. Martensitic, pearlitic and austenitic matrices were evaluated.
                  The 50-mm diameter balls were tested simultaneously in a 40cm diameter ball mill. Hematite, phosphate rock and quartz sand were wet ground. The tests were conducted for 200h.
                  Quartz sand caused the highest wear rates, ranging from 6.5 to 8.6μm/h for the martensitic balls, while the wear rates observed for the phosphate rock ranged from 1.4 to 2.9μm/h.
                  Increasing the carbide volume fraction resulted in decreased wear rates for the softer abrasives. The almost complete protection of the matrix by carbides in eutectic microstructures caused the eutectic alloy to present the best performance against hematite or phosphate rock. The opposite effect was observed for the quartz sand. The quartz abrasive rapidly wears out the matrix, continuously exposing and breaking carbide branches. A martensitic steel presented the best performance against the quartz abrasive.
                  With phosphate rock, the wear rate of 30% carbide cast irons increased from 1.46 to 2.84 and to 6.39μm/h as the matrix changed, respectively, from martensitic to austenitic and to pearlitic. Wear profiles of worn balls showed that non-martensitic balls presented deep subsurface carbide cracking, due to matrix deformation. Similar behavior was observed in the tests with the other abrasives.
                  In pin-on-disc tests, austenitic samples performed better than the martensitic ones. This result shows that pin tests in the presence of retained austenite can be misleading.Wear is one of the most important cost factors during mineral processing Many laboratory studies have been performed with high chromium white cast irons in view of their great potential as wear resistant materials in mineral processing and other applications. However, since the laboratory wear conditions differ greatly from the industrial grinding applications, the transfer of laboratory results to field service is a difficult task. In practice, few laboratory tests results can be expected to have wide acceptance among industrial professionals. On the other hand, field studies of grinding media are time consuming and expensive. Moreover, they exhibit severe methodological shortcomings since, in production conditions, it is almost impossible to keep constant all the operating variables involved, which is essential to obtain valid performance comparisons. A fair compromise may be attained using laboratory ball mill tests. In these tests, mills with diameters up to 1 Compared with field tests, the advantages of laboratory ball mill tests are the much shorter time required to perform the tests and the possibility of introducing and controlling operation and materials variables. A typical testing program will vary the type and coarseness of abrasives, evaluating their effect against a particular group of wear resisting material or, else, for a fixed abrasive and operating conditions, the performance of a range of materials can be measured. High chromium cast irons constitute a family of materials that can present a wide range of characteristics depending on chemical composition and heat treatment. These basic variables can be manipulated to produce different carbide volume fractions and compositions as well as radically dissimilar metallic matrices. Additionally, more subtle variations can be introduced, using alloying elements and varying cooling rate during solidification. As mentioned, many studies using standard laboratory tests, such as pin-on-disc or rubber-wheel tests, have been conducted scrutinizing the effects of most of these possible variations, but data originated from ball mills are scarce and poor. Most frequently, published results refer to comparisons between roughly dissimilar materials, such as “steel versus high chromium cast iron versus Ni-hard”. Though useful for marketing purposes, these data do not provide information necessary to the continuous improvement of this important material, and for the understanding of wear mechanisms. During the present investigation a laboratory ball mill test procedure has been developed, that permits, at the same time, to perform practical studies, aimed to rank materials for specific applications, and provide information concerning the wear mechanisms present during ball mill operation. The present paper discusses the mechanisms that determine the wear rates in different systems, during tests in a laboratory ball mill. A set of wear systems was obtained varying the carbide content and the type of matrix of the cast irons, and using two ores and silica sand as abrasives. Cast, balls, 50 The chemical compositions, the carbide fractions and the densities of the alloys are presented in A martensitic matrix was obtained for all compositions by means of a heat treatment as follows, 700°C for 1 The effect of the type of matrix was studied in the cast iron with 30% carbide fraction. A pearlitic matrix was obtained treating the as-cast cast iron at 700°C for 1 The abrasives used were iron ore, phosphate rock and quartz sand. The ores were sampled from the production and supplied by mining companies. The iron ore-referred as “hematite” in this paper-constitutes the feeding of the second stage grinding for the production of pellets. Its composition is essentially hematite, with some silica and clay as contaminants (amounting to 2.6%). The typical hardness of this mineral ranges from 400 to 600 The phosphate rock corresponds to the feeding of the second stage grinding and has apatite as the main mineral. The typical hardness of this mineral is around 300 The quartz sand was a typical fine foundry sand, classified as AFS 90/100. Its constitution was essentially quartz, with <1% of impurities, presenting a typical hardness around 1000 The tests were conducted in a Denver laboratory ball mill having a 40 A “run-in” period of 30–50 Pin tests were performed using 6.2 For each abrasive, the average accumulated weight losses for each alloy were measured after grinding about 1 day and then every 2 days. The results of ball mill tests comparing the effects of martensite, austenite and pearlite against the three abrasives are presented in The results of pin tests are presented using a dimensionless parameter Pin test results concerning the effects of carbide percentage and of matrix type are presented in The laboratory ball mill test proved very effective to compare the alloys, establishing performance rankings. In addition, the test established the severity ranking of the abrasives. The test program was very satisfactory concerning the reproducibility of the results. For each group of balls, the confidence interval of the average weight loss was kept under 6% (the only exception is discussed below) and the measured wear rates for a given material/abrasive pair did not show important variations along the various testing periods. According to many authors, the rate of weight loss of a mill ball at a given moment is proportional to its surface area at that moment Using this equation, the performance of different materials can be expressed by the parameter The validity of this model holds as long as the wear is caused solely by surface phenomena, such as abrasion and corrosion. Results relative to industrial mills presented by Norman and Loeb To present the results in the form of   The relative performances of cast irons with different matrices are compared in  To explain these results, the wear micromechanisms and the severity of the test in each case must be considered. Though the carbides are too hard to be cut by quartz, the interactions between quartz grains and carbides are severe enough to promote the breaking of carbide branches in the prevailing conditions during ball milling. This effect is made possible by the fact that the quartz grains easily cut away the tempered martensite matrix, since the abrasive hardness is much superior to that of the matrix. Once the matrix is removed, carbide branches are exposed and subsequently broken by interactions with grains or any other element of the system. In single scratch experiments, a quartz grain scratching a cast iron polished surface causes deep grooves in the matrix, while practically no effect is seen in the main portion of the carbide particles. However, a detailed observation shows that microspalling occurs at the points where the quartz particle impacts the carbides. The results concerning the eutectic alloy (alloy D) present a deviation from the general trend in the test with quartz, as shown in For the softer abrasives hematite and phosphate rock, the effect of the carbides as barriers against wear predominated. It can be noted, from The above results show that valid qualitative evaluations of ball materials wear resistance can be obtained by means of tests using ores within a certain range of abrasive characteristics, as is the case of hematite and phosphate rock. On the other hand, the use of an abrasive with too severe characteristics can be misleading. It is clear that quartz can not be recommended as a standard abrasive for the modeling of industrial systems where it is not the main abrasive. Results from Zum-Gahr and Eldis The severity of the test is determined not only by the type and by the size of the abrasive, but also by the testing system itself. Essentially the same mineral that caused a severe condition in the present investigation-quartz, would act as a mild abrasive in Zum-Gahr’s testing conditions. As a consequence of the above discussion, it is proposed that the severity of a testing arrangement should be analyzed to establish whether it is appropriate to evaluate the wear of material in a particular application. The testing system and the practical application must present the same correlation between imposed conditions (such as type, hardness and size of abrasives, as well as kind and intensity of the loads) and wear behavior, specially concerning the occurrence of mechanism changes. The results of the present investigation do not recommend quartz to be used as abrasive in ball mill tests, if the wear resistant material contains carbides or other hard and brittle particles. Comparing materials with a fixed amount of carbides (30%), the determining factor for the results obtained in the ball mill tests was the ratio Contrary to the results in the ball mill, the austenitic matrix gave the best performance in the pin tests, a usual result in the literature. A more detailed analysis of testing conditions shows, however, that this kind of result is limited to pin tests with extremely hard abrasives, such as SiC and alumina. Gundlach and Parks The behavior of these cast irons in different testing conditions can be explained considering two main factors, the presence of brittle microconstituents and the differences in the mechanical loading.  Austenitic and pearlitic matrices are too soft to give support to the carbides. In the case of these materials, cracked carbides are observed under the surface until depths of about 20 It can be concluded that the mechanical efforts acting on the balls can cause the cracking of carbides that are not supported by a strong matrix. The same behavior was observed by Sare and Arnold Considering the importance of the above conclusions, additional observations were made to check whether the carbide cracking could have been produced by the sample preparation. It was verified that the cracks were present exclusively in worn pearlitic or austenitic balls. Additionally, examination of worn balls surfaces polished without cutting showed high densities of carbide cracking in the case of pearlitic or austenitic balls, again a feature not shown by martensitic balls. The good performance of austenite in some pin test conditions can be attributed to the fact that the interactions in this case are more restricted to the surface of the test piece. In this condition, the consumption of energy for the plastic deformation and cold working of the austenite makes the microcutting mechanism less effective, and the deep microcracking of carbides is not promoted. The hypereutectic alloy, with 41% carbides, presented the worse performance against all the abrasives, when compared to the cast irons with carbide contents from 20 to 38%. The presence of coarse carbides, typical of the solidification of hypereutectic cast irons, makes it easy for the microcracking mechanism to start, leading to high wear rates. In the maximum severity testing condition, represented by the ball mill test with quartz, the wear rate of the hypereutectic alloy follows the general trend, as shown in The least severe of all testing conditions was the pin test with fine alumina. In this system, even the presence of the coarse primary carbides does not favor the microcracking as the determining mechanism for the wear. Therefore, the hypereutectic alloy shows a good wear resistance in this particular testing condition. In the pin test using coarse SiC, a severe wear condition was attained, resulting in wear rates much higher than those observed in the test with alumina. In this test, the hypereutectic alloy presented a much worse performance when compared with those with 20–38% carbides, similarly to the observed behavior in the ball mill tests with iron and phosphate ores. Again, the reason for this is the promotion of the microcracking mechanism due to presence of the coarse carbides. To analyze the possible practical application of the testing procedures and results described in this work, the present results were compared to those obtained in an industrial ball mill. The results of wear tests in a 3 Comparing the performance of balls supplied by several manufacturers, a range of wear rates from 2.5 to 7.3 On the other hand, the results using quartz as abrasive show the difficulty for establishing standard testing procedures. Since the effects of increasing the carbide content of the alloys were so completely opposed when using quartz or the ores, it becomes clear that quartz should not be used as standard abrasive for tests intended to evaluate and develop materials for grinding media. The use of the same ore of the intended practical application as the abrasive in the laboratory ball mill test is obviously the best choice. If only a qualitative ranking is required, iron ore, an abundant abrasive, could be used to evaluate grinding media for many other ores. Attention should be given to the fact the more severe conditions (for example, a harder or coarser abrasive) tend to compress the performance of the different materials, while mild conditions tend to separate the results. For martensitic cast irons, the general trends showed in pin tests using SiC as abrasive were similar to those obtained in the ball mill. The test using alumina did not show clearly the adverse effect of coarse primary carbides. The main drawback of pin test is the tendency to highlight only the positive effects of austenitic matrices. This is contrary to the practical field observation and to the results of the ball mill tests of the present work. Results concerning martensitic cast irons can be biased because of the presence of non-controlled amounts of retained austenite.  The effect of the amount of carbides on the wear resistance of high chromium cast irons depends on the test severity. Severe conditions, as imposed by quartz in the ball mill test, lead to increasing wear rates as the carbide percentage increases. This occurs by a mechanism combining rapid removal of the metallic matrix followed by microcracking of the carbides. In less severe conditions, as in the case of grinding of hematite or phosphate rock, the carbides are effective to protect the metallic matrix against the microcutting mechanism, and the wear rates decrease as the carbide percentage increases, up to the eutectic composition. Quartz sand is not recommended as standard abrasive in ball mill wear tests. The ratio of the abrasive hardness by the matrix hardness was a determining factor for the wear rates, for 30% carbide cast irons with different matrices. Low resistance matrices, such as pearlite and austenite, result in subsurface carbide cracking and low wear resistance in the ball mill test. As a consequence, the superior performance of austenitic cast irons in pin tests does not reproduce in the ball mill test.