The use of by-products or wastes as phase change materials (PCM) in thermal energy storage (TES) systems is a good option to decrease the cost of such systems. One of the main disadvantages of PCM if inorganic materials are used is subcooling, as was found with bischofite, a by-product from the Chilean non-metallic industry, which subcooling is about 36°C. Subcooling can be reduced by the addition of nucleating agents, but the selection of the best nucleating agent should be done taking into consideration the physical and chemical parameters of the salt hydrate. In this paper the parameters considered were the solubility of the materials in water, the chemical structure and the crystalline structure (crystal system, lattice parameters, density, cell volume, Z, and space group). It could be concluded that solubility, chemical structure and the crystal system have no influence in the nucleation capacity of a salt hydrate. The parameter that needs to be considered when selecting a nucleating agent for a salt hydrate is the lattice parameters of the crystal structure (cell longitude or angle).Cooling water from annealing furnaces Cooling water from internal combustion engines Exhaust gases exiting recovery devices in gas fired boilers, ethylene furnaces, etc. Conventional hot water boiler Thermal energy storage(–) Phase change material(–) Sample composition(wt%) Melting temperature(°C) Solidification temperature(°C) Melting enthalpy(kJ Solidification enthalpy(kJ Solid density(kg Liquid density(kg Heat capacity(kJ Weight percentage(%) Energy storage density(kJ Not available(–) Coefficient of bischofite (wt%) Mass fraction of bischofite(–) Mass fraction of nucleanting agent(–) Looking for new thermal energy storage (TES) materials for latent heat energy storage with lower costs to those available today has brought researchers to study waste materials or by-products from the industry This statement is supported by the good thermophysical performance of bischofite against other salt hydrates and commercial PCM, either organic or inorganic, as it is shown in Ushak 2015 Subcooling (also called supercooling or undercooling) means that a liquid can be cooled below its melting temperature without solidifying. As Huang et al., 2010 The scope of this paper is to select the best nucleating agent to be used with bischofite in order to optimize its performance as phase change material by reducing its subcooling. Due to the chemical composition of bischofite (95% MgCl Following this scope, the parameters and factors that have been listed in the literature to have influence in the selection of a nucleation agents were taken into consideration and were compared to the results obtained to corroborate their influence. The factors considered were the solubility of the materials in water, the chemical structure and the crystalline structure (crystal system, lattice parameters, density, cell volume, Z, and space group). The main nucleating agents are those that will have stable structure and stable state under the working conditions with crystallographic parameters close and similar to the material under study (in this case bischofite). There are several criteria to classify and select the proper nucleating agent for each material as has been previously reported by other authors   This classification is summarized in In this study, some candidates based on literature Bischofite (>95% MgCl The solubility data were obtained from literature reported by Linke and Seidell A complete thermophysical characterization of the samples of bischofite without and with the nucleating agents was carried out at lab scale. The composition of the samples is represented by Eq. The equipment used to perform the thermal analysis was a DSC-822e commercialized by Mettler Toledo. The amount of sample analyzed was around 10 Nowadays statistics have achieved scientific methods that are useful for application in different experimental scenarios. These methods are known as design of experiments (DoE). Experimentally, the use of DoE reduces errors; time, and optimizes the number of experiments. Using a minimum number of experiments, maximum information can be obtained. In this paper, the selected design of experiments was a response surface three level factorial plan for two variables and the experimental plan was performed and analyzed with the “Design-Expert 7.0″ software. The concentration of nucleating agent was varied between 0.5 The evaluated response was the evaluation of the sample subcooling by applying for the lowest subcooling. The subcooling was evaluated by the thermophysical properties measured with the DSC mention above.  Crystallographic parameters obtained from the data base showed that some salts hydrates present more than one crystallographic structure. In order to be sure about the crystallographic parameters of the salt hydrates studied, these were determined by XRD. Results obtained are presented in Based on DoE, eight mixtures of bischofite with each nucleating agent were performed in different percentage by weight composition. Results of thermal composition and reduction of subcooling obtained are show in The curves of enthalpy vs. temperature are represented in In agreement with the described results, design of experiments elucidate that the addition of CaO is not statistically significant to reduce the subcooling while Sr(OH)  CaO did reduce the subcooling of bischofite partially, but at the same time did reduce very much the melting enthalpy. Moreover, its addition to bischofite as nucleating agent does not affect statistically subcooling. CaO has the most different crystal structure to bischofite ( LiOH·H Sr(OH) The chemical structure of bischofite and the considered nucleation agents is compared considering the anion (A: compared to Mg), the cation (C: compared to Cl) and the presence of hydration water (W) (see Similarly, the solubility of the products with water has no influence in the nucleation capacity. The materials studied have either similar solubility (LiOH·H As mentioned before, the crystal structure has been listed as one of the most important parameters to select the adequate nucleation agent. These experiments show that only the lattice parameters (cell longitude or angle) are the parameters that should be considered to choose the adequate nucleating agent. Thermal properties of bischofite and the reduction of subcooling by the addition of nucleating agents, make it a promising candidate to store latent heat at low temperature. Potential applications for this range of temperature are summarized in Salt hydrates present subcooling when used as phase change materials (PCM). In the case of bischofite, a by-product from the Chilean non-metallic industry, subcooling is about 36 In this paper different parameters and properties have been considered. The factors considered were the solubility of the materials in water, the chemical structure and the crystalline structure (crystal system, lattice parameters, density, cell volume, Z, and space group). A first selection of nucleating agents was done based in literature data and then chemical and physical analyses of these materials were determined. Furthermore, 1 As conclusion, it can be seen that the parameter that needs to be considered when selecting a nucleating agent for a salt hydrate are the lattice parameters of the crystal structure (cell longitude or angle). Solubility, chemical structure and the crystal system have no influence in the nucleation capacity of a salt hydrate. The work at the University of Antofagasta was supported by