In order to achieve a successful cemented paste backfill (CPB) mixture design, multiple project requirements such as strength, flowability and cost should be met. For this achievement, the key design parameters, solid content (SD) and cement percentage (C), should be well adjusted. With increasing the amount of cement in the mixture, CPB strength and production cost increase together, whereas the workability decreases. In order to reduce the cost, more tailings can be added while keeping the cement amount the same but this will reduce both strength and workability. Therefore, CPB design is in fact a multi-objective optimisation problem. In this study, the particle swarm optimisation (PSO) algorithm is used to design CPB mixture meeting multiple objectives. PSO identifies the optimum set of SD and C yielding in desired strength and workability with a minimum cost. The proposed workflow can be a useful and practical for multiple decision making where CPB designers face strength-workability-cost paradox. In addition to reducing the number of trial experiments, the multi objective mixture design of CPB also provides the optimum use of materials to reduce the incurred costs and ensure cleaner and more sustainable production.Mining is one of the main solid waste generating industries. Tailings are fine-grained solid waste materials left over after extracting valuable minerals from the mined ore. The chemical and physical properties of tailings change with the nature of the ore and the processing method. These waste materials must be managed considering their environmental impacts and to have a more sustainable mining industry which is a challenge in present projects. Generally, surface tailing dams are used to store mine tailings. Recent tailing dam failures around the world lead to the loss of human lives, devastation of agricultural and forestry lands, and financial losses for the mining companies. These events triggered serious concerns about tailings management. To handle these concerns, various management approaches have been suggested, including the use of tailing as backfill materials (e.g. in Falconbridge Nickel mines Ltd. at the Hardy mine in Sudbury mine ( The main factors controlling the design of CPB are strength, flowability and cost. The key controlling parameters, strength and flowability, are affected by intrinsic and extrinsic factors ( CPB is a mixture of fine tailings (about 75 to 85% solids by total weight), cement as a binder (typically between 3 and 9% by total solid weight) and water for an approximate solid content of 70 to 80% by weight ( The design of cemented paste backfill (CPB) is important in underground mines that use backfill-based production methods such as cut and fill, sublevel stoping. CPB design is specific to each mine due to varying tailings characteristics ( In order to preserve the stope stability in an underground mine, CPB must remain stable during the extraction of ore from adjacent stopes. When CPB is not strong enough, the adjacent faces may relax and collapse into the open stope. The strength of CPB is mostly measured by its uniaxial compressive strength (UCS). In designing CPB, both short term and long term strength are important. Short term strength is important to prevent liquefaction and reduce delays in production. Long term strength reduces the occurrence of ground subsidence in mining operations, safeguards the operation of secondary stopes in the mine and ensures the long term stability of the mine. If the CPB could not gain enough strength within the planned time then it would not be possible to mine out the nearby stopes. The possible consequences of weak CPB can be mine dilution, the collapse of stopes, and large scale hangingwall or footwall failure, threating the overall mine stability. The minimum strength required at the early stage is 0.15 MPa to prevent liquefaction ( Generally, CPB is produced at surface batching plants and transported to underground stopes through pipelines. Therefore, freshly mixed CPB should be “flowable” enough for efficient pumping or delivery. The flowability or workability of CPB is as important parameter as strength in paste design. In order to facilitate the transportation of CPB and prevent pipeline clogging, the workability of CPB is mainly controlled by the rheology of the mixture. Moreover, CPB with low flowability requires high pumping pressure to transfer it to the underground stopes, which increases the costs of pipe/pump maintenance and energy. The flowability or workability of CPB is mostly characterised by a slump test or rheometer. The slump is defined as the difference between the heights of the slump cone and the collapsed material after removal from the cone. When traditional slump cone with 12” height with 8” base and 4” top radius ( The cost of CPB typically represents almost 20% of all mining costs, with binder cost reaching up to 75% of that amount ( All of the listed CPB properties are mainly affected by the same key design parameters such as cement percentage, solid content, type of tailing, curing time ( Cement percentage (C): It is the key parameter controlling strength, yield stress and most importantly the cost of CPB. More cement helps improve the strength but also increases the cost. Yield stress is also affected by cement percentage to some extent. The cement content used generally ranges from 4 to 9% (by weight) and is mainly influenced by the magnitude of the stress expected around the exploited stope, scheduled production time and the cost of paste production i.e. higher binder content yields higher strength but also increases the cost. Solid content (SD): Yield stress, the key parameter controlling the transportation of CPB, is strongly related to the solid content. To enhance the flowability, fluidity and workability of CPB the water content is increased, thereby decreasing the solid content. For the same amount of cement increasing SD improves both short and long term strength. Moreover, it is well known that the mechanical strength of cementitious materials such as CPB can be improved by reducing the total amount of water ( Type of tailings: Density, particle size and chemical composition of the tailings are all important parameters controlling the mechanical properties of CPB such as strength and yield stress. As CPB is designed for a specific type of tailings it is not possible to use the same design parameters for other mines or tailings. Therefore, each type of tailings should be considered separately. As only one type of tailings is used in this study, the tailings related parameters are considered as constant rather than separate parameters. Time (T): Like other cementitious materials, the strength of CPB is a function of time. From the production planning perspective, time is the most important parameter as it has a direct effect on the proposed mining sequence. For example, sufficient strength in a shorter time will allow the adjacent stopes to be scheduled earlier. As outlined above, successful design of CPB is a complex optimisation problem. Different optimisation techniques are used in mining and geotechnical engineering applications. As most of the optimisation problems do not perfectly fit exact algorithm, heuristic algorithms such as the genetic algorithm (GA), particle swarm optimisation (PSO), ant colony optimisation (ACO), and simulated annealing (SA) have been used in mining engineering applications such as mine planning ( For the sample preparation, mine tailings were harvested from a hard rock underground gold mine in Western Australia. Chemical composition analysis was conducted on tailings samples ( Scanning electron microscope (SEM) analysis was conducted for the identification of the shape of individual tailing particles ( The tailings mineralogical composition is determined by X-ray diffraction analysis (XRD), which is a powerful non-destructive technique for characterizing crystalline mineral composition of materials. The diffraction pattern in the 2θ range of 5–90° were recorded using PANalytical Empyrean X-ray diffractometer with Cu K radiation (λ = 1.5404 Å), 40 kV, and 40 mA at a rate of 2°/min. According to the peak intensity of minerals shown in In this study, general purpose Ordinary Portland Cement (OPC) ( Samples were prepared by varying the key design parameters, cement content (C) and solid content (SC), to determine yield stress and 7, 28 and 56 days uniaxial compressive strengths. 5–9% OPC was used for sample production. The solid content of CPB samples ranges from 76% to 79%. All the laboratory tests were conducted on 16 batches as shown in Cement percentage (C), solid content (SD) and water contents (W) are determined using Eqs. (1)–(3). The CPB mixtures were thoroughly mixed using a bench top high speed mixer for one minute, then the side of the bowl were cleared and the batch was mixed for two more minutes. Following mixing, slump tests were conducted and samples were moulded in cubic moulds for strength experiments. The Slump test was conducted on CPB samples using a hollow cylinder with 110 mm (diameter) × 110 mm (height). The test method was suggested by Recent studies proved that the alternative method using a cylinder can be successfully applied to CPB samples ( Over 100 UCS tests were conducted using 5x5x5 cm cubic samples as suggested by ASTM ( At predetermined curing periods of 7, 28 and 56 days, the samples were loaded axially to determine uniaxial compressive strength. Compressive strength tests were conducted using computer controlled mechanical loading press. For each mix, the average compressive strength values are shown in As indicated previously, the main cost item for CPB is the cost of cement. By knowing the values of SC and C for each batch, the cement cost per wet cubic metre of CPB was calculated and presented in After collecting data, the next stage of the optimisation procedure is the construction of predictive models for the strength, yield stress and cost. The constructed models will be used as objective functions for the optimisation. In this study, a simple multiple regression modelling technique is used for this purpose. Multiple regression models were developed for the prediction of UCS, yield stress and cost based on key design parameters C and SD using statistical software SPSS ( Particle swarm optimisation (PSO) is a population-based metaheuristic algorithm proposed by The velocity vector reflects the exchanged information and, in general, is defined in the following way: PSO is a single function Optimisation algorithm which is basically developed to find optimal solutions for merely one function. A multi-objective PSO (MOPSO), proposed by ( As represented in For this practical application, two hypothetical cases were considered. In the first case, it was assumed that mine production engineer is looking for best design parameters C and SD, to produce CPB having UCS ranging from 750 to 800 kPa in 28 days, yield stress between 500 and 800 Pa and maximum cement cost of 17 AUD/m For the second case, it was assumed that to increase production rate, high early strength and lower yield stress are the main concerns. The production engineer is looking for the same UCS (750–800 kPa) in 14 days and yield stress ranging from 400 to 500 Pa. In this case, the algorithm yields different batches with different C and SD ( As can be seen from the presented case, the proposed algorithm provides production engineers with different alternatives satisfying the desired values, then the design engineer chooses the best one considering current conditions and priorities. It should be noted that it is also possible to reduce the number of alternative batches or get a unique batch by narrowing the ranges for the desired outputs. In practise, CPB is designed by using predictive models for indirect assessment of the key design parameters, or classical trial and error method requiring extensive laboratory studies time and thereby cost. In this paper, a hybrid algorithm combining conventional regression modelling and particle swarm optimisation techniques is presented. An experimental program was completed for the construction of a database to generate predictive regression equations. The constructed models were used as objective functions in the optimisation algorithm designed for maximising strength, minimizing yield stress and cost. For the desired strength, yield stress and cement cost values, the algorithm suggests a range of design parameters such as cement percentage and solid content providing specified strength, yield stress and cost. Such range provides an opportunity for the designer to select the best design parameters for the case under consideration. If the main concern is strength, then the designer can choose the design parameters yielding the highest strength with acceptable yield stress and possible minimum cost. For the cases where the main concern is the cost then the designer choses the relevant design parameters giving the lowest cost with acceptable strength and yield stress. Using the presented approach, it is possible to find out the best combination of design parameters for the desired outputs (i.e. strength, yield stress, and cost), whichever is important to the production engineer. The presented algorithm can provide instant batch designs, in terms of key design parameters C and SD, for each particular stope without a time consuming trial and error procedure. Acknowledging that each mine has specific requirements, the algorithm can be modified easily, even improved by adding mine specific variables or conditions.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.