Ergosterol is a sterol produced by fungi, and it is not found in healthy barley grains. The presence of ergosterol could be indicative of a fungal infection in grain. This study aimed to determine the correlations between the thermal properties and the ergosterol content of barley grain. Measurements were performed in transmittance mode in a wavelength range of 570–1100 nm to determine the ergosterol content of barley grain. Thermal parameters, including thermal conductivity, thermal resistivity, volumetric heat capacity and thermal diffusivity, were investigated using the KD2 Pro Thermal Properties Analyser with a dual-needle SH-1 sensor. Two thermal analysis methods, differential scanning calorimetry and thermogravimetric analysis, were additionally deployed to determine the thermal properties of grain. A significant positive linear correlation was noted between ergosterol content vs. thermal conductivity, volumetric heat capacity and the area under the DSC curve, and a negative correlation was noted between ergosterol content vs. thermal resistivity and the second and third endothermic peaks of phase transition in grain. The highest value of the correlation coefficient (0.96) was determined between the ergosterol content ratio and thermal conductivity. Regression equations were developed based on thermal properties to estimate the ergosterol content of grain.The kernels of barley are composed of embryo, endosperm and outer layers, such as: aleurone layers, pericarp, husk and testa. Endosperm is the most important part of the kernel. Chemical characteristics of endosperm indicate the quality of grain and they are significant for its further processing ( Ergosterol (ERG) is a major sterol in the cell walls of fungi and it is absent in healthy higher plants ( Fungal infection of kernels can affect the modifications of the starchy endosperm cell walls. The fungi, in order to penetrate the cells and to obtain nutrients, can degrade hemicelluloses of the cell wall in kernels. It may cause changes in the thermal properties of kernels ( In the literature, very few reports of the use of thermal analysis for identification of mycotoxins, fungi enzymes and for assessment of the infected kernels are present. Based on a review of available literature on the thermal characteristics of fungal infection, it was found that it included only information on standards for mycotoxins, isolated enzymes or isolated starch of artificially-inoculated barley kernels. There is a lack of data on the evaluation of naturally affected grains. Additionally, studies of phase transitions were only related to gelatinization and were limited to a narrow temperature range (10–100 °C) and did not explain the course of other thermal processes occurring in grains infected by fungi. There is no information about the opportunity to inference fungal infection based on specific thermal parameters. Therefore, there is a need for a more complete understanding of thermal changes in barley grains caused by fungi to supplement the knowledge of more thermal properties and the selection of parameters which could indicate the fungal infection of grains. The aim of this study was to determine the thermal parameters indicating the infection of grains by fungi. The thermal conductivity, thermal resistivity, volumetric heat capacity, thermal diffusivity, temperature of endothermic phase transition peaks in a temperature range of −30 to 500 °C, area under the DSC curve and mass loss of barley grains were determined. The relationships between these parameters and ergosterol content ratio (which indicates the degree of fungal infection of grains) were examined. The research was intended to contribute to the development of a method for identifying fungal infection in cereal grains based on thermal properties. The materials included the grains of malting and feed varieties of spring and winter barley. Eleven varieties of barley were examined, including malting spring varieties (Baryłka, Kormoran and KWS Orphelia), feed spring varieties (Iron, Skald and Suweren), a malting winter variety (Wintmalt) and feed winter varieties (Quadriga, Zenek, SU Vireni and Titus). The moisture content [%] of grain was determined according to the The ergosterol content of barley grains was determined using an Infratec 1241 Grain Analyser ( The ergosterol content ratio was calculated to present all results on a normalized, unitless scale of 0–1, where 1 denotes the highest ergosterol content in all analysed samples. According to A KD2 Pro Thermal Properties Analyser was used to identify the thermal properties of grain mass using a dual-needle sensor SH-1 (length: 30 mm, diameter of needle: 1.3 mm, spacing between needles: 6 mm). The following parameters were determined: thermal conductivity ( The DSC and TG curves were recorded using a Netzsch STA 449 F1 Jupiter The DSC and TG curves for each variety were determined. An example of a DSC curve for the Wintmalt variety is presented in A correlation analysis was carried out in the Statistica 12.0 Software (StatSoft Inc., Tulsa, USA) to determine the relationships between thermal properties vs. ergosterol content ratio of grains. The ergosterol content ratio of the examined barley varieties was in the range of 0.248–1. The lowest value was identified for Iron and the highest was for Wintmalt ( The values of thermal conductivity ( The numerical values of the endothermic peaks on DSC curves are shown in The linear correlations were identified. The values of Pearson's correlation coefficient were calculated at a significance level of P < 0.05. The correlation coefficients and regression equations between ergosterol content ratio and thermal properties: The correlation (P < 0.05) between ergosterol content ratio vs. second and third endothermic peaks (as well as the area under the DSC curve) was observed. The correlation coefficients are presented in The influence of other factors resulting from varietal differences on the thermal properties of grain was also analysed. According to the literature, the physical properties of grain can differ across varieties ( The obtained results revealed the presence of thermal parameters of barley grains indicating the ergosterol content and, indirectly, the fungal infection of grains. Because the fungal infection of cereal grains may cause health consequences and economic losses, the grain industry still needs a rapid analytical method to determine the occurrence of fungi in grains ( The relationships between selected thermal properties: thermal conductivity ( This study was supported by grant No. The author would like to thank Słodownia Soufflet Polska Sp. z o.o. for the opportunity to conduct measurements of ergosterol content.