Magnetite nanoparticles successfully produced from a pregnant leach solution (PLS) of iron ore tailings via a simple reduction–precipitation method using Na2S2O3·5H2O reducing agent while the ratio of [Fe3+] to [S2O3
                     2−] were 3 and 2 in the presence and absence of nitrogen gas respectively. The produced nanoparticles were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD), Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), scanning and transmission electron microscopy (SEM, TEM), Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET), and vibrating sample magnetometry (VSM). The achieved XRD and FTIR results confirmed the presence of Fe3O4 nanoparticles while SEM and TEM images displayed that the formed nanoparticles were spherical with an average diameter of 19 ± 3 nm. The average surface area and the pore volume of produced nanoparticles were calculated to be 64.04 m2 g−1 and 0.079 cm3/g, respectively using the BET method. By performing VSM analysis and estimation of the low magnetic remanence (Mr) and coercive field (Hc), it was concluded that the produced nanoparticles are highly ferromagnetic at the room temperature.Each year, about 5 million tons of tailings containing hematite and goethite are dumped from concentrator plants in Gol-Gohar mine complex of Sirjan, Iran. At present, about 30 million tons of the dry tailings are present in the complex with an average iron content higher than 25%. By 2025, this amount will be increased to 80 million tons thus it is essential to find some alternatives uses for this significant source of minerals. One approach is to solubilize the iron ions in a pregnant leach solution (PLS) to produce magnetite (Fe We herein describe a novel and simple reduction-precipitation method for Fe The iron ore tailings obtained from Gol-Gohar magnetite tailings dump in Sirjan, Iran. The elemental analysis of the tailings comprised 43.47% Fe, 7.99% Si, 9.07% Ca, 3.8% Mg, and 2.4% Al. We used 5 M H Prior to the acid leaching, the samples were ball milled to d Na Ferric and ferrous ion concentrations were measured by complexing with 5-sulfosalicylic acid (SSA) (using a Varian UV–Vis spectrophotometer, model Cary 50) [ In a non-oxidizing oxygen condition when the pH range changes from 8 to 14 and the stoichiometric ratio is 2:1 (Fe Experimental obtained results at different R values are consistent with the theoretical stoichiometry data values as displayed in The variation of PLS redox potential based on the addition of thiosulfate was demonstrated in Eq. Based on the principles of chemistry, 1 mole of sodium sulfite (Na  D = (Kλ)/(βcosθ) [ The detection of the magnetite phase was also scrutinized by FTIR. The analysis was performed using 0.2 mg of the produced magnetite nanoparticles powder with 250 mg KBr. In fact, oxygen is not the only factor that transforms the surface of magnetite into the maghemite (γ-Fe The microstructure of Fe   Spherical magnetite particles with mean diameter of about 20 nm were successfully synthesized from PLS via a reduction-precipitation method. Before alkalinizing by ammonia, the PLS was reduced by sodium thiosulfate pentahydrate according to the stoichiometry of the reaction. The optimum condition for magnetite nanoparticles generation was achieved when the [Fe The authors would like to thank the