Synthesis of submicrometer crystalline particles of cobalt carbonate was achieved hydrothermally using different cobalt salts and urea with a molar ratio from 1:3 to 1:20 (cobalt salt:urea) in aqueous solutions at 160°C for 24–36h, in the presence of cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) as a surfactant. Nanoparticles of Co3O4, with an average size from 30 to 39nm, were obtained by thermal decomposition of CoCO3 samples at 500°C for 3h in an electrical furnace. The as-synthesized products were characterized by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD), Fourier transform infrared spectra (FT-IR), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), UV–Vis spectra and thermal analysis. Studying the optical properties of the as-prepared cobalt oxide nanoparticles showed the presence of two band gaps, the values of which confirmed the semiconducting properties of the prepared Co3O4.Over the past several years, considerable attention has been paid to nanomaterials, including their synthesis, characterization, chemical and physical properties. This considerable interest is due to their unique electrical, magnetic, optical and catalytic properties compared with those of the bulk materials Metal carbonates have been intensively investigated in recent years because they are an important class of inorganic materials, and they are extensively used as a standard model systems in industry because of their abundance in nature and their wide applications (such as in the paper, plastic, paint and rubber industries) CdCO Herein we report a facile hydrothermal procedure to synthesize submicro cobalt carbonate crystals by a hydrothermal method using different cobalt salts (such as cobalt chloride, cobalt acetate and cobalt nitrate, separately), cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) as a surfactant and urea, a low cost and environmentally benign chemical employed as a carbonate source. The as-prepared cobalt carbonate was then thermally converted to phase-pure Co All reagents were of analytical grade and were purchased and used as received without further purification: cobalt acetate (Co(CH In a typical hydrothermal synthesis, 2.5 The thermal decomposition of the as-prepared CoCO The as-prepared samples were characterized by X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) using a 18 The morphologies of the as-prepared CoCO The crystal phases of the as-prepared cobalt carbonate samples prepared by using the previously mentioned counter ions were examined by XRD patterns as shown in where The bonding and chemical composition of the cobalt carbonate were investigated using FT-IR. The thermal behavior of the as-prepared CoCO Additionally, the DTA thermal analyses show that the thermal decomposition of the as-prepared cobalt carbonates is an endothermic process, as seen in On the basis of the TGA results, the temperature for the calcinations of the CoCO UV–Vis absorption spectra were carried out in order to characterize the optical absorbance properties of the cobalt oxide samples, as presented in where Submicrometer crystalline particles of cobalt carbonate with different morphologies can be prepared by a hydrothermal process using cobalt acetate, cobalt chloride or cobalt nitrate and urea, in presence of cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) as a surfactant. Squared-shape nanoparticles of Co The authors would like also to cordially dedicate this work to the soul of Prof. Dr. R.M. Issa, Tanta Univ., Egypt. Also, the authors would like to express our sincere gratitude and appreciation to Prof. Dr. M.R.H. Mahran, National Research Centre, Egypt.