A direct solvent extraction (DSX) process to recover nickel and cobalt from laterite leach solutions is potentially more cost effective compared to the traditional precipitation and re-leaching method. A synergistic solvent extraction (SSX) system consisting of Versatic 10 and Acorga CLX 50 in ShellSol 2046 was studied for DSX nickel and cobalt recovery from a synthetic solution using semi-continuous tests. The effect of pH on the metal distribution profile and metal separation were investigated. It was found that the SSX system can effectively recover nickel and cobalt and separate them from manganese, calcium and magnesium. Over 99% of Ni and Co was extracted using four stages of semi-continuous extraction from the synthetic laterite solution at pH 6.3 and an A/O flowrate ratio of 1:1. More than 80% of the manganese was rejected to the raffinate. The co-extraction of calcium was less than 5% and the co-extraction of magnesium was negligible under these conditions. The co-extracted manganese and calcium were readily scrubbed in three stages semi-continuous scrubbing. The loaded strip liquor with a high concentration of nickel (71.3g/L Ni) was obtained after two-stage continuous stripping. The final strip solution pH of 3 would be suitable for nickel electrowinning. A conceptual DSX process flowsheet using the SSX system to recover nickel and cobalt from laterite leach solutions after iron removal has been proposed.The recovery of nickel and cobalt from leach solutions of nickel laterites by sulphide or hydroxide precipitation has been widely used in industry ( The Bulong process was the first commercially used DSX process. After impurity removal by neutralisation to pH 4.5–5.5, cobalt and manganese were extracted from the pregnant leach solution using Cyanex 272 (bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl) phosphinic acid) in the first SX circuit and then nickel was extracted using Versatic 10 (the main component of 2-methyl-2-ethylheptanoic acid or neodecanoic acid) in a second SX circuit ( The Goro process is another commercially applied DSX process where after impurity removal, nickel and cobalt are co-extracted from the leach solution using Cyanex 301 (2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)dithiophosphinic acid) ( The LIX 1104 (mixture of trialkyl hydroxamic acids) system has also been investigated. This system demonstrates effective extraction of nickel and cobalt at relatively low pH with the extraction order of Ni–Co The use of synergists to improve the selectivity of existing extractants is an attractive alternative for nickel and cobalt recovery ( Although CLX 50 is slightly inferior to other pyridinecarboxylate esters as the synergist for Versatic 10 in terms of nickel and cobalt extraction and their separation from manganese, it has been used in copper extraction at an industrial scale ( Industrial grade Versatic 10 (98% purity) supplied by Shell Chemicals, Australia, and CLX 50 by Avecia (now Cytec Industries) were used without purification. The active component is diisodecyl pyridine 3,5-dicarboxylate and its purity is unclear. ShellSol 2046 supplied by Shell Chemicals, Australia, was used as the diluent. A synthetic solution, mimicking a typical nickel laterite leach solution after iron and aluminium removal containing a high concentration of magnesium, was prepared by dissolving AR grade sulphate salts of Ni, Co, Mn, Zn, Cu and Mg, and CaCl Organic solutions consisting of 10% (v/v) Versatic 10 and, separately, 10% (v/v) Versatic 10 and 20% (v/v) CLX 50 were mixed with an aqueous solution containing 1.0 Metal distribution isotherms of the organic solution and the synthetic solution were obtained by varying A/O ratios from 1:2 to 10:1 in a same reactor as mentioned above at room temperature (23 A small mixer-settler rig with 140 In the semi-continuous extraction tests, four stages, marked EX-1, EX-2, EX-3 and EX-4 were used. The aqueous feed solution was pumped in EX-1 and flowed through EX-2, EX-3 and EX-4 before exiting to a raffinate tank. Organic solution was pumped counter-currently from EX-4 to EX-1, then to a loaded organic tank. During the tests, an A/O flowrate ratio of 1:1 was maintained. The pH control in each stage was achieved with a Walchem Model 260 pH controller connected with an Iwaki dosing pump. Ammonia solution (2.5% by volume) was used for the pH control. The residence time of the two phases in the mixer was 2 In the tests of semi-continuous scrubbing, three stages were used marking SC-1, SC-2 and SC-3. The loaded organic solution was pumped from SC-1 to SC-3, and an aqueous scrub solution was pumped from SC-3 to SC-1. An A/O flowrate ratio of 1:5 was maintained during the tests. The A/O phase ratio in mixers was maintained to near 1:1 by recycling aqueous solution from the settlers of the same stage. The pH control for these stages was also achieved by dosing 2.5% (v/v) ammonia solution. The tests were conducted for two hours to reach the steady state. Similarly, the stripping test was conducted in two stages marked ST-1 and ST-2. The loaded organic solution was pumped from ST-1 to ST-2, while the aqueous strip solution was pumped from ST-2 to ST-1. The A/O flowrate ratio of 1:10 was maintained whilst using aqueous recycle to maintain 1:1 ratio in the mixer. The tests were conducted for two hours. Samples of continuous tests were taken from settlers. The mixture of organic and aqueous solutions was separated using Whatman 1PS filter paper with the organic solution passing through. The aqueous solution was then filtered using a 0.45 The metal extraction pH isotherms were determined for the selection of the best pH range for metal separation using the SSX system and a synthetic solution containing 1.0 From Metal extraction distribution isotherms were determined by varying the A/O ratio at pH 6.2 and the McCabe Thiele diagram was constructed to determine the theoretical number of stages for the extraction of nickel and cobalt from the synthetic solution ( The metal extraction kinetics with the system consisting of 10% (v/v) Versatic 10 and 20% (v/v) CLX 50 in ShellSol 2046 and the synthetic solution were studied at an A/O ratio of 1:1, pH 6.0 and room temperature ( The metal stripping kinetics was also studied using 100 Therefore, it was concluded that a residence time of 2 To obtain high cobalt recovery from the synthetic solution, four stages were used for semi-continuous counter-current extraction instead of 2 stages indicated by the McCabe Thiele diagram in Both copper and zinc were completely extracted in all tests due to their stronger affinity with the SSX system than that of nickel and cobalt. Magnesium extraction was very low with less than 10 The extraction profile of cobalt and manganese in the two phases are shown in Very different distribution profiles of manganese in both aqueous and organic phases were observed at pH 6.5 compared to those at other pH values ( From the performance of semi-continuous extraction tests, it is clear that more than 99% of nickel and cobalt were extracted by controlling pH at 6.3 while most of the manganese, calcium and magnesium were rejected to the raffinate in four-stage counter-current extractions ( It is shown in Nickel scrubbing efficiency was negative in all three tests, indicating that instead of being scrubbed, more nickel was extracted from the scrub solution. Cobalt scrubbing efficiency was negative at pH 6.2 and 6.0, also indicating that more cobalt was extracted from the scrub solution. More nickel and cobalt extraction in the scrubbing stages suggested that manganese and calcium in the loaded organic phase was replaced by them. When pH 5.8 was used, cobalt scrubbing was 9.3%, suggesting that some cobalt would be recycled to extraction stages in a fully continuous operation. High cobalt recycling could exacerbate the cobalt recovery in the extraction stage and also result in high base and acid consumption. Therefore, pH 6.0 would be an optimal value for metal scrubbing in order to obtain low or no cobalt recycling and efficient manganese scrubbing. Further optimisation is required to improve scrubbing, such as using more stages, an appropriate pH profile, and a more suitable composition of the scrub solution. The distribution profiles of manganese and cobalt in both aqueous and organic phases for the three scrubbing stages are shown in It is shown in A two-stage semi-continuous stripping test was carried out using the scrubbed organic solution and an acidified sulphate solution containing 30.0 More than 98% Co, Mg and Zn, over 95% Ni and 88% Cu were stripped. A high nickel concentration of 71.3 In the proposed process flowsheet ( The SSX system consisting of Versatic 10 and CLX 50 was tested to separate nickel and cobalt from manganese, magnesium and calcium from a synthetic laterite leach solution. More than 99% Ni and Co were extracted from this solution containing 3.4 The Authors would like to thank Dr Keith Barnard, Dr Danes Shiers and Mr Michael Hutton-Ashkenny for reviewing the paper and providing valuable comments. Mr Peter Miovski is thanked for carrying out part of the test work. The provision of Acorga CLX 50 by Cytec Industries and Versatic 10 and ShellSol 2046 by Shell Chemicals, Australia, is acknowledged. The support of CSIRO Mineral Resources National Research Flagship is gratefully acknowledged.