Various carbon capture and sequestration (CCS) technologies have been developed to address the issues concerning climate changes associated with anthropogenic CO2 emissions. In the present work, the possibilities of mineralizing CO2 with the reactive species, such as Mg2+ ions present in nature in seawater and produced water, have been explored. Laboratory tests conducted with solutions containing 1400ppm Mg2+ ions showed that nesquehonite (Mg(OH)(HCO3)⋅2H2O) is formed upon CO2 injection to the solution at atmospheric pressure. The results showed that for the mineralization to occur, the pH should be raised above 6.8 as predicted from thermodynamics. Kinetic studies conducted at different temperatures showed that the nesquehonite formation involves activation energy of 66.7kJ/mol, which can be overcome by increasing the mass- and heat-transfer efficiency as well as the operative temperature. Based on the kinetics data obtained at a low agitation speed, the number and volume of the mineralization reactors required to capture the CO2 emitted from a 600MW coal power plant have been determined. In addition, the amounts of alkalis needed to raise the pH for precipitation and subsequently to the natural pH of seawater have been estimated.As part of the National Energy Technology Laboratory's Regional University Alliance (NETL-RUA), a collaborative initiative of the NETL, this technical effort was performed under the RES contract DE-FE0004000. In addition, the authors would like to thank Dr Yong-Koo Seol and Dr Gerald Luttrell for helpful discussions and Dr Neil Johnson for sample characterization. According to the fourth Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Assessment report (AR4), In the CCS option, CO The four different geological storage options noted above have an estimated capacity of 350-11,000 Gt CO Many investigators have explored the possibility of reacting CO Lackner et al. The major difficulty associated with CO The ocean is the largest CO In the present work, the kinetics of carbonation of Mg  The equilibrium constant ( In Step 2, pH is raised above the critical pH of precipitation so that the bicarbonate ions formed in From According to the thermodynamic data given in  In the present work, [Mg    By plotting the ln ( According to the Arrhenius equation,   In Step 2, the solution containing the HCO  Note that the pH increased from 6.9 to 9.3 during Step 2, which may be attributed to the dissociation of part of the nesquehonite formed via Part of the hydroxyl ions formed in this manner may also be used to precipitate nesquehonite.  As shown by Recognizing that seawater is probably the largest source of Mg  The data presented in  According to  Note here that the Mg It has been shown in the present work that CO In the CO A low-cost method of raising pH may be to use ultramafic rock. To demonstrate this possibility, a small amount of forsterite (Mg  In this communication, the possibility of mineralizing CO The first-order rate constant (  The key parameter affecting the number and size of the reactors is the rate constant. One way to increase the first-order rate constant is to use a higher energy dissipation rate during Step 2. The value of As shown in Because 4 It has been shown in the foregoing sections that once nesquehonite begins to form, pH starts to increase spontaneously. Two reasons were given: one is the dissociation of the excess HCO The above discussions suggest that CO On the other hand, the reaction products such as nesquehonite can be marketed as building materials or as a source of magnesium to defray the CCS cost. Further, the CO The possibility of mineralizing CO According to a thermodynamic analysis, 5.1