Modified sodium vermiculite, an iron-rich clay mineral, has been used in novel heterogeneous electrochemical Fenton-based treatments, so-called electro-Fenton (EF)-vermiculite, UVA photoelectro-Fenton (PEF)-vermiculite and solar photoelectro-Fenton (SPEF)-vermiculite. Tests were made with 130 mL of 0.150 mM Ponceau SS diazo dye in 0.050 M Na2SO4 at pH 3.0, in the presence of 1.0 g L−1 catalyst microparticles. The electrolyses were performed in an undivided cell with a boron-doped diamond anode (BDD) and air-diffusion cathode for H2O2 production, at 33.3 mA cm−2. Decolorization and mineralization were upgraded in the sequence: EF-vermiculite < PEF-vermiculite < SPEF-vermiculite. The removal of organics occurred by the combined action of OH oxidant formed at the BDD surface and homogeneous and heterogeneous Fenton's reactions, along with the photolysis caused by UVA light or sunlight. The homogeneous Fenton's reaction resulted from iron ions leaching, but the heterogeneous mechanism was prevalent. Comparative treatments by anodic oxidation in the presence of H2O2 and homogeneous EF were less effective than EF-vermiculite. The diazo dye absorbance decays agreed with a pseudo-first-order kinetics. SPEF-vermiculite was the most powerful process, yielding total decolorization and 84.1% mineralization after 300 and 360 min, respectively. The influence of catalyst concentration, current density and diazo dye content on PEF-vermiculite performance was examined. Oxalic, oxamic, malic, tartronic and acetic acids were detected as final short-linear carboxylic acids.The high effectiveness of the electrochemical advanced oxidation processes (EAOPs) for the destruction of refractory organic pollutants in synthetic and real wastewater has been recently reported ( In a one-compartment cell, the oxidation ability of AO can be enhanced if a weaker oxidant such as H The oxidation power of electrogenerated H Lately, heterogeneous EAOPs like hetero-EF and hetero-PEF with solid mineral catalysts (goethite, magnetite or pyrite) or synthesized catalysts are being studied with particular interest ( Natural and modified vermiculite clays are cheap layered materials. Vermiculite is widely available on the planet, being Brazil one of its larger producers. Its excellent thermal resistance, light weight and water-wicking ability constitute an advantage in many industrial and environmental applications ( A large plethora of aromatic azo dyes with one or various –N The aim of this work is to investigate whether the novel EF-vermiculite, PEF-vermiculite and SPEF-vermiculite processes, i.e., the EF, PEF and SPEF treatments run with vermiculite as heterogeneous catalyst, are viable for the degradation of organic pollutants in water. Modified sodium vermiculite was used because better catalytic properties are expected upon surface replacement of alkaline earth metals by Na Disodium Ponceau SS was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and its purity (80%, the rest corresponding to inorganic stabilizers) was confirmed by total organic carbon (TOC) analysis. Standard carboxylic acids were of analytical grade purchased from Merck, Fluka and Panreac. Solutions were prepared with high-purity water from a Millipore Milli-Q system, with resistivity >18.2 MΩ cm at ambient temperature. The solution pH was adjusted with analytical grade sulfuric acid (96% purity) purchased from Acros Organics. Analytical grade sodium sulfate used as background electrolyte was purchased from Prolabo. The catalyst used for homogeneous EF was analytical grade heptahydrated Fe(II) sulfate purchased from Fluka. Other chemicals used for analysis were of analytical or HPLC grade supplied by Panreac and Merck. The raw vermiculite clay powder was obtained in the municipality of Santa Luzia (Paraíba, Brazil). Aiming to improve its performance as heterogeneous catalyst, it was conditioned as reported elsewhere ( The electrolytic experiments were made in an open, undivided and cylindrical glass tank reactor containing 130 mL of stirred solution. The solution temperature was maintained at 25 °C by means of external thermostated water circulating through a jacket surrounding the cell. A thin layer of BDD on Si substrate purchased from NeoCoat was used as the anode. The cathode was a carbon-PTFE air-diffusion electrode supplied by E-TEK, which was fed with air pumped at 400 mL min The AO-H The solution pH was monitored with a Crison GLP 22 pH-meter. Fe The mineralization of the diazo dye solutions was monitored from their TOC abatement with a Shimadzu TOC-VCSN analyzer. An aliquot of 50 μL was injected into the analyzer and the non-purgeable organic content (NPOC) was measured with ±1% reproducibility. The generated carboxylic acids were analyzed by ion-exclusion HPLC by injecting 10 μL aliquots into a Waters 600 liquid chromatograph, equipped with a Bio-Rad Aminex HPX 87H (300 mm × 7.8 mm) column at 35 °C and a Waters 996 photodiode detector selected at λ = 210 nm. Chromatograms were obtained by eluting 4 mM H All the assays were replicated and the average values are given. The figures contain the error bars with a 95% confidence interval. The morphology of the conditioned sodium vermiculite powder was studied by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) using a JEOL JSM7100F microscope. Its chemical composition was determined by energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) with an Oxford Instruments INCA 200 detector coupled to the microscope. The concentration of iron in solution was measured by inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) using a PerkinElmer Elan-6000 spectrometer. NH  The stability of sodium vermiculite in aqueous medium was determined by suspending this material at 1.0 g L A blank was first made with 130 mL of 0.150 mM Ponceau SS in 0.050 M Na In By comparing the relative increase of decolorization percentage in homogeneous EF and EF-vermiculite (5.7% vs. 18.1% as compared to AO-H The absorbance decays determined for the above experiments agreed with a pseudo-first-order kinetics, as presented in  It is well known that the –SO Eq. The effect of the main experimental variables, namely catalyst content, current density and diazo dye concentration, on the performance of the heterogeneous Fenton-based EAOPs in 0.050 M Na The effect of sodium vermiculite concentration, from 0.25 to 2.0 g L The same tendency can be observed in The current density determines the production of oxidizing agents in the PEF-vermiculite process. An increase in The influence of the diazo dye concentration on the performance of the PEF-vermiculite treatment was studied between 0.075 and 2.25 mM Ponceau SS at The reproducibility was tested by reusing a given sample of sodium vermiculite catalyst at a concentration of 1 g L The mineralization of azo dyes usually leads to the generation of short-chain linear carboxylic acids as final products ( Microparticles of a modified clay mineral like sodium vermiculite can be effectively employed as catalyst in heterogeneous Fenton-based water treatments such as EF-vermiculite, PEF-vermiculite and SPEF-vermiculite. A galvanostatic study was carried out using 0.150 mM Ponceau SS solutions at pH 3.0 in a BDD/air diffusion cell to assess the performance of these novel methods. The decolorization and mineralization processes involved the attack of BDD( Based on the promising results found in the present work, the heterogeneous Fenton-based treatments with sodium vermiculite as catalyst are currently in progress, testing their performance for other dyes at neutral pH aiming to expand the applicability to a wider pH range. That study includes the characterization of the clay mineral, before and after use, by conventional physicochemical techniques that are expected to shed light on the catalyst stability. Financial support from project The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at