The potential of 3-phenyl-4-benzoylisoxazol-5-one (HPBI) as metal extractant has been evaluated for the first time for Cu(II) transport from aqueous nitrate solutions by supported liquid membrane (SLM) in the solvents chloroform, 2-nitro phenyl octyl ether (NPOE) and dodecyl nitro phenyl ether (DNPE). The efficiency of the membrane transport was optimized as a function of pH, temperature, aqueous phases and membrane composition. It follows the sequence CHCl3
                     >DNPE>NPOE. The results suggested that the transport mechanism was mainly controlled by the diffusion of the Cu(PBI)2 complex in the membrane core. A comparative investigation of Cu(II) transport ions has been made between SLM and polymeric plasticized membrane (PPM), containing HPBI with NPOE and DNPE as organic solvents or plasticizers in order to evaluate the feasibility of PPM with HPBI.Copper is one of the most important metals as it plays an essential role in various industrial applications The β-diketone compounds composed only of carbon, hydrogen and nitrogen atoms are also interesting extractants of divalent metals and are widely used in copper hydrometallurgy investigation. Among them, the pyrazolone 1-phenyl-3-methyl-4-benzoyl-5-pyrazole (HPMBP) and the acyl-isoxazole 3-phenyl-4-benzoylisoxazol-5-one (HPBI) highly acidic extractants have been studied for liquid extraction of divalent, trivalent metals and actinides In this paper, the transport of Cu(II) ions was studied through SLM containing HPBI as carrier in the solvents chloroform, 2-nitro phenyl octyl ether (NPOE) and dodecyl nitro phenyl ether (DNPE). The parameters affecting the transport efficiency were evaluated such as the aqueous components (stirring, The specific carrier 3-phenyl-4-benzoylisoxazol-5-one (HPBI) was prepared in the Tizi-Ouzou laboratory by benzoylation of 3-phenyl-isoxazolone (H The polymeric SLM support used was Celgard 2500 polypropylene (Hoeshst celanese, chascotte NC) with the following characteristics: nominal porosity 45%; thickness 25 Several membranes were prepared by a procedure already described The scanning electron microscopy (SEM) observations of the membrane samples were made by a 8 Transport experiments were performed in a permeation cell in Teflon. The SLM or PPM were placed in the transport cell between the aqueous feed phase and strip phase each having a volume of 200 For both SLM and PPM systems, aliquots of 0.5 Permeability The membrane flux The experiments have been repeated three times. The experimental accuracy of the measurements was ±5% of the mean value. Several factors in both the aqueous solutions and the membrane phase were investigated in order to determine the efficiency of Cu(II) transport across SLM or PPM systems by the carrier HPBI. In order to evaluate the adequate conditions for the Cu(II) transport through both SLM and PPM systems, the global equilibrium dissociation constant A value for log The extraction of Cu(II) from 1 The apparent constant value of the extraction was log In order to establish the optimal stirring speed in feed and receiving phases, the variation of the flux of copper across the SLM was studied in the speed range of 200–1000 The copper permeability flux through SLM was also measured as function of the temperature (25 The facilitated transport of divalent metal ions through membrane systems containing acidic organic compounds such as HPBI is generally ensured by a counter-transport of protons. The carrier exchanges one metal ion at the feed solution–membrane interface releasing two protons. The complex formed between the carrier and the metal diffuses through the membrane and one metal ion is released at the membrane–strip phase interface by substitution of two protons. It is clear that the pH difference between feed and strip aqueous solutions may play the role of driving force for the transfer of metal from the feed to the strip aqueous solutions.  In order to improve the dissociation of the complex in the strip phase, the variation of the extracted Cu(II) amount was studied as a function of the pH of the strip phase by varying the concentration of HNO Besides, the variation of the extracted Cu(II) amount was studied as a function of thiourea in the strip phase. Thiourea is known to form cationic species with Cu(II) in acidic medium in the pH range 0–1 The effect of initial copper concentration range between 10 SEM images of the surface of the SLM membrane exposed to the feed phase corrobotates this observation (see  The Cu(II) concentration in the strip phase was measured for SLM s obtained from 10 In order to compare the efficiency of copper transport through SLM and PPM, experiments have been performed with NPOE and DNPE as solvent or plasticizers. The values of flux have been normalized  Besides, the nature of the solvent (in SLM) or plasticizer (PPM) shows that the transport of copper is enhanced in the membrane containing a plasticizer with the higher polarity constant. DNPE could increase the solvation of HPBI carrier in the polymer core of the PPM thus favouring the transition to a SLM structure as proposed by Fontas et al. In the case of the PPM with the plasticizer DNPE, an additional transport experiment of copper ions shows that 50% of copper is extracted in 30 The feasibility of HPBI as metal extractant in SLM has been demonstrated for the first time for Cu(II) metal ions. This extractant is easy to synthesize and is efficient for the transport of divalent metal ions across membranes in similar way than that of trivalent metal ions already reported in the literature. The Cu(II) transport has been optimized for SLM with CHCl Future works will be devoted both to the study of the PPM stability and the development of a microfluidic system for PPM extraction with channel dimensions that affect enrichment factors and extraction efficiencies We are indebted to the research team “Interfaces and bio-inspired Membranes” at the Membrane European Institute, respectively for their constant support and helps about the experimental studies. We thank the DEF and the CNRS for their travel assistance in the frame an exchange program n°18429.