The present research arises from the need to gain knowledge to control the precipitation of interdendritic dispersed graphite in mottled Nihard cast irons used in the outer ring layer of industrial duplex work rolls. Industry desires a volume fraction of 2.5–4% graphite, distributed homogeneously across the layer thickness, with a reasonably constant, high number of particles across the layer, with a predominantly short flake-graphite shape. The objective was to ascertain the role of metallurgical manufacturing parameters and their interaction with graphite precipitation in the layer, and in the outer and inner sections of the roll collar. These rolls, used in the finishing stands of hot strip steel mills, were processed by a double pour method using vertical centrifugal casting machines.
                  Analysis was conducted using a fractional Design of Experiments (DOE) program consisting of 16 industrial trials based on the study of 7 manufacturing factors at 2 levels. The analyzed responses, obtained by quantitative metallographic techniques, were: the volume fraction, V
                     V, number per unit area, N
                     A, and the graphite morphology across the layer thickness. The results confirmed that an increase from 0.5 to 0.8kg/T of SiCaMn added as a bath inoculant in the ladle increased the fraction of precipitated graphite without affecting N
                     A. An outstanding result was that the addition of 1kg/T of FeTi as a bath inoculant did not modify the amount of precipitated graphite but significantly affected the morphology, favouring the development of elongated graphite shapes.The purpose of this research was to development knowledge regarding the influence of metallurgical manufacturing parameters, and their interactions, on the occurrence of the graphite phase, in the outer ring layer of alloy indefinite chill (AIC) work rolls for the steel rolling industry, used in the last stands of hot strip mills. The work was a collaboration between a Spanish roll manufacturer and the Materials-Pro research group of the Materials Science and Metallurgical Engineering Department, Oviedo University, Spain. The industrial scale study was performed on duplex work rolls with compositions falling within the specification range ( The goal of this work was to investigate the influence of the aforementioned manufacturing parameters, both in the entire layer and at two locations in the shell layers with different solidification conditions: the outer part of the ring layer in contact with the die wall and the inner portion of the ring in contact with the roll core. By controlling the morphology of the precipitated graphite, it is possible to optimize thermal shock spalling resistance of the roll layer, and thus an increase of its service life, benefiting from the excellent heat diffusivity of this constituent ( Analysis was performed with a fractional Design of Experiments (DOE) program consisting of 16 industrial trials based on the study of 7 manufacturing factors at 2 levels. Fractional Factorial DOE allows a high number of factors to be studied with a considerably lower number of experiments executed in comparison to Complete Factorial DOEs. The loss of information derived from the possible interactions among the chosen factors, known as “confusion of the factors”, is assumed on conducting a fractional DOE. This variant is often employed where the unknown possible interactions are thought to have minimal or no influence ( Fractional designs are usually denoted by There are many publications regarding precipitation of graphite in grey cast irons. However, the originality of this study resides in the investigation of the metallurgical manufacturing factors affecting precipitation of graphite in white cast irons without a definite chill zone; that is, in white cast irons in which graphite occurs by a critical balance between alloying elements such as C, Ni and Si which promote the formation of graphite, and carbide forming elements such as Cr, Mn and Mo. The present analysis determined the metallurgical variables and their interactions in the shells of the AIC rolls that have a significant influence on the graphite formation. The main conclusions of this study arose from the addition of SiCaMn and FeTi added as bath inoculants. An increase in the amount of SiCaMn added from 0.5 to 0.8 The compositional range used for obtaining the desired outer layer is indicated in The manufacturing method consisted of a melting stage conducted in medium frequency induction furnaces followed by stream-ladle treatment with bath inoculants. The pouring temperature of the melt from the furnace to the ladle was 60  The experimental procedure that describes the metallographic techniques leading to the measured responses specified above is summarized as follows. First, samples were cut from the upper part of the roll barrel, corresponding to the position while the role was kept vertical in the centrifugal cast machine. The cutting process was conducted using an abrasive disc cutting machine. The dimensions of the specimens for metallographic inspection were approximately 15 The responses studied in this DOE were ( The volume fraction of graphite, denoted by The number of graphite particles per unit area, The Feret quotient expressed by: Representative micrographs corresponding to the as-polished state at the mid section or work zone (Zones II and III), in the outer shell for each experiment are presented in Presentation of data with a normal distribution using a normal probability plot will reveal an alignment of the data points. The straight line so defined should pass through the point of coordinates (0, 50%) for the standardized effects and probability percent, respectively, thus indicating that the mean variability of the distribution is zero. The slope of the line represents the magnitude of experimental error. Every experimental response is subjected to random variations. This variation follows a normal law, and its standard deviation represents the experimental error. The effects are linear combinations of the responses; hence, by application of the central limit theorem, they follow a normal law. If all the effects were non-significant, they would follow an As a result, each effect can be considered as a random variable; the value so determined is an estimate of its arithmetic mean. Accordingly, this value is accompanied by its standard deviation. The significance of a given effect is based on the ratio of its mean value to its error, using the Student-   The weight of the layer, the Si weight percentage, the amount of SiCaMn added, and the interactions of two factors given by AG  In summary, the metallurgical parameters contributing to an increase in the graphite volume fraction over the layer are: an increase of the Si content, the use of low liquidus temperature melts and the addition of SiCaMn inoculant at the highest level chosen. The former results are consistent with the physical metallurgy grounds for stable solidification of hypoeutectic compositions during the eutectic reaction in grey cast irons. In effect, they all contribute to increase the equivalent carbon and thus enhance the development of graphite. The layer weight and, therefore, its thickness also seem to have a key role, because the higher weights being poured allow for lower cooling rates during solidification and solid-state transformation of the roll shells. This might favour a reduction of the undercooling through the stable eutectic reaction, thus promoting a higher proportion of the liquid evolving through this reaction with the consequence of a higher proportion of graphite being formed. The results obtained from the interaction of the factors also showed that the use of isolating sleeves during solidification and the inoculation of the melt with A-type FeSi at the highest level studied could have an influence on the increase of the fraction of graphite precipitated. Because the aim of this research is to restrict the volume fraction of graphite to 4% or less, our strategy should be to control these metallurgical factors accordingly.  The significant effects in controlling the amount of graphite formed in the most distant sections of the thickness in the ring roll, representing two extremes in the solidification of the layer, are, simply, the liquidus temperature and layer weight.  In In summary it is concluded that in order to obtain a high graphite   The significant effects for the whole layer ( A decrease of the liquidus temperature and the elaboration of melts with high Si contents have been found to increase the development of elongated graphite morphologies in these mottled Nihard irons, i.e., with high   In summary, the interactions reveal that a heavy layer weight in combination with low liquidus temperature melts enhance the development of graphite with elongated geometries capable of providing higher heat conductivities in the layer, thus enhancing the thermal shock resistance.  A decrease of the volume fraction of graphite can be achieved with melts of low equivalent carbon contents, based on compositions of low Si content (∼1 The factors found to have a significant effect on the graphite count number are consistent with the physical metallurgy of grey cast iron. If the goal is to increase the number of counts of the graphite phase, melts with high equivalent C and high Si content should be poured. Alternatively, the inoculation with A-type FeSi at a level of 2.2 The addition of FeTi as a bath inoculant decreased the graphite count number in both the outer and inner sections of the roll shell. FeTi's main contribution, at a level of 0.1 It was found that the periphery of the rolls with thicker layers, i.e., with higher weights being poured for a similar roll geometry, in combination with low liquidus temperature melts, promoted the development of graphite with more elongated shapes. The authors wish to thank the University of Oviedo Vice-Rectorade for Research for providing economic support to carry out the correction of the grammar and syntax of the first draft manuscript. We likewise want to thank Eng. Dipl. Celedonio Rodriguez, manager of Fundición Nodular, S.A., for having granted his permission to publish the results derived from the research work developed within the Materials Pro research group.