The clear advantages of microwave (MW) sintering in terms of energy savings as well as superior mechanical properties have led to the popularity of this technique in recent years, especially in the bioceramics community. However to date, no study has established a systematic comparison between the sintering behavior of the most commonly used bioceramic, hydroxyapatite (HA), during MW and conventional sintering. Here, we utilize in situ dilatometry along with optical pyrometry to monitor the rate of shrinkage and temperature profile for various sintering conditions of HA. Temperature-dependent dielectric measurements indicate that microwave coupling occurs around 900°C and the maximum linear shrinkage is reached, on average, 4 times faster in MW sintering. Finally we show that by tuning the MW power, one can effectively benefit from the non-linear increase in relative permittivity to exert control over the evolution of microstructures and hence achieve the desired combination of physical properties for personalized biomedical applications.The dominant mode of heat transfer in primary stages of conventional sintering is convective and therefore temperature gradient in the sample can widely vary before the surface is sufficiently heated and thermal conduction takes over. In microwave (MW) sintering on the contrary, dielectric heating gives rise to a nearly uniform volumetric heat transfer as the microwaves penetrate and dissipate throughout the bulk concurrently. This major difference leads to a number of significant benefits including higher electricity-to-heat conversion efficiency, faster heating rate, lower energy consumption and remarkably less heat leakage. Some studies have suggested that MW sintering can achieve up to 90% better energy efficiency as compared to conventional electric furnaces Beside the lower energy consumption and a shorter processing time, both of which contribute positively to the overall cost savings, MW-sintered samples often show improved mechanical properties. This can be attributed to the lower thermal stress in the bulk due to uniform volumetric heating as well as the faster heating rate that leads to smaller grain size A detailed description of synthesis of nanocrystalline HA via precipitation can be found elsewhere Conventional sintering was carried out with a heating rate of 25 In order to record The effect of the SiC susceptor was taken into consideration by repeating the measurements with and without the HA sample. It should also be noted that dielectric measurements were obtained on a dedicated setup to avoid any interference from the dilatometer. Average grain size was determined using the intercept method based on ASTM E112-96. Relative density was measured in accordance with ASTM B962 standard. Vickers indentation tests were done on polished samples to obtain hardness and fracture toughness. A micro-indenter was used with a load of 500 A number of researchers have studied the dielectric properties of HA sintered under different conditions. Valdes et al. for instance have reported frequency-dependent measurements that show capacitive or resistive response for slowly cooled and quenched samples, respectively With regard to the overall physical attributes, as shown in It must be emphasized that to some extent, the anomalies can be attributed to the relatively large standard deviation in grain size which despite the uniform volumetric heating may be an outcome of increased heat dissipation from the surface that in turn leads to uneven evolution of microstructures (for example see the scanning electron micrograph of In summary, we have utilized This study was funded by Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at 