The use of Late Quaternary tephra horizons as isochronous markers for high resolution correlation between records is of growing importance in a number of scientific fields. Particular advancements have been made through the identification of microtephra deposits (very distal deposits of volcanic ash invisible to the naked eye). The successful correlation of ash layers and volcanic eruptions depends on the acquisition of the major element chemistries of a tephra layer, derived from microprobe analyses of individual glass shards. This is particularly important for microtephras where aeolian fractionation has removed much of the mineral phase of the ash deposit, which often aids tephra discrimination. There are, however, difficulties in distinguishing precisely between different eruptions of the same volcano using major element composition and this may not always be resolved by the use of trace elements. Given the potential of tephrochronology as a correlative tool in many disciplines it is important to resolve this difficulty. One way forward is to perform more robust statistical analyses on the geochemical data, as in general, analyses are confined to a series of bi-plots of major elements. Here the authors explore some of the problems associated with dealing with microprobe data generated for individual tephras and pay particular attention to the ‘unit sum problem’. Using a subset of data generated as part of a EURODELTA project on tephra distribution in the Adriatic, the authors demonstrate that this problem is detectable in major element data from tephras and have consequently applied the logratio method before further analyses of the data. It is demonstrated that the use of logratios combined with discriminant functions analysis provides a more robust assessment of likely chemical correlations between tephras, and are superior to the use of bi-plots alone; and obviate the need for any data normalization, a particular point of contention between tephrochronologists.The purpose of this paper is to explore some of the numerical issues associated with the assessment of major and minor element compositional data from vitreous distal tephra deposits. The use of tephras as isochronous marker horizons is of growing importance in many related fields including archaeology ( In order to consider some of the numerical issues surrounding major and minor element tephra data a subset of data produced as part of a larger EURODELTA funded project has been selected ( Problems of this nature are not confined to tephrochronology, and powerful statistical tools have been developed to aid interpretation of major element data in other fields, such as the investigation of glass and ceramic data in archaeology for the purposes of determining provenance (e.g., The data set studied here consists of the major and minor elements (SiO It is normal practice in WD-EPMA analysis of microtephra shards to ‘filter’ the data before publication and analysis. There are at least two reasons for this. One is that the flotation process for isolating vitreous tephra ( More controversially, it is common to ‘filter’ out data using the analytical total, with 95% marking the commonly-used lower limit of acceptance ( In SEM low analytical totals might be given by poorly-polished and mounted surfaces, or because the area encompassed by the electron beam has included either a vesicle in the glass or is at the edge of the sample, due to the small shard size, or because of charging. In theory these factors should affect all oxides equally, and might plausibly be mitigated by normalizing the analytical total to 100%. This is not recommended, as discussed below. Certain individual elements might be adversely affected, such as beam-induced migration of Na – the extent of which is a function of beam current, analytical time, and spot size. If it occurs during the analysis of a particular spot it should be easily detectable and the point discarded. Careful recording of the analysis point should prevent any re-analysis of the point. Water in volcanic glasses might account for a few percent, either from phreatomagmatic eruptions (where water is introduced into the magma, increasing eruption explosivity), or from the uptake of water by shards after deposition through ionic exchange ( Inspection of the complete data selected for this test ( A similar pattern is shown by samples in Groups 2–4, but Group 14 presents a very different picture. The totals ( In order to proceed, the full test dataset of 257 samples has been filtered to remove all entries with an analytical total below 94.4%, or which contain an oxide value of zero. The cut-off at 94.4% was selected from an inspection of This filtering removed 54 samples – 46 with low analytical total, and a further 8 because of a zero recorded for MgO. It is noteworthy that whilst the exclusion of these samples substantially reduces the coefficient of variation of the analytical totals and the SiO The resulting group statistics are shown in Groups 3 and 4 appear to be very similar in all oxide abundances, but there are differences in internal oxide distributions as indicated by skew and kurtosis. Groups 1 and 2 are similar in some oxides (e.g., SiO Group 14 is similar to Group 2 in many oxides, but differs in MnO and MgO. The analytical totals for all groups after filtering are relatively close to 100% (96.0–99.6%), and the dispersion of the totals (expressed as CV%) is below 1.5% for all groups. Even with low dispersion of total, some oxides show high dispersion in some groups. Some oxides tend to show uniformly higher dispersion across all groups (e.g., MnO, typically 30%). Some values are oddly high, such as 84% for MgO in Group 1). The normality or otherwise of the data is an important factor when interpreting analytical results, since many inferences are based on the assumption of normality. The skew and kurtosis ( It has been suggested for more than a hundred years that the numerical analysis of compositional data (the ‘unit sum’ problem) – data which is constrained to add up to 100%) is ‘fraught with danger’ ( Briefly, the unit sum problem can be explained as follows. The simple definition of an oxide concentration expressed as a percentage involves not only the concentration of the particular oxide, but also the sum of the concentrations of all other oxides, e.g.:  the natural log of all possible oxide ratios; the natural log of the ratio of all other oxides to a common oxide; the natural log of the ratio of all oxide values to the geometric mean of all oxides in a particular sample (the ‘centred logratio’). In this investigation the authors have used (i) to determine the variance structure of the logratios via a  It has already been suggested that the correlation matrix is a poor tool for the investigation of inter-relationships between major element analytical data. Aitchison recommends 3 matrices for evaluating these relationships: The The The  Visual comparison of the logratio means, as well as the observed similarity of the logratio variance structure, suggests that Groups 3 and 4 are similar to each other, and quite similar to Group 2, although the latter has different ratios to CaO (as seen in the raw mean data, Bi-variate oxide plots are commonly used to display geochemical data on tephra – especially FeO-TiO Another use of logratios, but this time the It is clear from this that the filtering step (i.e., the removal of samples with totals below 94.4%) is critical in interpreting these data. Without filtering, a sub-set of samples from Group 14 are visually associated with samples from Group 2 (as in Superficially, it might be concluded that the best separation is given by One temptation when dealing with major element data which should total 100% is to normalize the totals and carry out a numerical analysis on these data. As discussed above, normalization might be valid under some analytical circumstances but not in others, and it is hard to know raw unnormalized data; the same raw data normalized to 100%; the unnormalized raw data converted to centred logratios; the normalized raw data converted to centred logratios. The PCA of the raw partially filtered data [test (i)] is shown in The logratio covariance matrix can be used to perform statistical tests of similarity between two groups. The technique is therefore applied to Groups 3 and 4, which have been identified above as similar. This method uses the ratio of each component to a common component, and is statistically insensitive to the choice of divisor. There may, however, be analytical or chemical reasons for selecting a particular divisor. For reasons outlined above, the authors have used the ratio of all oxides to that of Al. To test the hypothesis Given the discussion above about the MnO values in these two groups, and the possibility that the high variance of ratios of oxides to MnO is due to poor determination of MnO, the values for MnO were deleted from this calculation, and again a test statistic value in excess of 200 was obtained for the hypothesis that An alternative but less rigorous means of testing for association between groups is to use the cross-validated classification results from Discriminant Function Analysis as a measure of the success of separating the groups. This allocates each of the input samples in turn to the closest of the input group centroids (using Mahalanobis distance) by dropping the sample from the calculation and treating it as an unknown. If all of the samples are allocated to the original input group, then the discrimination is successful and the original groupings are robust and discrete. If there is ambiguity between the membership of two or more groups, then it may be concluded that there is some chemical similarity between these groups. The aim of this paper is to explore the protocols of numerical analysis of major element chemical data from distal microtephras, and in particular to evaluate the use of a logratio approach, taking as a test case a subset of tephras recovered from a large project on Adriatic marine cores. It has been demonstrated that the unit sum problem outlined by Aitchison is detectable in these data, and consequently the logratio method proposed by him has been applied as a solution to this problem. The dataset used contains (deliberately) data which would not normally be expect to be published in a tephrostratigraphic study – both low analytical totals, and poor-quality data from non-vitreous materials in the sample. This was done to test the robustness of the approach. In particular, it has been shown: The crude correlation matrix for each group shows the expected pattern of behavior, i.e., false correlations between oxides, and consequently the use of bivariate or trivariate plots for presenting data and inferring relationships is dubious. In the cases studied here, there is no overall improvement in the normality of the data to be obtained by taking logarithms of the raw data. The logratio covariance matrices have been calculated for each group, which show much more consistent patterns of variation than do the crude correlation matrices, and the authors suggest that this internal variation might be related to volcanological processes. The centred logratio values have been used as inputs into PCA and DFA. Although the resulting diagrams are visually similar to those of the raw data, the authors believe that the logratio approach, as well as being theoretically more sound, has the potential to provide more geological data than do the results of calculations on the raw data. The variance matrix based on the logratios to Al In the light of this, the following is concluded: The quality of the analytical data is of paramount importance. After the analyses of any non-tephra material have been removed, some filter (probably based on analytical total) is necessary if all data is not of the highest quality. The value of the filter is critical, balancing between distorting the analysis by including poor-quality data, and removing useful information. It is likely that no single figure will be optimal for all analyses, but around 95% is likely to be typical. Normalization of the data is to be avoided. It is unnecessary if the logratio approach is used, and unhelpful otherwise because it masks the quality of the data. Bi- and tri-plots of raw data are potentially misleading, since they are only partial segments through the data. Logratio methods are recommended. The authors believe that logratio covariance matrices contain useful geochemical information, and that centred logratios are the best format for data that are to be subjected to PCA or DFA. Although, in this test, multivariate analyses of the filtered raw data provided plots with equal visual discriminating power, it is believed that logratios are to be preferred because they are theoretically more sound, obviate the need for normalization, and possibly give PCA plots which contain some geochemically useful structure. Hypothesis testing using logratios to determine similarity has not yet been particularly helpful. The matrix manipulations are cumbersome and repetitive to carry out in Excel, and alternative vehicles for carrying out and automating such comparisons are being explored. An alternative approach has been outlined using Discriminant Function Analysis which gives believable results, and is, at least, more repeatable and less susceptible to observer bias than allocations made by ‘eyeball’ using bi-plots. The authors would like to acknowledge the help, support and interest of the following colleagues: Fabio Trincardi, John Lowe, Allesandra Asioli, Ian Matthews, Alison Macleod, Gareth Hatton, Norman Charnley and Chris Doherty. The data used in this paper was generated in part through the EURODELTA EVK3-CT-2001-20001 project within the 5th framework programme. We would like to thank an anonymous referee who made a number of very valuable comments. 