A study of the treatment of an acidic mine drainage to extract its Cu(II) content by emulsion liquid membranes is made. Copper was removed using 5-nonylsalicylaldoxime (LIX-860 N-IC) dissolved in aviation kerosene. The effects of various factors, such as pH and metal content in the feed solution, carrier concentration and surfactant content in the membrane, acidity of the stripping solution, and stirring speed to prepare the primary and the double emulsion, are reviewed. The experimental data were analyzed in terms of a metal transport mechanism based on a facilitated transport model, which takes account the chemical reaction between the metal and the oximic extractant and the diffusion processes in the aqueous phase close to the external interface of membrane.
                  The results indicate that with adequate control and adjustment of these experimental conditions the extraction extent of metal through the membrane as well their degree of enrichment in the stripping liquor can be favored.It is well known that acidic drainage formed by sulfide oxidation can precipitate many relatively soluble and insoluble metals –mostly iron, copper and zinc – whose speciation is controlled by pH, degree of oxidation, moisture content, and solution composition. Acidic mine drainage (AMD) is recognized as the largest environmental problem facing the mining industry ( Specifically, to remove or recover the metals, ion-exchange (IX), solvent extraction in mixer-settler reactors (SX), biosorption, and chemical precipitation appear to be the most appropriate and extensively studied methods ( This report deals with the application of surfactant or emulsion liquid membrane (ELM) technology to remove and recover copper from a sample of an acidic mine drainage collected close to a copper mine located in the central part of Chile. The ELM method is in the pilot-scale testing stage, but practical research activities have expanded quickly in recent years. The use of liquid membranes in metal uptake is becoming the most promising approach to separation processes ( Then, the contribution of this work can be centered on two aspects: (a) the analysis and explanation of experimental results achieved in the batch-stirred tank, similar to industrial extractors and feasible to be used in practical applications by means of a metal facilitated transport model deduced in a former study in which we used a stirred kinetics transfer cell without double emulsion formation. The model is based on a diffusion mechanism which considers a chemical reaction between the metal and the oximic carrier at the aqueous feed/membrane interface. The results obtained in the stirred tank were consistently described in terms of the mechanism defined by former analysis of the stirred transfer cell. The information obtained in this study has been used in the design of a small pilot plant which is being tested in these days. (b) On the other hand, in this work we have effectively succeeded in applying the use of emulsion liquid membrane methodology to an actual sample of an acidic mine drainage from a copper mine. Most of the papers related to this topic have been based on the use of pure laboratory solutions or some solutions that simulate residual industrial aqueous phases which behave as a too ideal matrix. An efficient extraction of copper with a surfactant liquid membrane was carried out in a batch-type stirred tank in which a complete mix of the three phases – aqueous feed, organic solvent and strip liquor – occurs. LIX-860 N-IC (5-nonylsalicylaldoxime) used as carrier extractant for copper was supplied by Cognis Chile Ltd. Span-80 (sorbitan monooleate), a nonionic commercial surfactant, was purchased from Munich Pharm Co. It is a yellow liquid with a hydrophilic/lipophilic balance of 4.3 and a molecular weight of 428.6 Samples of an acidic mine drainage from a copper mine in the central part of Chile were used as the metal-containing feed solution which constitutes the external aqueous phase of the liquid membrane system. It had a pH that varied in the range of 1–5, a variable sulfate concentration between 4 The primary emulsion was prepared by vigorous mechanical agitation of the stripping aqueous phase and the organic phase. This organic solution consisted of the extractant and the surfactant dissolved in kerosene. In this step it is necessary to disperse the stripping solution in the organic phase, which was achieved using an OMNI ultrasonic agitator that produced an emulsion with small droplets between 0.5 As mentioned above, the acidic mine drainage generated in the surroundings of a copper mine contains variable but significant amounts of several metal ions. Among them copper and zinc are valuable metals with many industrial uses that justify their recovery, especially considering the large volumes of drainage produced permanently. In order to recover the copper, the solution was treated in a first stage with an emulsion liquid membrane contactor in the stirred tank in contact with an organic solvent formed by solutions of LIX-860 N-IC as carrier extractant and Span-80 as surfactant in kerosene. It was not necessary to use any phase-modifier, probably because the oxime carrier contains some The effect of a higher concentration of extractant in the organic phase is represented in An increase of extractant content in the liquid membrane brings about an increase in metal transport due to the existence of a larger amount of carrier molecules at the available interface to complex the cupric ions. Under these conditions, the chemical extraction reaction occurs in a shorter time, making possible the occurrence of a greater number of extraction–stripping cycles. In previous reports it has been shown that the overall metal transport process may be affected by this chemical extraction reaction that would occur at the interface between the aqueous feed phase (the AMD solution) and the primary emulsion globule. However, the carrier extractant content in the organic phase cannot be increased indiscriminately because the increased viscosity of the organic phase would cause an important decrease in the diffusion of the metal complex in the liquid membrane. The effect of the initial copper concentration in the mine drainage on its extraction was studied. The stoichiometry of the chemical reaction presented in Eq. The figure shows that, as expected, metal extraction decreases as copper content in the AMD solution increases, which is consistent with the chemical reaction that governs the Cu-LIX-860 N-IC complex. However, although higher Cu(II) concentration in the acidic drainage would require the use of a higher content of extractant in the membrane, in these experiments with surfactant liquid membranes the contact of the three participant phases is very fast, causing a very rapid overall process kinetics, thereby reducing the amount of carrier required for the same extraction compared with conventional solvent extraction (SX) in mixer-settler reactors. One of the most important variables for obtaining efficient metal transport in an ELM process is the stripping agent concentration in the internal aqueous phase. The carrier extractant used in this study, the oxime, correspond to acid compounds that form complexes with metals that must be broken down with stronger acid solutions during the back-extraction step. It is seen that when a 1.02 As has been mentioned in previous papers, it is necessary to use an appropriate stirring speed to prepare the primary emulsion, and a different one to produce the double emulsion. Many experiments were carried out to check the importance of these variables. In both cases it was established that a minimum of 1000 With respect to the effect of stirring speed of the double emulsion, extraction of Cu(II) from the feed solution was enhanced as stirring was increased. Several experiments were carried out changing this agitation rate in a range between 100 In all these experiments the oximic extractant showed excellent selectivity for copper extraction with respect to other metals present in AMD solution. It was found that it is completely feasible to get a highly enriched copper strip liquor able to be driven to a final recovery step in a copper sulfate crystallization process, because the same primary emulsion volume containing the same strip liquor is contacted successively with different fresh feed fractions. For instance, after few continuous contacts a content of 1.40 After extracting the copper, the raffinate produced during its extraction contains all the zinc, as well as the other metallic ions and impurities detected in the AMD sample which were not extracted by the oxime extractant. Therefore, it is necessary to carry out a second stage with a selective zinc extractant for recovery from the copper extraction raffinate which will be matter of a future report. The experimental data obtained in this study are analyzed by a metal transport mechanism based on a facilitated transport model, which takes account the chemical reaction between the metal and the oximic extractant and the diffusion processes in the aqueous phase close to the external interface of membrane. It is assumed that the emulsion droplet behaves as in model proposed previously raised to analyze our data obtained in experiments to measure the initial extraction rates of copper in a stirred transfer cell. The model was derived from the information related to the kinetics equations deduced in our former studies and from analogues models found in the literature. In the model, the double emulsion droplet system can be considered as a large liquid membrane droplet where is assumed that the metal–carrier complex diffuses through membrane towards the inner aqueous phase, while the extractant migrates in an opposite direction. The water droplet inside the emulsion globule moves freely containing an average metal composition. Furthermore, as the content of sulfuric acid in the strip liquor is kept much higher than in feed solution, the reverse reaction of Eq. The transfer rate of Cu(II) ion per unit surface area of emulsion droplet, Introducing this expression in Eq. In most of cases, once equilibrium is reached [H The study proposed here at the laboratory scale showed that this ELM methodology is especially attractive to be used for the treatment of natural acidic mine drainages and residual industrial dilute solutions. Substantial metal enrichment in the inner aqueous phase can be achieved using only a low expense extractant inventory if a suitable volume ratio between the strip acceptor solution and the feed solution is used. System variables for the treatment of an acidic mine drainage by an emulsion liquid membrane process in a stirred tank were studied with the purpose of optimizing the practical extraction and recovery of its copper content. LIX-860 N-IC was used as carrier and Span-80 as the surfactant. It was found that the stirred tank designed was very efficient, achieving intimate contact between the three participating phases. Copper extraction was favored in a feed solution at pH 2.14, 3% (w/w) LIX-860 N-IC, and 1.02 In the batch extractor, the best extraction behavior was obtained when stirring speeds of 1000 The experimental data were analyzed in terms of a metal transport mechanism based on a facilitated transport model, which takes account the chemical reaction between the metal and the oximic extractant and the diffusion processes in the aqueous phase close to the external interface of membrane. In the model is assumed that the small water droplet inside the emulsion globule moves freely containing an average metal composition and that the back-extraction reaction would occur instantaneously at the stripping interface. The experimental metal extraction results were approximately well explained by the model, particularly in the early stage of the process when emulsion breakdown and swelling difficulties are controlled. The feasibility of removing low contents of metallic ions from acid aqueous solutions using a liquid membrane extractor has been studied. The experimental and theoretical information obtained in this study constituted the basis of the design of a small-pilot plant that is being tested in two mining companies to decontaminate mine waters polluted with heavy metals. The financial support of this work under FONDECYT Project 1040567 is gratefully acknowledged. The authors also wish to thank Cognis Chile Ltd. for providing the LIX 860 N-IC extractant. Claudio Araneda acknowledges to Conicyt Doctoral Fellowship.