This paper presents the energy requirements for mechanical production of fine and ultra-fine particles in comminution. Recent approaches for effective size reduction and energy saving in comminution are described, viz., (a) development and application of new mills/classifiers, (b) adjustment of the bead characterization in stirred bead mills, (c) hybrid comminution systems with roller-press and media mill, (d) assisted methods, and (e) simulation.Comminution, especially ultra-fine comminution, is an energy-intensive stage in the overall process to provide materials in proper fine size ranges for the required properties of the final product. High energy consumption and inefficiency in comminution technology for such materials as mineral, cement, pigment, chemicals and food have long been regarded as a major area for development, especially for producing particles below micron sizes. Conventional devices (mainly, tumbling ball mills) have been used for comminution for many years, but the basic problem is that the power consumed is limited by the centrifugation occurring at speeds above the critical, and the grinding media could not be too small, for the impact energy of each ball would otherwise be insignificant. At low speed, large grinding media in a tumbling mill generate mainly impact and abrasive stresses, which, for micron- or sub-micron-size particles, do not work well. Comminution mill development is always aimed at lowering energy consumption, increasing throughput and perfecting a universal machine for different grinding problems. To meet these requirements, numerous mills have recently been developed and improved by institutes, universities and companies worldwide ( Besides, equipment for classification is equally important. It is desirable to discharge the fines or separate the coarse in the comminution process in order to reduce energy cost and avoid over-grinding of the final product. The resultant particle size distribution of the product from the grinding system is also determined by classification. It is well known that classification becomes increasingly difficult as the cut size is reduced, particularly if the material has low specific gravity or a high fraction of ultra-fines. A current trend towards fine and ultra-fine products with higher surface areas places more exacting requirements on classification. Considerable efforts have been made to develop new air classifiers ( Also, the feasibility of the application of chemical, thermal or ultrasonic energies to comminution has opened a viable avenue of exploration and research. These assisted-techniques have a significant impact on improving the performance and lowering the energy consumption in comminution. Chemicals or grinding aids used in comminution generally increase grinding energy efficiency, lower the limit of grinding, prevent agglomeration or aggregation of ground particles, avoid grinding media coating and improve the rheology of material flow as well ( In addition, optimisation for fine particle production in comminution devices and processes has become significant in order to achieve the desired product quality at reduced energy consumption. One option is computer simulation using appropriate models for design, optimisation and analysis of comminution ( This paper will present recent advances on the improvement of energy efficiency in comminution technology, involving (a) development and application of new mills/classifiers, (b) adjustment of the bead characterization in stirred bead mills, (c) hybrid comminution systems with roller-press and media mill, (d) assisted methods (grinding aids, microwave and ultrasound), and (e) simulation. In addition, the energy requirements for mechanical production of fine and ultra-fine particles in comminution are also described. Comminution is a process whereby particulate materials are reduced from coarse feed sizes to fine product sizes required for downstream or end use ( Therefore, smaller particles require more events in which breakage can occur. Larger particles have many flaws that are depleted during breakage into daughter fragments. Reduced number of flaws means less chance of breakage of smaller particles. Thus, increase of energy inputs is necessary to raise the number of events by which the smaller particles may be broken. The range in the reported specific energy consumption in some mills may span as much as an order of magnitude, a range which is caused by variations in material hardness, operating conditions or parameters, and circuit configuration. A mill usually performs just one operation of size reduction, and the energy consumption is intimately tied to the operation performed, similar for all machines in a specific size range in modes of breakage. Mills classified according to the operation they perform, coarse, intermediate, fine and ultra-fine, show common attributes with respect to grinding, feed and product sizes, specific energy consumption, and efficiency. Using mills for mechanically stressing particle materials remains the most practical way of carrying out industrial comminution for production of fine materials. Improvement in energy efficiency and ground product quantity should be directed towards the design of machines in addition to process optimisation. The development and application of new mills have been recognized to be of paramount importance due to energy inefficiency of conventional comminution devices like tumbling ball mills. These new mills involve the following:  less specific energy consumption and consequently less wear in downstream ball milling; increased capacity of existing plants with comparatively small investment; better liberation of valuable constituents; more intense attack by leach liquor; and comparatively low space requirement, depending on the selected flow sheet. The POITTEMILL from Poittemill Ingenierie Group in France eliminates high-compaction flakes and agglomerates due to its specific pulsated pressure action during processing. The HOROMILL, which is manufactured by FCB Research Centre in France, is one of the specific designs of the roller press ( Small media grinding innovations include agitated bead mills, as opposed to the more traditional ball mills and stirred ball mills ( Sala Agitated Mill or SAM (Grinding Division of Metso Group, UK); IsaMill (Netsch-Feinmahltechnik GmbH, Germany); MaxxMill (Maschinenfabrik Gustav Eirich, Germany); ATR-MILL (Hosokawa Alpine AG, Germany); ANI-Metprotech Mill (Metprotech, Australia); KD tower mill (Japan). Power savings are achieved by the ability of the mills to stir the very small media necessary for efficient fine grinding. Some aspects on recent developments of high-efficiency stirred media mills mainly involve (a) use of very small grinding beads down to 0.10 In addition, there are other types of high-efficiency mills associated with vibration and eccentric, impact and centrifugal actions such as the VKE (  Particle classification with new and improved classifiers (air classifier and centrifuges) during processing can save energy, avoid over-grinding, improve product quality and increase unit capacity. Some new air classifiers, V-/VSK separator from KHD Humboldt Wedag, AG, Germany; Inprosys from SINTEF, Norway and Turboplex with a new wheel from Hosokawa Alpine AG & Co., Germany, have been applied to various fine comminution processes in order to save energy for required product quality ( The high-speed stirred bead mills have been applied to the production of ultra-fine particles. These mills offer significant reductions in specific energy consumption compared to conventional mills, mainly due to the use of small grinding media (minimum diameter 0.1 Beads as grinding media play a key role in ultra-fine grinding due to their high kinetic energy intensities (up to 1700  Because the HPRM is more efficient at lower energy inputs and the ball mill is more efficient at higher energy inputs, the greatest potential for energy savings should come from using the two different comminution modes in tandem or in series as a hybrid grinding circuit. A systematic study of energy efficiency of comminution ( Recent studies included ultra-fine comminution of calcium carbonate in dry and wet hybrid systems with the HPRM and stirred media mills (i.e., wet Drais mill and dry Sala Agitated Mill). In a wet hybrid system ( One approach for effective size reduction and energy saving is the use of grinding aids or chemical additives in fine comminution. Relevant results have mostly been obtained for tumbling mills ( The effect of chemical additives for dry grinding of carbonate minerals in stirred media mills has been examined ( Microwave is a form of electromagnetic energy with associated electric and magnetic fields. The materials that absorb microwave radiation are termed dielectric and contain dipoles. When microwave is applied to dielectric materials the dipoles align and flip around since the applied field is alternating. Subsequently, the material heats up when stored internal energy is lost to friction. When energy is applied, stresses of different magnitudes can be created within the lattice, both by heating and cooling, leading to localised fractures of an inter-granular and trans-granular nature but not necessarily to catastrophic failure. These fractures may lead to a significant reduction in comminution resistance. Microwave energy treatment can reduce the work index of certain materials, to favor subsequent processes for efficient size reduction and valuable component liberation with less energy. The application of thermal energy to assist mineral or material fracture and liberation by microwave heating has been an interesting subject ( The fragmentation effect of minerals by ultrasonic fields in suspensions and ores has been studied since the 1950s ( Computer simulation as a technique for design, optimisation and analysis of comminution has been developed since the 1960s ( JKSimMet by Julius Krutschnitt Mineral Research Centre, Australia ( USIM PAC by BRGM, France ( High Fidelity Simulation or HFS by Herbet, USA ( The energy consumption by comminution in the mechanical production of fine particles is summarized. Energy requirements are classified according to the commodity being processed, feed and product size as well as type of mill. The information merits recent attention with regard to the improvement of energy utilization in comminution. Recent approaches for effective size reduction and energy saving in comminution are: Development and application of new mills and classifiers The mill developments have been brought forward to the manufacture of equipment, which is based on either high-pressure inter-particles bed or on small grinding media intensively stirred comminution, in combination with either vibration or eccentric actions. Some of the mills have been designed according to the combined actions of attrition and compression. The developed mills have been replacing the conventional ball mills for effective size reduction and energy saving in the mechanical production of fine and ultrafine particles. Particle classification with air classifiers and centrifuges from the processes can save energy, avoid over-grinding, improve the product quality and increase the unit capacity. Adjustment of the bead characterization in stirred bead mills Beads as grinding media play an important role in the ultra-fine grinding in stirred media mills. The effect of bead size is significant. The pre-grinding of coarse particles using larger beads and the subsequent milling of fine particles using smaller beads are suggested. An optimum ratio of bead size to top size of feed exists in the ultra-fine grinding operation. The effect of bead load was found to be significant for the production of new BET surface area. The energy utilization increases linearly with bead load. The selection of bead density suitable for ultra-fine grinding in the mill should be based on the optimisation of the energy utilisation. Hybrid comminution systems with roller-press and media mill In the hybrid comminution system, the fine comminution in the subsequent mills is favorably influenced by pre-crushing with the HPRM. The existence of micro-cracks in the particles pre-crushed by the HPRM is supposed to reduce the work index of the particles. The results show the effective utilization of energy consumed for the production of fine and ultra-fine particles in the hybrid system. Assisted methods for comminution Utilisation of chemicals, or microwave or ultrasonic energies to the fine comminution process has been a viable avenue of exploration and research. These assisted-techniques have a significant impact on the improvement of the performance and the achievement of lower energy consumption in a comminution process. Simulation The existing simulators developed can be used as an engineering tool in steady-state process simulation for data analysis, plant optimisation and design. Some simulators like USIM PAC 3.0 offer a wide spectrum of design criteria such as comminution process optimisation in industry.