The effect of kaolinite and montmorillonite on fine coal flotation in deionized water and calcium solution were studied through flotation experiments on a mixed coal–kaolinite/montmorillonite system in the present study, respectively. Fuerstenau upgrading curve was used to evaluate the whole flotation selectivity and the interaction force between kaolinite/montmorillonite and coal was measured using atomic force microscopy (AFM) colloidal probe technique. It was found that kaolinite and montmorillonite caused different issues in coal flotation process. In deionized water, the results show that a lower flotation recovery and worse selectivity were obtained for coal-montmorillonite system compared with that of coal-kaolinite. AFM results show that slightly jump-into-contact phenomenon was observed in coal–montmorillonite interaction while a repulsive force was always detected in coal–kaolinite interaction. The heterocoagulation between coal and montmorillonite was responsible for the low flotation recovery and bad selectivity in deionized water for coal-montmorillonite system. In presence of 0.1mol/L calcium ion, the flotation recovery increased considerably while the selectivity of both systems was deteriorated. The jump-into-contact and high adhesion force were always found in coal-kaolinite/montmorillonite AFM force curves, indicating attractive force dominated the interaction between kaolinite/montmorillonite and coal. The electrostatic repulsive force between coal and clay particle or air bubble is fully suppressed by Ca2+, aggravating the kaolinite/montmorillonite coating and also leading to an increase of flotation recovery.The difficulty in treating coal slime in the presence of clay minerals is well known in the coal preparation plant. Clay minerals (kaolinite, illite, and montmorillonite) have a detrimental effect on fine coal flotation because of mechanical coating and water entrainment, leading to low flotation recovery and poor flotation selectivity Clays belong to the family of anisotropic phyllosilicate minerals and the basic structural elements of the clay minerals are two-dimensional arrays of silicon–oxygen tetrahedral and that of aluminum or magnesium oxygen-hydroxyl octahedral The objective of this study is to explore the effect of kaolinite and montmorillonite on fine coal flotation in deionized water and 0.1 Fine ultra-pure coal samples with 2.36% ash content were collected from Taixi coal preparation plant in Ningxia Province, China. Analytical grade kaolinite and montmorillonite powders with 99% purity were collected from Yongcheng City, Henan Province. Pure coal and kaolinite/montmorillonite were mixed at a mass ratio of 3:1 for flotation test. Ultra-pure graphite substrate was used to represent ultra-pure coal in AFM experiment. Deionized water was used in present study and analytical grade CaCl Flotation kinetics tests were conducted in an XFDIII 1.0 The Fuerstenau upgrading curves were used for characterization, comparison, and analysis of the whole coal flotation selectivity in presence of clay particles. These curves have proven to be very useful in the analysis of de-ashing and desulfurization of coal flotation results Multimode 8 (Bruker, America) AFM was used in the contact mode for force measurement between clay particles and graphite substrate, representing ultra-pure coal. A clay particle was glued to the apex of a triangular tipless cantilever using a very small amount of epoxy resin under an optical microscope; this process is described in detail elsewhere The effect of kaolinite and montmorillonite on fine coal flotation in deionized water is shown in To further explore the effect of kaolinite and montmorillonite on flotation selectivity, the Fuerstenau upgrading curves of coal-kaolinite system and coal-montmorillonite system in deionized water are plotted and are shown in The kinetics data was fitted by using Eq. To further explore the effect of kaolinite and montmorillonite on fine coal flotation, flotation experiments in presence of 0.1 The Fuerstenau upgrading curves of coal-kaolinite system and coal-montmorillonite system in 0.1  It was found that kaolinite and montmorillonite caused different issues in coal flotation process. In deionized water condition, 84.0% combustible matter recovery with 6.8% ash recovery was obtained. In contrast, only 69.0% combustible matter recovery with 6.2% ash recovery was obtained. Not only flotation recovery but also selectivity for coal-montmorillonite system is lower than that of coal-kaolinite system. AFM results show that slightly jump-into-contact phenomenon was observed in coal–montmorillonite interaction while a repulsive force was always detected in coal–kaolinite interaction. The heterocoagulation between coal and montmorillonite was responsible for the low flotation recovery and bad selectivity in deionized water for coal-montmorillonite system. However, the hetero-coagulation between coal and kaolinite was not found. In presence of 0.1 This research was supported by the