In the present study, specific energy for grinding and physical properties of wheat, canola, oat and barley straw grinds were investigated. The initial moisture content of the straw was about 0.13–0.15 (fraction total mass basis). Particle size reduction experiments were conducted in two stages: (1) a chopper without a screen, and (2) a hammer mill using three screen sizes (19.05, 25.4, and 31.75 mm). The lowest grinding energy (1.96 and 2.91 kWh t−1) was recorded for canola straw using a chopper and hammer mill with 19.05-mm screen size, whereas the highest (3.15 and 8.05 kWh t−1) was recorded for barley and oat straws. The physical properties (geometric mean particle diameter, bulk, tapped and particle density, and porosity) of the chopped and hammer-milled wheat, barley, canola, and oat straw grinds measured were in the range of 0.98–4.22 mm, 36–80 kg m−3, 49–119 kg m−3, 600–1220 kg m−3, and 0.9–0.96, respectively. The average mean particle diameter was highest for the chopped wheat straw (4.22-mm) and lowest for the canola grind (0.98-mm). The canola grinds produced using the hammer mill (19.05-mm screen size) had the highest bulk and tapped density of about 80 and 119 kg m−3; whereas, the wheat and oat grinds had the lowest of about 58 and 88–90 kg m−3. The results indicate that the bulk and tapped densities are inversely proportional to the particle size of the grinds. The flow properties of the grinds calculated are better for chopped straws compared to hammer milled using smaller screen size (19.05 mm).Interest in biomass production is growing because it is considered both carbon neutral and a sustainable resource for industrial-scale energy production The commonly available cereal straws are wheat, barley, and rice, and oat Particle size reduction of biomass is necessary, as the current biorefinery technologies cannot efficiently digest whole stems of grass and woody feedstocks. Paulrud For proper design and optimization of biomass size-reduction equipment, it is necessary to know its mechanical properties. Power or energy requirements for size reduction of straw is one of these properties, and is influenced by initial particle size, moisture content, material properties, feed rate of the material, and machine variables Balk Physical properties like bulk, tapped, and particle density are important to understand the quality of feedstock delivered to the biorefinery or for co-firing plants Flowability is one of the major factors for efficient supply of biomass to refineries. Flow properties data on biomass is necessary to design silos and other bulk solid handling equipment to make the material flow without obstructions, segregation, irregular flow, flooding, etc. Quantitative information regarding flowability of bulk products is required to understand the behavior of the material in the storage bins. Flowability depends on several parameters—like particle-size distribution, particle shape, biomass chemical composition, moisture, and temperature The trend to use particle-size reduction techniques before transportation and to supply flowable and uniform particles to biomass end-users is becoming common The parameters used for evaluating the performance of size-reduction equipment include the energy efficiency of the equipment, and the resulting particle bulk density and physical properties (such as particle size, shape, distribution, density, and particle surface area) The present study focuses on understanding the grinding energies and physical properties of chopped straw (without screen, resulting in bigger particle sizes), and further grinding to smaller particle sizes using a hammer mill. Four agricultural straws (wheat, oat, canola, and barley) are considered. The specific objectives of the present research are to study: (a) grinding energy requirements for wheat, barley, oat, and canola straws using a chopper with no screen (Stage 1 grinding) and a hammer mill (Stage 2 grinding) with screen sizes of 19.05, 25.4, and 31.75 mm; (b) the physical properties (namely moisture content, bulk, tapped and particle density, porosity, and average mean particle diameter); and (c) Hausner ratio and Carr index of chopped and ground straws. The current study builds upon the work conducted by Adapa et al.  The baled straw sample was chopped using a chopper fabricated by Bioprocessing Lab, Department of Agricultural and Bioresource Engineering, University of Saskatchewan The chopped biomass was further ground using a hammer mill (Serial no. 6M13688; Glen Mills Inc., Maywood, NJ) having 22 swinging hammers, attached to a shaft powered by a 1.5-kW electric motor During the chopping and grinding experiments, 3 kg of each straw type was manually fed into the chopper (no screen) and hammer mill (three screen sizes of 19.05, 25.4, and 31.75 mm). The power used by the chopper and hammer-mill motors and the time required for the grinding process were measured and recorded. The power required to run the empty chopper and hammer mill was recorded prior to the introduction of material in order to obtain baseline data. This allowed determination of the net power required to grind the material. The specific energy (kWh t Moisture content of chopped and hammer-milled biomass was measured using ASAE Standard S358 The loose bulk density of chopped and hammer mill ground agricultural straw at three screen sizes (19.05, 25.4, and 31.75 mm) was determined by carefully filling a standard 0.5-L cylindrical container (SWA951, Superior Scale Co. Ltd., Winnipeg, MB) with a sample. Initially, the material was filled up to the top of the container and the excess material was removed using a steel ruler. At this point, the material was weighed. The container was tapped on a flat surface about 10 times to allow the material to settle. The container was further filled with material, and the excess material was removed using the same steel ruler. The material was again weighed, and the bulk and tapped density were calculated based on the volume of the container and weight of material. The bulk and tapped densities were then used to calculate the Hausner ratio (Eq. A gas multi-pycnometer (QuantaChrome, Boynton Beach, FL) was used to determine the particle density of the hammer-mill-ground straw by calculating the displaced volume of nitrogen gas by a known mass of sample material The geometric mean particle length of chopped and hammer-milled agricultural straw samples was determined using ASAE Standard S424 Standard deviation was calculated to measure the variability in the measured data. Holm–Sidak Test was used for pairwise comparisons of column means of experimental data. This test is more useful than the Tukey and Bonferroni tests as it can detect differences and is recommended as the first-line procedure for pairwise comparison testing. The Sidak–Holm procedures are similar to Bonferroni–Holms method except the differences are not compared to the alpha, but instead are compared to the Sidak-adjusted alpha. In this test, the   Statistical analysis using the Holms–Sidak multiple comparison test at The loose bulk and tapped bulk density values of barley, wheat, oat and canola straw grind are given in The observations are similar for tapped bulk density where highest value of 119 kg m The porosity values calculated based on bulk and particle density (see Equation   From the present investigation, it is very clear that the specific energy requirement for grinding biomass increases with a decrease in the screen size or degree of fineness of the grind, as similarly reported by Tavakoli et al. Mechanical size reduction (comminution) of biomass helps to increase the bulk density. To further increase the densities of ground biomass, they were made into pellets and briquettes by mechanical compaction. The ground agricultural biomass, which had about 80 kg m The flow properties calculated based on bulk and tapped densities indicated that there is a distinction between the Hausner ratio and Carr's index values of chopped and hammer-milled biomass. A Hausner ratio of <1.25 indicates a solid that is free-flowing, whereas >1.25 indicates poor flowability. The chopped biomass was mostly of poor flowability, except that of chopped canola (1.23). The hammer-mill-ground biomass with screen sizes of 25.4 and 19.05 mm also generally had poor flowability. The smaller the Carr's index, the better the flow properties, where 5 Canola and wheat straws ground with hammer mill (screen size of 31.75 mm) have an intrinsic property that enhances or allows easy orientation and better flow properties. Oat and barley straws ground with hammer mill with 31.75-mm screen size had poor flowability. Further reduction of the hammer mill screen size increased the degree of packing (bulk density) of ground straw. However, high pressure does not always increase the tendency of solid material to flow, as it does in liquid. Instead, increased pressure tend to pack the particles of solid material more tightly together and makes flow more difficult Finely ground biomass tends to behave like dry powder that seems like a mass of tightly packed particles (due to particle interlocking), and adheres strongly to vertical surfaces of bins or silos and causes difficulty of flow. McCabe et al. The present investigation studied the effect of two-stage grinding of four types of agricultural straws —barley, wheat, oat, and oat—using a chopper and hammer mill on their grinding energy and physical properties. The following conclusions can be drawn from this study: Canola consumed the least grinding energy of 1.96 kWh t The physical properties (geometric mean particle diameter, loose bulk density, tapped bulk density, particle density, and porosity) of the chopped and hammer milled wheat, barley, canola and oat straws were in the range of 0.98–4.22 mm, 36–80 kg m Ground canola straw had the highest loose bulk and tapped bulk density values of about 80 kg m Loose bulk and tapped bulk density values are inversely proportional to the particle size of the grinds. Canola recorded the highest particle density of 1219.7 kg m The Hausner ratio and Carr index calculated were better for chopped biomass compared to hammer milled at 19.05 mm screen size. This research was supported financially in part by the