The study of the fracture behavior of polypropylene/glass fiber (PP/GF) composites can be an interesting subject for many investigators. Since glass fiber and polypropylene have different elastic moduli, a complex stress distribution will be developed when the composite body is loaded uniaxially in the direction of fibers. Thus, the prediction of stress distribution by using a simulation method can be helpful for more understanding of the true reasons of fracture of polymer composites. This research is focused on the effect of fiber–matrix interaction on stress distribution along fibers. For this purpose, finite element method was performed. The results of analytical method show that stress distribution along fiber length strongly depends on matrix volume fraction. In fact, increasing matrix volume fraction causes to change variation of stress distribution along fiber length from trapezoidal to parabolic. Looking at in more details on matrix placed near fiber tip indicates that the stress intensity is higher than that of other zones and it leads the matrix to crazing. The simulated results were confirmed by SEM micrographs taken from the polished surface of polypropylene/glass fiber composite, which is loaded under tensile test.Today the demand for polymer matrix composites (PMCs) has been increasing and this is due to the very fast growing rate of their applications. Among PMCs, short glass fiber reinforced polypropylene (PP–GF) composite is one of the most important engineering materials. Its huge applications in automotive and other industries have been caused to be under attention. In spite of the importance of fracture mechanism on the mechanical behavior of materials, there are limited studies dealing with the fracture mechanism in PP/GF composites The first approach concentrated on the influence of the residual stress on the deformation mechanism of the short fiber reinforced PMC. The results showed that the residual stress of composites strongly depends on the thermal properties of both reinforcement and matrix The second approach paid attention to the prediction of composite strength by FEM method. The results indicated that composite strength is related to the size, shape and distribution of reinforcement In the third approach, the investigators focused on the elastic properties of short fiber composites. Evaluation of the modulus of unidirectional short fiber composites has been studied by various methods. Modeling and analytical methods were used to predict effective longitudinal Young’s modulus of composites containing misoriented short fibers. The results showed that the Young’s modulus of this kind of composites strongly depends on fiber volume fraction and the angle between fiber and load direction The fourth approach is to simulate the fiber–matrix behavior in composite processing In fact, in the above approaches, the researchers’ view is based on the macro-mechanism of fiber–matrix interaction and there is no evidence of studies which are concentrated on micro-mechanism of fiber–matrix interaction. As a matter of fact, an aspect that still remains under debate is the effect of matrix volume fraction on stress distribution along fibers and deformation mechanism under this condition. Thus, the main goal of this study is focused on the influence of the matrix volume fraction on stress distribution along fibers. The models were based on polypropylene/glass fiber composites and analysis was done at elastic and plane stress condition. It is worth noting that yielding of the matrix or fiber in this analysis was not considered and both materials were assumed with constant ideal elastic modulus. The properties of used glass fiber and polypropylene are summarized in In order to clarify the fracture mechanism of PP/GF composite during tensile test, composite pellets containing 25 The tensile test was done according to ASTM D638 using an 1115 Instron tensile frame at a cross-head speed of 5 A finite element code was used to calculate the stress fields around the fiber and matrix. Also, to obtain incremental displacement, the principle of the virtual work was used. A homogenous polymer matrix, which is reinforced with three fibers whose aspect ratios ( Although in all models, the aspect ratio of the fibers and both the fiber and model lengths are identical, but the total diameter of the models, including 3 fibers and matrix, is different. The relationship between the diameters of models is summarized in Eq. The boundary condition for FEM models is shown in The stress distribution along the three fibers of model a is shown in On comparison of stress distribution along the three fibers, it can be concluded that the failure of centric fiber can occur at the middle point and for the other two fibers, it can occur at the ends. The stress distribution along fiber for models b and c is shown in The stress contours inside the polymer matrix which is reinforced at 75%, 95% and 97.5% matrix volume fraction, respectively are shown in The stress in matrix near fiber tips for three models is shown in The matrix failure mode depends strongly on the magnitude and distribution of tensile stress, thus as it is clear in The results of this study and our previous works The role of matrix volume fraction on stress distribution along fiber length was predicted using finite element method. The results are given hereunder: Stress distribution along fiber length strongly depends on matrix volume fraction. Increasing matrix volume fraction causes to change stress distribution along fiber length from trapezoid to parabola. Increasing matrix volume fraction from The failure mode of the matrix which is placed near the fiber tip is crazing. The simulated results of PP/GF composite are very close and are compatible with the experimental results, and the matrix craze can be predicted at some zones near the fiber tip.