The northern slope of Tazhong uplift is one of the key areas in the Tarim Basin with great exploration potentials. Previous exploration experiences suggest that strike-slip faults distributed therein play an important role in reservoir formation and hydrocarbon accumulation. In this study, based on the interpretations of the 3D seismic data, six strike-slip fault zones cutting through the Cambrian-Middle Devonian units are identified and characterized. On the seismic cross sections, these faults show a complex geometric feature that consists of a lower positive flower structure in the Cambrian-Upper Ordovician and an upper negative flower structure in the Upper Ordovician-Middle Devonian. On the seismic coherence slices, the lower faults show a linear geometry orienting NNE and only developed within the principal displacement zone. The upper faults are NW trending and display right-stepping en-echelon arrangements. By analyzing the change in the reverse separation of the interface and counting the fault growth index, we suggest that the lower and upper faults developed sequentially in different geological times and formed as a result of two-stage evolution. The lower strike-slip faults may have been formed no early than the Late Ordovician. The upper en-echelon normal faults were developed during the Middle Silurian-Middle Devonian due to the reactivation of the lower strike-slip faults. The horizontal displacement determined from the time slices of faults S1, Sn1 and Sn4 are 743 (±150) m, 1545 (±150) m and 1780 (±150) m, respectively. Such a variation indicates that the amount of horizontal strike-slip displacement is likely to have a tendency to decrease from the south to the north, which agrees well with the regional geodynamics that the compressive stress was transmitted from the south to the north when the strike-slip faults developed during Late Ordovician and Middle Devonian.Strike-slip faults in the Tarim Basin have significant impact on reservoir formation and hydrocarbon accumulation. Previous studies suggest that a series of Paleozoic strike-slip fault system with enriched oil and gas were developed in the northern slope of Tazhong uplift ( Acquisition of high-quality 3D seismic reflection data of the study area allowed us to better constrain and understand the geometry, kinematics and formation mechanisms of the strike-slip faults. In this paper, four 3D seismic volumes are used. S1 and S1x 3D seismic volumes cover an area of about 2400 km The Tarim Basin is the largest oil and gas basin in China. It is surrounded by the Tianshan Mountains fold belt to the north, the western Kunlun Mountains to the southwest, and the Altyn Mountains to the southeast ( The Tarim Basin experienced intense multiple tectonic events during Paleozoic ( Based on geological and geophysical data, the Tazhong uplift is filled with Paleozoic rocks of that generally comprises the Cambrian System to the Permian System. Marine carbonate beds (thickness up to 3000m) are developed in the Cambrian-Middle Ordovician and mud stones (thickness of about 2000m) are developed in the Upper Ordovician. During the Silurian to Carboniferous, clastic rocks were widespread in the Tazhong area. From the bottom to the top, the Paleozoic sedimentary successions of the Tazhong area have been divided into twenty-two Formations. A simplified stratigraphic chart that includes both the main seismic reflection interfaces and litho-stratigraphic units of the Tazhong area is given in The identification characteristics of strike-slip faults can be classified mainly into three aspects: sectional, planar and three dimensional. The strike-slip faults often appear as sub-vertical faults and flower structures in cross section (  Based on the detailed interpretations of the 3D seismic data, six groups of major faults (faults S1, S2, Sn1, Sn2, Sn3 and Sn4) are observed in the 3D seismic volumes studied in this paper ( Seismic sections displayed in On the seismic cross sections, significant differences in structural styles exist between the lower and upper layers ( The coherence slices of interface T74 extracted from the 3D seismic volumes reveal that the six major fault zones are all NNE-trending ( The description presented above suggest that the strike-slip fault system in the northern slope of Tazhong uplift exhibit a variety of structure styles including sub-vertical fault, negative flower structure, positive flower structure, linear structure, horsetail splays, pull-apart graben and en-echelon normal faults. A detailed chart summarizing the structure styles and their distribution characteristics in the northern slope of Tazhong uplift is given in Based on the analyses presented above, the Paleozoic fault zones in the northern slope of Tazhong uplift are composed of the lower strike-slip faults and the upper en-echelon normal faults. However, it is uncertain whether the lower and upper faults formed in the same geological period. Regarding the fault zones described in this paper, local uplifts are clearly observed in the Cambrian-Late Ordovician units along the faults ( As stated above, the upper faults are represented by a series of en-echelon normal faults. The growth index, which is the ratio between the stratigraphic unit thicknesses of the downthrown side and that of the upthrown side, can be used to determine the timing of normal faults ( The best constraint on the 3D geometry of the strike-slip faults can be provided by the time slices or depth slices, where the strike-slip faults are typically imaged as discrete linear zones of low coherency (  Based on the restoration of strike-slip displacement on plane, faults S1, Sn1 and Sn4 have slipped with different magnitudes. This indicates that the amount of horizontal strike-slip displacements is likely to have a tendency to decrease from the south to the north. Extensive work on the strike-slip faults in the northern slope of Tazhong uplift has been carried out previously, leading to important understanding on their structural styles, distribution and their effect on hydrocarbon accumulation ( A number of workers have postulated that the strike-slip faults in the northern slope of Tazhong uplift are reactivated pre-existing basement structures ( Although the formation and growth related to the strike-slip faults in the northern slope of Tazhong uplift have been extensively documented ( The subduction between the Ancient Kunlun Ocean and Tarim block initiated at the end of Early Ordovician with small magnitude ( As described in previous sections, each upper fault zone is composed of a series of NW–trending normal faults with NNE-trending arrangement, which is sub-parallel to the basement principal displacement zone (PDZ) direction. The angle between the strikes of en-echelon normal faults and the principal displacement zone is about 45°on average ( It should be noted that the slip vectors are not completely horizontal and the dip (vertical)-slip displacement varies frequently along the strike-slip faults developed in the northern slope of Tazhong uplift ( The analysis on the causative mechanisms of the strike-slip faults and the regional tectonic background suggest that the intense subduction of the Ancient Kunlun Ocean in SW occurred during the Late Ordovician and the intense folding orogeny of the Arkin tectonic domain in the SE during the Middle Silurian to the Middle Devonian could be responsible for their formation and evolution. In comparison, the restorations made in this study also indicate that the amount of horizontal strike-slip displacements is likely to have a tendency to decrease from the south to the north. Such a tendency of the strike-slip displacement variation agrees well with the regional geodynamics that the compressive stress was transmitted approximately from the south to the north. In addition to the geometric and displacement characterization of the strike-slip faults presented in this study, it should be noted that several other questions remains to be answered, such as, the segmentation mechanism and the mechanical genesis of these NNE strike-slip faults. These questions are intriguing and are worth for further studies. Previous studies suggest that faulting, specifically strike-slip faulting in the central Tarim Basin can exert significant influences on Ordovician carbonate reservoir beds ( Previous studies on damage zone-fault core transition in carbonate rocks suggest that fault cores originated from the damage zones by rotation and comminution of rock particals would impede the reservoir rocks and result in complex permeability patterns ( In this study, we have analyzed the 3D seismic data of six strike-slip fault zones in the northern slope of Tazhong uplift. The following specific conclusions can be drawn: On the seismic cross sections, these faults are restricted to the Cambrian-Middle Devonian units. Vertical segmentation is present within these faults: the lower faults appear as positive flower structures (or sub-vertical faults with reverse separation) and the upper faults are characterized by negative flower structures. On the seismic coherence slices, lower faults are NNE-trending and generally segmented. They appear as linear structures and develop within the principal displacement zone (PDZ). Each upper fault zone is composed of a series of NW-trending normal faults, which present right-stepping en-echelon arrangements. The lower faults were formed no early than the Late Ordovician and the timing of the upper en-echelon normal faults was from the Middle Silurian to Middle Devonian. With reference to the regional tectonics of the Tarim Basin, the lower and upper faults might be formed as a result of two-stage evolution. The first stage of strike-slip faulting was related to the collision and suturing between the Tarim block and the Middle Kunlun block. The intense thrusting caused by intensive folding orogeny in the Arkin tectonic domain is believed to be responsible for the reactivation of the lower strike-slip fault system, which resulted in the formation of the upper en-echelon normal faults. Restorations of strike-slip displacement on the time slices suggest that the faults S1, Sn1 and Sn4 have cumulative sinistral offsets of 743 (±150) m, 1545 (±150) m and 1780 (±150) m, indicating that the amount of horizontal strike-slip displacement is likely to have a tendency to decrease from the south to the north. This agrees well with the regional geodynamics that the compressive stresses were transmitted from the south to the north when the strike-slip faults developed during Late Ordovician and Middle Devonian. Given the variation in displacements among the strike-slip faults, the thicknesses of the fault associated damage zones and their influences on carbonate reservoir beds and hydrocarbon accumulations are worth for future studies. This study is financially supported by