The effect of ramp cooling and ramp heating on the density of Pb–Sn alloys containing 4, 8, 15, and 20at.% Sn was measured in the temperature range between 190°C and ambient. It was found that the precipitation and dissolution of β-Sn and the ramp rate had a significant effect on the density of the alloys as a function of temperature.Belaidi et al. Leighly and Belaidi Turnbull and Treaftis Leighly and Belaidi Lu et al. Lead–tin alloys having nominal compositions of 4, 8, 15, and 20 The Pb–Sn alloy ingots were annealed at 190°C for 48 The programmer controller was programmed to ramp cool at a selected rate from 190°C to ambient temperature followed by ramp heating at the same rate to 190°C. Before each cooling and heating cycle, the specimen was annealed at 190°C for 48 The outputs from the digital thermometer and from the electronic balance were connected to a personal computer. A program was written which would allow the personal computer to pulse these two devices approximately every 30 The density of the silicone fluid had been determined as a function of temperature by weighing in the fluid, over a range of temperatures, a specimen of high purity OFHC copper for which the density had been calculated at several temperatures. On the basis of the data obtained, a quadratic equation of the fluid density versus temperature was determined Precipitation of β-Sn from a supersaturated Pb Frear et al. Frost et al. To reverse the precipitation of β-Sn, ramp heating will lead to the dissolution of the precipitated phase. Frear et al.  Examination of the density versus temperature curves in this figure for the alloy cooled at the two cooling rates shows that, at the highest temperatures, the curves are linear while their slopes are approximately the same for both experiments which indicates that no nucleation β-Sn has yet occurred. In this temperature regime, the density is increasing in the alloy approximately in proportion to the decrease in temperature. At the lowest temperatures, the densities as a function of temperature for the curves for these two cooling rates are converging. Consider the curve resulting from the experiment during which the cooling rate is 4.1°C The temperatures of these peaks and the plateaus creates a dilemma. The curve resulting when the cooling rate was 4.1°C The second curve given in The initiation of the peaks results in an acceleration of the increase in density which is revealed by the individual data points being resolved. It is most obvious at ∼56°C in the case of the curve for the alloy cooled at 10.8°C  Consider the lowest curve where the cooling rate is 4.9°C The continuing lower density of this curve as compared with the second curve, resulting from a cooling rate of 10.0°C It is proposed that at the fastest cooling rate, 34.3°C All the curves for this alloy generally have similar trend lines. At the highest temperatures, the curves as basically parallel as are the curves at the lowest temperatures. The two curves resulting from the fastest cooling rates intermingle at the highest temperatures and at the lowest temperatures. This leads to the conclusion that the nature of the precipitation of β-Sn is nearly the same at these two cooling rates. A lead–tin alloy containing 15 At the higher cooling rate, 16.7°C  When the cooling rate is slow, there are numerous peaks and valleys on the density versus temperature curves. In general, the slower the cooling rate, the larger the peaks. These peaks may be attributed to heterogeneous nucleation of β-Sn followed by discontinuous precipitation of β-Sn. The valleys are the result of the creation of excess vacancies during the precipitation of β-Sn. Capture of these excess vacancies by sinks will serve to eliminate the valleys with decreasing temperature and restore the slope of the curve. The rate of restoration depends on the temperature and the concentration of vacancy sinks. With faster cooling, the peaks and valleys tend to be replaced by plateaus which can be attributed to homogeneous precipitation. During homogeneous precipitation, due to the numerous intragranular precipitates formed, many more sinks are available to capture vacancies simultaneously generated. This tends to eliminate the formation of valleys in the density versus temperature curves. In general, a faster cooling rate results in a greater density at a corresponding temperature. The reason for this is that the fast rate will produce a finer microstructure which will have a larger number of vacancy sinks. The vacancies generated as the result of the precipitation of β-Sn and the vacancies in excess of the thermodynamic equilibrium concentration must be captured by sinks. Rapid cooling will result in a finer microstructure which will yield more vacancy sinks and have a greater density. Specimens used for this experiment had been annealed at 190°C in silicone fluid for 48  Consider the curve resulting from the data obtained during heating at 12.6°C In  When this alloy is ramp heated at 5.0°C The density of Pb–Sn alloys containing 4, 8, 15, and 20 The author wishes to thank the machine shop crew of the School of Mines and Metallurgy of the University of Missouri-Rolla for their valuable assistance in preparing the alloy specimens. Also, thanks go to C. Berendzen and his associates from the Rolla Technical Institute for their assistance in preparing the figures. Special thanks go to M. Hill for writing the invaluable computer program without which this paper would not have been possible.