There is dearth of documented information on nutrient retention of Dioscorea cayenensis products. This study was carried out to evaluate effects of processing methods on nutrient and antinutrient retention of yellow yam products. Fresh Dioscorea cayenensis tubers were purchased from Bodija market in Ibadan, peeled, cut into small pieces, divided into nine portions. One portion was treated as raw sample, and others processed into local delicacies. All nine samples were analysed for proximate, mineral, vitamin and antinutrient composition using AOAC methods. Data were analysed using ANOVA at p=0.05. Raw yam contained 66.79g moisture, 2.62g crude protein, 0.27g lipid, 0.17g fibre, 0.63g ash, 29.69g carbohydrates, 262.30mg potassium, 61.53mg magnesium, 0.79mg iron, 0.39mg zinc, and yielded 108.26kcal energy with insignificant vitamin content/100g edible portion. Processing significantly improved macronutrients and energy content with significant reduction in all antinutrients of products (p<0.05). The yam products can serve as staple source of energy to consumers.The nutritional value of yams lies in their potential ability to provide one of the cheapest sources of dietary energy in the form of carbohydrates in developing countries ( Yam belongs to the family In West Africa the most economically important yam species are the White yam ( Yam tubers have been used as traditional food in the home with little industrial use; however the traditional uses are diverse and the crop has more utilization potentials. Yam is consumed in different forms, mainly boiled, fried, or baked. Tubers are often dried and milled into flour for various products. Boiled yam could also be pounded and eaten with sauce. Yam can be fried or roasted as snacks. Another processed product is pottage which is usually prepared with other ingredients such as onions, pepper, a protein source, oil, and so on ( Most domestic cooking methods have effects on nutritional quality of foods by reducing the level of antinutrients and some nutrients, while enhancing other nutrients as well ( Despite the fact that yellow yam ( Fresh yellow yam tubers ( The second section of the fresh yam was peeled and cut into small round pieces, mixed thoroughly, washed with distilled water, and then divided into five portions of 500 The fourth portion of the peeled, washed and sliced raw yam (500 The moisture content of the samples was determined by air oven method (Gallenkamp, Model OV – 440, England) at 105 Potassium and sodium content of the samples were determined by digesting the ash of the samples with perchloric acid and nitric acid, and then taking the readings on Jenway digital flame photometer/spectronic20 ( The β-carotene content of the yam was determined through ultraviolet absorption measurement at 328 Thiamine content of the samples was determined by measuring the absorbance of the sample solution and that of the standards on a fluorescent UV Spectrophotometer (Cecil A20 Model) at a wavelength of 285 Riboflavin content of the sample was determined by measuring the absorbance of the sample solution on the fluorescent spectrophotometer at a wavelength of 460 Ascorbic acid in the sample was determined by titrating its aqueous extract with solution of 2,6-dichlorophenol-indophenol dye to a faint pink end point ( Oxalate was determined by extraction of the samples with water for about three hours and standard solutions of oxalic acid prepared and read on spectrophotometer (Spectronic20) at 420 The % apparent retention (AR) of nutrients was calculated by the formula of Data were analysed using analysis of variance and level of significance set at p The result of proximate nutrient composition of raw yellow yam and its processed products are shown in Roasting, frying and preparation of the yam to porridge and    The percent apparent nutrient retention in products (Samples 2, 4, 6, 7 and 9) are shown in Raw yellow yam was very high in moisture, high carbohydrate and gross energy, but low in crude protein, lipid, and ash content. The values obtained for the moisture content and crude protein of yellow yam is similar to the values reported by Roasting, frying, and processing the yellow yam to porridge and However, boiling resulted in increase in moisture content of yellow yam with attendant decrease in crude protein, lipid, fibre and carbohydrate and energy content of the products (Samples 4, 6, 7) compared with raw sample. Pounding the yam with the cooking water retained more nutrients and fibre than the sample in which ordinary water was used in pounding the yam (samples 7 and 6 respectively, The significant reduction in all nutrients and gross energy content observed in The result of mineral composition of raw and processed yellow yam is shown in The observed pattern in mineral content variation of the yellow yam products is generally similar to that of white yam reported in the literature (  The level of all antinutrients in the raw yellow yam (Sample 1) was very low ( Raw yellow yam was high in moisture and carbohydrate content with moderate gross energy compared with its other nutrients. Processing the yam to different products led to improvement in the macronutrients with moderate gross energy, hence they are suitable for consumption by everyone. The low sodium, lipid and antinutrient content coupled with improved mineral and β-carotene values of the products qualify them for consumption by everyone. Pounding yam with the boiling water retained greater part of the nutrients. Yellow yam products are moderate in gross energy content, and can serve as good source of energy to consumers. It is advisable that the yam should be consumed in roasted form so as to retain greater part of the nutrients, or cooked with calculated amount of water when not being prepared into fried yam, porridge or The authors hereby declare that there is no conflict of interest whatsoever on this paper, as it was solely funded by them.