Management of open, comminuted fractures presents a challenge for the foot and ankle surgeon. Reconstructive surgery for such injuries has a high potential for the development of serious complications, and factors such as the extent of soft tissue injury, neurovascular status to the foot, and fracture stability must be taken into consideration before determining a surgical plan. This article describes the case of a patient who presented with an open, comminuted first metatarsal fracture as a result of a chainsaw injury. The patient was treated with a uniplanar mini-external fixator, demineralized bone matrix, primary wound closure, and external bone growth stimulation. At 1-year follow-up, the interview and examination revealed the patient to be pain free with a functional first ray. ACFAS Level of Clinical Evidence: 4.Open fractures of the foot are surgical emergencies and a challenge to manage. An open fracture is defined as a fracture in which the broken bone has penetrated through overlying skin, in association with underlying soft tissue injury ( A 61-year-old male presented to the emergency department (ED) with an open, comminuted first metatarsal fracture as a result of chainsaw injury. The patient stated that the chainsaw had slipped out of his hand and cut through his tennis shoe and part of his left foot. He complained of severe pain, but denied numbness in his left foot. The patient’s medical history was unremarkable, although he had no recent history of tetanus prophylaxis. Physical examination revealed a skin defect, approximately 10 × 3 cm, with irregular, jagged edges on the dorsum of his left foot, extending from the medial aspect of the first metatarsal shaft to the second metatarsal ( Treatment was initiated with the use of 1 g of cefazolin intravenously, administered in the emergency department, and tetanus prophylaxis was administered in the form of tetanus toxoid 0.5 mL intramuscularly. Standard preoperative blood tests were also obtained, and the results were all within normal limits. Thereafter, the patient was taken to the operating room for surgical debridement and fracture repair, at approximately 6 hours after the time of the injury. Following general anesthesia and standard surgical preparation, the wound was copiously irrigated with a mixture of 1 L normal saline and 1 vial of 1 g per 3 mL of kanamycin. All nonviable tissue, foreign debris, and excessively small fragments of bone were removed from the wound. With the aid of intraoperative fluoroscopy, the fracture was reduced and realigned using an Orthofix MiniRail Fixator™ (Orthofix Inc, McKinney, TX) external fixation device, by placing 2 pins distal and 2 pins proximal to the fracture (and soft tissue wound) ( Following discharge from the hospital, the patient was initially seen weekly for postoperative follow-up visits. Fortunately, he was compliant throughout the postoperative course and had minimal pain at the injury site. At the 3-week follow-up visit, all wound edges remained well coapted and the decision was made to remove all of the skin sutures. Furthermore, radiographs revealed satisfactory position of the external fixator with acceptable bony alignment and length of the first metatarsal. The hallux was noted to be in a slightly plantarflexed position; however, the patient was able to satisfactorily dorsiflex the first metatarsophalangeal joint (MTPJ). Two months following the initial surgery, the patient was taken back to the operating room for removal of the external fixator using intravenous sedation and local anesthetic infiltration. Thereafter, the patient continued to be non–weight-bearing in a below-the-knee fixed walking brace, and physical therapy was initiated in order to strengthen the hallux and to improve dorsiflexion of the first MTPJ. The patient remained compliant with the postoperative plan and continued to use the bone growth stimulator daily. By 3 months following the injury, the patient had resumed wearing regular shoes with no complaint of foot pain or difficulty walking, and he was also able to return to his regular, pre-injury daily activities. At the 1-year follow-up visit, the patient displayed no residual pain or secondary problems with his foot. The patient had full first MTPJ range of motion and normal strength ( There are a number of advantages to using an external fixator for the management of complex open fractures. It is minimally invasive and helps maintain alignment and stability. In addition, it allows early joint motion and manipulation of the fracture fragments postoperatively to improve the position or obtain compression, if needed ( Early bone grafting has also been advocated in the presence of open fracture defects ( Potential complications of open fractures include soft tissue infection, delayed union, nonunion, malunion, skin loss, nonhealing wounds, vascular compromise and gangrene, severe scarring, loss of function, nerve injury, and osteomyelitis ( In conclusion, our patient experienced a satisfactory result by combining the use of a mini-external fixator, allogeneic demineralized bone matrix, primary wound closure, PEMF bone growth stimulation, and early postoperative joint rehabilitation therapy in the treatment of an open, comminuted first metatarsal fracture. With the use of the fixator, bone graft, and bone stimulator, we were able to restore the length and alignment of the first metatarsal and stabilize the fracture site without additional soft tissue trauma related to surgical dissection that would have been related to the use of internal skeletal fixation. Despite primary wound closure following initial operative debridement, the patient never displayed any evidence of osteomyelitis during the postoperative phase. At 1-year post-injury, the patient had not developed any of the complications that often develop in association with such trauma.