The purification process removes impurity in the solution through a chemical reaction with an additive. The amount of additive to be fed into the process depends on the estimate of its efficiency in removing the impurity. We propose the Box–Jenkins method in time series models for the estimation of efficiency. Through simulation, the performance and the robustness of the method are analyzed under various situations including an actual case and compared with those of existing regression and adaptive methods. The case study determines the amount of zinc dust additive that reacts with copper impurity in a hydrometallurgical zinc purification process. In this study, the Box–Jenkins method has been found superior, in both performance and robustness, to the other existing methods.Insufficient removal of impurities in hydrometallurgical purification process results in great impediment and loss in later processes such as the reduction in the purity of electrolyte and the amount of metal production ( In determining the proper amount of additive, the steady-state balance equation of chemical reaction between additive and impurity can be used. We define steady-state efficiency of additive in removing impurity and estimate it as a parameter in a model. However, numerous factors such as temperature, humidity, pressure, agitation, reaction time, the volume of solution tank, pH of solution, etc. complicate actual large-scale reactions in a plant. Thus the actual efficiency varies with time. An expert system approach has been proposed to remedy this uncertainty in chemical reaction ( We consider the observed efficiency of additive in removing impurity as a time series, In addition to an actual case in a zinc hydrometallurgy plant, three situations of stable, trend and cyclic are considered through simulation. For each situation, two existing methods are applied in addition to the proposed Box–Jenkins method. One is the regression method which estimates the efficiency as an estimate of the parameter of a regression model ( We first introduce the conventional methods such as the simple linear regression method and the adaptive method for estimating the efficiency under various situations. In these conventional methods, the efficiency is indirectly inferred from the slope of linear regression function between two variables. Next, we present a search algorithm which we developed to obtain minimum MSE in the adaptive method. Then, we propose the Box–Jenkins method which has been widely used for the estimation of time series. In contrast to such conventional methods, the Box–Jenkins method directly represents the efficiency through the model selected and its coefficients (parameters). Denoting the atomicity ratio of additive to impurity as We denote 1 The estimate of the efficiency We call this the regression method. We note that the estimate is updated continuously using a statistical software package whenever new data is collected. Another method to determine the amount of zinc dust modifying Eq. The weights However, these weights can be obtained to minimize MSE of Given a time series The Box–Jenkins method selects an appropriate model from a pool of the almost infinite number of models, a family of For examples of simple models, a model It is perhaps remarkable that a small range of values of 0, 1, or 2 for Generally the Box–Jenkins method produces good estimates in various situations, whereas its procedure is somewhat complex and needs many calculations, requiring more than 50 sets of data for preprocessing. However, this procedure can be performed easily by a statistical software package such as SAS/STAT ( We consider an actual case and three situations: stable, trend and cyclic. We denote the estimate of the efficiency during period For the actual case of zinc dust additive and impurity copper we collected 134 ( From these data, actual efficiencies, The data under three situations are generated by simulation. We define these situations in the following statistical models. Suppose the efficiency fluctuates around a mean value In these three situations, the first half of the 84 efficiencies data is generated by simulation. Using the data collected in the actual case and the data generated in the situations, fundamental features of the three methods are determined. In the regression method, the estimate of efficiency Also simulation generates one by one the latter half of the data efficiencies in each situation. Three methods update their fundamental features at each time new data are generated, estimate the next period efficiency, and calculate the estimate error with the value generated. Their performance and robustness are compared in each situation. The estimation of efficiency by the regression method The efficiency during period Applying the procedure to the latter half of the data with given values of Example values of the model coefficients, We implemented SAS/STAT for the Box–Jenkins method. The behaviors of model updates and its estimated coefficients are summarized in Many studies have attempted to determine the most appropriate estimation method in a given situation ( Under the trend and cyclic situations, the adaptive method is modestly superior to the regression model since it can reflect the errors observed in the previous periods. In On the contrary, the Box–Jenkins method corresponds well to situation changes and thus shows the best results. The Box–Jenkins method updated not only the model coefficients but also the model itself whenever needed; Under the trend situation, the Box–Jenkins method updated once the model from The Sukpo Zinc Refinery of Young Poong Corporation used to manually control the feeding of zinc dust by Eq.  In this paper we defined the efficiency of additive in removing impurity in hydrometallurgical purification process. Viewing the efficiency in chemical reaction where numerous factors are involved as a time series, we estimated the efficiency by two existing methods: a regression method with intercept 0 and an adaptive method with optimal weights reflecting previous errors. Then, we proposed the Box–Jenkins method which has already been proven as a very efficient tool for forecasting in time series. We evaluated and compared the performance results obtained by the three methods under various situations including an actual case. In the actual case, all methods showed their usefulness in saving the amount of zinc dust. In stable situation, all methods showed their applicability while the Box–Jenkins method proved to be slightly more accurate in estimation than the other two methods. In trend and cyclic situations, both regression and adaptive methods showed difficulty of use. In trend situation, the Box–Jenkins method was superior to the regression method (28.9% decrease in MSE) and to the adaptive method (41.6% decrease in MSE). In cyclic situation, the Box–Jenkins method was also superior to the regression method (24.3% decrease in MSE) and to the adaptive method (47.3% decrease in MSE). The Box–Jenkins method proposed in this paper has been applied to the removal of copper in a hydrometallurgy zinc plant, using a system with statistical software package SAS/STAT. The system collects the data, calculates the amount of zinc dust and automatically controls the feeder in real time. We greatly appreciate the valuable corrections, comments and suggestions of the reviewers. This work was supported by the Second Brain Korea 21 Project.