Introduction
                  Acromion fractures are extremely rare. There are no common accepted treatment schemes and fixation methods We aimed to present a case which may contribute to the diagnosis and treatment of acromion fracture in a patient with polytrauma.
               
                  Presentation of case
                  Acromion fracture associated with scapula and clavicle fractures was diagnosed in 40 years old patient and treated with open reduction and cannulated screw fixation. The fracture healing was completed without causing subacromial impingement.
               
                  Discussion
                  In patients with polytrauma, diagnosis and treatment of acromion fractures can be delayed or overlooked. In improperly treated acromion fractures; pain, movement restriction, subacromial impingement, rotator cuff injury and symptomatic nonunion can occur.
               
                  Conclusion
                  We recommend early surgical treatment for displaced acromion fractures, reduction of subacromial space and disruption of the superior shoulder suspensory complex.The acromion is a large bony projection on the superior end of the scapula. Acromion fractures are rare injuries. They constitute 8%–16% of scapula fractures The following case report is compliant with SCARE guidelines 40 years-old male patient was evaluated in emergency room after motor vehicle accident. Patient was a motorcycle driver, an amateur swimmer, non-smoker, non-drug user. He had a normal psychosocial history. He and his family did not have a specific genetic history. He had ecchymosis, crepitation and deformity on his right arm, clavicle, scapula and forearm. He had no neurovascular deficit. On radiographic examination of the patient, right scapula nondisplaced body fracture, right acromion fracture ( The patient was operated after he came to emergency service. Surgery was performed by an orthopaedic surgeon. Longitudinal incision was applied between clavicle shaft and anterosuperior edge of acromion. Reduction and fixation by anatomical clavicle plate was applied to clavicle comminuted fracture. Fixation was completed by placing anatomical clavicle plate. Acromion fracture was reached over by entering between trapezius and deltoid muscles. Fracture line was transverse ( The patient was hospitalized for wound care for five days. Arm sling was used after surgery. On radiographic evaluations, reduction was observed to be successful on fracture line ( Acromion fractures are rare injuries. In patients with polytrauma, diagnosis and treatment of acromion fractures can be delayed or overlooked. In improperly treated acromion fractures; pain, movement restriction, subacromial impingement, rotator cuff injury and symptomatic nonunion can occur There are three classifications in acromion fractures. Ogawa and Naniwa The patient with clavicular fracture and acromion fracture was admitted as unstable because of two injuries on superior shoulder suspensory complex Open reduction was applied by extending the incision to lateral, which was used to reach out clavicle fracture. We chose cannulated screw fixation because the pattern of fracture was transverse. Acromion fractures can be treated with K-wires In acromion fractures, implant failure can be seen after fixation with K-wire. Irritation and infection can be seen after fixation with plate screw Early surgical intervention to the patient can have a positive effect on fracture healing. Kim et al. Patient with shoulder trauma should be carefully examined for acromion fractures. Acromion fracture can be treated with good results with early surgical treatment and proper fixation. Surgical treatment is important to regain shoulder functions, as it enables early rehabilitation of treatment. Cannulated screw is enough and reliable for fixation. We recommend early surgical treatment for acromion fractures that reduce subacromial space and disrupt superior suspensory shoulder complex. The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest. No funding source. Not applicable. Patient consent was obtained. An informed consent has been obtained. Özgür Çiçekli: contributed to surgery, data collection and writing of paper. Abdulhalim Akar: contributed to data collection. Hüseyin Nevzat Topçu: contributed to data collection and writing. Özgür Çiçekli.