The production of nanosuspensions has proved to be an effective method for overcoming bioavailability challenges of poorly water soluble drugs. Wet milling in stirred media mills and planetary ball mills has become an established top-down-method for producing such drug nanosuspensions. The quality of the resulting nanosuspension is determined by the stability against agglomeration on the one hand, and the process parameters of the mill on the other hand. In order to understand the occurring dependencies, a detailed screening study, not only on adequate stabilizers, but also on their optimum concentration was carried out for the active pharmaceutical ingredient (API) naproxen in a planetary ball mill. The type and concentration of the stabilizer had a pronounced influence on the minimum particle size obtained. With the best formulation the influence of the relevant process parameters on product quality was investigated to determine the grinding limit of naproxen. Besides the well known phenomenon of particle agglomeration, actual naproxen crystal growth and morphology alterations occurred during the process which has not been observed before. It was shown that, by adjusting the process parameters, those effects could be reduced or eliminated. Thus, besides real grinding and agglomeration a process parameter dependent ripening of the naproxen particles was identified to be a concurrent effect during the naproxen fine grinding process.active pharmaceutical ingredient photon correlation spectroscopy polydispersity index transmission electron microscope/microscopy  rounds per minute diameter (m) number of revolutions (1/s) radius (m) stress energy (J) stress frequency (1/s) velocity (m/s) density (kg/m grinding media grinding chamber planetary wheel sun wheel tip A significant number of newly developed pharmaceutical molecular entities are poorly water soluble and, therefore, have an insufficient biopharmaceutical profile after oral administration Not only the stabilizer type and concentration but also the process parameters of the mill  In order to characterize the unground material, laser diffraction using the laser sensor HELOS (Sympatec GmbH, Germany) with the dispersing unit CUVETTE was applied. Naproxen powder was added to de-ionized water into the cuvette under stirring. Ultrasound was then applied for 10–30 For characterization of the nanoparticles, photon correlation spectroscopy (PCS) was performed using a ZetaSizer Nano Series ZS (ZEN3600) (Malvern Instruments, Germany). Prior to measurement, samples were diluted with a saturated solution of the drug compound. The temperature was set to 25 For morphology investigations on the ground particles, transmission electron micrographs were obtained using a TEM Zeiss Leo 922 Omega microscope (Carl Zeiss AG, Germany), operated at 200 Solutions of the stabilizers in bidistilled water were prepared and the API was suspended in these solutions by stirring on a magnetic stirrer to prepare the raw suspensions for the milling process. The naproxen solids concentration for all experiments was 5% referring to the whole suspension mass. Stabilizer concentrations were varied between 0.1% and 15% referring to the whole suspension mass. Above a certain concentration, the increase in viscosity was so high for some of the stabilizers that the API could not be dispersed homogeneously. Therefore, the maximum concentration under investigation for Klucel® LF, Metolose® 60SH-50 and Metolose® 65SH-50 was 2.5%, for Pharmacoat® 645 7.5%, and for Pharmacoat® 603 10%. A planetary ball mill (PM 400, Retsch GmbH, Germany) was modified according to The viscosity of the pure stabilizer solutions was determined using a Haake Rheo Stress 6000 (Thermo Scientific, Germany) with double cone geometry (2°). The measurement was stress controlled at 2 Several studies already dealt with the question of how to stabilize naproxen during the fine grinding process All stabilizers under investigation led to a characteristic curve. Pharmacoat® 603 was an extreme example, as the pronounced increase in viscosity occurred at moderate to low concentrations ( Besides Pharmacoat® 603 and Tween® 80, the concentration dependent stabilizing performance of ten further stabilizers was investigated as detailed as described for these two before. Grinding time for all samples was 4 Overall, the type of stabilizer had a significant influence on the minimum particle size obtained. Choi et al. Kollidon® K30 as stabilizer produced the smallest particle sizes at a satisfying PdI value (see In order to get an impression how grinding media size and material affect the energy which could be transferred to the product material in one stress event, a rough estimation was carried out: As the velocity of the grinding media inside the planetary ball mill is not a discrete value but a velocity distribution, which is not accessible via direct measurements, a characteristic velocity value had to be defined to calculate stress energy according to Eq. The velocity is maximal, when the grinding chamber wall is farthest away from the center of rotation (thus, adding the radius of the planetary wheel and the grinding chamber to the sun wheel) and minimal, when the grinding chamber wall is closest to the center of rotation (thus, subtracting the radius of the planetary wheel and grinding chamber from the radius of the sun wheel). With the given geometry (radius of the sun wheel  Beginning with a grinding time of about 120  Although the growth of naproxen during comminution could not be observed in a larger scale mill so far, the change of morphology is not solely related to the small scale of the mill used in this work. In a previous study with the API cinnarizine After the grinding experiment with naproxen in the current work, the particle size was measured every 5  As larger beads transfer more energy per contact and, thus, stress energy due to their higher mass (compare Eq. Breakage of primary particles. Agglomeration and aggregation of primary particles. Ripening causing primary particle and aggregate growth. The effect of stress energy and stress number of the three different mechanisms is very complex, and, as of today, not fully understood. As described above for the 100 By further increasing the diameter of the beads, the growth effect was not observed even after 960 As particle size growth was also observed for alumina beads ( In conclusion, it could be shown that not only choice and concentration of the applied stabilizers have an influence on particle agglomeration but also the choice of the grinding media material. During the comminution of the drug naproxen, not only the known mechanisms of real grinding and agglomeration occurred, but also a process parameter dependent particle size growth which was not identified before. It is assumed that under certain process conditions surface amorphization is induced by the grinding media, which leads to recrystallization and particle growth during, or more likely, directly after the comminution process. Increasing stress energy, i.e. by increasing the bead diameter, leads to real comminution without particle growth. Decreasing the stress energy and stress number by decreasing the number of revolutions of the mill delays or inhibits crystal growth. Furthermore, it was shown that photon correlation spectroscopy measurements alone could lead to false assumptions regarding product quality and primary particle size and, therefore, should always be complemented with additional techniques like transmission electron microscopy. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland. They would like to thank Katharina Dahl (Institute for Pharmaceutical Technology, TU Braunschweig) for obtaining some of the TEM micrographs. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 