Background
                  Results of hemiarthroplasty after acute complex proximal humerus fractures are controversial. The main problem is the fixation and healing of the greater tuberosity (GT). To address this problem a hemiarthroplasty with a large metaphyseal volume was designed and introduced.
               
                  Methods
                  Thirty hemiarthroplasties were implanted for acute, complex, proximal humeral fractures in 30 consecutive patients (average age: 63.3 years; range, 41-78). One patient was lost; 2 patients could only be interviewed telefonically. Two patients had to be revised because of secondary displacement of the GT within the first 2 postoperative years. The remaining 25 patients were assessed clinically, radiographically, and with computer tomography (CT) imaging after a mean of 25 months (range, 24-29).
               
                  Results
                  Greater tuberosity healed in situ in 23 patients. In 12 cases, CT documented severe resorption of GT without displacement of a measurable bone fragment and an intact clinical cuff function with a radiographically preserved acromio-humeral distance. The mean Constant score was 59 points (range, 26-81), the mean relative Constant score 75% (range, 31-100). The mean anterior elevation was 117° (range, 45-160). The mean subjective shoulder value was 70% (range, 25-98). In 4 cases (14%), tuberosity dislocation occurred which was associated with an increase of fatty infiltration and poor result.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The 2-year results with a large metaphyseal volume fracture-prosthesis showed good to excellent results, with a failure rate of 14%. Substantial resorption of the greater tuberosity was frequent, but was not associated with functional incompetence of the rotator cuff. The overall results obtained justify its continued use.Fractures of the proximal humerus are frequent in the elderly. Different implants and surgical methods have been proposed to prevent secondary displacement and malunion of the greater tuberosity. Some authors have reduced the volume of the proximal humerus to allow bone grafting and more secure healing of the tuberosities to the grafted bone. Between August 2006 and March 2010, a total of 30 patients with a proximal humeral fracture were consecutively treated with a large metaphyseal volume hemiarthroplasty (Anatomical Shoulder Fracture The surgical technique was standardized as well as allowed by the individual fracture pattern. Patients were operated on in the beach chair position under general anesthesia, using antibiotic prophylaxis (1.5 g Cefuroxim i.v.) immediately pre- and 12 hours postoperatively. The tendon of the long biceps was tenotomized at the level of the intertubercular groove; the intra-articular stump was resected. The humeral head was identified between the 2 tuberosities which were separated by incising the supraspinatus in the prolongation of the fracture line separating the tuberosities. Two to 3 drill holes were drilled through the cartilage into the head to confirm absence of bleeding of the cephalic segment. This confirmed the indication for hemiarthroplasty. The tuberosities were then grasped with several no. 2 braided polyester sutures (Fiberwire; Arthrex, Naples, FL, USA) that penetrated the tendon at the tendon bone junction, and the tuberosities were cautiously mobilized. After excision of the head, the height of the prosthesis was determined using the following references: First, the distance from the upper border of the pectoralis major tendon to the head. The preoperative assessment consisted of plain radiographs (anteroposterior view, Y-view, and if feasible axillary view) and computed tomography (CT) of the shoulder in all cases (Somatom Plus 4; Siemens Medical Solutions, Erlangen, Germany). Continuous slices of 2-mm thickness were acquired and recalculated in 1-mm slice thickness. Coronal and sagittal 2D-reformations were then performed. The fracture was classified according to Neer. The postoperative imaging consisted of plain radiographs (anteroposterior, Y-view, axillary view) directly after surgery at 6 weeks and 1 and 2 years, with additional CT scanning at final follow-up. On the conventional follow-up radiographs reduction was assessed (anatomical/not anatomical). The measurement was made using the corresponding edge of the prosthetic metaphyseal component and the anatomical position to the cortical bone of the tuberosity. The acromiohumeral distance (ACHD) was measured (in millimeters) from the undersurface of the acromion to the tip of the humeral head component on the ap view. Signs of prosthetic loosening, tuberosity resorption (less than 50% of thickness of the reduced tuberosity in the first postoperative x-ray = mild; more than 50% = severe), and heterotopic ossification were recorded. On the final CT scans, healing or nonunion, malunion, or resorption of the greater tuberosity in the frontal and the axial slices were assessed. On the frontal images through the postero-lateral edge of the shaft, the thickness of the greater tuberosity was measured in millimeters. Measurements were taken in 5 mm intervals from 5 to 20 mm distal to the tip of the humeal head component. Furthermore, the antero-posterior extension of the greater tuberosity was measured on the axial slices at the same levels as in the frontal view. Displacement of greater and lesser tuberosity was measured on the axial images. Fatty infiltration and the tangent sign were assessed as preoperatively according to Goutallier et al At final follow-up, patients underwent clinical assessment consisting of a structured interview and a standardized physical examination, including functional scoring, according to Constant and Murley. Statistical analyses were performed by a statistical consultant. The Spearman rank correlation was applied to correlate different variables. The Mann-Whitney test was used for unpaired groups. The significance level was set at The mean age at surgery was 63.3 years (range, 41-78) for the 29 of the 30 patients (19 men) who could be reviewed at 2 years (mean 25 months; range, 24-29) postoperatively. One patient known for severe alcohol dependence could not be traced. Two patients had undergone revision surgery consisting of conversion to reverse total shoulder arthroplasty, without stem exchange at 5 and 7 months after index surgery because of a displacement of the greater tuberosity and an unsatisfactory clinical result. The Constant score was 26 and 29 points, the mean age- and sex adjusted Constant score were 25% and 50% before revision surgery, relatively. One patient showed an unsatisfactory result with only a slight increase of the Constant score to 32 points (32% for the age- and sex adjusted Constant score) 12 months after revision. Anterior elevation was improved from 70° to 90°. The main remaining problem was pain (only 5 points in the Constant score). The second patient had an excellent result 3 years after revision, with a Constant score of 80 points, a relative Constant score of 96%, and an active anterior elevation of 150°. Two patients who live in a foreign country could only be interviewed over the phone. Both did not undergo further shoulder surgery and are still very satisfied with a subjective shoulder value of 90% and 80%, respectively. The remaining 25 patients were personally examined clinically and radiologically for the purpose of this study. The 30 fractures were classified in four 3-part fractures with dislocation and three 3-part fractures with an avascular head. The remaining 23 were 4-part (6), 4-part with dislocation (5), 4-part with comminution (3), and 4-part with head split (11). The mean delay from trauma to surgery was 6 days (range, 0-23). The reduction of all 30 cases was considered as anatomical in all but one case in which the lesser tuberosity was not reduced anatomically resulting in lesser tuberosity nonunion. In 23 of the 25 patients with clinical and radiological follow-up (the 2 revised cases are not included), the greater tuberosity healed in a correct position, while in two cases a secondary dorso-medial displacement of greater tuberosity ranging from 10 to 20 mm occurred. In the 23 nondisplaced cases, the greater tuberosity showed no resorption in 3 ( The mean Constant score of the 25 patients, who were assessed clinically and radiologically, was 59 points (range, 26-81). The mean age- and sex-adjusted Constant score was 75% (range, 31-100). The mean score for pain was 12 points (range, 3-15), the mean anterior elevation was 117° (range, 45-160), the mean range for abduction 111° (range, 30-170), and the mean abduction strength at 90° of abduction was 2.3 kg (range, 0-5.4) including 4 values below 90°. The mean subjective shoulder value was 70% (range, 25-98). Twelve patients rated the result as excellent, 9 as good, 3 as fair (1 because of stiffness, which was subsequently successfully treated with arthroscopical capsulotomy), and 1 as poor. There were no infections, nerve palsies, or haematomas in this series. Four of the 29 cases were clinical failures with an unsatisfactory result. All of these were associated with absence of anatomical healing of the greater tuberosity and an increase of fatty infiltration. Two patients were revised, and the other 2 patients refused revision surgery and accepted the dysfunction with 26 and 27 Constant score points, 37% and 39% relative Constant scores, and a subjective shoulder value of 40% and 45%, respectively. For the 23 patients in which the greater tuberosity healed anatomically with or without resorption, the mean Constant score was 64 points (range, 27-81), the mean relative Constant score of 81% (range, 39-100), and the mean subjective shoulder value of 75% (range, 45-98). In complex, proximal humeral fractures with a very high risk of avascular osteonecrosis or a nonreconstructable humeral head, humeral head replacement is the treatment most likely proposed. Early implantation seems to yield a better outcome than late replacement. Current hemiarthroplasty is not uniformly successful. The importance of anatomic healing of the greater tuberosity for the clinical outcome is well known. Our study confirms the hypothesis that resorption does occur without displacement. Second, it confirms the hypothesis that displacement results in fatty infiltration but that resorption of the greater tuberosity without its displacement does not. While resorption occurred during the first year, the ACHD remained stable between one and at least 2 years, suggesting that a stable fixation of the tendon exists and explains the overall good to excellent clinical results observed in this study. This study did not use a control group. It was designed to rule out an undue rate of complications in a pilot study. In addition, a gold standard for hemiarthroplasty for fractures was not established. Therefore, the results of this study do not document a superiority of the large metaphyseal volume concept. But the results of this study appear to justify the continued use of this type of arthroplasty and document the necessity of a randomized trial comparing the large metaphyseal volume and the low profile concept for hemiarthroplasties for fractures of the proximal humerus to determine the best indications for either option. The 2-year results of a large metaphyseal volume prosthesis for the treatment of complex fractures of the proximal humerus in a consecutive series of thirty patients are good to excellent with a failure rate of 14% (4 of 29). All failures are associated with secondary displacment of the greater tuberosity. Greater tuberosity resorption without displacement is the rule, but is not associated with functional disability of the shoulder or cranial migration of the humeral head on conventional anteroposterior radiographs. Bernhard Jost and Christian Gerber are consultants of Zimmer Inc, with C.G. receiving royalties from Zimmer. The other authors, their immediate families, nor any research foundation with which they are affiliated received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.