A high voltage pulse (HVP) breakage model was developed as a general modelling structure to represent the three HVP breakage indices: body breakage probability (the D
                     1-model), body breakage product fineness (the D
                     2-model), and body breakage product pre-weakening degree (the D
                     3-model). Relations between the HVP breakage indices and HVP pre-concentration characterisation curves were established. The preliminary result indicated that the HVP breakage model has the potential to predict the recovery of valuable metals from the calibrated model parameters. A tn
                     -family of curves (tn
                      is defined as cumulative percentage of product passing 1/n of the initial size) was used to describe the HVP breakage product size distribution. The tn
                     -family of curves can be employed to estimate the product size distribution from the predicted t
                     10 values by the D
                     2-model.The mineral industry is facing increasing challenges in improving comminution energy efficiency and reducing operation costs. Much has been done in the past to improve the existing comminution processes and various novel methods that will transform current comminution practices have been sought. One of these novel methods is high voltage pulse (HVP) breakage, a comminution method that uses high voltage pulses to initiate electrical breakdown inside ore particles which are immersed in water, generating a strong tensile force to disintegrate the particles. Initially, HVP breakage had been investigated as a selective liberation method characterised by the intergranular breakage of ore particles ( In addition to selective liberation and pre-weakening, ore pre-concentration was reported as the third potential application of HVP breakage ( Mining companies are often interested in knowing the pre-weakening effect on their ores by HVP, as well as how the pre-weakened ore responds in a grinding mill in terms of mill throughput and energy consumption. The simulation software package, JKSimMet, can predict the performance of a comminution circuit through simulations. For this purpose, a model predicting the HVP breakage behaviour of ore particles is required to simulate and optimise the performance of the comminution circuit which incorporates HVP breakage to pre-condition the material for downstream mechanical comminution. The development of an HVP breakage model requires a detailed investigation of ore particle behaviour in HVP breakage. A joint experimental study of HVP breakage of ores was conducted by the Julius Kruttschnitt Mineral Research Centre (JKMRC) and the SELFRAG AG Company in 2014, using a pilot scale HVP breakage device to treat three ores ( In the experimental study of ore particle breakage behaviour subjected to HVP treatment using pilot scale machines, the effects of specific energy, pulse voltage, cumulative discharges, feed particle size and particle breakage pattern (body breakage or surface breakage) were investigated in detail ( There are two distinct breakage modes when a particle is subjected to a single pulse discharge ( The first HVP breakage index, the body breakage probability is adopted to describe the probability of an ore particle reported to the body breakage class. The body breakage probability is defined by Eq. The second breakage index ( The third breakage index for the HVP breakage model is the pre-weakening degree of body breakage product. The pre-weakening degree of body breakage product is defined as the percentage change of ore competence indicator The experimental study of ore breakage behaviour in the pilot scale and laboratory scale HVP machines revealed that the mass-specific energy of HVP was the most significant factor affecting the breakage behaviour. This effect was compounded by the effects of ore properties and particle size. The trend lines presented in A size-dependent breakage model reported by Eqs. Despite these successful applications of the size-dependent breakage model, one limitation in the previous HVP breakage modelling is that all work focused on predicting the HVP breakage product fineness index To model the three HVP breakage indices, Eqs. Statistical In the previous applications of Eq. Eqs. The data collected from the pilot scale HVP tests on three ore samples (  It was believed the scatter of the data reflected ore variation in metal grades. Ore A data appeared more scattered than the other two ores. Ore A was also used for HVP pre-concentration tests, in which copper grade variations in the feed particles have been demonstrated ( As mentioned in Section With the pre-concentration by high voltage pulse technique, the HVP breakage product was classified into body breakage or surface breakage product based on a critical mass loss (10%) from the parent particle. It was found that some particles classified as the body breakage product were still retained on the initial particle size fraction due to the particle shape effect ( A pre-concentration characterisation graph has been proposed to present the relationships between the test output, in terms of metal-mass-size distributions, and the test input, in terms of specific energy provided by the high voltage pulse generator. By way of example, The graph consists of four curves. Parameters required to draw these four curves include:       With the data determined from As there is only one size/voltage level available for the data derived from Once the HVP breakage model is calibrated with experimental data for a given ore sample, the predicted breakage indices can be related to the pre-concentration characterisation parameters. The index Therefore, the pre-concentration characterisation curves ( The HVP It was known that the  The HVP breakage model and the The use of The size-dependent breakage model was modified as a general modelling structure to represent the three HVP breakage indices: body breakage probability (the The HVP breakage model was applied to represent the ore pre-concentration characterisation data published by the same authors. Relations between the HVP breakage indices and ore pre-concentration grade-recovery characterisation curves were established. The preliminary exercise indicated that the HVP breakage model structure has a potential to predict the recovery of valuable metals reported to the screen undersize, once the model is calibrated. More data are required for further validation. A set of The financial support from