We explore the possibility of modifying the multiplicity of the basic clusters in the entropy functional used in the cluster variation method so that the truncation errors arising due to finite size of the basic clusters may be corrected. The numerical values of the multiplicity of the basic clusters are found by requiring the modified CVM entropy functional in the tetrahedron–octahedron approximation for the face-centered cubic structure to yield the nearly exact critical temperatures for ordering and phase separating systems. This modification correctly reproduces the triple point in a prototypical fcc ordering system, using the same first neighbor pair interaction energy parameter for all the ordered (L10 and L12) and disordered (A1) phases, without increasing the computational burden and thereby making a long standing problem tractable. The modification also improves the agreement between the values of thermodynamic quantities (for ordered and disordered phases at arbitrary temperatures and compositions) obtained from CVM and Monte Carlo simulations.Computational Thermodynamics (CT) provides an integrated framework for representing thermodynamic properties, phase equilibria and phase diagrams of alloy systems. The advantage of such an approach is the capability to predict those features of phase equilibria which cannot be easily measured as well as to predict them for complex multicomponent systems using properties of lower order sub-systems. CT is most often based on the CALPHAD method We shall consider here phase diagrams and thermodynamic calculations only for first neighbor pair interactions, since theoretical or reliable Monte–Carlo simulation results which are required for comparison are available only for this case. Various approximations of CVM It may be observed that, in general, critical temperatures obtained by using the TO approximation of CVM are overestimated in comparison with the best known results. This overestimation is as high as 20% in the case of triple point temperature. This necessitates a need to improve the CVM-TO entropy functional so as to improve its accuracy without increasing the computational effort. There have been some earlier efforts to improve the accuracy of CVM calculations. With particular reference to the fcc structure, a hybrid approach of MC simulations and CVM has been applied to ordering The source of inaccuracy in the CVM entropy functional, particularly near phase transitions, can be attributed to the truncation of entropy functional corresponding to a basic cluster of finite size The configurational Gibbs energy of the fcc phase is expressed as The exact configurational entropy is given by the following infinite series. After simplifying Eq. In practice, configurational entropy is approximated by retaining a finite number of terms (up to cluster(s) of type Limiting the basic cluster size thus leads to truncation error. The series given in Eq. There are four invariant temperatures of interest in fcc phase separating and ordering systems, namely (i) consolute temperature for phase separation, (ii) critical temperature for In order to compare the results of M-CVM calculations with exact (or more accurate) values, we have performed MC simulations and obtained values of enthalpies at various temperatures and compositions for both ordering and phase separating systems. All the simulations were performed on a 16 The conjugate gradient algorithm given by Powell Using the optimized set of multiplicities, coherent phase diagram for an ordering system has been calculated as shown in As mentioned earlier, we have considered two variants of modification of the CVM entropy functional. It is clear from the results shown in The modified CSA under tetrahedron approximation As mentioned earlier, we have considered only first neighbor pair interactions, hence optimized multiplicities obtained here will correspond to this particular case. One may expect to have different sets of optimized multiplicities for other cases (or in case of various real alloys) because of the possible dependence of optimized multiplicities on the energy parameters. However, in an earlier study of the bcc phase, it has been shown that the optimized values of the multiplicities are only weakly dependent on the energy parameters corresponding to all clusters except the pair clusters An improved CVM entropy functional in the TO approximation has been found for the fcc structure by modifying the multiplicities of the tetrahedron and octahedron basic clusters. The modified values of multiplicities have been found by minimizing the differences between the calculated critical temperatures and the exact (or best known) values for ordering as well as phase separating systems. The phase diagram and the thermodynamic quantities found by using the modified CVM entropy functional are in much better agreement with those found from MC calculations. Most importantly, the triple point is correctly reproduced using the same first neighbor interaction energy parameter for the disordered (A1) and ordered (L1 The authors would like to thank Dr. Indrajeet Sinha, Department of Applied Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology (Banaras Hindu University), for help in developing the Monte Carlo code as well as useful discussions.