The photo degradation of Amaranth (AR) dye by advanced photo Fenton process in the presence of symmetrical peroxides like hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) and ammonium persulfate (APS) are investigated. The influence of various reaction parameters like the effect of iron dosage, concentration of H2O2/APS, initial dye concentration, effect of pH and the influence of various aromatic derivatives were studied and optimum conditions are reported. The efficiency of the oxidant was strongly influenced by the nature of aromatic photoproducts formed during the course of the degradation reaction. To study their effect on the rate of degradation these aromatic derivatives were added in known concentration (10ppm). The influence of various aromatic derivatives on the degradation kinetics shows the following order: hydroquinones>chlorophenol>dichlorobenzene>aromatic carboxylic acids>anilidine>nitrophenol. The addition of these derivatives did not influence the degradation pathway although it altered the reaction rate. The percentage COD and TOC removal were determined in presence of aromatic derivatives to evaluate the complete removal of the pollutant. Based on the intermediates obtained in the UV–vis and GC-MS spectroscopic techniques probable degradation mechanism has been proposed.Zero-valent metallic iron (ZVMI) has been used as a potential catalyst for the efficient production of hydroxyl radicals in Fenton/photo-Fenton process to degrade many pollutants Amaranth (AR), iron powder (100 mesh size, electrolytic), ammonium persulfate (APS), hydrogen peroxide (50%), NaCl, Na All the photoreactions were carried out at room temperature using a circular glass reactor whose surface area is 176.6 A reaction mixture of 5 The classical Fenton process involves aqueous Fe (II) ions with H The optimization of the catalyst is a necessary step in the photo-Fenton process The present study investigates the application of H pH is an important parameter in the efficiency of the photo-Fenton process. It affects the rate of generation of hydroxyl radicals. Kang et al The specific reactions were carried out in the presence of aromatic and aliphatic derivatives. Among the various aromatic derivatives, HQ, RH and CH shows enhancement in the degradation rate with the following order: HQ RH and CH showed lower rate compared to the QH probably due to the lower stability of these compounds due to stearic hindrance arising from the two –OH groups. p-CP showed almost similar rate with that of controlled reaction ( the reaction in the absence of aromatic derivatives) for the first 20 The C–Cl bond is more susceptible to free radicals attack compared to C–C bond. Hence slight enhancement in the degradation rate for aromatic chloro derivatives were observed compared to aromatic carboxylic acid derivatives. The protonation of –NH The complete mineralization of dyes has been followed by two techniques: The chemical oxygen demand (COD) and Total Organic Carbon (TOC) analysis. Both the techniques are complementary to one another for expressing the detoxification level of water. The COD analysis is given in Percentage COD removal efficiency for the process Fe TOC analysis of AR in the Fe The dye solution was decolorized to an extent of 6, 10 and 18% for the experiments Fe The GC-MS analysis for the experiment Fe The GC-MS analysis for the experiment Fe The photo Fenton degradation of AR was carried out by using ZVMI as the catalyst along with symmetrical peroxides as the oxidants. The influence of various reaction parameters like effect of iron dosage, concentration of H Financial support from