Using a custom-designed self-heating apparatus and procedure, activation energy (E
                     a) was determined for four sulfide-bearing materials: two nickel concentrates, a copper concentrate and a sphalerite/pyrite mixture. The E
                     a ranged from 22–29kJ mol−1, implying a common reaction. Comparing to literature, the E
                     a values correspond to partial oxidation of hydrogen sulfide, supporting the contention that H2S may be an intermediate product in the self-heating of sulfide minerals.The extraction of mined resources can encounter spontaneous exothermic reactions that initiate spontaneous heating or self-heating (SH). One example is coal ( Self-heating of sulfides is considered to occur in stages ( Models to describe SH for a reactive porous solid involve physico-chemical parameters (e.g., the activation energy, the enthalpy of the reaction) ( Knowledge of The samples were two Ni-concentrates, from Voisey’s Bay (Labrador, Canada) and Raglan (Nunavik, Canada), a Cu-concentrate from Voisey’s Bay and a mixture of pyrite and sphalerite. The principal components of the samples are shown in The concentrate samples were shipped as slurry in sealed containers. They were pressure filtered, placed in plastic bags, sealed and stored in a freezer. Prior to a test, 500 For the sphalerite/pyrite case, around 4 Experiments were performed using a standard SH method ( The apparatus consists of the following major components ( Number of cycles: 10; Duration of air injection for every cycle: 15 Time between injections: 5 Temperature (°C): 70 (stage A), 140 Air flow rate (ml min In this work, we are concerned only with stage A. The test was modified to have only three air injections and a range of set temperatures. An array of nine calibrated thermocouples was inserted at the center plane of the sample where the set temperature is recorded ( Samples were tested at 45–85 An example illustrating the uniformity of the temperature (and The 95% CI for Plots of ln( A number of reactions have been surmised to cause SH of sulfide minerals. Some of these and the associated energies of activation are shown in While the self-heating rates for two Ni-concentrates were higher than the other two samples ( The range in    The In light of the above, it may be surmised that the SH of sulfide minerals at low temperature (<100 Activation energy ( Funding is through the NSERC CRD program with sponsorship by: Teck, Vale, Xstrata Process Support, Xstrata Zinc, Golders Assoc and Cytec coordinated through CAMIRO – MPD. Thanks to Mr. Frank Rosenblum and Pr. In Ho Jung for their valuable comments.