An impact pulverizer is widely employed for dry milling of powders in many industrial sectors. However, effect of the equipment geometry on grinding performance of the impact pulverizer is still unknown. This paper presents systematic analysis of effect of the stator geometry of an impact pulverizer on its grinding performance. Three types of stators with different concave angles were investigated. Effect of the stator concave angles on grinding performance of the impact pulverizer was investigated through both experimental and theoretical approaches. As the theoretical approach, a computational fluid dynamics (CFD)–discrete phase model (DPM) coupling simulation was conducted and the particle–stator collision properties were analyzed. The grinding experiment demonstrated that size of the ground powder was reduced with a use of stator with smaller concave angle. A CFD–DPM simulation revealed that the cumulative impact energy per particle became higher at smaller concave angle, because stator with smaller concave angle lead to longer particle residence time and higher total number of the particle–stator collision. In summary, this work revealed effect of the stator geometry on grinding performance of the impact pulverizer; the stator concave angle mainly affects the particle residence time and total number of the particle–stator collision. This results in change in the cumulative impact energy, leading to change in grinding performance of the impact pulverizer.Impact pulverizer, also called as hammer mill and atomizer mill, is widely employed for dry milling of powders. The impact pulverizer basically consists of a high speed rotating rotor and a concavo-convex-shaped stator on its grinding chamber wall. Raw powder is continuously fed into the grinding chamber, and the particles are broken by particle–stator collision, particle–rotor collision, and particle–particle collision. The impact pulverizer has advantages such as relatively high grinding performance, high throughput due to continuous operation, simple equipment construction, and less contamination. Due to these advantages, impact pulverizers have been extensively employed in many industrial sectors such as mineral processing, coal processing, pharmaceutical, cosmetics, food, ceramics, and electronics. Some impact pulverizers specially designed have been applied not only for grinding but also for producing composite materials ( It is hard to analyze the particle motion and fluid flow in the impact pulverizer by experimental approaches due to their complexities. One powerful way to analyze the particle motion and fluid flow is a computer simulation. So far, computer simulations of impact pulverizers have been reported. Some works ( Our finding suggests that geometry of the stator can be a critical factor which determines grinding performance of the impact pulverizer. Importance of geometry of the stator in design of the impact pulverizer can also be implied from a variety of unique stator geometries of impact pulverizers commercially supplied. However, despite its potential importance, effect of the stator geometry on grinding performance of the impact pulverizer is unknown. Here, we reported systematic analysis of effect of the stator geometry of an impact pulverizer on its grinding performance. Three types of stators with different concave angles were investigated. Grinding experiments were initially conducted using the stators with different concave angles. A computer simulation using a computational fluid dynamics (CFD)–discrete phase model (DPM) coupling model was then conducted to analyze the particle–stator collision properties at different stator geometries. Based on the experimental and simulation results, influence of the stator geometry on grinding performance of the impact pulverizer was discussed.  A calcium carbonate (#16, Nittofunka Kogyo, Japan) was used as an experimental material. To analyze the particle–stator collision in the impact pulverizer, a computer simulation was conducted. For this purpose, both the particle motion and fluid flow are needed to be solved, because the rotor generates high-speed air flow and this air flow strongly affects the particle motion. In this study, both the particle motion and fluid flow were simulated using a computational fluid dynamics (CFD)–discrete phase model (DPM) coupling model ( A fluid flow in the impact pulverizer was simulated using a CFD. In the impact pulverizer, the fluid flow is a high-speed turbulent flow caused by the high-speed rotating rotor with hammers. Thus, the fluid flow was considered as unsteady and turbulent flow in the CFD simulation. The fluid was also treated as compressible and viscous fluid. The calculation was performed in a three-dimensional domain. For modeling the turbulent flow, Reynolds-averaged governing equations were used. In the Reynolds averaging, instantaneous fluid velocity From the above equations and governing equations of fluid dynamics, the Reynolds-averaged continuity equation, the Reynolds-averaged Navier–Stokes (RANS) equation, and the Reynolds-averaged energy equation were derived as follows: Equation of continuity Equation of motion (RANS equation) Equation of energy For modeling swirling flow caused by rotating motion of the rotor, a sliding mesh model ( The individual particle motion was simulated using a discrete phase model (DPM). In the DPM, the particle is treated as a point mass, and the particle-to-particle contacts are not taken into account. In the impact pulverizer, the particle phase can be considered as a dilute phase, because the particle volume fraction is generally less than ten volume percent ( For the coupling between DPM and CFD, a one-way coupling model was used; influence of the fluid flow on the particle motion was solely taken into account, whereas influence of the particle motion on the fluid flow was not taken into account because of the dilute particle phase. The individual particle motion was calculated by solving the following equation of motion:  A finite volume method employing a staggered grid was used for discretizing the governing equations. The time-derivative terms in the governing equations were discretized using a first order full-implicit method. The convection terms were discretized by a first-order upwind scheme, while the diffusion terms were discretized by a second-order least-squares cell based method ( Three-dimensional full-scale geometry of the impact pulverizer was considered as a simulation domain.  As a boundary condition in the CFD simulation, pressure boundary conditions were applied; at the flow inlet and outlet the pressure was considered as constant atmospheric pressure. In the DPM simulation, a single particle was continuously generated at the inlet of the grinding chamber per one time step and fed into the chamber. To evaluate the grinding performance through the computer simulation, impact energies for the particle–wall collisions were calculated. In our previous studies ( We calculated two kinds of impact energies: impact energy per collision and cumulative impact energy per particle. The impact energy per collision (   In order to understand this rank order of As shown in If the impact energy per collision is determinant of grinding performance of the impact pulverizer, this simulation result can be correlated with experimental result. However, rank order of the impact energy per collision (22.5   These simulation results imply that in the range of smaller particle sizes the cumulative impact energy per particle becomes higher with a decrease in the stator concave angle. This rank order is consistent with the experimental result shown in We analyzed effect of the stator geometry of an impact pulverizer on its grinding performance through both experimental and theoretical approaches. As the theoretical approach, a CFD–DPM simulation was conducted and the particle–stator collision properties were numerically analyzed. The grinding experiment demonstrated that size of the ground powder was reduced with a use of stator with smaller concave angle. A CFD–DPM simulation revealed that at smaller particle size less than 40 In summary, this work revealed influence of the stator geometry on grinding performance of the impact pulverizer. The stator concave angle mainly affects the particle residence time and total number of the particle–stator collision, resulting in change in the cumulative impact energy. This leads to change in grinding performance of the impact pulverizer. This finding will help to design and optimize an impact pulverizer with higher performance. The authors would like to acknowledge ANSYS Japan K. K. for providing the Fluent software. The authors also would like to acknowledge Mr. Naochika Asai in Dalton Co., Ltd. for his assistance in experiments.