In this work, composite bone cements, based on a commercial polymethylmethacrylate matrix (Palamed®) loaded with ferrimagnetic bioactive glass-ceramic particles (SC45), were produced and characterized in vitro. The ferrimagnetic bioactive glass-ceramic belongs to the system SiO2–Na2O–CaO–P2O5–FeO–Fe2O3 and contains magnetite (Fe3O4) crystals into a residual amorphous bioactive phase. Three different formulations (containing 10, 15 and 20wt.% of glass-ceramic particles respectively) have been investigated. These materials are intended to be applied as bone fillers for the hyperthermic treatment of bone tumors. The morphological, compositional, calorimetric and mechanical properties of each formulation have been already discussed in a previous paper. The in vitro properties of the composite bone cements described in the present paper are related to iron ion leaching test (by graphite furnace atomic absorption spectrometer), bioactivity (i.e. the ability to stimulate the formation of a hydroxyapatite – HAp – layer on their surface after soaking in simulated body fluid SBF) and cytocompatibility toward human osteosarcoma cells (ATCC CRL-1427, Mg63). Morphological and chemical characterizations by scanning electron microscopy and energy dispersion spectrometry have been performed on the composite samples after each test.
                  The iron release was negligible and all the tested samples showed the growth of HAp on their surface after 28days of immersion in a simulated body fluid (SBF). Cells showed good viability, morphology, adhesion, density and the ability to develop bridge-like structures on all investigated samples. A synergistic effect between bioactivity and cell mineralization was also evidenced.The oncological hyperthermia is a therapy frequently used for the treatment of solid tumors. The treatment consists of the increase of the cancer wound temperature above the physiological values (> Recently, new approaches for the preparation of magnetic bone substitutes have been described, like bioactive (Fe In the present work innovative magnetic biomaterials for the cancer treatment by not invasive hyperthermia have been synthesized and characterized by in vitro tests. The proposed materials are composite bone cements based on polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA, an acrylic resin used in the majority of cements and bone filler) loaded with glass-ceramic powders (named SC45), which have both bioactive and magnetic properties, characteristics that none of the materials reported in the above-mentioned literature possess at the same time. The amorphous phase of the glass-ceramic assures bioactivity properties, where bioactivity is intended as the ability to establish a chemical bond between the implant and the biological tissue. The presence of the magnetic phase guarantees the possibility of obtaining a localized heating of the tissue around the implant by means of hysteresis loss. The composite bone cements characterized in this work could be proposed for the treatment of both the primary and secondary bone tumors: they can be used as fillers of bone cavities, also of complex shape, having the ability of promoting a fast functional restart (due to their high osteointegration and osteoinduction potentialities) as well as the ability of producing heat, if subjected to an alternating magnetic field. The heating effect can be used to apply a hyperthermal therapy, killing the tumor cells not surgically removed or those formed during an eventual relapse. Among different commercial formulations, Palamed® was chosen as polymeric matrix for the present study, since it is one of the most commonly used PMMA-based bone cements. However, it is worth of mentioning that the addition of the bioactive and ferrimagnetic glass-ceramic (SC45 powders) can be extended to any other commercial or experimental formulation, taking into account the different component ratios and physical properties of other bone cements, because it does not imply any modification into the polymerization mechanism of the organic matrix. Any improvement or modification of the commercial polymeric phase it is foreseen by the addition of the glass-ceramic phase, and the present paper is only intended to investigate the role of the new inorganic additional phase (SC45) on the final properties of a common PMMA-based bone cement. The composite bone cement object of the present paper have been already completely characterized in a previous work In the present paper the attention is focused on the in vitro properties of the composite bone cements, both in terms of bioactivity (i.e. the ability of stimulate mineralization) in a simulated body fluid and cytocompatibility toward osteoblast-like cells. SC45 is a bioactive glass-ceramic belonging to the system SiO As reported in The composite bone cements were synthesized using the commercial PMMA-based cement Palamed® (medium viscosity, produced by Heraus Kulzer S.r.l.). This cement is commercialized in a kit with 1 packet of a solid phase, containing poly-(methylacrylate, methylmethacrylate), zirconium dioxide as radio-opaque agent, benzoylperoxide, colorant E141, and one ampoule of liquid containing methylmethacrylate (the monomer), N,N-dimethy-p-toluidine, hydroquinone, and colorant E141. The solid phase and different amounts (10, 15 and 20% w/w) of SC45 powders In order to evaluate the composite bioactivity, in vitro test in simulated body fluid (SBF, Kokubo's protocol Each composite cement (P10, P15, P20) was soaked in 25 At the end of the treatment, samples have been gently washed in distilled water, dried at room temperature and characterized from the morphological and compositional points of views by scanning electron microscopy (SEM–FEI, QUANTA INSPECT 200) and energy dispersion spectrometry (EDS–EDAX PV 9900). Composite bone cements were subjected to leaching test, in order to assess if any iron release could occur, causing a potential risk of iron overloading in the fluids in future in vivo applications. Leaching tests have been performed aiming to exclude not only any potential iron concentrations of toxicological interest but also sub-toxic iron values, which could contribute to produce cytotoxic effects. The leaching of other ions, involved in the bioactivity mechanism and widely described in the literature regarding bioactive glasses and glass-ceramics, was not the object or the present work. The cement formulation containing the highest SC45 amount (P20) was selected for the test in order to evaluate the maximum value of potential leaching. The samples were dipped in 30 At determined time steps (3 The test was performed in triplicate and commercial cements containing 20 Human osteosarcoma cells (ATCC CRL-1427, Mg63) were cultivated in Dulbecco's modification minimal essential medium (DMEM, Sigma) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Sigma) and 1% antibiotics (penicillin–streptomycin) at 37 For the indirect test, serum free DMEM was incubated without cells for 1 For the direct contact assay, cells were seeded in a defined number (1 The morphology of cells attached to the samples surfaces was investigated also by field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM — SUPRATM 40, Zeiss) equipped with energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS). Briefly, samples were removed from the media, gently washed with PBS, fixed with 2.5% glutaraldehyde for 2 Statistical analyses were performed using statistical package for social sciences (SPSS v20.0, IBM Co. Armonk, New York, US). The assumptions of homogeneity of variances and normal distribution of errors were checked for all the variables considered. Afterwards, ANOVA one-way and post-hoc Sheffe's test were used. The significance level was set at 5%. The composite bone cements were subjected to the in vitro bioactivity test (soaking in SBF) in order to evaluate their ability of inducing the precipitation of HAp on their surface. SBF is an inorganic solution (which does not contain proteins, cells and other organic moieties) with the same ionic composition of human blood plasma. This test is commonly used to assess the bioactivity of glasses and glass-ceramics and it has been reported that the in vitro HAp formation after immersion in SBF can be correlated to the in vivo bioactivity of biomaterials The glass-ceramic SC45 has already been characterized for its ability of inducing the formation of HAp in vitro  It must be mentioned that the bioactivity of the SC45 glass-ceramic is not very fast Based on these results, we can assess that the glass-ceramic particles were sufficiently exposed at the cement surface to confer bioactive properties to the bone composite cements. The amount and kinetics of iron release were investigated by dipping P20 and control samples in SBF and analyzing an aliquot of spilled solution at fixed time periods with GF-AAS. The obtained results demonstrate an iron release in the range of 0.6–1 The SC45 glass-ceramic was preliminarily characterized in terms of citocompatibility in a previous work The direct cytocompatibility assay showed encouraging results regarding the viability of cells seeded directly onto sample surfaces. In fact, in comparison with controls, no loss of viability was reported; moreover, the P10 sample viability increasing values resulted as statistically significant compared to controls at each time-point ( These data confirmed that the addition of the SC45 glass ceramic into the commercial PMMA-based bone cement has not negatively affected its cytocompatibility for all the formulations (P10, P15, P20). Particularly, P10 resulted as the best one in terms of cell viability. This result could be tentatively related to morphology features (such as the surface roughness, which could be different at the microscopic level if different amounts of glass-ceramic powders are exposed) which must be investigated, as well as to a combination of chemical and magnetic effects. Specifically, the formulation containing the lower content of bioactive glass-ceramic (P10) is potentially prone to a lower release of ions, including those involved in the bioactivity mechanism (like Na Another very interesting result is the observation by FESEM-EDS of HAp crystals near the cells that cover the specimen surface, as reported in In this work three different formulations (P10, P15, P20) for composite bone cements, based on Palamed® loaded with bioactive and magnetic glass-ceramic powders (SC45), have been synthesized and characterized by in vitro tests. These materials are intended as innovative magnetic and bioactive biomaterials for the cancer treatment by not invasive hyperthermia in bone surgery. The glass-ceramic particles conferred bioactive properties to the composite bone cements, since all the tested samples showed the growth of HAp on their surface after 28 The authors would like to thank the