Introduction
                  Treatment of tibia pilon fractures is challenging. Outcome after tibia pilon fractures depend on multiple factors. Aim of this study is to evaluate the potential variables that are known to affect the outcome after tibia pilon fractures.
               
                  Patients and methods
                  Forty patients with 42 tibia pilon fractures with a one-year follow-up, who had undergone surgical treatment between January 2007 and June 2011, were evaluated, retrospectively. Patients were divided into 3 groups regarding the choice of surgical treatment (Group A-22 patients treated with open reduction-internal fixation; Group B-9 patients treated with mini-open reduction-internal fixation and external fixation; and Group C-11 patients treated with closed reduction-external fixation). Fractures were classified using Müller-AO and Rüedi/Allgöwer classifications. Quality of reduction was evaluated using Ovadia and Beals’ criteria. All patients underwent functional assessment using AOFAS ankle-hindfoot scale and Teeny–Wiss scoring system at the last follow-up.
               
                  Results
                  Mean age of the patients was 49 (20–80). There were eight 43-B3, six 43-C1, twelve 43-C2 and sixteen 43-C3 fractures according to Müller-AO classification and ten type 1, ten type 2 and twenty two type 3 fractures according to Rüedi/Allgöwer classification. There were 15 (35.7%) open fractures. No statistically significant relation was found between quality of reduction and type of surgery. Also no significant relation was found between the type of surgery and functional scores. No significant correlation was found between functional scores and Müller-AO classification, but functional scores were found significantly worse in Rüedi/Allgöwer type 3 fractures. Functional scores were found significantly related to the quality of reduction. Early complications were seen in 22 and late complications were seen in 9 fractures. No statistically significant relation was found between complications, type of surgery and functional scores.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The most important factor affecting outcome in surgically treated tibia pilon fractures was quality of reduction. Poor functional scores were found independent from the type of surgery and quality of reduction in Rüedi/Allgöwer type 3 fractures, which was characterized with articular surface comminution and metaphyseal impaction.Tibia pilon fractures represent a spectrum of traumatic lesions of the load bearing distal tibial articular surface, with a range between low-energy simple fractures to high-energy injuries characterized with articular comminution and metaphyseal impaction Surgical treatment of tibia pilon fractures is challenging because of articular comminution, metaphyseal bone loss and serious soft tissue injury. Management of this injury must include articular surface and metaphysis reconstruction as well as treatment of injured soft tissue envelope Outcomes of tibia pilon fractures mainly depend on the severity of the trauma, soft tissue conditions, comorbidities, treatment modality and rehabilitation. The factors, which affect the outcomes, should be investigated thoroughly to achieve satisfactory results. This study aims to evaluate the potential variables that are known to affect the outcome in tibia pilon fractures. In order to evaluate these variables, influence of fracture type, surgical treatment method and quality of reduction on functional scores of patients with tibia pilon fractures, who had undergone surgical treatment, were assessed in this study. The institutional review board approved the study with a protocol number of TUTF-GOKAEK 2011/38. One hundred eighteen patients with ankle fractures have been treated surgically in our institution between January 2007 and July 2011. The group of 118 patients included 40 patients with 42 tibia pilon fractures (AO/ASIF types 43-B3, 43-C1, 43-C2 and 43-C3) that were fully documented and followed up for at least 1 year that formed the basis of this retrospective study. The patients were evaluated using institutional data (clinical and radiologic archive and medical records) regarding, age, gender, injured extremity dominance, mechanism of trauma, preoperative soft tissue conditions, accompanying injuries, type of surgery, quality of surgical fracture reduction, early and late complications and fracture union times. The fractures were classified using Müller-AO fracture classification system and Rüedi/Allgöwer classification. Open fractures were classified using Gustilo–Anderson classification All patients underwent routine evaluations including clinical and radiographic examinations and goniometric range of motion (ROM) evaluations in postoperative 6th week, 3rd month and 6th month ( Collected data were analyzed statistically. Statistical analysis was made with the SPSS 15.0 statistical programme (IBM Corporation, USA). Normal distribution of the measurable variables was tested using Kolmogorov–Smirnov test. Inter-group comparisons in more than 3 groups were performed using non-parametric Kruksal–Wallis test. Comparisons between 2 groups were performed using t-test. Mann–Whitney U test was used for comparisons between the groups, which do not suit into parametric assumptions. The limit of statistical significance was accepted as The study group was consisted of 10 (25%) female and 30 (75%) male patients with a mean age of 49.5 (20–80). The fractures were at the right side in 22 (52.4%) and at the left side in 20 (47.6%) patients. There were bilateral tibia pilon fractures in 2 (5%) patients. Trauma mechanisms were fall from height in 17 (40.5%), motor vehicle accident in 11 (26.2%), domestic falls in 6 (14.3%), crush injury in 1 (2.4%) and ankle distortion in 7 (16.7%) patients. There were traumatic soft tissue lesions such as open fractures, fracture bulla, blisters and large skin abrasions in 40 fractures (95.2%). Open fractures were mostly seen in the patients with fall from height and motor vehicle accidents and thought related to high-energy trauma. Open fractures were found in 15 (35.7%) patients in the study group. There were 6 (14.3%) Grade I, 7 (16.7%) Grade II and 2 (4.7%) Grade III open fractures regarding to the Gustilo–Anderson classification The fractures classified using Müller-AO fracture classification system and Rüedi/Allgöwer classification Quality of surgical fracture reduction has been evaluated using Ovadia and Beals’ criteria at the postoperative antero-posterior and lateral ankle radiographs and mortise view radiographs of all patients Accompanying injuries were seen in 14 (35%) patients. The distribution of accompanying injuries is shown in Fibular integrity plays an important role in ankle stability. Presence of fibula fractures is important in patients with tibia pilon fractures. Accompanying fibula fractures were found in 35 (83.3%) patients in our study group. Accompanying fibula fractures were more frequent in open tibia pilon fractures, 14 (60%) fibula fractures were seen in open tibia pilon fractures. Plate osteosynthesis was performed for 22 fibula fractures and 4 fibula fractures were fixed using intramedullary Kirschner wires. Fibula fractures in 9 ankles were ignored because of the use of ankle spanning EF. Ankle ROM was found better in patients with plate osteosynthesis of the fibula ( The patients were evaluated functionally using AOFAS ankle-hindfoot scale and Teeny and Wiss’ ankle scoring systems at the last follow-up Early complications were seen in 52.4% of the patients. Swelling and superficial skin necrosis was found in 15 (35.7%), superficial infection and serous drainage from the wound was found in 7 (16.6%) and pin-tract infection was found in 4 (9.5%) patients. No deep venous thrombosis was seen in any patient. All patients treated with consecutive debridement, antibiotics, and local flaps and split thickness skin grafts. Late complications were seen in 9 (21.4%) patients. Delayed unions and nonunions were seen in 4 (9.5%) patients, long-term deep and resistant infections and late wound dehiscence were found in 5 (12.5%) patients. There was no statistically significant difference for early and late complications regarding fracture type and surgical treatment option ( Tibia pilon fractures represent about 1% of all lower extremity fractures. These fractures are mostly seen due to high-energy trauma, approximately 25% of these fractures are open fractures. Fibula fractures accompany 85% of pilon fractures Rüedi and Allgöwer introduced plate fixation of fibula with subsequent reduction of articular surface and metaphysis followed by medial buttress plate fixation of distal tibia and reported 74% good results in low-energy pilon fractures and 69% good results in high-energy pilon fractures. This method has become conventional treatment in tibia pilon fractures The fractures have been classified using Müller-AO and Rüedi/Allgöwer classifications in our study. These progressive classification systems reflect the severity of injury upon advancement in classification. The relation between fracture types, ankle ROM and functional scores were investigated in our study. Rüedi/Allgöwer type 3 fractures had significantly worse functional scores and decreased ankle ROM. Decrease in ankle ROM and worse functional scores were thought related to articular fragmentation and metaphyseal impaction, which are the key features of Rüedi/Allgöwer type 3 fractures. There are multiple factors affecting the clinical and functional outcomes in tibia pilon fractures. Williams et al. evaluated 29 patients with 32 tibia pilon fractures at a minimum 2 years from the time of injury Williams et al. retrospectively evaluated patients with pilon fractures treated using medial monolateral EF with and without fibular plate fixation The influence of fracture type, surgical treatment option and quality of reduction on functional outcome of surgically treated tibia pilon fractures have been investigated in this retrospective study. The most important factor that affecting functional outcome of patients was the quality of reduction in our study. Rüedi/Allgöwer type 3 fractures had the poorest functional results independent from quality of reduction and type of surgical treatment. Fibular malalignment and shortening may be another important factor causing poor functional results. The results of this study lead us to state that quality of reduction has superior importance on functional outcomes in tibia pilon fractures. Because of the poor prognosis of Rüedi/Allgöwer type 3 fractures, those fractures should be treated in an ankle spanning EF with the restoration of fibular alignment and length to have fewer complications. All named authors hereby declare that they have no conflicting interest to disclose