Bauxite tailings are a major type of solid wastes generated in the flotation process. Based on the high Fe2O3 content and low Al2O3 content of bauxite tailings, ferric-rich ceramics were prepared in this study. It has been found that the sintering temperature of the ferric-rich ceramics is only about 1100 °C. Sintering mechanism of ferric-rich ceramics was preliminary analyzed. By optimizing the chemical composition of the ceramic, ferric-rich ceramics performance of flexural strength was reached a maximum of 197.41 MPa sintered only at 1130 °C. Finally, ceramic proppants were successfully prepared with high-strength ferric-rich ceramics. At the best sintering temperature of 1130 °C, the performances were 4.65% of breakage ratio under 52 MPa and 2.78 g/cm3 of apparent density. The properties indicated that the production of high-strength ferric-rich ceramics may be an attractive method for recycling solid waste bauxite tailings.Ceramics prepared with bauxite as the main raw material is widely used in abrasive materials, electric porcelain, ceramic proppants and other fields due to their high strength, corrosion resistance and wear resistance [ With the development of the ceramic industry, high alumina bauxite has caused a rapid decline in reserves due to long-term mining [ In fact, the effective use of bauxite tailings has been a traditional topic. Yang et al. [ In order to reduce the environmental hazard of bauxite tailings, this study proposes a practical, cost-effective solution. In this study, ferric-rich ceramics was successfully prepared using bauxite tailings as the main raw material. It has been found that the sintering temperature of the ferric-rich ceramics is only about 1100 °C. This paper systematically studies the mechanism of low temperature sintered ceramics at about 1100 °C. In addition, in order to make the ferric-rich ceramics have a wide range of applications, high-strength ceramics have been successfully prepared by optimizing the chemical composition. Finally, ceramic proppants in accordance with national standards were successfully prepared from ferric-rich ceramics. All raw materials used in the experiment were from Mianchi Dehui Petroleum Proppant Co., Ltd., Sanmenxia City, Henan Province, China. The phase composition of the bauxite tailings is shown in In order to effectively utilize solid waste, ceramics were prepared using bauxite tailings as the main raw material. At the same time, in order to make the ceramics has a wide application field, high-strength ceramics was obtained by increasing the content of alumina through adding second-grade bauxite. The design of a series of formulations is shown in  Powder preparation. The mixing was carried out according to the mass ratio of the raw material: ball stone: water = 1:3:1.4. The mixture was ball milled in a 480 r/min. ball mill for 15 min to obtain a suitable size distribution of the granules (1–8 μm). The average particle size was 5.40 μm. The slurry was completely dried at 100 °C. Molding process. The dried mixture completely passed through a sieve having a pore size of 60 meshes. 7 wt% of water was added to the dry material for spray granulation. All materials passed through a 40 meshes sieve. The prepared material (7 g) was pressed into a 56 mm × 10 mm × 5 mm rectangular sample by a dry pressing method at 16 MPa. Sintering process. The samples were dried at 80 °C for 12 h. The ceramic samples were sintered in the box type resistance furnace. Firing rates were 10 °C/min. from room temperature to 1000 °C and 2 °C/min. up to sintering temperature. The sample was quickly removed after heat treatment. Finally, the sample was cooled to room temperature and analyzed. The preparation processes of (a) Powder preparation and (c) Sintering process of the ceramic proppant are the same as those of the ceramic material.(b) Molding process. The dried mixture completely passed through a sieve having a pore size of 120 meshes. The prepared powder was added to a sugar-coated machine to obtain a spherical green body of a certain size. The calculation method of the water absorption The calculation method of the shrinkage The calculation method of the flexure strength ( The calculation method of the apparent density ( The calculation method of the breakage ratio ( The crystal phase compositions of the ceramic material were analyzed by X-ray diffraction (XRD, Cu The experimental study found that the ferric-rich ceramics prepared from bauxite tailings has a low sintering temperature (about 1100 °C). Therefore, research on its sintering mechanism is necessary. This part systematically studied the sintering process of sample A. The synthesis process of ferric-rich ceramics is mainly divided into two stages: Dehydration and Sintering.   In order to further investigate the chemical reaction during ceramic sintering, XRD analysis was performed on the sample A sintered at different temperatures ( It is known that the sintering of ceramics is a process in which the liquid phase filled pores are densified. The sample began to shrink from 800 °C, indicating that the liquid phase began to produce. This proves that the ferric-rich ceramic system produces a eutectic phase. The shrinkage of the sample accelerated from 900 °C, suggesting a large amount of liquid phase production in ceramic system. This result demonstrates that the eutectic phase in the ferric-rich ceramic system melts into a liquid phase. The liquid phase begins to melt a large amount of crystals to increase the liquid phase content of the system. At 1110 °C, the shrinkage of the sample reached its maximum, which proved that the density of the ceramic reached the maximum. As the temperature continues to rise, a large amount of liquid phase was generated in the ceramic system, causing the sample to swell. Moreover, in In order to show the changes in the diffraction peaks more clearly, In order to further study the relationship between Fe The type of solid solution formed by Fe  From the analysis of the SEM of Based on the above discussion, there are two main reasons for sintering ferric-rich ceramics at the low temperature with bauxite tailings as the main raw material: (a) The strong flux (K In order to make the ferric-rich ceramics prepared by using bauxite tailings as the main raw material has a wide application field, it is necessary to improve the strength of the ceramics. By optimizing the chemical composition of ceramics, research provides a facile and controllable method for the preparation of high-strength ceramics.    By adjusting the chemical composition of ceramics, sample D with a flexural strength of 197.41 MPa was successfully prepared at 1130 °C. Ferric-rich ceramics with high strength and low sintering temperatures will have broad application prospects. It also provides a convenient method for the efficient use of solid waste bauxite tailings. Ceramic proppant is an important application area for high-strength ceramics. Therefore, ceramic proppants were prepared using ferric-rich ceramics from bauxite tailings as the main raw material. Sample D was chosen to be the final formula. At best sintering temperature of 1130 °C, ceramic proppants showed the optimum performance. The apparent density was 2.78 g/cm Low temperature sintered high-strength ceramics were successfully prepared by optimizing the chemical composition of ceramics. At the same time, ceramic proppants in line with national standards were successfully synthesized. Based on the above study, the following conclusions can be drawn. Low-temperature sintering of ferric-rich ceramics was mainly attributed to high content of Fe Ferric-rich ceramics performance of flexural strength was reached a maximum of 197.41 MPa sintered only at 1130 °C. Cost-effective ceramics have enormous application potential. Low-cost ceramic proppants that meet national standards have a clear competitive advantage in the market. The use of bauxite tailings to prepare high-strength ceramics will be one of the effective ways to utilize bauxite tailings. This work was financially supported by the