Manganese extraction from low-grade ores was investigated by using glucose as a reducing agent in dilute nitric acid medium. Ore characterisation by X-ray and SEM denoted that manganese is present as a mixed oxide Mn7O13 (6MnO2·MnO) surrounding and joining together aluminosilicate fragments. The effects of temperature, particle size, glucose and nitric acid concentrations were investigated and compared with previous results using H2SO4. The operating conditions of leaching were optimised to obtain maximum manganese extraction and purity by performing sequential factorial designs and evaluating the statistical significance of the different factors by analysis of variance (ANOVA). The optimised conditions are 90 °C, stoichiometric nitric acid, −20% below stoichiometric glucose and 295–417 μm size fraction. The stoichiometric reagent concentrations were evaluated according to the following reaction assuming all manganese in the ore as Mn(IV):
                        
                           C6H12O6+12MnO2+24H+=6CO2+12Mn2++18H2O
                        
                     
                  
                  Optimised leaching conditions with HNO3 give up to 99% manganese extraction, <0.05% iron dissolution and reduced reagent consumption compared to previous tests using H2SO4.Manganese is a strategic element used in several industrial activities such as steel production, preparation of dietary additives, fertilizers, cells and fine chemicals ( Adopting a zero-waste approach, carbohydrates from agricultural wastes are low-cost, renewable and nonhazardous reducing agents that can be used for manganese leaching at 70–90 °C under mild acidic conditions ( The use of nitric acid is investigated in this work as an alternative to H The advantages of using nitric acid are therefore: the recovery of a secondary product in the purification step (NH the reuse of nitric acid from the activation step in the leaching stage. The aim of this work is to optimize the leaching conditions using nitric acid with particular attention to the effects of temperature, glucose and nitric acid concentrations, particle size and acid type (sulphuric versus nitric). Experimental tests were performed according to sequential factorial designs to maximise the information, minimise experimental labour and to evaluate statistically the significance of the principal effects and possible interactions among the investigated factors. Manganese ores were collected from an Italian pyrolusite mine located in the North of Latium. Samples were ground in a two-step process using a jaw crusher (yielding ore particle size ranging from 1 to 2 cm) and then a cone gyratory crusher to obtain the 80% in weight with particle dimensions smaller than 417 μm (bulk sample). The particle size distribution of crushed ore was determined by a Ro-Tap testing sieve shaker. The quantitative chemical composition was determined by X-ray Fluorescence (XRF) on bulk sample and size fractions. The main mineral components of the ore were identified by X-ray Diffraction (XRD) analyses. Ore morphology was investigated by Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) and by thin sections of size fractionated samples observed under a polarized microscope. Thin sections of representative subsamples of each size fraction were prepared by mixing with a transparent paste, gluing the mixture on a glass and polishing down to 30–40 μm. Leaching tests were carried out using 10 g of ore and 100 ml of leaching solution in closed glass flasks placed in a thermostated Dubnoff shaker at 200 rpm. The levels of glucose and nitric acid considered in the factorial designs were evaluated as excess or deficient with respect to the stoichiometric molar value calculated according to the overall For simplicity, all the manganese in the ore (evaluated by XRF) is assumed to be Mn(IV). The operating conditions investigated in the different sequential factorial designs are reported in The experimental results were examined by the analysis of variance (ANOVA) to estimate the significance of the principal effects and interactions of the operating factors on the investigated variables during the leaching tests ( The experimental error contribution (SS The other sums of the squares (SS Characterisation of the ore was carried out by determining the particle size distribution, the elemental analysis of the bulk and sized fractions, and the mineralogical composition. Particle size distribution, as wt.%, denoted that the two-step grinding procedure adopted in this work generated large amounts of fine particles (39.8%<74 μm) ( The results of chemical analysis on bulk material ( SEM analyses ( In order to optimise the operating conditions of the leaching, the effect of temperature, acid concentration, glucose concentrations, particle size and acid type were statistically evaluated by performing sequential factorial designs and related ANOVA ( Levels of each factor in the first factorial design were initially chosen according to previous results by using H The analyses of manganese and iron dissolution (see 87–99% Mn extraction can be achieved after 23 h depending upon conditions. Iron is initially solubilized and then precipitates after 3 h ( ANOVA reveals that the nitric acid concentration does not significantly influence manganese and iron dissolution under the investigated conditions, whereas temperature positively affects manganese dissolution with no effect on iron ( In the following factorial designs, the temperature was therefore fixed at the maximum value, whilst glucose and nitric concentrations were considered at lower levels. In the second factorial design, the effects of a stoichiometric deficiency of glucose and nitric acid were investigated at 90 °C using bulk samples of the ore. Maximum and minimum levels for glucose and nitric acid concentrations were −20% (below stoichiometry) and 0% (stoichiometric ) with the central point set at −10% ( The change of acid concentration from −20% to stoichiometric has no effect on iron dissolution, but positively affects manganese extraction. Glucose does not significantly influence the extractions of both metals. This shows that manganese dissolution is mainly responsible for acid consumption under these conditions. In fact, quartz and aluminosilicates ( According to these first two factorial designs results, in subsequent tests the acid concentration was selected at the stoichiometric value, whilst lower concentrations of glucose were investigated. The effect of glucose concentration in the range from −40% to −20% below stoichiometry was investigated in the third factorial design at 90 °C and using stoichiometric nitric acid. In this case, ANOVA found that the change of glucose concentration has a positive effect on the manganese dissolution. Thus, the optimum level of glucose concentration to ensure quantitative manganese extraction with minimum reagent consumption was fixed at −20% below stoichiometry. This is because the stoichiometric concentration assumes all the manganese in the ore was Mn(IV) when in fact a mixed oxide Mn Factorial designs I, II and III were performed on bulk material obtained by ore grinding. The fourth design investigated the effect of particle size by considering two distinct ore fractions obtained by ore sieving. The fine “low” fraction was made up of particle size ranging from 74 to 104 μm and the coarse “high” fraction from 295 to 417 μm. The whole factorial design was replicated three times ( When the manganese dissolution for the two fractions are compared at the same leaching time, the extraction is surprisingly higher for the coarse fraction than for the fine fraction. ANOVA analysis confirmed that increasing the particle size has a significant positive effect on Mn dissolution. This result is quite unusual because the fine fraction should have the largest specific surface area. In order to explain these unexpected but reproducible results, thin sections of both size fractions were prepared and observed. These analyses showed that the fine-low fraction especially is characterised by large amounts of manganese oxide particles (smaller than 74 μm) filling the pores of the pumice matrix. These fine particles, generated by grinding more exposed surfaces, are less accessible to leaching solution once encapsulated in the pumice pores and more subject to blinding by precipitated iron oxides. The leaching performances of sulphuric and nitric acid were compared in the fifth factorial design by using the same two ore fractions of the fourth factorial design, at 90 °C and −20% below stoichiometry of glucose ( Nitric acid gave significantly higher manganese extraction and lower associated iron dissolution in accord with other sulphuric acid experimental results reported in the literature ( The increase in particle size in the investigated range positively affects Mn dissolution. Reductive leaching conditions for a low-grade manganese ore using nitric acid were optimised with respect to manganese and iron dissolution by planning tests according to sequential factorial designs. The investigated factors were temperature, nitric acid concentration, glucose concentration, particle size and type of acid (sulphuric versus nitric). ANOVA was used to statistically evaluate the effect of each factor and possible interactions. The best operating conditions giving the highest manganese and lowest iron extraction were stoichiometric nitric acid and glucose [based upon the actual Mn(IV) content of the ore] for 23 h at 90 °C using coarsely ground ore. In particular, the results showed that the use of nitric acid instead of sulphuric acid gives higher manganese and lower iron dissolution and avoids the need for separate iron precipitation from leach liquor. In addition, leaching with HNO Further studies are required to verify these findings on different manganese ores to highlight the effect of mineral species. Meanwhile, further studies are continuing on the production and characterisation of CMD from evaporated leach liquors [containing up to 50% Mn(NO Manganese data Iron data