The morphology and size of hydroxyapatite Ca10(PO4)6(OH)2 (denoted HAP) can be controlled under hydrothermal treatment assisted with different dendrimers, such as carboxylic terminated poly(amidoamine) (PAMAM) and polyhydroxy terminated PAMAM. The structure and morphology were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD), infrared spectroscopy (IR) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). IR spectra were also used to investigate the complexation of Ca2+ with PAMAM. The results revealed that the inner cores of the PAMAM dendrimers are hydrophilic and potentially open to calcium ions, since interior nitrogen moieties serve as complexation sites, especially in case of the polyhydroxy terminated PAMAM. And the reasonable mechanism of crystallization was proposed that it can be attributed to the localization of nucleation site: external or interior PAMAM. Additionally, the PAMAM dendrimer with carboxylic and polyhydroxy groups has an effective influence on the size and shape of hydroxyapatite (HAP) nanostructures. Different crystal morphology was accomplished by adsorption of different dendrimers onto specific faces of growing crystals, altering the relative growth rates of the different crystallographic faces and leading to different crystal habits.Calcium phosphate in the form of plate-like or needle-shaped crystals of hydroxyapatite (HAP; Ca Although many macromolecules, such as stearic acid, monosaccharides and related molecules were used to prepare hydroxyapatite, they are not suitable for constructing ordered structures of the nanopaticles. Unlike linear polymers, dendrimers are composed of a core molecule, hyperbranches, which regularly extend from the core, and terminal groups. Thus, dendrimers have a definite molecular weight and size. In addition, they can encapsulate mental complexes, nanoparticles, or other inorganic and organic guest molecules As a continuation of our studies on effect of PAMAM with different terminated groups on the crystallization of inorganic compounds at hydrothermal condition Our synthetic approach follows a bio-mineralization process of HA nanostructures assisted with –C(CH An X-ray diffraction (XRD) study was firstly carried out using a Bruker AXS D8 ADVANCE X-ray diffractometer (with Cu Kα radiation at 40 The crystal phases of the obtained hydroxyapatite were characterized by XRD patterns. The morphology and size of the as-obtained hydroxyapatite nanocrystallines are also directly characterized by TEM images ( To confirm the complexation of PAMAM dendrimers with as-prepared HAP, the samples obtained with PAMAM dendrimers were characterized by FTIR spectra ( It was proposed that the PAMAM dendrimer might serve as nucleation site due to calcium binding on the carboxylic acid groups present on the surface and the amphipathic half-generation dendrimer act as supramolecular (micellar) aggregate which might serve as nucleation site To further confirm the interaction between Ca It is difficult to fully understand the mechanism of the variation of the crystals. We assume that the difference presented in the present study is attributed to the electrostatic interactions and stereochemical character of different terminated dendrimers That is because the PAMAM dendrimers present in the crystallization solution can block the incorporation of mineral ions into the crystal surface. This interference gives rise to the inhibition of crystal growth and changes in the properties and morphology of the crystal. In summary, the nanoscaled HAP was successfully synthesized by hydrothermal crystallization at 150 This work was supported by the National Science Foundation of Shanghai (No. 03ZR14073), the youth Science Foundation of Shanghai Higher Education (No. 03DQ23), the Shanghai Rising-Star Program of Shanghai (04qmx1444), the Shanghai Leading Academic Discipline Project (T0402), the Key Subject of Education Ministry of China and the Science Grant (No. 870) and the Key Subject of Applied Chemistry (No. 1) of Shanghai Normal University.