Adsorption mechanism of l-cysteine on pyrite was investigated by thermogravimetric and electrochemical techniques. TG curves provided the direct evidence for chemisorption of cysteine on pyrite surface. Once cysteine adsorbed to pyrite surface, E
                     corr (corrosion potential) sharply lowered whereas I
                     corr (corrosion current) increased rapidly. Pyrite became more susceptible to be oxidized even at lower potential as cysteine was added. However, the mechanism for pyrite oxidation does not fundamentally change, although cysteine can obviously accelerate oxidation rate of pyrite. These findings have important implications for understanding the mechanism of bacterial adhesion to pyrite and even metal sulfide bioleaching.Bio-hydrometallurgical operations have been successfully applied to the recovery of metals from sulfide ores in many countries ( Although cysteine has proved highly effective to enhance pyrite leaching, the mechanism involved was not well understood yet. Tributsch et al. speculated that the active group sulfydryl (–SH) of cysteine molecule was involved in bio-leaching process ( In addition, cysteine may play another role in microbial hydrometallurgy. Blake et al. reported that purified recombinant aporusticyanin and intact Therefore, it is fundamentally interesting and significant to investigate how cysteine interacts to mineral. Our previous study revealed that chemisorption dominated the interaction between pyrite and cysteine based on the results of Langmuir-type adsorption isotherm, FTIR and XRD analyses ( Pyrite used in experiment was well-crystallized mineral from Hunan Geological Museum. Its chemical composition analysis by scanning electron probe was reported elsewhere ( DSC-TGA measurement was performed by using a Simultaneous DSC-TGA (SDT) Q600 thermal analyzer under air atmosphere with a flowing rate of 100 All electrochemical measurements were carried out using standard three-electrode cell on Model The TG curves with different heating rates are shown in It is shown that at the heating rate of 8, 12, and 16 Compared to  In order to obtain more explicit image, the curves are magnified at potentials between − The peak During the negative scan, a sharp peak Then 1 Linear polarization measurement proceeded on M352 software. The entire potential scan was programmed to ± It can be obviously observed that corrosion process of pyrite was dependant of pH. Under nearly neutral condition, both corrosion current Based on the discussion above, it is of interest to reexamine the issue of the interaction between aporusticyanin and pyrite ( The interaction pattern between pyrite and cysteine was investigated to reveal how cysteine accelerates pyrite dissolution in biomining operation. TG curves provided the direct evidence for chemisorption of cysteine on pyrite surface. It suggests that cysteine may play a critical role in bacterial adhesion to pyrite. Once cysteine was adsorbed to sulfide surface, pyrite can be readily oxidized at lower potential. Cysteine may act as a bridge or conductor to facilitate electronic charge transfer from pyrite and end-product. However, although cysteine can obviously accelerate oxidation rate of pyrite, pyrite oxidation mechanism does not fundamentally change. The authors gratefully acknowledged the financial support from the