Background
                  Shoulder hemiarthroplasty (HA) has been the standard treatment for complex proximal humerus fractures in the elderly requiring surgery but not amenable to fixation. Reverse total shoulder arthroplasty (RTSA) has also emerged as a costly albeit highly effective alternative. The purpose of this study was to compare the cost-effectiveness of nonoperative fracture care, HA, and RTSA for complex proximal humerus fractures from the perspective of both U.S. payors and hospitals.
               
                  Methods
                  A Markov model was constructed for the treatment alternatives. Costs were expressed in 2013 U.S. dollars and effectiveness in quality-adjusted life-years (QALYs). The principal outcome measure was incremental cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER). Sensitivity analyses were performed to evaluate model assumptions.
               
                  Results
                  In the base case, from the payor perspective, RTSA was associated with an ICER of $8100/QALY; HA was eliminated from payor analysis as a cost-ineffective strategy. From the hospital perspective, however, HA was not cost-ineffective and the ICER for HA was $36,700/QALY, with RTSA providing incremental effectiveness at $57,400/QALY. RTSA was the optimal strategy in 61% and 54% of payor and hospital probabilistic sensitivity analyses, respectively. The preferred strategy was dependent on associated QALY gains, primary RTSA cost, and failure rates for RTSA.
               
                  Conclusions
                  RTSA can be a cost-effective intervention in the surgical treatment of complex proximal humerus fractures. HA can also be a cost-effective intervention, depending on the cost perspective (cost-ineffective for payor but cost-effective for the hospital). This analysis highlights the opportunities for increased cost-sharing strategies to alleviate the cost burden on hospitals.Proximal humerus fractures represent 5% of all injuries to the appendicular skeleton Since the introduction of RTSA in the United States, there has been increased national utilization, Cost-effectiveness analyses aim to understand the economic value of an intervention from the perspective of extending and improving a patient's quality of life and not just from a cost perspective alone. As such, the goal of value-based care is to maximize the clinical benefit accrued to patients while keeping the cost of achieving these benefits within stakeholders' willingness to pay (WTP). Cost-effectiveness analysis in the United States has traditionally been performed from a societal cost perspective, with the goal of capturing a global cost perspective and reporting cost-effectiveness from the perspective of all possible accruable costs. As new payment models are introduced and various stakeholders within the U.S. health care system are held responsible for attendant costs, economists have asked for increased attention to the specific cost perspectives of various stakeholders in the health care industry (ie, governmental, payor, and hospital). The purpose of this study was to use Markov model analyses to estimate the cost-effectiveness from both the payor and the hospital perspective of 3 management strategies for complex proximal humerus fractures requiring operative management but not amenable to fixation: nonoperative care, HA, and RTSA. Secondarily, we sought to understand the variables that influence the cost-effectiveness of these interventions. We developed a Markov state-transition model to simulate treatment options and subsequent health and economic outcomes for patients with complex proximal humerus fractures that require surgery but are not amenable to fixation. Markov models create mutually exclusive health states through which patients transition over predefined analytic cycles. In our base case, we assumed a 70-year-old patient with a complex proximal humerus fracture that could be treated either nonoperatively or with shoulder arthroplasty (HA or RTSA). It was assumed that the nature of the fracture or bone stock was not amenable to open reduction–internal fixation. Comparative value was expressed using an incremental cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER)—cost per QALY gained. In accordance with national guidelines for reporting cost-effectiveness results, strategies that were dominated—less effective and more costly, or less effective with a higher cost per QALY gained—were excluded from further incremental analysis. Our analysis consisted of 3 Markov states depicting the 3 treatment strategies. At the start of the model, patients were assigned to 1 of the 3 treatment strategies under investigation. State-transition probabilities were based on the following probability types: annual probability of surgical failure, probability of surgical success or failure, and annual probability of electing to undergo surgical intervention ( Utilities assigned to nonoperative management and HA were derived from 2-year randomized controlled trial data. There is a significant lack of price transparency with regard to devices and implants within orthopedics. We used a lifetime horizon for analysis with life-table mortality rates used until 100 years of age, at which age all surviving subjects were assumed to be deceased and transitioned to the “dead” health state. We examined the sensitivity of base case results to all model inputs using both deterministic and probabilistic sensitivity analyses. We conducted probabilistic sensitivity analysis using Monte Carlo simulation. Monte Carlo simulation samples across prespecified distributions in cost-effectiveness models with relative uncertainty to provide a range and spread for cost-effectiveness. For the base case payor analysis, HA and RTSA were associated with $15,300 and $18,100 in discounted lifetime costs, respectively. In the base case hospital analysis, HA and RTSA were associated with $63,600 and $92,200 in lifetime costs, respectively. There were no costs associated with nonoperative management. Lifetime discounted QALY gains for nonoperative care, HA, and RTSA were 7.91, 9.64, and 10.18, respectively. In the payor analysis, HA was both less effective and had a higher cost per QALY gained than RTSA when both interventions were incrementally compared with nonoperative treatment. As such, HA was eliminated from incremental analysis because of the principle of extended dominance ( We performed a 1-way sensitivity analysis on all model variables and assumptions to understand which variables influenced the preferred cost-effective strategy. The model was sensitive to patient age, QALY benefits, operative costs, and success probabilities for RTSA. A full explanation of model sensitivities is presented in Probabilistic sensitivity analysis was performed using 100,000 Monte Carlo simulations to account for overall uncertainty and chance related to model inputs. At a cost-effectiveness threshold of $100,000/QALY, RTSA, HA, and nonoperative intervention were, respectively, the optimal cost-effective strategies in 61.0%, 34.7%, and 4.3% of payor analyses and 53.8%, 37.4%, and 8.8% of hospital analyses (Supplementary Fig. 1, available on the journal's website at HA has been the standard treatment for complex proximal humerus fractures requiring surgery but not amenable to fixation. RTSA has gained popularity for the management of these injuries, but high RTSA implant costs may slow the utilization of the procedure for this condition. Payors, hospitals, and surgeons are the key stakeholders navigating financial pressures and influencing the utilization of new implant technologies. The purpose of this study was to understand the cost-effectiveness of different treatment options in the management of complex proximal humerus fractures; we also sought to understand the variables that influence the preferred cost-effective option. In this study, we found that RTSA in the management of complex proximal humerus fractures can be a cost-effective intervention from both the payor and hospital perspectives. Compared with nonoperative management and HA, the ICER for RTSA is below the $100,000/QALY societal WTP threshold. The economics of treating proximal humerus fractures has not been well studied. One prior retrospective review In this study, we adopted payor and hospital perspectives for analysis. RTSA was cost-effective from both cost perspectives, but there was disagreement between the payor and hospital perspectives on the role of HA. Whereas HA is a dominated and cost-ineffective strategy from the payor's perspective, from the hospital perspective, both HA and RTSA are viable and cost-effective options. Our cost-effectiveness plot for the hospital perspective ( We used sensitivity analyses to better understand how the preferred cost-effective strategy was influenced by model inputs. The cost-effectiveness of the interventions under study was influenced to varying degrees by the patient's age, QALY inputs, cost of shoulder arthroplasty, and probabilities for success or failure associated with RTSA (a full explanation is presented in We uniquely adopt a payor and hospital cost perspective for our analysis. This type of dual perspective cost-effectiveness methodology is not typically applied in U.S.-based studies. The U.S. Panel on Cost-Effectiveness in Health and Medicine recommends a societal analysis perspective for cost-effectiveness studies. The management of proximal humerus fractures remains contentious. An increasingly referenced study This study has certain limitations. Study assumptions are limited by the strength of the available literature. Although there is a growing body of evidence, there are few trials looking at the interventions of interest. We preferentially selected systematic review evidence when available, and we used sensitivity analyses to highlight which assumptions in our model drive the conclusions. However, for certain assumptions (eg, utilities), assumptions were based on single studies that ranged from level II to level IV evidence. Continued work and attention can be given to these variables in future investigations. In this analysis, we specifically looked at proximal humerus fractures that were operative in nature but were not amenable to internal fixation. This limits the generalizability of our conclusion; however, it establishes that the new technology to address this specific indication can be cost-effective. Our use of hospital charge data may also not be an accurate reflection of costs to the hospital; obtaining true hospital costs may require microcosting. We found that compared with nonoperative management and HA, RTSA can be a cost-effective strategy in the management of complex proximal humerus fractures. Regardless of cost analysis perspective, RTSA is well below the $100,000/QALY WTP threshold. Payor and hospital perspectives differ on whether HA should be regarded as a cost-ineffective strategy, in part because there is a significant cost differential between HA and RTSA for the hospital. Increased cost sharing for RTSA may better align incentives and ultimately provide patients with this highly effective treatment for complex proximal humerus fractures. Frank McCormick reports grants from Zimmer, outside the submitted work. David M. Dines reports personal fees from Biomet, outside the submitted work. In addition, he has a patent with Biomet with royalties paid. Edward V. Craig reports personal fees from Biomet, outside the submitted work. In addition, he has a patent with Biomet with royalties paid. Lawrence V. Gulotta reports personal fees from Biomet, outside the submitted work. The other authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following is the supplementary data to this article: