The influence of a commercial electroless Ni–P (EN) deposit known as Nimet's HP autocatalytic nickel®, on the fatigue properties of a quenched and tempered SAE 4340 steel, has been investigated. Such an EN deposit had a thickness of approximately 10 μm, a P content of approximately 12 wt.% and it was evaluated in two different conditions: (a) as-deposited; and (b) deposited and post-heat treated (PHT) at 723 K for 1 h, the condition in which the deposit showed its maximum hardness. It has been determined that the application of such a coating to the steel substrate gives rise to a significant reduction of the fatigue life and fatigue limit, in comparison with the uncoated material, which is more marked in the PHT condition. The reductions in fatigue life have been quantified in terms of the computed values of the Basquin parameters of the materials tested under different conditions. Thus, it has been shown that the fatigue life of the steel can be reduced up to 93% in the as-deposited condition and up to 97% in the as-deposited and PHT condition. The fatigue limit can also be reduced between 12 and 23% depending upon the condition of the coating. From the microscopic point of view, it has been observed that the fatigue fracture of the substrate-coating composite initiates in the deposit and that it remains well adhered to the substrate during fatigue testing since interfacial cracks have been very rarely observed. Such adhesion characteristics enhance the transference of the early cracks nucleated towards the substrate steel, a belief that is supported by the analysis of the fracture surfaces of the samples tested at different stress levels.EN deposits represent an important group of metallic coatings that are employed on a wide range of substrates to provide protection against corrosion and abrasive wear. Such platings have found different applications in a variety of fields like electrical and electronics, oil and gas, machinery, aerospace, motor, chemical, foodstuffs, textile and printing industries. Currently, their use continues to increase due to a number of advantages that these coatings present, in comparison with other plating methods Regarding previous studies carried out on the effect of EN deposits on the fatigue properties of high strength steels (ultimate tensile strength of the order of 1200 MPa), Wu and coworkers On the other hand, Zhang et al. More recently, Garcés et al. Thus, the present investigation has been conducted in order to study further both the fatigue life and fatigue limit of a SAE 4340 steel which has been oil quenched and tempered prior to plating at industrial scale with an EN deposit of 10 μm in thickness and a P content of approximately 12 wt.%, known commercially as Nimet's HP autocatalytic Nickel®, which is believed to have better adhesion properties than the EN coating employed in the previous investigation The present study has been carried out with samples of a SAE 4340 steel with the following composition (wt.%): 0.41 C, 0.79 Mn, 0.24 Si, 0.79 Cr, 0.23 Mo and 1.73 Ni. The alloy was already provided in the quenched and tempered condition. This material is widely employed in the manufacture of automotive crankshafts and rear axle shafts, aircraft crankshafts, connecting rods, propeller hubs, gears, drive shafts, landing gear parts and heavy duty parts of rock drills. The material was provided as bars of approximately 16 mm diameter and 6 m length. Such bars were cut to pieces of different lengths: nine pieces of approximately 120 mm for machining tensile specimens; 102 pieces of approximately 102 mm for machining the fatigue samples; and seven pieces of approximately 10 mm for characterizing the deposit and to conduct hardness tests. Both the tensile and fatigue specimens had a gage diameter of 6.35 mm and shoulder diameter of 12.7 mm. However, the tensile samples had a gage length of 25.4 mm and a fillet radius of 12.3 mm, according to the ASTM standard A-370. The fatigue specimens had a curved gage length of 38.1 mm along the cord, machined following a continuous radius of 58.73 mm. The specimens were machined in several steps, with a continuous reduction in the depth of cut of the material. The turning operation was conducted on a horizontal turret lath at low speeds in order to minimize the introduction of residual stresses at the surface of the samples. Finally, the specimens were ground with successive SiC papers grit 100–1200 in order to eliminate the circumferential notches and scratches, and polished mechanically to a ‘mirror-like’ finish. The surface roughness within the gage length of the samples was maintained below approximately 0.2 μm. All the samples were plated at Nimet Industries Inc. (South Bend, Indiana, USA). The deposit applied is known commercially as Nimet's HP Autocatalytic Nickel®, with a phosphorous content of 12 wt.% and a thickness of approximately 10 μm, which was corroborated by means of the ball cratering technique (Calotest, CSEM) and image analysis (LECO 500). In order to determine the optimum PHT temperature a number of heat treatments were conducted at temperatures of 673, 723, 773, 823 and 873 K for 1 h in an argon atmosphere. Subsequently, hardness measurements were conducted on the cross section of the shortest cylindrical samples employed for this purpose. A total of 10 microhardness measurements were carried out on each specimen according to the ASTM standards B-578 and E-384. Such measurements were conducted employing a Knoop indenter (Shimadzu, Japan) with a load of 50 g applied during 10 s. As discussed later, this evaluation determined that the highest hardness of this deposit is achieved at a temperature of 723 K. Such a PHT has a negligible effect on the mechanical properties of the substrate steel which, after quenching, is usually tempered at a much higher temperature. Thus, three tensile and 24 fatigue specimens were PHT at this temperature for 1 h in an argon atmosphere, employing a heating rate of 473 K/h and allowing the samples to cool within the furnace after the treatment. The chemical analysis of the plating both in the as-deposited and PHT conditions was determined by means of SEM techniques (Hitachi S-2400, Japan) with EDS facilities. The observations were conducted at a constant potential of 20 kV. Tensile tests were carried out on a computer-controlled servohydraulic machine (Instron 8502, USA) at a cross-head speed of 3 mm/min. At least three samples were employed for characterizing the monotonic mechanical properties of both the coated and uncoated substrate. Fatigue tests were carried out under rotating bending conditions ( For the coated and PHT samples the tests were conducted at 498, 536, 574 and 612 MPa, corresponding to 44, 52, 55 and 59% of the yield stress of the base steel in this condition. A total of 24 samples were employed for evaluating the fatigue properties of the uncoated substrate, 24 for the coated material and 24 for the coated and PHT substrate, which fulfills the number of specimens required in S–N testing for reliability data according to the ASTM standard 739 (12–24 samples). Thus, the testing procedure followed in the present work allowed a replication greater than 80%. It is important to point out that in order to make possible a meaningful comparison of the fatigue life of the uncoated, coated and coated and PHT specimens, all the samples were mechanically prepared in order to have similar mirror-like polished surfaces before testing. The fatigue limit of the coated and uncoated specimens was determined by means of the staircase method employing a step of 7 MPa and 10 samples for each condition. According to the ASTM standard E-468, infinite life was specified at a number of 5×10 The fracture surfaces of the samples were closely examined by means of SEM techniques, particularly in relation to the site initiation of fatigue cracks and the different stages of their subsequent propagation.  As expected, the typical microstructure of the substrate evaluated on the scanning electron microscope revealed the presence of a large number of relatively coarse martensite plates together with carbides, visible as small particles which constitute a typical tempered martensite structure. It has already been mentioned that the coating thickness was evaluated by means of the ball cratering technique and also SEM observations, which showed a mean value of approximately 10 μm. As shown in It is widely accepted that the residual stresses in the deposit play a fundamental role in the fatigue behavior of any coated material and that such stresses are intimately associated, among other variables, with the chemical composition of the deposit. Regarding EN platings, an early investigation conducted by Parker and Shah In the as-deposited condition, the EN Nimet's HP autocatalytic Nickel® deposit presented a hardness of approximately 488±78 KHN In order to evaluate if the EN Nimet's HP autocatalytic Nickel® deposit had any influence on the monotonic mechanical properties of the composite coating–substrate material, a number of tensile tests were conducted with samples in the uncoated and coated conditions. The substrate material had a yield stress of approximately 1037±43 MPa and an ultimate tensile strength (UTS) of approximately 1143±30 MPa. In the as-deposited condition the coated samples showed somewhat lower mechanical properties: yield stress of 980±32 MPa and UTS of 1077±26 MPa, whereas in the as-deposited and PHT condition the yield stress was observed to increase slightly to 1010±19 MPa and the UTS remained constant at a value of 1077±18 MPa. Thus, it can be stated that the deposits plated onto the substrate employed in the present study did not give rise to any significant change either in yield stress or in UTS of the base steel, which is not surprising since in the present case the thickness of such deposits is so small that its effect is negligible. In contrast to the results reported by Garcés et al. In relation to the fatigue tests conducted in order to evaluate the fatigue life of both the coated and uncoated samples, the determination of the monotonic mechanical properties of the material allowed to establish a stress amplitude range of 612–726 MPa for the substrate which corresponded to a fraction of the yield stress of approximately 0.59–0.70. The coated samples in the as-deposited condition and after the corresponding PHT at 723 K were tested at a fraction of the yield stress ranging between approximately 0.55–0.66 and 0.49–0.61, respectively. The data showing the number of cycles prior to fracture ( The results obtained, regarding the fatigue properties of the coated and uncoated materials, have been plotted in In the as-deposited condition, at elevated alternating stress levels (726 MPa) the curve obtained for the plated samples indicates a reduction in fatigue life, in comparison with the uncoated substrate, of approximately 63%, whereas at low stresses (612 MPa) the samples present a reduction of approximately 93%. However, for the coated and PHT specimens the situation is even worse since at 726 MPa the fatigue life is reduced by 86%, whereas at 612 MPa it is reduced by 97%. As far as the reduction in fatigue limit is concern, for the samples in the as-deposited condition the reduction was of approximately 12% whereas for the PHT specimens it achieved approximately 23%. The linear relationship between the alternating stress and the number of cycles to failure in a double logarithmic scale indicates the validity of the simple parametric expression of the form earlier proposed by Basquin  A number of specimens tested under different alternating stress conditions were closely examined after failure by SEM in order to study, in more detail, the microstructural characteristics of the crack initiation sites, as well as the microstructural changes that take place both in the coating and substrate during the subsequent propagation of such cracks, leading eventually to the final fracture of the samples. For example, Some small secondary cracks that run parallel to the substrate–deposit interface are also clearly visible, as well as fatigue striations in some areas of the substrate near the interface. In general, after fracture, despite the elevated alternating stress applied to the samples, the deposit is observed to remain well adhered to the substrate. In relation to the samples in the PHT condition, All these observations lead to the conclusion that even though the deposit plated in this investigation, in the as-deposited condition, would be under compressive residual stresses due to its elevated P content, it has a lower fatigue strength than the substrate, which leads to the nucleation of fatigue cracks within it, prior to the nucleation of fatigue cracks at the substrate–deposit interface. Once such cracks have been nucleated, due to the preservation of the bonding at the interface, they propagate towards the substrate giving rise to a significant reduction in the fatigue properties of the steel. Thus, in agreement with the findings reported by Garcés et al. In summary, plating a high fatigue strength substrate with a deposit of lower fatigue properties could lead to a reduction in the fatigue properties of the composite material, particularly if a good bonding exists at the substrate–deposit interface which preserves its integrity. On the contrary, the fatigue properties of the composite material could be improved if the deposit performed better than the substrate under these conditions. The fatigue properties of a SAE 4340 steel could be severely decreased by plating it with an EN Nimet's HP Autocatalytic Nickel® deposit, even of 10 μm thickness. In the as-deposited condition, the decrease in fatigue life could reach between 63–93%, depending upon the alternating stress applied to the material, whereas the decrease in fatigue limit could be of 12%. In the PHT condition, the reduction in fatigue life could achieve 86–97% and that of fatigue limit could be of 23%. In agreement with previous findings, it is believed that such a reduction in fatigue properties takes place due to the early nucleation of fatigue cracks within the deposit which are subsequently propagated towards the substrate. Crack propagation is enhanced by the integrity of the substrate–deposit interface which is preserved by the good bonding between the two materials. Therefore, the use of EN platings, such as the one investigated in the present work, to improve the corrosion and wear properties of high strength steels, could lead to a severe reduction in the fatigue properties of the composite material since the low strength deposit would act as a surface notch, decreasing the time required for the nucleation of the fatigue cracks. The reduction in fatigue life has been found to be less marked for the samples in the as-deposited condition than those PHT. Also, the decrease in fatigue limit for both conditions seems to be less severe than that in fatigue life. The mechanical design of structural components and parts made of this steel and coated with EN deposits of this kind, in order to avoid a potential fatigue failure under high cycle fatigue conditions, should take into account the fatigue curves derived for the plated materials in the as-deposited and PHT conditions rather than that obtained for the unplated steel. However, such curves are expected to vary with the particular type of EN deposit, coating thickness and PHT applied after deposition. This investigation has been conducted with the financial support of the Venezuelan National Council for Scientific and Technological Research (CONICIT) through the project LAB-97000644 and the Scientific and Humanistic Development Council of the Central University of Venezuela (CDCH-UCV) through the project 08-17-4595-2000. J.A. Berrı́os is deeply grateful to the School of Mechanical Engineering, Faculty of Engineering and Architecture of the University of El Salvador.