In this study, the adsorption properties of synthetic zeolite produced from Brazilian coal fly ash were investigated for some heavy metal cations (Zn, Cu, Mn and Pb). The batch method has been employed, using metal concentrations in solution ranging from 100 to 3000mg/l. Preliminary statistical analysis has indicated that temperature and time of synthesis of zeolites were the most important variables that affect the their adsorption capacity. Results lead to the conclusion that a hydrothermal treatment can increase from 2 to 25 times the adsorption capacity (CA) of the coal ash comparing to its original capacity. The ion-exchange characteristic of the zeolites was determined using Langmuir, Freundlich and Dubinin–Kaganer–Radushkevich isotherms. The adsorption increases as cation concentrations in aqueous solution increases. The preference order observed for adsorption is Pb>Cu>Zn>Mn.Toxic soluble heavy metal species cause serious problems to ecosystems and this has been a great motivation for the growing number of research works on effluent treatment processes. Some of these processes are based on adsorptive properties of materials that may successfully immobilize heavy metals. Several natural or synthetic materials, such as bagasse, fly ash Zeolites are microporous crystalline hydrated aluminosilicates that can be considered as inorganic polymers built from an infinitely extending three-dimensional network (similar to a honeycomb) of tetrahedral TO The interstitial cations are not held firmly and can migrate quite freely through the voids of the lattice and are therefore readily exchanged Literature review shows that zeolites can be produced by hydrothermal methods from coal fly ashes On the other hand, many tons of fly ashes are produced as solid wastes every year in coal fired power stations. In southern Brazil, the coal consumption is about 3.7 This paper presents a study on adsorption of selected heavy metal cations in a synthetic zeolite produced from Brazilian coal fly ash. Temperature and time of zeolite synthesis were identified preliminarily as the most important variables that affect the adsorption of cations in solution. The fly ash used in this study originated from a coal thermo power station located in southern Brazil that operates with pulverized Brazilian coal. Ashes and synthetic zeolites produced by hydrothermal treatment were previously characterized chemically and mineralogically and subsequently used in adsorption experiments. These experiments were performed with synthetic solutions of sulphate salts of Pb(II), Cu(II), Zn(II), and Mn(II) prepared with analytical grade reagents in deionized water. The coal fly ash was submitted to hydrothermal treatment at different temperatures, reaction times, NaOH concentrations, solid/liquid ratios (S/L) and aluminum/silicon (Al/Si) ratios as shown in The molar ratio Al/Si was modified by adding analytical grade Al The hydrothermal treatment was carried out in a 450 The mineralogical characterization of the zeolites as well as of the ashes was carried out by X-ray diffraction (XRD) in a Bruker – AXS D5005 powder diffractometer with Goebel mirror and CoKα (35 The zeolites as well as the coal fly ash were washed up to pH 9 and subsequently dried at 60 The bottles were shaken for 2 The adsorption capacity was defined as a percentage and calculated by the equation The adsorption experiments for the heavy metals, Cu The obtained data were plotted and adjusted with isotherm adsorption models to analyze the cations adsorption onto the adsorbents. The XRD analysis of the ashes used for zeolite preparation is shown in   Several authors suggest that changes in synthesis temperatures lead to different zeolitic phases. The differences among adsorption capacities of the various zeolites synthesized may be credited to the different zeolitic phases present in the products of the hydrothermal synthesis The adsorption of different metal ion concentrations onto synthetic zeolite at 25 The preferred order observed for adsorption was Pb We used the Langmuir The Freundlich isotherm can be represented as An essential characteristic of Langmuir Isotherm can be expressed in a dimensional constant called equilibrium parameter (R The DKR equation can be represented as  The magnitude of The study demonstrates the application of Brazilian fly ash for zeolite synthesis by hydrothermal treatment. Statistical analysis shown that an increase of time and temperature in zeolite synthesis tends to increase the capacity of adsorption of ions tested onto products. The products obtained are effective adsorbent for removal of Pb