A series of laboratory batch flotation tests was conducted on a suite of calcium-ferrite-based slags made in continuous pilot plant smelting trials. The smelting tests were conducted as part of a wider CSIRO Minerals’ research project aimed at developing a single-stage continuous copper making process.
                  The slags treated included two moderately reduced low copper slags, an oxidised high copper slag and a very reduced low copper self-pulverising slag. The total copper content of the slags varied from 5.2% to 15.1% Cu. The copper was present in the form of metallic copper, oxide copper and copper ferrite phases with the dominant phase in all slags being metallic copper. The slags were crushed, ground, wet screened at 210 or 75 μm to remove coarse metallic particles of copper, and floated at natural pH (about pH 11) using reagents and conditions appropriate for the selective recovery of the copper phases.
                  In rougher–scavenger tests on the slags total copper recoveries between 80% and 87% were obtained for three of the slags tested. The best result for the fourth slag (low copper self-pulverising slag) was 74% copper recovery. Coarse copper metal was present in the flotation tails for this test suggesting the pre-flotation screen size was too coarse. Further optimisation of the grinding and flotation conditions for this slag should yield an improved copper recovery.
                  Minor differences in copper/iron selectivity for the flotation tests on the four slags were observed with the low copper slag giving the most selective result and the high copper slag the least selective result. These trends were generally consistent with the kinetic data obtained in the flotation tests and the given copper mineralogy for the different slag types.Over the past few years CSIRO Minerals has been conducting research aimed at developing a continuous copper converting process to replace the traditional two-stage batch process that is currently used to produce blister copper ( The research work has now been extended to focus on the development of a single-stage continuous copper making process (so-called direct copper converting) in which copper concentrates are converted to low sulphur blister copper in a single step, that is the smelting and converting steps occur in one continuous stage ( One feature of the direct copper converting process is that copper losses to the slag phase can be high, meaning the slag produced needs to be re-treated to recover the copper value. The feasibility of the whole copper making process will most likely depend on the efficiency and cost effectiveness of the copper recovery stage. The slags produced so far in single-stage copper making laboratory studies have varied in copper content from about 3% to 20% Cu. The copper can occur in the slag as copper metal (Cu Flotation has been identified as the most economical option to recover the copper from direct copper converting slags ( The results of batch flotation tests undertaken on a suite of slags made in laboratory smelting tests ( Laboratory batch flotation tests were conducted on four slag samples containing different levels of copper. The slags (referred to here as pilot plant slags) were made in continuous pilot plant smelting tests, conducted on-site at CSIRO Minerals using a Sirosmelt reactor and copper sulphide concentrates from MIM and Escondida. Details of the smelting trials are described by The slags treated included three prepared from MIM copper concentrate, namely a moderately reduced low copper slag, a more oxidised high copper slag, a very reduced low copper self-pulverising slag, and a fourth moderately reduced low copper slag prepared from Escondida copper concentrate. A description of the slags tested together with their chemical composition (ICP analysis) is given in The analytical results in All the pilot plant slags, except the self-pulverising slag, were crushed before grinding. The slags were crushed to pass 2 mm using a laboratory jaw crusher in closed circuit with a screen. Coarse pieces of metallic copper were removed by hand and discarded. They were not included in metal recovery calculations. Crushed or as received samples were then blended and riffled into 200 g lots for flotation testing. Sub-samples were cut out for chemical and sizing analyses. The amount of tramp copper removed during crushing, expressed as a percentage of the total slag weight, was variable and ranged from 0% to 2%. It is expected that in any continuous operation this tramp copper would be readily recovered. For each test, a 200 g batch of slag (as received or crushed) was mixed with 100 ml of distilled water and ground at 67% solids by weight in a small stainless steel rod mill (13 cm by 13 cm) with fifteen stainless steel rods (18 mm diameter). Grinding times were varied to achieve the desired P Coarse metallic copper was removed from the ground pulp prior to flotation by wet screening at either 210 or 75 μm. The oversize material was removed, dried, weighed and analysed, while the undersize portion became the flotation feed. The coarse metallic fractions (screen oversize) were included in the calculation of overall metal recoveries. Samples were floated in a 3 dm For both conditioning and flotation the impeller speed was 1200 rpm. Air was delivered to the cell at 8 dm The pulp pH and potential were monitored continuously during testing. The pulp potential was measured using a high-impedance, differential voltmeter with a platinum flag electrode and a calomel reference electrode. The performance of the electrode system was checked using standard ferric–ferrous ion solution ( The flotation collector used was a commercial potassium ethyl xanthate (KEX). A fresh batch of xanthate was prepared each day as a 0.1% w/v solution in distilled water. Laboratory grade sodium sulphide (Na Flotation tests were conducted on the wet screen undersize portions of the ground slag pulps. Standard operating procedures ( All tests were conducted at the natural pH of the respective slag mixtures, which was generally between pH 10.5 and 11.5, and a scraping rate of once every 5 s was maintained for all tests. Pulp potential was measured but not controlled and the natural Eh of the system was between 200 and 300 mV SHE. The potential decreased following the sulphide addition but returned to the air set potential after the 5 min aeration stage. The pulp volume was maintained at a preset level by small additions of distilled water. All flotation products were weighed wet, to allow calculation of water recoveries, washed with alcohol, dried and prepared for analysis in a standard manner. Full details of the test conditions used are given in Slag head samples and flotation products were assayed for total copper, iron, calcium, magnesium and silica by inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES) using a standard method. A separate sodium peroxide fusion was required for the silica analysis. Metallic copper was determined separately using a bromine–methanol leach procedure incorporating an ICP-AES finish. On-line monitoring of xanthate present in the pulp solution was conducted in a number of flotation tests. Filtered solution samples were collected continuously from the pulp during flotation and pumped to a diode array detector, set up to measure xanthate absorbance at 301 nm. The solution samples were then recycled back to the flotation cell. Sizing analyses was conducted on selected slags and flotation products using standard laboratory wet and dry screening methods. Where sub-sieve sizing was required a modified CSIRO cyclosizing technique was used ( X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were recorded on a Philips PW 1050 goniometer with a PW 1710 diffraction controller using CuKα radiation. Phases present were identified by comparison of the peak positions and intensities with data published by the International Centre for Diffraction Data (ICDD). Test results are discussed in terms of slag mineralogy, copper recovery, selectivity over gangue elements (especially iron), reagent considerations and particle size responses. The flotation response for each slag type is considered in sequence, which follows the chronological order in which the slags were produced and tested. Flotation tests have identification numbers SL28 to SL34. XRD analyses were conducted on all the pilot plant slags. The results show that the major copper phase present in all four slags was metallic copper (Cu In all the slags the major iron-bearing component was magnetite, with minor amounts of metallic iron. The magnesium occurred as a variety of magnesium and calcium/magnesium silicates, and the calcium was also present as calcium silicate phases. Flotation test conditions and reagent additions are listed in Under certain circumstances calcium-ferrite slag will self-pulverise, or disintegrate, during cooling ( The results in In the test on as received slag, without grinding (SL28), the total copper recovery was 73.5% at 16.0% Cu (total recovery is recovery by flotation and also from metallic copper recovered by wet screening prior to flotation). This represents an enrichment ratio for copper (ratio of concentrate copper grade to feed copper grade) of 3.02. By contrast, in the test on ground slag (SL29), the total copper recovery was 64.5% at 20.5% Cu, representing an enrichment ratio of 3.95. At first glance this result seems unusual in that grinding was expected to liberate more copper into floatable size ranges and yield a higher copper recovery. The final concentrate grade was higher in the test on the ground slag and in fact at comparable copper recoveries throughout the floats the copper grade of the concentrate is always higher in the test after grinding. This suggests that in spite of the lower overall copper recovery the liberation of copper-bearing particles has improved after grinding for this slag. The copper recovery from screening was significantly lower in the test after grinding; only 2.5% compared with 8.8% for the as received slag, reflecting the finer size distribution. In addition, the total copper recovery in the flotation stage decreased after grinding from 71% to 64%. These results suggest that using a finer screen in the test after grinding might have yielded a higher total copper recovery. To verify this the flotation tail from test SL29 was sized and each fraction assayed. The distribution data for copper is presented graphically in The grade of the +53 μm fraction (containing 31.8% of the copper in the tail) was 16.6% Cu while the grade of the +75 μm fraction (containing 6.13% of the copper) was 29.5% Cu. Recall the grade of the combined flotation (rougher/scavenger) concentrate for this test was 20.5% Cu. Combining the coarse material (+53 μm fraction) of the tail with the rougher/scavenger concentrate (in essence the equivalent to reducing the pre-flotation screen size from 210 to 53 μm) increases the overall copper recovery to 75.8% at a grade of 19.8% Cu. This result is better than the overall result from SL28 (73.5% recovery at 16.0% Cu), the comparative float on unground slag, in respect of both copper recovery and grade. While the above calculations help explain some of the differences between the two tests on the self-pulverising slag and indicate how it might be feasible to lift total copper recovery above 75% by optimising the screen size after grinding, the more important question is why the copper liberated by grinding into a floatable size range did not float as well as expected. Copper recoveries exceeded 90% in previous flotation tests on self-pulverising slags made in laboratory smelting trials from the same feedstock ( Spherical prills of metallic copper would be expected to be harder or slower to float than flakes or flattened copper metal particles given there is greater scope for air bubbles to make contact with flakes or flattened particles. Generally grinding has the effect of flattening spherical copper metallics and so this explanation would seem to be at odds with the present metallurgical results. However, the grind time for the self-pulverising slag was short (10 min compared with 22–32 min for the other slag types) due to the already fine size of the as received self-pulverising slag. The limited grinding may have had an impact on the extent to which any metallic prills present were flattened. Some optical or SEM studies would be needed to verify shape effects in this system. Another possibility relates to flotation retention time. The shape of the recovery-time plots for both tests indicates copper recovery has not reached a plateau after 20 min. One interpretation could be that the relatively coarse metallic copper is slow floating. Insufficient collector levels may be another possible reason for poor floatability of metallic copper. This possibility was investigated further by considering the collector (xanthate) level in the flotation pulp as a function of flotation time for both flotation tests. The collector concentration/time plot for test SL28 (as received slag) is presented as The three major peaks shown clearly in Only KEX collector was used in this study. Longer chain xanthates or other stronger collectors could also be considered in further work to help improve the floatability of coarse metallic copper. Samples of crushed Escondida, low copper and high copper pilot plant slags were each ground for different times to determine the grind time required to achieve a flotation feed P The results in The flotation tails from tests SL31 to SL33 were sized and each fraction assayed to determine the size distribution of the unfloated copper. The elemental distribution data is presented in The data in The comparative copper flotation behaviour with respect to the (pilot plant) slag type was considered in terms of the overall selectivity of copper over the main gangue element, iron, in the flotation tests conducted. A selectivity plot for four of the flotation tests undertaken is presented in The selectivity results in In a previous study ( It can be seen from In spite of the similarities in the extrapolated curves, that final copper recoveries were different for each comparable slag type for the laboratory and pilot plant slags suggests that further work is still needed to identify the reasons for differences in the copper flotation response that arise when the smelting step is scaled up from batch laboratory to continuous pilot plant level. On the basis of the evidence presented in this work it seems that understanding more fully the flotation behaviour of metallic copper in these systems should be the focus of any such studies. A series of batch laboratory flotation tests was conducted on a suite of different calcium-ferrite slags made in continuous pilot plant smelting trials. The slags included a moderately reduced low copper slag, a more oxidised high copper slag, a very reduced low copper self-pulverising slag, and a moderately reduced low copper Escondida slag. The slags varied in copper content from 5.2% to 15.1% Cu. The dominant form of copper in all the slags was metallic copper. A simple grinding/screening/flotation procedure was used in all tests with reagent additions typically 150–200 g/t KEX and 500–800 g/t Na In rougher/scavenger flotation tests on the pilot plant slags total copper recoveries between 80% and 87% were obtained for three of the slag types tested (low copper, high copper and Escondida). The best result for the forth slag (self-pulverising) was 74% copper recovery. Coarse copper metal was present in the flotation tails for this test suggesting the pre-flotation screen size was not optimal. It is expected that an improved copper recovery for this slag might be possible with an extended grind time, a finer pre-flotation screen size and possibly a longer float. The scope for improving the copper recovery for the other slag types to above the target 90% mark would seem to lie in optimising the flotation conditions to improve the floatability of relatively coarse metallic copper present. Minor differences in copper/iron selectivity for the flotation tests on the four slags were observed with the low copper slag giving the most selective result and the high copper slag the least selective result. These trends were generally consistent with the kinetic data obtained in the flotation tests and the given copper mineralogy for the different slags types. The more oxidised the slag, which is normally associated with a higher total copper content, the greater the proportion of copper present as copper oxide or copper spinel/ferrite phases, rather than as metallic copper. The spinel/ferrite phases would seem to be slower floating and given they contain both copper and iron, selective copper recovery is compromised by their presence. The authors wish to acknowledge Mr. Peter Guy and Mr. Graeme Heyes for assistance in conducting preliminary flotation testing, Mr. Mick Manuele for preparing samples for analysis, the staff of the Analytical Section of CSIRO Minerals for completing the analysis of flotation products, and Ms. Nicki Agron-Olshina for conducting XRD analysis. Financial support for this work was provided by the Australian Government Cooperative Research Centre program through the former G.K. Williams Cooperative Research Centre for Extractive Metallurgy, a joint venture between the CSIRO Division of Minerals and The University of Melbourne Department of Chemical Engineering.