The aim of this work is to investigate possible use of ultrasound waves in the concentration of colemanite from fine wastes. The retention time, pulp density, amount of feed and particle size were varied to determine the optimum conditions. The same sample was also tried to be cleaned with conventional mechanical attrition and washing methods, and results obtained by these two different methods were compared.
                  A colemanite concentrate containing 33.01% B2O3 was obtained from a feed containing 24.17% B2O3 with 84.93% recovery using mechanical attrition and washing. Concentrate containing 41.69% B2O3 was obtained with a recovery of 97.01% using ultrasound waves.Boron minerals are widely used in a wide range of industry with an increasing amount year by year. The importance of boron minerals are also increasing as the usage are widened. Therefore researches on the concentration and evaluation of boron ores have increased significantly. Sounds beyond hearable frequency by human ear are known as ultrasound. Ultrasound waves are widely used in industry from medicine to engineering ( The usage of ultrasound waves in boron concentration has been investigated in both laboratory and pilot plant scales successfully, and encouraging results have been obtained ( The cheapest and most known method for concentration of boron minerals is washing of clay out of boron minerals after mechanical attrition. In this method, fine clay particles that are either within the boron crystals or stuck on the boron minerals can not be removed from the surface. It could be possible to remove fine clay particles on boron mineral surfaces by using shearing forces of ultrasound waves. This method could be used for the beneficiation of fine colemanite particles from the fine wastes of mechanical attrition and washing. 1.5 million tons of colemanite concentration plant wastes have been accumulated in Eti Bor A.S. Emet Colemanite Company stock piles. The grade and particle size of wastes are 24.5% B Sample of having 24.17% B Experimental set consisted of a 400 The effects of residence time of ultrasonic treatment, water–solid ratio, amount of sample and particle size were tested to obtain optimum conditions. The same sample was also concentrated by means of conventional mechanical attrition and washing method. The experimental conditions of both methods are given below. The best results obtained by these two methods at optimum experimental conditions are given in Experimental conditions: Experiments were performed on −3 mm wastes having a grade of 24.45% B Cleaner concentrates were obtained as the residence time was increased. Pulp density affected the results significantly. It was found that lower pulp density produced cleaner concentrates. As the amount of material was decreased, the grade of concentrates also increased. The effects of ultrasonic waves on the dispersion of clay particles increased with increasing particle size. It was thought that ultrasonic waves penetrated better between coarser particles, leading to cleaner concentrates. It can be seen clearly that ultrasonic treatment produced better results than mechanical attrition and washing method. The best results obtained with ultrasonic treatment were 41.69% B It was observed that high grade colemanite concentrates with high recovery could be obtained from boron concentration plant wastes by removing fine clay particles from crystal surfaces by means of ultrasound waves. The only difficulty that may be encountered when employing this process is the need for higher capacity tanks because of long residence time. Despite this difficulty, it seems possible to use ultrasonic waves in the concentration of colemanite wastes. Better results could be obtained by using high power ultrasonic wave generators. The investment expenses might be high for ultrasonic beneficiation. But energy and operating costs are very low. On the other hand, both negative environmental effects of accumulated wastes would be reduced and considerable amounts of colemanite could be beneficiated. Therefore applicability of the process seems economical.