The reactions of 
                        
                     OH, H
                        
                      and eaq
                     − with 2,4,5-trichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4,5-T) and 4-chloro-2-methylphenoxyacetic acid (MCPA) were studied by pulse radiolysis. The site of 
                        
                     OH-radicals addition to the aromatic ring of 2,4,5-T was found to be—C1: ∼18%, C2/C4/C5: total ∼28% and C3/C6: total ∼41%. The overall rate constants with OH-radicals were k(
                        
                     OH+2,4,5-T)=6.4 (±0.5)×109
                     moldm−3
                     s−1 and k(
                        
                     OH+MCPA)=8.5 (±0.8)×109
                     moldm−3
                     s−1. The radiation induced decomposition of the pesticides, chloride- and product formation (phenolic compounds, aliphatic acids) was studied by gamma radiolysis as a function of dose. A mechanism for acetate formation is discussed. The presence of oxygen during irradiation affected the decomposition rate only indiscernibly, however, chloride elimination, ring fragmentation (formation of aliphatic acids), TOC- and toxicity reduction were strongly enhanced. For complete removal of 500μmoldm−3 herbicides a dose of ∼4kGy was required. Using air saturation during irradiation a reduction of 37–40% of the TOC was observable at 5kGy, detoxification (luminescence inhibition <20%) was achieved with 10kGy.In the last decades phenoxyacetic acid derivatives have been one of the most commonly applied herbicides in agriculture, and consequently, they can be present together with their degradation products in natural water resources. Contamination of waters and soil can also occur from pesticide discharges from manufacturing plants, from storage sites and run offs from vegetation and soil. For remediation of waters and waste advanced oxidation processes (AOPs) e.g. ionizing radiation ( The objective of this report was to elucidate the mechanistic details of 2,4,5-Trichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4,5-T), 4-chloro-2-methylphenoxyacetic acid (MCPA), 2,4,5-trichlorophenol (2,4,5-TCP), 4-chloro-2-methylphenol (4-CMP), 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4-D) and all chemicals used were of highest purity grade available (Aldrich, Merck). For sample preparation water was distilled and further puriﬁed using Direct-Q3 UV puriﬁcation system (Millipore, Bedford, MA, USA). The solutions (500 The 10 The transients absorption spectra are presented in OD/cm normalized to a dose of 10 The irradiations were carried out with a Co-60- gamma source (“Gammacell 220”, Nordion International Inc., Kanata, ON, Canada). In irradiation position the sample chamber of this gamma source is circular, surrounded by 16 Co-pencils, therefore it provides a homogenous dose distribution. The dose rate was 76–87 The primary species formed by interaction of ionizing radiation with the water solvent are illustrated in gross reaction In N In the presence of oxygen Under these reaction conditions Substrate degradation and aromatic product formation as a function of dose was determined by reverse-phase-chromatography (Hewlett-Packard series 1050 and 1100, column: Spherisorb ODS 2 RP-18 (125×4 Quantitative analysis of chloride was carried out by ion chromatography (see later) and by HPLC, using an indirect absorption technique via phthalations (column: asahipak ODP-50, temperature: 40 For identification of some phenolic compounds the mass spectra obtained by HPLC-ESI-MS analysis (M-1) mode were used. System: HPLC PE Series 200 (column: Spherisorb ODS 2 RP-18 (5 Aliphatic acids and chloride were detected by high-performance ion chromatography using a Dionex Series 4500i ion Chromatograph. Separation was performed on the IonPack AS11 analytical column (4×250 The acute toxicity of the aqueous pesticide solutions was determined using a luminescent bacteria test (LUMIStox measuring system, Dr. Lange, DIN 38412 L34, Dr. Bruno Lange Ges.m.b.H, Obergrafendorf, Austria). The bioassay was performed with the marine bacteria strain Organic carbon measurements were carried out using a multi N/C 3000 from AnalytikJena AG. The TOC was calculated from carbon dioxide formed by catalytic oxidation (850 All measurements were done at least in triplicate, the given results represent mean values. Pulse radiolysis experiments (N The addition of The transient absorption spectra of the The kinetics of To investigate if the presence of oxygen affects the 2,4,5-T-OH-adduct absorptions experiments in the presence of N The absorptions at 400–450 The initial yields of the chlorophenoxyl radicals were determined earlier by our group, using TMPD for their reduction and determining the yield of the TMPD In addition to the reaction rate constants with  Since in the absence of an oxidant the OH-adducts of aromatic compounds disappear very fast by unimolecular and/or bimolecular reactions, irradiations in the presence of K Summing up the following distribution of the  From the bending of the degradation curve at about 0.3  During radiolysis in the presence of air, oxygen is continuously reduced according to reactions Degradation of 2,4,5-T and formation of products in aerated (A), air saturated (AS) and oxygen saturated (OS, [O  The impact of oxygen concentration on the mineralization process was determined at a dose of 5 Whereas in N The phenoxyacetic acid herbicides are moderately toxic compounds. Their EC Using 500 The addition to C1 is ∼20% relative to Degradation of the herbicides is only insignificantly affected by the presence of oxygen, it is completed at ∼4 The authors like to thank Univ. Prof. Dr. G. Reznicek (University of Vienna, Faculty of Life Sciences, Department of Pharmacognosy) for carrying out the LC-ESI-MS analysis.