Joint simulation of attributes in multivariate geostatistics can be achieved by transforming spatially correlated variables into independent factors. In this study, a new approach for this transformation, Minimum Spatial Cross-correlation (MSC) method, is suggested. The method is based on minimising the sum of squares of cross-variograms at different distances. In the approach, the problem in higher space (N
                     ×
                     N) is reduced to 
                        
                           N
                           ×
                           
                              
                                 N
                                 −
                                 1
                              
                           
                           /
                           2
                        
                      problems in the two-dimensional space and the reduced problem is solved iteratively using Gradient Descent Algorithm. The method is applied to the joint simulation of a set of multivariate data in a marble quarry and the results are compared with Minimum/Maximum Autocorrelation Factors (MAF) method.Linear transformation of spatially correlated variables into uncorrelated factors has been one of the most challenging issues in mining engineering and earth sciences. In this direction, several methods have been introduced by researchers.  MAF is basically a two-stage principal component analysis applied to variance–covariance matrices at short and long lag distances. There are also some studies that use the independency property of the generated factors. For example,  In the present study, Minimum Spatial Cross-Correlation (MSC) method is introduced for generating approximately uncorrelated factors. It aims to minimise cross-variance matrices at different lag distances using the gradient descent algorithm. In this method the de-correlation problem is reduced to the solution of a sequence of 2 by 2 problems. Against other blind source separation algorithms such as U-WEDGE and ICA which generally work in high-dimensional spaces and try to solve the problem by choosing The outline of the paper is as follows: the second section describes multivariate random field model. The third section explains the theory of MSC. The method is presented in 2D and then is generalized into an Let The variogram matrix depends only on the lag distance Researchers have proposed various methods for generating spatially orthogonal factors. Some criteria have also been introduced to measure how well these methods orthogonalise the variogram matrices at different lag distances. For example, While developing our method in deriving spatially uncorrelated factors, we will consider Eq. 3, proving that In Eq. 4, Another issue is unequal sampling, which affects the calculation of cross-variograms. In case of partial heterotopy where some variables share some sample locations, it is advisable to infer the cross-variogram model on the basis of the isotopic subset of the data ( In minimization problems, the derivatives of functions are used widely. It is known that the absolute value of functions may not be differentiable at some points in their domains. We work with whitened data with cross-variograms lying between–1 and 1, so that In practice, to minimize Eq. 5, we would start from some vector This section includes a short explanation of the algorithm. Let The algorithm typically converges to a local minimum, but in the presence of only one saddle point it gives a global minimum. If start iteration  if if end The objective function of our optimization problem is presented in Eq. 5. In this study, an Assume that the experimental semivariogram matrix for The objective is to find a 2 Eq. 9 has only one parameter Blind source separation methods such as independent component algorithms use This technique is applied to an andesite deposit containing four variables to illustrate how The study area is an andesite quarry located in the Çubuk district, 60 MSC method was run by considering the sum of cross-variograms at five lag distances. Lag distance and lag tolerance were chosen as 20 For MAF approach, auto and cross-variograms of standardised variables were calculated at two lag distances equal to 28 and 100 The MSC and MAF factors were produced by multiplying the transforming matrices by the data matrix. By running the Jarque–Bera test of normality at the 5% significance level, it can be said that all factors but MAF3 have a normal distribution. Experimental variograms of MSC and MAF factors are calculated and shown together with the fitted models and model parameters ( To compare MSC and MAF simulations, some tests were carried out. For this purpose, the following criteria are considered: reproduction of summary statistics, cumulative histograms, correlation coefficients and auto/cross-variograms. The mean and variance values of 100 realizations obtained from both simulation methods are shown in The next test consists in comparing the correlation coefficients of simulations to those of real data. The reproduction of sample correlations is perfect for MSC simulations and reasonable for MAF simulations ( The experimental auto and cross-variograms of 100 realizations for both methods are shown in In this paper, a novel method is presented for spatially orthogonalization of multivariate data. Then, the results of joint simulations obtained by this method are compared to MAF simulations. MSC simulation method shows better performance over MAF. At most lag distances, the factors generated by MSC method have lower The case study shows that the reproduction of target statistics for MSC and MAF simulations is acceptable. The methods produce practically similar average values. MSC produces the simulated realizations with low variances, while MAF realizations show high variances. The CDF reconstruction of simulated attributes is acceptable for both methods. However, the reproduction of target correlation coefficients is good for MSC method and reasonable for MAF simulation. Also, MSC simulations reproduce auto and cross-variograms better than MAF simulations. In particular, the short-range variability is well produced in MSC. Minimization of cross-variograms is not the only criterion to use. Some other criteria can also be defined. For example, a new measure of spatial independency rather than spatial uncorrelatedness can be introduced. In addition, the MSC criterion based on the minimization of cross-variograms at different distances assumes that each distance is equally weighted. One can however consider different weights for each distance. MSC algorithm cannot handle non-linear correlations among variables since it uses linear transformations. Therefore, the method should be developed further in order to consider non-linear correlations. This study is supported by the Proof: Suppose that the number of variables is equal to 2. This can be easily generalized to  The derivative of The expansion of The derivative of Then