The growth of Cu6Sn5 and Cu3Sn5 interfacial layers after isothermal annealing and the resultant effect on the solder joint strength are studied in TiO2 and Ni containing Sn0.7Cu solders. These composite solders were fabricated using a powder metallurgy method and reflow soldered on a Cu substrate printed circuit board (PCB) with an organic soldering preservative (OSP) surface finish. With TiO2 additions, a more planar scalloped Cu6Sn5 morphology was observed with reduced interfacial boundary grooves while a fine scallop-shaped interfacial (Cu,Ni)6Sn5 layer was observed in Ni containing solder joints. The interfacial layer was further suppressed with a combination of Ni and TiO2 even after annealing which resulted in superior shear strength and fracture energy.Intermetallic phases such as Cu Ceramic reinforcement of solder matricies with a variety of micrometer or nanometer-size particles such as silicon carbide (SiC), nickel oxide (NiO), alumina (Al Various hypotheses exist relating to how the interfacial intermetallic layer is suppressed by additions of particle reinforcements. A growing body of research exists relating to the development of Sn0.7Cu alloys through reinforcement additions. This includes additions of either metallic or non-metallic particles to the solder. This paper investigates the effects of Ni, TiO  In fabricating solder balls, thin solder sheets were punched using a 2.5 The growth of the interfacial intermetallic compound growth was studied by conducting isothermal annealing experiment at 150 Solder joints were then cross-sectioned for microstructure observations. The microstructures of the samples were analysed using a JEOL 6610 SEM/energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) in secondary and backscattered electron imaging mode at an accelerating voltage of 20 In evaluating the solder joint strength of samples after isothermal ageing, solder joints were sheared using a Dage 4000 high speed bond tester with a 60 Microstructure formations particularly on the growth of interfacial intermetallic layers in Sn0.7Cu, Sn0.7Cu Comparing the 0.05 Investigations of the interfacial intermetallic compound layer growth after annealing were carried out by measuring the average thickness of the total interfacial layer (Cu During early stages of Sn0.7Cu solder wetting, Although the TiO Mechanical performance of solder joints was conducted by evaluating the shear strength, total shear fracture energy, shear fracture initiation energy and shear fracture propagation energy.   For a clearer understanding on the factors that affect the failure modes, fracture surfaces were analysed.  The effects of Ni, TiO The following conclusion can be made: A scallop-shaped interfacial Cu Additions of TiO Kirkendall voids on the Cu Evidence of TiO The solder joint strength of solders containing TiO Ni and TiO This work was financially supported from the University of Queensland (UQ)-Nihon Superior (NS) collaboration research project and ARC Linkage project (LP140100485). Authors would like to thank Mr. Xuan Quy Tran for his kind help in preparing the metallography samples. High speed shear tests were conducted at Nihon Superior Japan.