In most standard comminution tests, particles are broken in relatively high energy single impact events. However many of the breakage events inside industrial mills are due to relatively low energy collisions, accumulating internal damage resulting in body or surface breakage of particles. Incremental breakage, as it is known, occurs across a wide range of equipment and milling operations. The authors have investigated the probability of breakage during these repetitive impacts. A standardised procedure has been developed for incremental breakage testing where unbroken particles are selected for re-breakage after each breakage event. Breakage probability is then calculated from the relative mass of broken particles. The test results show that incremental breakage occurs under repetitive impacts and the JKRBT is a suitable device for incremental testing. The Vogel and Peukert method for multiple impacts has been modified to more accurately account for size dependency. The influence of particle shape, on the minimum energy of comminution, or threshold energy, E
                     min, and the applicability of the proposed approach to model the breakage probabilities are discussed.Low energy incremental breakage testing has been identified as a key input requirement for mechanistic mill modelling, and is not appropriately captured through conventional testing programs such as the JK Drop Weight Test (JKDWT) ( A low energy impact event is defined as impact loading of a particle where the specific energy of the impact is either: 1. not sufficient to produce any breakage – i.e. particle survives –, or 2. not sufficient to produce significant size reduction of the parent particle, thus resulting in surface breakage or bulk fracture, where the primary fragment produced is of a similar size to the parent particle. Incremental breakage is defined as repeating low energy impacts until a proportion or all particles are considered broken. The incremental mode of breakage has been observed and described earlier by Preliminary results obtained by the same authors on incremental breakage tests were presented in a conference proceedings ( The results of incremental breakage of three different ores both angular and rounded were measured and the cumulative percentage of broken particles was calculated. The percentage of material broken, also referred to as breakage probability, was modelled using the The JKRBT was used for the experimental testing of incremental breakage. The principle of this comminution testing device is to accelerate particles using rotational forces ( This testing device allows for direct, precise control over impact energy. Moreover, the overall testing process is fast and suited to incremental testing, where repeated impacts are conducted on the same particles, such as the procedure proposed in this study. The workflow of the proposed incremental breakage testing procedure cycles through three main steps: 1. Particle breakage, 2. Selection of survivors, and 3. Sizing of products as illustrated in As opposed to the standard DWT testing where 30 particles of a given size class were tested, it was found that a minimum of 200 particles should be selected to allow a sufficient number of impacts for a statistically repeatable result, and more reliable sizing of the fragments produced. After selecting the feed material by riffling splitting, hand picking was used to adjust to exactly 200 particles. The rotor revolutions per minute (RPM) was chosen to achieve the given size-energy combination. Particles were impacted following the JKRBT standard operating procedure (JKTech standard operating procedure). The product particles were then collected to select survivor particles for returning to the JKRBT. Narrow size fraction of Many methodologies exist to define whether breakage has occurred, such as 10% mass loss, or the particle size is reduced. In the present study, survivor particles have been defined as the unbroken particles retained on the sieve representing the lower limit of feed size fractions (i.e. for a feed size of − All undersize, i.e. broken, material was bagged for subsequent sizing. Unbroken particles were weighed and counted as this allowed calculating an average mass per particle throughout testing. Cycles of breakage, selection and sizing were repeated until either 100% of the particles were broken, an asymptote was reached (particles no longer break), or the designated maximum number of impacts was reached (usually 10 impacts). Three samples were tested: two basaltic quarry rocks, and a copper ore from Australia. The sample type – angular and/or rounded particles – indicates the preparation method used to produce the feed particles. Angular samples were products of crushing while rounded particles were produced by crushing followed by low speed tumbling in a laboratory autogenous mill. The preparation process was assumed to produce only surface breakage, smoothing surface of angular particles and producing rounded particles without accumulating any internal damage to the particles. It was found that rounding particle improves the selection technique using a mechanical screen, avoiding capturing broken particles that only undergo surface damage. The results obtained from the incremental breakage tests were measured in terms of proportion of broken particles after cycles of impacts. During each cycle, each particle was either broken, or survived the test. When testing a statistically representative number of particles of the same sample, the proportion of broken particles is also known as the probability of breakage. This concept originates in the Weibull statistics (  where The   In the present work, three different rock types have been tested. The experimental conditions and sample provenance are given in As indicated in The proportion of broken material measured during the tests were initially compared to the input energy, in the same way as the The principle of Vogel and Peukert's approach was used to model the probability of breakage as it applied to the results obtained with the Quarry rock. Cumulative energy is defined as the total energy after The results plotted with the absorbed energy on the x-axis are shown on Following these observations, the authors introduced another parameter, The improvements of the proposed model with the size dependency parameter When plotting the cumulative proportion broken against actual energy used, as shown on The main master curve comprising all size fractions tested and all energy levels is shown in The fitted parameters are presented in The relative residuals of the model prediction as a function of size and impact energy are shown in the discussion Similar breakage behaviour was observed for the Quarry rock 2 and is shown in The results of per cent broken versus cumulative energy usage are presented in The proposed model Eq. The same experimental methodology was conducted on the copper ore with the addition of optical sizing of the progeny (Camsizer) and calculation of the breakage index The experimental results and model predictions for copper ore samples are presented in For the copper ore, the modified The In this particular case, the actual energy input cannot be calculated using An example of the effective cumulative energy input is shown in The master curves shown in the results section represent the experimental and modelling results obtained for all sizes and energy levels. Additional statistical analysis was carried out to verify the model consistency across the particle sizes and energy levels tested. The relative residuals of the model predictions were calculated using Eq. The relative residuals were averaged for each size fraction and impact energy. As shown in the results section, there is good agreement with the proposed modelling methodology and the observed measurements for incremental breakage. The summary of the fitted parameters for the Vogel and Peukert's model, and the proposed model in this study for the 3 materials tested. The accuracy and average error of the model prediction was significantly improved by the proposed modification on the size dependency with the The results of angular particles incremental breakage showed that the proposed model structure was not able to predict the experimental observations, and significantly different value of The predicted mass broken is lower that the measured mass for low energy impacts in the early cycles, because the model under estimates at low energy and over estimates at high energy impacts, as shown on The minimum energy The observations on angular particles are in agreement with the literature such as the Vogel and Peukert model, originally used to model breakage of spherical shape particles. Further investigations need to be conducted to establish the breakage behaviour and modelling of angular shaped particles. It is recommended for future work to check the mass of each particle to capture the chipping happening but this would create tedious time-consuming experiments when testing 200 The minimum energy term, or threshold energy, has a significant impact on the outcomes of the proposed model. This equation was slightly modified for the present study, introducing the same  To test the validity of Eq. The value of The relationship between particle size and calculated minimum energy for the Copper ore rounded particles is shown in It should also be noted that the magnitude of the minimum energy values calculated by model fitting represent a significant portion of the input impact energy used, confirming that low energy impact is being used. For example for the Quarry rock size fraction + The influence of It should be noted here, that the model parameters The proposed incremental breakage test was conducted on two different rock types with different heterogeneity. The influence of particle composition, lithology and alteration could affect the results of incremental breakage. It is plausible that the soft lithology is a preferentially broken during the impact cycles leading to the hardest particles surviving the tests, resulting in a different asymptotic value compared to a homogeneous material. Unfortunately, the particles that were unbroken after 10 impacts were not specifically tested to investigate this hypothesis. It is recommended in future studies to test the survivors under single impact breakage in a drop weight test in order to comment on the selection of the particle of the hardest lithology during the test. This is plausible for the copper ore tested which contained various level of alteration and components, however it is not expected with the Quarry rocks that are known for their homogeneous properties. This study presents a detailed testing and modelling methodology for incremental breakage. The methodology has been validated on two quarry rocks and one copper ore. It was shown that the JKRBT is a suitable device for incremental breakage testing. Analysis of incremental breakage results show that breakage outcomes depend on the total accumulated impact energy: a large number of low-energy impacts have the same breakage outcome as the same energy delivered in a smaller number of impacts or in a single impact (providing It was found that careful sample preparation is required and that particle shape, rounded versus angular, influences the tests outcomes. The present study focussed on the body breakage during repeated low energy impact applied to rounded particles. The application to angular particles is also discussed. For completeness, it is recommended that the surface breakage mechanisms, happening during the rounding process be tested and modelled independently, as proposed by The results also showed that the testing methodology with sizing of progeny particles can be applied to predict The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support of the