Rheological characteristics as a function of particle size at 25°C and the effects of pre-treatment and temperature on colour degradation kinetics of green chilli puree were investigated. Green chilli puree behaved as a shear-thinning fluid and the power law described well the shear stress–shear rate behaviour. The consistency index (K) decreased while the flow behaviour index (n) increased as the particle size of the puree decreased. The results indicated that colour degradation during thermal processing of chilli puree followed a first-order reaction kinetics. The combination L×a×b closely described the colour degradation behaviour. Dependence of the rate constant during thermal processing of chilli puree obeyed the Arrhenius relationship. The activation energy values for water-blanched and lye-treated chilli puree were 11.4 and 16.0 kJ/g mol, respectively. Lye treatment resulted in retarding the colour degradation rate.Chilli ( Fresh spice-vegetables (chilli, onion, garlic, coriander) are mainly processed to obtain the dehydrated products. The distinct aromatic odour, colour and pungency are seldom carried over to the processed products Knowledge of the rheological properties of food purees is essential for product development and the design and evaluation of process equipment. Factors affecting the rheological behaviour of purees include total solids (TS), total soluble solids (TSS), particle size and temperature. Although numerous studies have been conducted on the rheological properties of fruit and vegetable products Colour plays an important role in assessing product quality. The most common change that occurs during thermal processing of green spice-vegetables is the conversion of chlorophylls to pheophytins, causing a change from bright green to olive-brown Green chillies (variety: CH-1) were washed in running tap water, destalked manually and blanched in water at 85°C for 3 min. The water-blanched chilli was pureed in a laboratory size grinder (Comitrol, USA) through 10 (1.68 mm), 12 (1.41 mm) and 14 (1.19 mm) mesh screens to obtain purees of different particle sizes. Another batch of chillies was blanched in a 2% lye solution at 85°C for 3 min, washed in potable water to remove lye adhering to the chilli’s surface and pureed through a 14 mesh sieve. The total solids content was determined following the method described by Rheological characteristics (shear stress, shear rate and apparent viscosity) of green chilli puree were measured at 25°C using a Brookfield DV-II digital viscometer (Brookfield Engineering Laboratory Instruments, USA). Approximately 500 ml puree was placed in a 600 ml graduated glass beaker with a flat bottom. Constant temperature water bath (±0.5% accuracy) was used to maintain the desired temperature. The viscometer was operated between 10 and 100 rpm and shear stress, shear rate and apparent viscosity data were obtained directly from the instrument. The S# 4 spindle was selected for the measurement and was used without a spindle guard of the instrument. The consistency of the puree was measured using the Bostwick consistometer (Central Scientific, USA). The trough of the consistometer was filled with the puree, the gate was instantaneously released and the puree was allowed to flow for 30 s at 25±1°C. The distance travelled by the puree in the specified time was measured in cm (±0.1 cm) and expressed as the Bostwick consistency Approximately 200 g puree was weighed and transferred into a 250 ml glass beaker and covered. The beakers were placed in a water bath maintained at selected temperatures, viz., 60°C, 75°C and 90°C and periodically agitated to ensure uniform temperature throughout the bulk of the sample. The temperature of the sample at its geometric centre was monitored using a thermometer. The beakers were heated for 0, 5, 10, 15 and 20 min, respectively (0 to 15 min in case of lye-treated puree), after the puree at its geometric centre attained the desired temperature. The samples were transferred to an ice water bath immediately after the thermal treatment. Colour measurement was carried out using a Hunter colorimeter model D25 optical sensor (Hunter Associates Laboratory, Reston, VA, USA) on the basis of three variables, namely The power law model, used widely in engineering applications, was used to relate shear stress and rate of shear Following earlier evidence The Arrhenius equation which relates the dependence of the rate constant with temperature is represented by the following equation:  The flowability of green chilli puree was enhanced as particle size decreased. The results indicated that the power law model described adequately the rheological behaviour of the puree ( An increase in the green colour of the chilli puree was observed as fineness increased, as was reflected by the Hunter colour The kinetics of colour degradation was studied for both water-blanched and lye-treated chilli pureed through a 14 mesh screen. The TS and TSS values of green chilli puree were 24% and 8°Brix, respectively, while the pH of water-blanched and lye-treated chilli puree were 5.1 and 6.6, respectively. The Since the The effect of temperature on the rate constant is depicted in Green chilli puree exhibited pseudo-plastic behaviour and the shear stress–shear rate relationship obeyed the power law model. The