Non-conventional densely packed concrete mixtures are proposed and evaluated in this paper using engineered recycled mineral admixtures and recycled aggregates obtained from steel slag, quartz mining tailings, and quartzite mining tailings. High fines content sand-concretes containing coarser- and finer-than-cement recycled powders were designed to obtain blends with broader particle-size ranges and improved packing density. As a result, compressive strength up to 99 MPa, cement intensity up to 2.33 kg/m³/MPa, and consumption of recycled material up to 95 vol% were obtained. Compressive strengths up to 66 MPa and cement intensity up to 2.34 kg/m³/MPa were also obtained with the addition of coarse aggregates to such sand-concrete mixtures, with consumption of recycled material up to 96.5%. The results launch new insights on the role of recycled admixtures and aggregates on the mixture design of cement-based composites regarding efficiency improvement and technological performance.Reducing the negative impacts of the construction industry is imperative to meet the demands of a more sustainable world, as the sector is responsible for much of the entire world’s material and energy consumption, waste generation, and CO Self-compacting concretes (SCC), as well as high- and ultra-high-strength concretes, usually demand high cement consumption ( The technical and economic feasibility of using steel slags as aggregates and binders in mortars and concretes have been demonstrated ( In this work, the authors explore the use of engineered recycled mineral admixtures (ERMA) and recycled aggregates to enhance the binder efficiency and waste consumption in low-cement concretes. The proposed methods and materials were, in fact, effective in reducing the cement intensity (CI) in concretes with high consumption of recycled materials. For this reason, the authors believe this work is relevant to sustainability and cleaner production as new insights are launched on the role of recycled mineral admixtures in the obtention of low-impact concretes. Among the observations, the results highlight the role of coarser-than-cement powders in improving the concrete eco-efficiency with technological and economic advantages (stability and grinding cost). Also, other views on mix design and particle-size distributions of powder fraction and aggregates are proposed and discussed, as well as aspects related to durability and feasibility. Three industrial wastes collected in cities of Minas Gerais States, in southeastern Brazil, were used in this study, they are basic oxygen furnace slag (BOFS), quartz mining tailing (QT), and quartzite mining tailing (QIT). The BOFS consisted of a dark grey granular material, provided by a steelwork located in the city of João Monlevade, with particle size range between 4.5 and 12.5 mm and a specific gravity of 3.77 g/cm³. The material was weathered for three years on a storage site in order to stabilize the expansive oxides. The QT was obtained from a mining operation in the city of Sete Lagoas. The material was also supplied in granular form, presenting beige coloration, particle-size range between 4.5 and 12.5 mm, and a specific gravity of 2.956 g/cm³. Finally, the QIT was supplied by a company in the city of Itabirito and consisted of white material, with a specific gravity of 2.774 g/cm³. Its particle size covers a range compatible with well-graded sands but has a high content of fines. The chemical compositions of the materials are listed in A high-early-strength Portland cement (PC) (ASTM Type III equivalent), specified by the Brazilian standard NBR 5733 as CP-V ARI ( Conventional aggregates (CA) from different regions of Minas Gerais State were obtained. They comprised of a natural river quartz sand and gneiss gravel. This study also used recycled aggregates obtained from the crushing of BOFS (referred to herein as steel slag aggregates – SSA) and QT (referred to herein as quartz tailing aggregates QTA). Both conventional aggregates and recycled aggregates were separated into two main fractions, named here as fine aggregate (particle size range of 0.15–2.4 mm) and coarse aggregate (particle size range of 2.4–12.5 mm). The comminution process was carried out for the production of SSA and QTA in a Retsch BB 200 laboratory jaw crusher. SSA was submitted to a magnetic separation process to recover part of the metallic iron content (three replications, Inbras HF CC magnetic roll, 950 Gauss intensity). Aggregates were segregated into particle-size fractions for the following composition, which was adjusted by the modified Andreassen distribution curve ( All procedures were carried out in oven-dried samples (105 ± 5 °C, 24 h). The fine aggregates were stored in plastic containers and maintained indoors. The coarse aggregates were washed in running water and stored in water for complete saturation. In order to reduce distortions in water consumption by sequestration of mixing water, conventional and recycled coarse aggregates were used in the saturated surface dry condition for concrete production. Because they represent less distortion and for simplicity, the fine aggregates were used in dry condition. The ERMAs were obtained from crushed BOFS, QT, and QIT, using two grinding programs named GP1 and GP2 ( Two concrete types were proposed, named here ‘sand-concrete’ (containing no coarse aggregates) and ‘concrete’ (containing coarse aggregates). The mixtures of the sand-concretes were designed using four fractions of fine aggregate, Portland cement, and two ERMAs ( The superplasticizer dosage was set in 1.0% by the total mass of fines. This value was adjusted based on A three-step hand-mixing procedure was performed using a rigid steel blade paint scraper (11 cm size), and a rigid prismatic plastic container measuring 28 × 13 × 12 cm. The same protocol was used in both concrete and sand-concrete mixtures. In the first step, a dry mixing was performed for 5 min. After that, 100 mL of water containing the total superplasticizer content was added, followed by a homogenization process performed for 5 min. Finally, small amounts of water were added carefully using a wash bottle until the achievement of the required consistency after homogenization. The total amount of water was determined by the mass difference of the wash bottle before and after the consistency adjustment. The density of the fresh concrete was determined using a known volume vessel. Regarding sand-concretes, compressive strength tests were performed in 40 mm × 40 mm × 160 mm prismatic specimens according to the methods NBR 13279 ( The cylindrical specimens were molded in multiple layers to favor the escape of trapped air bubbles. Each layer comprised of an approximate volume of 30 mL, and 30 s was the approximate time between consecutive launches. After molding, the specimens were placed in a humid chamber (99% RH; 25 °C), demolded after five days, and kept in the same wet chamber until the test. Additional concrete mixtures were designed for similar compressive strengths, and cylindrical samples measuring ∅50 × 100 mm were prepared and subjected to physical characterization in the hardened state, comprising water absorption, void index, and specific gravity. For this purpose, the specimens were oven-dried (105 ± 5 °C) until constancy of mass and their masses were measured. Ultrasonic pulse velocities in the dry samples were measured using a Tico tester (Proceq). Then, the specimens were kept in water for a complete saturation (7 days). The saturated surface dry condition was achieved using a damp cloth, and the mass in this state was measured for each specimen. Finally, the mass immersed in water was measured by hydrostatic weighing. Soundness tests were performed in some blended cement pastes in the Laboratory of Construction Materials/UFOP using an autoclave Matest E070. The tests were conducted according to the method ASTM Calorimetric investigations were carried out in the Division of Technology of Construction Materials/BAM/Germany. The tests were performed in a cement only REF paste and blended pastes containing the studied ERMAs. A European Portland cement CEM I 42.5R was used, and the relative solids volume For the sand-concrete BOFS/QIT-SSA, the dry base mixture consisted of 5% of fine ERMA, 5% of Portland cement, 47% of coarse ERMA, 8% of sand fraction 0.15–0.30 mm, 12% of sand fraction 0.30–0.60 mm, 13% of sand fraction 0.60–1.18 mm, and 15% of sand fraction 1.18–2.36 mm ( In this study, the solid fraction consisted mainly of coarse ERMAs, with reduced or no binder properties. This material plays an intermediate role between a powder and a fine aggregate. For this reason, the fines to aggregate ratio (F/A) was used instead of the binder to aggregate ratio (B/A) in the evaluations and discussions. The obtained proportion was confirmed by the experimental evaluation using SP and the water content adjusted for the required consistency. The F/A reached was 1.08 for the sand-concretes, which is considered high compared to the well-accepted reference of 0.75 (  The incorporation of coarse aggregates reduced the water to solids ratio as expected ( Despite lower water consumption, the sand-concretes had a good ability to flow through obstacles and fill corners of the formworks without the need for mechanical compaction. However, the mixtures showed difficult mixing and no pumpability. With the addition of coarse aggregates, the flow became more difficult, and mechanical compaction is required. The use of the proposed concrete as ready-mixed concrete for implementations in-loco will require adjustments, but it has been observed that the addition of a small amount of water is sufficient to achieve flow performance compatible with SCCs. The use of the concrete proposed in precast elements, however, is reasonable. Finally, the sand-concretes showed a significant ability to expel air bubbles and reduce exudation. Aspects of the concretes in the flow test are shown in   On the other hand, the QT concretes had higher densities than their corresponding sand-concretes. These results suggest that the air bubbles from the QT concretes escaped more easily compared to the other concretes. In this sense, the same property also favored the higher exudation observed in such concretes, which is explained by the characteristics of the QT particles. While the sharp edges and the elongated aspect do not favor the grain packing, their smooth surfaces are believed to favor the flow of fluids. The chart of Sand-concretes containing BOFS-C achieved remarkably better results compared to sand-concretes containing QT ERMAs. Sand-concretes produced with steel slag fine aggregates had higher compressive strength values for all cement contents and blends. The highest compressive strength value was observed for the mixture BOFS/QIT-SSA M15 (98.9 MPa) with a cement consumption of 344.4 kg/m³. With these results, the cement intensity CI was 3.48 kg/m³/MPa. However, the best overall eco-efficiency performance was achieved by the mixture BOFS/QIT SSA M05. This sand-concrete reached 50.25 MPa with a cement consumption of 117.1 kg/m³ (CI = 2.33 kg/m³/MPa).  Concretes containing coarse aggregates showed reduced compressive strengths compared to sand-concretes, which is explained by the lower relative cement consumption. Concretes made with SSA aggregates showed the best performances for QT blends and BOFS blends C10 and C15. QTA aggregates, in association with BOFS blends, reached better results for reduced cement consumptions. The best overall mechanical performance was observed for the concrete BOFS/QIT SSA C15 (66.3 MPa) for a cement consumption of 254.4 kg/m³ (CI = 3.92 kg/m³/MPa). The best overall eco-efficiency was achieved by the concrete BOFS/QIT QTA C05 (compressive strength of 37.0 MPa; cement consumption of 86.6 kg/m³; CI = 2.34 kg/m³/MPa). There are few reports of similar levels of binder efficiency in literature, and no reports of CI below 3 kg/m³/MPa were found. Recently, Increases in the eco-efficiency indicator CI were observed with the reduction in cement consumption for the concretes and sand-concretes produced with the ERMA BOFS-C. This trend was observed for all mixtures and represented an interesting finding in this research. The increase in CI indicator is commonly related to increases in the compressive strength, i.e., good binder efficiency is generally reported associated with high- and ultra-high-strength concretes. However, the increase in compressive strength is not necessarily required in most applications ( Consumption of recycled material is another remarkable feature of this research. The reduced cement consumption and the use of recycled mineral admixtures and aggregates led to maximum consumptions of recycled material corresponding to 95% in total solid volume for sand-concretes. For concretes, this value achieved 96.5%. Results of the physical characterization of hardened concrete specimens produced in this study using BOFS-C, BOFS-F, and QIT-F are listed in  The partial replacement reduced heat-flow due to the dilution effect and the slow reactivity of supplementary materials. The curves of binary blends with a replacement rate of 25% by volume show that the fineness and chemical/mineralogical composition exerted a significant influence. The quartz-based ERMAs had higher maximum heat flow values during the acceleration period in comparison to BOFS fines. QT-F and QIT-F blends presented the highest maxima and accelerated effect compared to the other fines. This performance is related to the presence of an increased amount of reactive ultra-fine quartz particles ( As expected, ternary blends containing 30% and 10% by volume of cement presented an accentuated reduction in the heat flow maxima in the acceleration period. The blends containing QIT-F showed faster peaks in the acceleration period compared to the corresponding blend containing BOFS-F. Reducing cement content from 30% to 10% by volume resulted in a remarkable difference in the behaviors of the ternary blends containing BOFS. While the blends containing 30% cement by volume showed behavior compatible with the blends containing 75% cement by volume, the blends containing BOFS and 10% cement by volume presented a fast and reduced peak. This behavior may be related to an imbalance of sulfate content in these blends. As a result, the C Besides, polycarboxylate-based superplasticizers affect hydration kinetics ( Quartz fines and aggregates are materials with recognized high quality for use in cement composites as inert material due to its high chemical stability and mechanical performance ( The results of the autoclave soundness test ( Pastes with 10% cement, 10% BOFS-F, and 80% BOFS-C failed in the soundness test ( The drastic reduction in cement content and the increase in ERMA dispersed cement particles. As a result, the early hydration is very efficient, but the short-term strength is weak. Finally, the effective stabilization process dedicated to BOFS fines is recommended and is likely to mitigate undesirable behaviors. In this respect, previous studies indicate that it is feasible and even profitable ( In a recent study, The performance results show that the proposed ERMAs, RAs, and mix designs were effective in obtaining concretes with consistent low cement consumptions. However, the applicability of these concretes is limited due to the exploratory aspect of the research. Therefore, the authors consider the techniques are promising and contribute to the development of more eco-efficient concretes comprising reduced consumption of natural resources and increased consumption of industrial and mining by-products as recycled building materials, and launch new insights on the subjects. The cementitious properties of BOFS-based ERMAs were determinant for their best results and should be taken into account in the feasibility assessment. In this regard, a comprehensive approach should be taken, including the treatment and production of aggregates and fines. The production of fines involves extra costs with grinding and a more effective stabilization process compared to the production of aggregates. In this sense, the high mechanical performance of the material is also related to its low grindability, which leads to an increased cost in obtaining fines. Fortunately, the study showed that the less expensive coarse BOFS ERMA is very effective in improving cement efficiency, and it was consumed in high amounts. Thus, a material with great potential was obtained with a reduced impact on production costs. The study also showed that another cheaper super-fine powder can successfully replace BOFS-F and promote improvements in the performance of cement-based composites (mechanical and durability). Concretes with very low cement intensities, low paste content, and low to moderate compressive strength require additional care in comparison to sand-concretes. The latter presented both better mechanical, rheological, and efficiency results. Finally, recovering the metallic fraction is indicated as a relevant element in the economic viability of steel slag processing ( The mix design and proposed ERMAs were effective in producing low-cement concretes with high consumption of recycled material. The best performances were observed for the blends containing the steel slag coarse ERMA and the quartzite fine ERMA. Concretes made from recycled aggregates achieved similar or improved performances compared to conventional aggregates. Meager cement consumption resulted in a slow strength gain, and the expansions observed in pastes containing steel slag ERMAs in the autoclave test indicate that an effective stabilization treatment is required. The concretes and sand-concretes showed conventional or high compressive strengths. All results of cement efficiency obtained in this study are among the lowest reported in the literature (below 9.5 kg/m³/MPa). However, some results reached inedited values (below 3.0 kg/m³/MPa). The consumption of recycled material was up to 95% by volume of solids in the sand-concretes, and up to 96.5% in the concretes.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This study was financed in part by the