The removal of iron from industrial aluminum sulfate by the primary amine extraction system composed of primary amine N-1923 as the extractant, n-octanol as the modifier and kerosene as the diluent was studied. The mechanism of removing iron by primary amine system was determined through slope analysis method and IR spectra. Also investigated were effects such as pH in aqueous phase, phase ratios O/A (organic/aqueous), the volume fractions of extractant and modifier in organic phase, and the contact time of extraction. At the same time, the research was conducted on stripping of iron using sodium chloride solution or sulfuric acid as stripping agents from the iron-loaded organic phase. The results showed 99.99% extraction of iron from industrial aluminum sulfate with the extraction system composed of 25vol.% N-1923, 25vol.% n-octanol and 50vol.% kerosene when the phase ratio O/A was 1:2, pH value>1.2 and contact time was 6min. The difficulties in separating aqueous phase and organic phase were effectively overcome by n-octanol. The strip recovery of iron using 4.0molL−1 sulfuric acid as the stripping agent was 96.5% which was slightly higher than that using 2.0molL−1 sodium chloride.Aluminum sulfate, one of the basic inorganic salts, is applied in various fields including paper-making industries and water purification ( Aluminum sulfate solution with an iron content < The solvent extraction systems usually studied are systems of phosphates ( The extraction system of amines has a higher extraction yield and better selectivity when extracting iron. Compared with phosphates, amine systems with iron are easier to be stripped ( In order to remove iron from industrial aluminum sulfate solution, the extraction system composed of primary amine N-1923 as the extractant, n-octanol as the modifier and kerosene as the diluent was investigated. The mechanism of primary amine extracting iron is discussed through the slope analysis method and IR spectra. The extraction yield of iron with this system is high, and n-octanol can effectively inhibit the third phase from appearing in the extraction process. Stripping the iron-loaded organic phase by sodium chloride solution or sulfuric acid is examined with good results. This research may provide reference data and guidelines for productive practice of removing iron by solvent extraction. The extractant, N-1923 ( As primary amine N-1923 can only extract Fe Stripping was carried out by adding sodium chloride solution or sulfuric acid to the organic phase and the mixed solution was shaken for some time. After the organic phase and aqueous phase were separated, the aqueous phase was sampled to determine the content of iron by spectrophotometry. The organic phase after stripping then was supplied directly for the extraction of iron so that the organic phase could be regenerated.   Based on the mechanistic study, The equilibrium constant K of the reaction can be expressed below: Although Liu ascertained the composition of extracted complex which is formed whilst extracting iron, the value of n was not determined. In order to determine the value n, the effect of concentration of (RNH In order to further confirm the composition of the extracted complex and the existing form of SO The extraction of iron is related to the concentration of hydrogen ions, so the pH of feed solution has some effect on extraction yield. The effect of changing pH in aqueous phase with other factors fixed is shown in A higher phase ratio (O/A) increases the rate of extraction and overall extraction, but the extraction yield is limited by the amount of extractant and economic cost when the phase ratio gets higher. Therefore, the effect of phase ratio was studied with different volume ratios of organic phase and aqueous phase at the fixed initial concentration of iron, composition of organic phase and contact time. The volume fraction of extractant in the organic phase is a crucial factor ( Contact time is another important factor that can affect extraction recovery. Shorter contact time means faster mass transfer rates are required in the extraction process. Experiments with different contact times ranging from 2 to 15 The solubility of primary amine in kerosene is so small that the third phase, which is unfavorable for extraction, appears frequently between organic phase and aqueous phase. As surfactants, alcohols have the advantages of having high active surface, and low toxicity, being readily biodegradable and good for low temperature application. Therefore, it is generally considered that adding alcohols to organic phase can increase the solubility of primary amines in the organic phase. Accordingly, alcohols were chosen as modifiers. The relationships between extraction yield and different modifiers such as n-hexanol, n-heptanol, n-octanol and iso-octanol under fixed conditions were studied and According to the results above, the extraction of iron by the primary amine system is high, which illustrates the extraction system has a good affinity for iron. Starting with a concentration of 2.3 Sodium chloride can react with the complex iron compound formed by the reaction with amine sulfate and ferric ion, resulting in the regeneration of extractant primary amine N-1923. Therefore, the concentration of sodium chloride is a significant factor affecting the results of stripping. However, as seen from Eq. As shown in The mechanism of removing iron by primary amine system was determined through slope analysis method and IR spectra. The extraction system consisting of primary amine N-1923, n-octanol and kerosene removes iron from industrial aluminum sulfate as a iron(III) hydroxyl-sulfate complex at pH > The present work was financially supported by projects under