Objective. To assess the fixation rigidities of a custom designed blade plate, a 2.7 mm T-plate and 3.0 mm cannulated screws.
                  
                     Design. A cadaveric non-comminuted radial neck fracture model was employed to test the three fixation methods, using a multi-directional shear loading protocol.
                  
                     Background. The management of displaced radial neck fractures in adults remains unsatisfactory due to failure of internal fixation with secondary loss of reduction, and non-unions.
                  
                     Methods. The stiffness of the various fixation methods was measured in five directions of loading in the transverse plane. Failure testing was performed on the final testing condition for each specimen, in a posteroulnar to anteroradial direction.
                  
                     Results. The direction of specimen loading did not have a significant effect on the stiffness of the various methods of fixation (P=0.4). There was no significant difference in the fixation stiffness between the 3.0 mm screws or blade plate, however, both were superior to the T-plate (P<0.05).
                  
                     Conclusions. Although the 2.7 mm T-plate has been reported in the literature as a viable method of fixation for radial neck fractures, it may not be optimal from the viewpoint of fixation stability. In the setting of a non-comminuted radial neck fracture, the use of cross-cannulated screws or blade plate fixation is preferred.
                     Relevance
                  
                  This study supports the use of cross-cannulated screws or blade plate fixation for non-comminuted fractures of the radial neck.Radial neck fractures, while not uncommon in children, are infrequently seen in adults. Fortunately, most are undisplaced and can be adequately treated non-operatively. The management of displaced radial neck fractures in adults remains unsatisfactory due to problems with loss of reduction, and non-union ( Current techniques of fixation of radial neck fractures include the use of K-wires, screws and plates ( The purpose of this study was to evaluate the rigidity of the blade plate, in comparison to a 2.7 mm T-plate (Synthes, Paoli, PA, USA) and cross 3.0 mm cannulated screws (Synthes). Our hypothesis was that the blade plate would have greater stiffness than both the T-plate and cannulated screw reconstructions. We employed a cadaveric non-comminuted radial neck fracture model to test the three fixation methods, using a multi-directional shear loading protocol. Cannulated screw fixation was achieved with two crossed 3.0 mm cannulated screws with threaded washers ( Six previously frozen proximal radii were studied (mean age 74, range 54–92 years). The proximal 10 cm of the radius was cleaned of all soft tissue, and rigidly fixed in polyvinylchloride tubing using acrylic cement. Each specimen was aligned such that the proximal articular surface of the radius was perpendicular to the axis of the potting tube. The distance from the articular surface to the potting tube was standardized at 5 cm. A servo-hydraulic testing machine (Instron 8300, Canton, MA, USA) was used to load the specimen in five directions at 45° intervals ( The T-plate and blade plate were contoured to the intact proximal radius. The proximal screw holes in the radial head were drilled, tapped and the screws were temporarily placed. The distal plate holes were marked with an indelible marker and the plate was then removed. The drill holes in the radial neck were placed more distally than the marked holes to ensure compression of the simulated fracture site following the osteotomy. After the osteotomy was performed and the plate reapplied, the oblique compression screw was placed through the plate into the radial head to augment fixation. The cannulated screw holes were similarly drilled and the screws were temporarily placed. A transverse osteotomy of the proximal radius was created at the radial neck using a fine saw blade. The osteotomy was repaired in random order using the three fixation methods each applied with compression of the simulated fracture. Fixation rigidity was measured for the intact specimen without and with the pre-drilled screw holes, and subsequently for each of the three methods of fixation. To determine the stiffness of each construct, loading was applied at a rate of 2 mm/min in each of the five directions of loading. Load and displacement were recorded from the Instron testing machine. After completion of the stiffness testing, failure testing was performed on the third testing condition for each specimen. Loading was applied in a posteroulnar to anteroradial direction at a rate of 2 mm/min. The stiffness and failure load of the various fixation methods was compared using a repeated measures analysis of variance and a post-hoc Student–Newman–Keuls test. The average reduction in stiffness of the intact specimen with holes when compared to the intact specimen without holes was 6.5%. There was no significant difference with respect to the direction of loading ( The stiffness of the specimens for the five different loading directions are shown in This study compared the rigidity of three different methods of fixation of simulated radial neck fractures in vitro. Although the 2.7 mm T-plate has been reported in the literature as a viable method of fixation for radial neck fractures, this model showed that it had less stiffness when compared to that achieved with both the 3.0 mm cannulated screws and the custom blade plate. The data suggests that for simple non-comminuted radial neck fractures, screw fixation may be the preferable technique. The screws provide both rigid fixation and compression, with minimal soft tissue stripping and ease of insertion. The low profile of the screws and lack of periosteal stripping of the radial neck may decrease the tendency of the radius to develop soft tissue adhesions, with a consequent loss of forearm rotation. Moreover, they may also reduce the risk of osteonecrosis and non-union. The cannulated feature of the 3.0 mm screws ensures that they will pass through the cortex of the radial neck since they follow the guide wires rather than glancing off into the medullary canal, as often occurs with non-cannulated screws. The threaded washers employed in this study provided excellent purchase in the cancellous bone of the radial head. Recent clinical experience with this technique suggests that simply countersinking the screws into the subchondral bone of the radial head provides sufficient fixation and use of the larger threaded washers may not be required. The small size of these screw heads is potentially less destructive to cartilage of the radial head than the larger threaded washers as employed in this study. Placement of the screws as close to 180° to one another is possible in vivo by placing one screw with the forearm in full pronation and one in full supination through a lateral surgical approach. While only one blade plate size was employed in this study, it appeared to fit well for all specimens. However, it is rational to assume that any forthcoming developments regarding this design would require an examination of the morphological characteristics of the proximal radius and the selection of a suitable sizing scheme. Efforts to optimize this prototype might include a lower profile configuration to reduce adherence to the annular ligament. In this study we employed an osteotomy to simulate a radial neck fracture. While the osteotomy site was compressed during fixation, interdigitation of bone did not occur as would likely occur in a clinical fracture. The fracture model and elderly osteoporotic specimens employed represent in some respects, a worse case scenario. Conversely, patients with a comminuted radial neck fracture where compression between the head and neck is not achievable would be much less stable than the contact model used in this study. Cannulated screws that rely on cortical contact and compression to achieve stability would be poorly suited to such a fracture pattern, particularly when subjected to axial loading. Similarly, in these comminuted radial neck fractures, the blade plate would be predicted to outperform the T-plate due to the fixed angle system that should have a greater resistance to cantilever bending than a screw plate construct.  The testing method employed in this study was based on clinical experience with fixation failure of radial neck fractures, where translation of the radial head (in the transverse plane) relative to the neck has been typically observed. There are currently no reported studies that have quantified the in vivo forces experienced by the proximal radius. Compression testing would not have demonstrated any difference between the fixation techniques, as the osteotomy site would simply abut together as loading was applied. Torsional loads are not likely to be the cause of fixation failure due to the lack of rotational constraint of the proximal radius. The authors chose to study multiple directions of shear loading to ensure that all those that might be clinically relevant were included. Submaximal non-destructive stiffness testing was employed to permit a repeated measures experimental design, increasing study power, while preserving specimens. Given that only two specimens were tested to failure with each fixation method, it is difficult to draw conclusions regarding the failure characteristics of the three techniques. A larger sample size might have found small differences between the blade plate and screws. In conclusion, the results of this study suggest that in the setting of a non-comminuted radial neck fracture, fixation with cross-cannulated 3.0 mm screws should be considered due to their stiffness and low profile relative to plates. In a comminuted radial head fracture with loss of cortical contact, the blade plate may be indicated due to its ability to stabilize the fracture without shortening the radius. Unlike cross-screws, the blade plate should be able to maintain alignment despite neck comminution, however, further laboratory studies will be required to confirm this. Compared to cross-cannulated 3.0 mm screws and the blade plate, the 2.7 mm T-plate provided the least stiff fixation. Financial support for this work was obtained from the Noelle Sue Grainger Fund. The authors appreciate the support of Synthes Canada in providing some of the internal fixation devices and the technical support of Mike Young and Frank Otten.