Application of mechanical excavators for rock excavation in both civil construction and mining engineering fields has increased significantly in recent years, and small-scale (core cutting) and full-scale laboratory rock cutting tests have emerged as necessities to provide basic data for machine selection, design and performance prediction for a given rock formation Prediction of the excavation performance of any mechanical excavator such as roadheaders, continuous miners and shearers for any geological formation is one of the main concerns in determining the economics of a mechanized mining and/or tunneling operation. There are several methods of performance prediction and the best approach may be the use of more than one of these methods. These methods may be generally classified as the full-scale linear cutting test, the small-scale cutting test (core cutting), empirical approach, semi-theoretical approach and field trial of a real machine The full-scale linear cutting test is widely accepted and a precise approach, since a large block of rock in size of (1×1×0.6 The small-scale cutting test (core cutting) is discussed in detail by McFeat and Fowell Specific energy values were correlated, in the past, with rock properties by different researchers Previous studies were usually limited to one rock type, one machine type and/or one index rock property. This study attempts to correlate the small and the full-scale rock cutting tests to select mechanized excavation machines, which have not been searched till now. The full-scale and the small-scale rock cutting tests and physical and mechanical property tests are performed on 18 different rock, ore and mineral samples collected from different mining sites in Turkey. The relationships between unrelieved specific energy obtained from the small-scale rock cutting and optimum specific energy obtained from the full-scale rock-cutting test are investigated by using statistical methods. And also, relationships between unrelieved specific energy values obtained from the small-scale rock cutting test and uniaxial and Brazilian tensile strength are analyzed by using statistical methods. The testing program includes physical and mechanical tests, and the full-scale and the small-scale rock cutting tests. Eighteen different massive rock samples are collected from different mining sites in Turkey including sandstone, claystone, tuffite, chromite, and trona. All the samples are massive except from claystone and trona having bedding planes. The rock cutting and mechanical tests are carried out perpendicular to the bedding planes. The rock samples are subjected to the following physical and mechanical tests and the rock cutting tests. Physical and mechanical property tests are performed on the core samples obtained from the different rock samples to determine uniaxial compressive strength, indirect (Brazilian) tensile strength, static and dynamic elasticity moduli, Schmidt hammer rebound values, density and Cerchar abrasivity index. Uniaxial compression tests are performed on trimmed core samples, which have a diameter of 54 Brazilian tensile strength tests are conducted on core samples having diameter of 54 Tangent Young's modulus is measured at a stress level equal to 50% of the ultimate uniaxial compressive strength P and S-wave velocities are measured on the cored rock samples having a diameter of 54 Twenty rebound values from single impacts separated by at least a plunger diameter are recorded and the upper ten values are averaged to estimate Schmidt hammer rebound values Trimmed core samples are used in the determination of natural density. The specimen volume is calculated from an average of several caliper readings and the weight of specimen is determined using a sensitive balance. The natural density values are obtained from the ratio of the specimen weight to specimen volume. Cerchar abrasivity tests are performed according to test procedures described by West The full-scale linear rock-cutting machine used in this study was recently built based on a project supported by NATO, Unrelieved cuts are performed prior to relieved cuts. Cutter (line) spacing to depth of cut ratios ( Unrelieved and relieved modes of cutting are explained in The effect of the spacing between the cuts and depth of cut on the cutting efficiency/specific energy is also explained in Small-scale rock cutting test has been developed for the purpose of measuring direct cuttability of a given rock. Available in the Istanbul Technical University is a 10-ton shaping machine used for the small-scale rock cutting tests. This cutting test is discussed in detail in The measured and calculated parameters for each small-scale rock cutting experiments are defined and illustrated in In the small-scale rock-cutting tests, two different specific energy parameters are described as The physical and mechanical properties of the rocks are summarized in The unrelieved specific energy values at 5 Equations of the best-fit curves with 95% confidence limit, observed The statistical relationships between laboratory specific energy The statistical relationship between laboratory specific energy  Accuracy of constants in each equation is determined by The full-scale linear cutting test is more expensive and complex than the small-scale core cutting test and requires up to 1×1×0.6 The statistical analyses clearly indicate that the small-scale rock cutting tests in unrelieved cutting mode at 5 The experimental studies and analysis performed in this study do not include the effect of discontinuities found in rock masses such as joints, bedding and foliation, even though it is known to have some influence on the performance of mechanical miners. Total system efficiency (machine utilization time, excluding the stoppages) should also be considered when planning a mechanized mining system. The results of this study can also be applied to other mechanical miners such as roadheaders, continuous miners, shearers and surface miners. Same rules might be adapted to the tunnel boring machines provided that a database with disc cutting is available. The results of the experimental and statistical analyses show that the optimum specific energy obtained in the laboratory from the full-scale rock cutting tests can be predicted reliably from the small-scale rock-cutting tests. If it is not possible to run the full-scale rock cutting tests due to the lack of large rock samples or not enough time to perform the tests, the small-scale rock cutting tests that are easily and inexpensively obtained from core or rectangular block samples, obtained during geotechnical investigations can be used to predict mechanical excavators’ net cutting rate. The relationship between laboratory specific energy Using the small-scale rock-cutting tests on core or rectangular rock samples would possibly reduce the number of cutting tests and time. However, it should be noted that this prediction cannot be more precise than a set of full-scale rock-cutting tests. This research was supported by the State Planning Organization, MTA, the Mining Engineering Department of Istanbul Technical University, and the Research Fund of Karaelmas University. The authors thank Nuri Ali Akcin, Hanifi Copur, Kebire Kel, Hakan Tuncdemir, and Murat Ali Demircin for their generous contributions to this study.