Les auteurs rapportent les résultats de 36 ostéosynthèses de la palette humérale d’une population âgée. L’objectif était de comparer ces résultats aux autres séries d’ostéosynthèses, mais aussi aux séries d’arthroplasties de coudes fracturés.
                  L’étude rétrospective a été réalisée sur 34 patients, dont la moyenne d’âge était de 77,6 ans, avec un recul moyen de 35 mois. Les fractures se répartissaient en 8 types C1, 10 types C2 et 18 types C3. Les patients ont été évalués par un critère social, un critère clinique (Mayo elbow score), un critère radiologique (classification de Bröberg) et un critère subjectif.
                  Le Mayo elbow score moyen était de 73,3 : 13 excellents résultats, 8 bons, 5 moyens et 10 mauvais. Les meilleurs résultats étaient obtenus par double plaque d’ostéosynthèse. Vingt-trois patients étaient douloureux. L’arc moyen de mobilité était de 80°. L’indice de satisfaction restait positif. Dix patients ne purent retrouver leur autonomie préopératoire. Soixante-quinze pour cent des patients présentaient des signes radiologiques d’arthrose et 32 % une pseudarthrose du foyer de fracture humérale. Nous retrouvions 3 infections superficielles et 4 lésions neurologiques.
               
                  Purpose of the study
                  This is a retrospective analysis of patients aged over 60 years treated in a single center for intra-articular fractures of the distal humerus. Outcomes were compared with published results for osteosynthesis and arthroplasty.
               
                  Material and methods
                  The cohort included 34 patients (36 fractures) reviewed at mean 35 months. Mean age was 77.6 years. Fracture types were: C1:8, C2:10, C3:18. The transtricipital posteromedial approach was used in the majority of patients. Fixation was achieved with a prebent lateral plate (n = 11 fractures), a Y-plate (n = 9), two plates (n = 4), pins or screws (n = 9) and an external fixator (n = 3). Outcome was assessed with the Mayo elbow score, the Bröberg radiographic score and patient satisfaction. The social impact was also noted.
               
                  Results
                  The mean Mayo elbow score was 73.3; outcome was excellent (n = 13), good (n = 8), fair (n = 5) and poor (n = 10). Pain persisted in 23 patients. The mean range of movement was 80°. Patient satisfaction remained good. Ten patients did not recover their preoperative level of autonomy. Radiological signs of osteoarthritis were noted for 75% of patients and nonunion of the humeral fracture in 32%. There were three superficial infections and four neurological lesions.
               
                  Discussion
                  Good and very good outcome was noted for 59% of the osteosyntheses in this series, compared with 71% in the literature. The rate for arthroplasty is 95%. The mean range of motion is 101°, 17% of patients with a prosthesis complain of pain, 5% develop a superficial infection and 6.5% suffer neurological injury. The estimated rate of revision for arthroplasty is 11% at 7 years.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Beyond the age of 65 years and based on evidence reported in the literature, it would be advisable to prefer another mode of treatment for these intra-articular fractures, for example elbow arthroplasty, particularly for comminutive fractures on osteoporotic bone.