Purpose
                  To compare the efficacy of quadratus femoris muscle pedicle bone flap transplantation combined with hollow compression screw fixation versus AO hollow compression screw fixation in the treatment of femoral neck fracture for Chinese young and middle-aged patients.
               
                  Methods
                  Case-controlled studies (CCTs) were used to compare the two operative methods in the treatment of femoral neck fractures. Data were retrieved from the Cochrane Library, Pubmed Database, CNKI, Chinese Biomedical Database.
                  Wanfang Data published during the period of January 2005 to December 2014. Methodological quality of the trials was critically assessed, and relevant data were extracted. Statistical Software Revman 5.0 was used for data-analysis.
               
                  Results
                  Eight articles were included in the meta-analysis. The results showed that there was statistical significance in the rate of fracture healing [OR = 5.43, 95% CI (2.89, 10.20), p < 0.05], the rate of good function of hip joint [OR = 5.12, 95% CI (3.21, 8.17), p < 0.05], the rate of femoral head necrosis [OR = 4.21, 95% CI (2.02, 8.76), p < 0.05], the time of fracture healing [WMD = −46.85, 95% CI (−65.13, −28.56), p < 0.05] between the two groups.
               
                  Conclusions
                  For the treatment of femoral neck fractures, the transplantation of quadratus femoris muscle pedicle bone flap combined with hollow compression screw; fixation is superior to the AO hollow compression screw fixation in terms of the rate; of fracture healing, the rate of good function of hip joint, the rate of femoral head; necrosis and the time of fracture healing.The management of femoral neck fractures especially the displaced ones in young adults is one of the most challenging tasks for orthopedic surgeons. Judet et al We searched CCTs including randomized controlled study (RCT) and retrospective case study and compared the quadratus femoris muscle pedicle bone flap transplantation combining with hollow compression screw fixation and hollow compression screw fixation in the treatment of femoral neck fractures for Chinese young and middle-aged patients from Cochrane Library, Pubmed, CNKI, Chinese Biomedical Database, Wanfang Data published during the period of January 2005 to December 2014. The searched key words are The inclusion criteria were: (1) Chinese young adults with femoral neck fracture; (2) CCTs; (3) comparison of the quadratus femoris muscle pedicle bone flap transplantation combining with hollow compression screw fixation and hollow compression screw fixation for the treatment of femoral neck fractures; (4) the outcome being measured by the rate of fracture healing, the rate of good function of hip joint, the rate of femoral head necrosis, and the time of fracture healing. The exclusion criteria were: (1) case-based reports or reviews; (2) object of study and intervention measures failed to meet the inclusion criteria; (3) the original documents of experimental design being not precise; (4) studies with incomplete data. Inclusion decisions were made independently by two reviewers according to the pre-stated eligible criteria. Disagreement in opinions between the two reviewers was resolved by discussion and a third reviewer was consulted as necessary. The criteria included seven items as follows: (1) whether to adopt the random sequence generation; (2) whether to use the principle of allocation concealment; (3) whether to use the principle of blinding for the subjects, implementers and measurement; (4) whether to use incomplete data and selective report; (5) whether there is any other bias. The relevant data recorded in this study included: first author's name, publishing year, sample size of quadratus femoris muscle pedicle bone flap transplantation combined with hollow compression screw fixation and hollow compression screw fixation, country of origin, duration of follow-up, the rate of fracture healing, the rate of good function of hip joint, the rate of femoral head necrosis, and the time of fracture healing. Data were independently imput into the RevMan 5.0 Meta-analysis Software Program by two reviewers. Dichotomous outcomes were expressed in terms of Odds ratio ( A total of 325 potentially relevant articles were identified. After screening all the titles and abstracts, 277 studies were excluded. After reading all the full-text of 48 studies, 8 studies including 800 patients met all the inclusion criteria. There was statistical difference between two groups [ There was statistical difference between two groups [ There was statimoral hstical difference between two groups [ There was statistical difference between two groups [ A strict quality assessment was carried out in the meta-analysis process. All the studies are CCT and the possibility of bias is low. But the funnel figure showed that there was a small bias, which might be associated with the incomplete collection of relevant literature, insufficient sample size and the different levels of clinical physicians. Sensitivity analysis is well qualified concerning the overall results The treatment of displaced femoral neck fracture in young adults is always a challenging task for orthopedic surgeons, which has been described as the unsolved fracture. The purpose of this study, focusing on the efficacy and safety of quadratus femoris muscle pedicle bone flap transplantation, was to provide an insight into the options for treating displaced femoral neck fracture for Chinese young and middle-aged patients. From this meta-analysis, the rate of fracture healing showed statistical difference between quadratus femoris muscle pedicle bone flap transplantation combined with hollow compression screw fixation and AO hollow compression screw fixation for displaced femoral neck fracture. The rate of fracture healing was significantly higher in quadratus femoris muscle pedicle bone flap transplantation group. In regard to the rate of good function of the hip joint, the rate of femoral head necrosis, the time of fracture healing, the transplantation of quadratus femoris muscle pedicle bone flap showed a better result compared to another group. Our meta-analysis has some limitations. First, only 8 CCTs were included in this study. Second, the follow-up period was not long enough to confirm the results. Third, all the retrieved documents were Chinese and there may be language bias. In conclusion, this study suggested that transplantation of quadratus femoris muscle pedicle bone flap could promote the fracture healing of femoral neck fracture for Chinese young adults. In the future study we hope that there will be more multicentre, large-scale and high quality CCTs to further prove the conclusion. 