Introduction
                  Comminuted patella fractures are uncommon and difficult fractures to manage. Multiple treatment modalities have been suggested, with little clinical data to support practice. Recent biomechanical and technical investigations have described successful plate fixation of comminuted patella fractures. The purpose of this study was to evaluate radiographic, clinical and functional outcome of comminuted patella fractures treated with a fixed angle locking plates. We believe stable fixation, which results in successful fracture union and functional recovery, can be achieved with this technique.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  A retrospective review was performed at a single regional academic Level 1 trauma hospital. All comminuted patella fractures treated with a fixed angle locking plate (AO/OTA 34C2 and C3) over a six-year period were evaluated. Thirty-six patients were identified. Average length of follow up was 154 weeks (range 12–297 weeks). Twenty patients were available for functional outcome scoring. Primary outcome measures were: Knee Outcome Score (KOS), Lower Extremity Functional Scale (LES) and goniometer measured knee range of motion. Secondary outcomes evaluated the need for additional screw or cerclage fixation, reoperation for any reason, bothersome hardware, infection and nonunion.
               
                  Results
                  Average KOS = 57.2 (20–74), average LES = 58.9 (15–80). Median extension = 0° (full extension), median flexion = 130°. Supplemental screws were used in 17/36 cases; cerclage used in 2/36 cases. Hardware irritation was noted in 4/20 patients, no patient requested elective hardware removal, one patient had failure of fixation and no nonunions were identified.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Fixed angle plate stabilization of comminuted patella fractures is a viable technique for fracture fixation. Good to excellent return of knee function and low complication rates, including need for hardware removal, can be expected.Comminuted patella fractures are challenging orthopaedic injuries. Restoration of the disrupted knee extensor mechanism and patellar articular surface are primary goals of management. Regardless of treatment, some patella fractures have been associated with poor functional outcomes [ Patellar fixation with a standard anterior tension band construct is best suited for transverse fractures. In the setting of comminution or multiple fracture lines, screw(s), plate(s), or cerclage wire fixation is therefore often utilized to aid reconstruction [ The use of a plate and screw devices for patellar fracture fixation has been suggested but limited primarily to biomechanical investigations using a transverse or inferior pole patellar fracture model [ The purpose of this study is to provide radiographic, clinical and functional outcome data on patients with complex patellar fractures treated with a fixed angle locking plate. Fracture healing, functional outcome data, rate of hardware prominence and need for removal were primary outcome measures. We hypothesized that a fixed angle plate and screw device can be effectively used for fixation of difficult patellar body fractures resulting in predictable union, good functional recovery and be associated with low rates of hardware related complications. Institutional Review Board approval was obtained for this study. A retrospective review at a single regional level-one trauma center was performed between January 1, 2010 and December 1, 2015. The Current Procedural Terminology (CPT) code 27524 was used to identify all patients who underwent open treatment of a patellar fracture. Seventy-seven patients were initially identified. Chart and radiographic review was then performed to identify those patients who had fracture fixation performed with a fixed angle mini-fragment locking plate and screw device. Exclusion criteria were age <18, pathologic or non-acute fractures and simple or partial articular fractures classified as AO/OTA 34A or 34B. Minimum three month follow up was required for evaluation of fracture union, complications and functional outcome. Patient age, gender, mechanism of injury, medical comorbidities and surgical details were obtained from the medical record. Each fracture was classified by the AO/OTA classification system [ Post-operative follow-up information from the electronic medical record, including radiographs, was then gathered and reviewed. Particular attention was paid to any mention of bothersome hardware or the need for reoperation. Radiographs were evaluated for fracture union or any evidence of fixation failure. Fracture union was defined as consolidation of major fracture lines on the lateral knee radiograph as well as return to full weight bearing and unrestricted range of motion without evidence of fixation failure. Statistical analysis of outcome measures was performed for all data. Simple averages and ranges were calculated for KOS, LES as well as ROM. Secondary outcomes were reported in simple number of patients and percent. A linear regression model was used to calculate an R Thirty-six patients (46.7%) underwent fixed angle plate fixation of a comminuted patella fracture ( Average patient age of the 20 patients who completed the functional outcome scoring was 49.3 years (range 22–91 years); there were 11 males and 9 females. Six patients reported tobacco use and one was a diabetic. Ten fractures were AO/OTA 34C2, 10 were 34C3 and; five fractures were open injuries. The average length of follow up was 132 weeks (range of 12–269 weeks). An attempt to recall all eligible patients was made through a formal letter and phone call. Twenty (56%) patients with greater than three months of follow-up were able to be reached and willing to participate in the study. Sixteen patients (44%) were unable to be reached or refused participation. The Knee Outcomes Survey (KOS) and Lower Extremity Functional Scale (LEFS) was provided to each participant [ The average KOS was 57.2 out of 75 with a range of 33–74. The average LES was 58.9 out of 80 with a range of 27–80. Final ROM averaged 1-126° (median: extension = 0°, flexion = 130°) with measured flexion ranging between 90-150° and extension deficit ranging between 0-15°. To evaluate whether patient age or time since surgery correlated to clinical outcome survey results, a linear regression was performed for both variables. The coefficient of determination (R The use of supplemental screws in fixation was seen in 17/36 (47.2%) of patients. The use of cerclage wire or supplemental sutures for fixation were seen in 2/36 (5.5%) of patients. In those patients with follow up greater than 12 weeks, post-operative hardware irritation was seen in 4/20 (20%) of responding patients. Hardware removal for infection occurred in one patient. No patient with available follow-up requested elective hardware removal. Failure of fixation was seen in one case ( Patella fractures account for 1% of all fractures [ Surgical treatment of patella fractures is associated with persistent functional deficits and hardware related complications. Lebrun et al. reported that following patellar fixation, patients had a statistically higher level of persistent knee pain and overall lower rate of quality of life and return to sport when compared to a normal population. In this same series, surgical implant removal was undertaken because of pain and loss of function in 52% of the patients [ Knee stiffness is also common and contributes to functional deficits following patellar fractures [ Deep infections can also occur with a rate of as high as 11% in open patellar fractures following fixation [ To the authors knowledge, this study represents the largest series of comminuted patellar fractures treated with a fixed angle locking plate construct. There are limitations to this study. The primary limitation was that we were only able to reach and obtain functional outcome scores on just over half of all eligible patients. In addition, only 14 patients retuned to clinic for ROM measurements. Bias may therefore exist with regard to the retrospective nature of this study and patient recall. Our institution is a county hospital and serves a diverse socioeconomic patient population, with a higher number of patients who cannot or do not follow-up after surgery. Strengths of this study include the inclusion of validated functional outcome scores and goniometer measured ROM. Minimum patient follow up was 12 weeks, with all patients having progressed to full weight bearing and unlimited ROM. Finally, both previously published clinical series of patients treated with patellar plating numbered less than 10 subjects [ Plate fixation of the patella fractures provides the surgeon with a means to secure fracture comminution that may not be amenable to screw or wire fixation. Based on the fracture, our preference is to treat extra-articular (AO/OTA 34A) or partial articular (AO/OTA 34B) fractures based on the location, articular involvement and whether they result in an extensor mechanism disruption. Fixation and treatment varies and is beyond the scope of this discussion. Our preference for standard articular transverse fractures (AO/OTA 34 C1.1) remains anterior tension band fixation with wire or cannulated screws. In this study, all cases of fixed angle patellar fixation were performed in comminuted (AO/OTA 34C2 and 34C3) fractures where there were, at a minimum, three fracture lines present. Fixed angle plate fixation is therefore our construct of choice for these complex injuries. Fixed angle plate fixation requires placement of a surface implant on the anterior aspect of the patella, but our use of minifragment and thinner implants has been shown to result in low rates of bothersome hardware and hardware removal. Plating systems vary in cost and this should be considered, especially when comparing fixed angle implants to all-wire fixation strategies. Neutralization of multiple fragments, and the ability to provide secure fixation, without devascularizing the patella, remain the primary advantages of this technique, and have resulted in a low rate of fixation failure and no observed nonunions. In conclusion, we believe that fixed angle plate fixation is a viable option for comminuted patellar fractures. The use such a plate on the anterior patellar surface is tolerated well and rarely requires removal. Supplemental screw and cerclage fixation techniques can be utilized as needed to achieve interfragmentary compression or reinforce the extensor mechanism as needed. None. None.