Issues related to environmental pollution and resource wastage have made the utilisation of Pb-bearing Zn residue an extremely urgent requirement. The floatability of artificial galena (AG) with a traditional xanthate collector was greatly improved by using a catanionic mixture (CM) as a collector, and the micromechanism was examined using flotation, zeta potential, adsorption, and slow positron beam measurements, together with molecular dynamics simulation. The flotation results revealed that the floatability of AG was inferior to that of natural galena (NG) when potassium amyl xanthate (KAX) was used as the collector, but it improved when using the CM. The results of zeta potential measurements, adsorption experiments, and slow positron beam detection demonstrated that the amount of KAX adsorbed on AG in the KAX/AG system was lower than that on NG in the KAX/NG system because of the greater electronegativity of surface Pb active sites resulting from the presence of S vacancy defects in AG. The molecular dynamics simulation showed that cetyl pyridine chloride and KAX promoted each other’s adsorption in the CM/AG system because of the electrostatic attraction between the sulfhydryl and pyridyl groups and the hydrophobic attraction between the amyl and cetyl groups. An adsorption model was proposed to better explain the greater floatability of AG when using the CM.Currently, 70% of Zn metal is obtained from sulfide deposits and extracted from a zinc sulfide concentrate after flotation concentration. Further, 70% of Zn is smelted by a traditional roast–leach–electrowinning processes worldwide. Approximately 0.9 tons of Zn leaching residue is formed when 1 ton of Zn metal is produced by this zinc smelting process ( As resource crises become more severe, these residues become increasingly important as a secondary resource because they commonly contain many valuable metals such as Zn, Pb, Au, and Ag ( A technology based on conversion of anglesite (PbSO Catanionic mixtures (CMs) have been used to improve the flotation of some minerals with relatively poor floatability ( In this work, flotation of AG using different collectors was investigated and compared to that of NG using a common collector. The aim of this study is to clarify why AG is less floatable than NG and how to improve the flotation of AG. Flotation, zeta potential, and adsorption tests were conducted to explore the mineral flotation behaviour and adsorption mechanism of collectors on the AG surface. Slow positive electron beam detection was employed to compare the near-surface defect concentration and understand the difference in floatability between AG and NG. The AG was prepared from −74 μm natural anglesite (NA) by reduction roasting with carbon monoxide. The specific preparation method and optimal conditions for AG preparation were reported in our previous publication ( Analytically pure cetyl pyridine chloride (CPC) and sodium hexametaphosphate (SHMP) were obtained from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd. Potassium amyl xanthate (KAX) was purchased from Qixia TongDa Flotation Reagent Co., Ltd., China, and purified by recrystallisation from acetone. Analytically pure methyl isobutyl carbinol (MIBC) was employed as a frother in both the microflotation and Zn residue flotation studies. The chemical structures of both reagents are easily available in previous publications. Analytical grade sodium hydroxide and sulfuric acid were used for pH control. The water used in all the tests was deionised (DI) water with a resistivity of 18.3 MΩ⋅cm. Microflotation tests were conducted in a mechanically agitated flotation machine (XFG, 40 mL, Jilin Exploration Machinery Plant, China ( Three flotation tests were performed under the same experimental conditions, and the average values were reported with the error in recovery less than 3%. Note that to obtain the CM collector, the same mole number of CPC was introduced into the KAX solution. The zeta potential of AG and NG was measured using a Coulter DELSA 440S II electrokinetic instrument. A powder sample (2.0 mg) was first ground to ~2 μm in an agate mortar and then transferred to a 100 mL beaker containing 50 mL of 1 × 10 Species diagrams for lead ions were constructed to describe the chemical species that may be present over the entire range of experimental conditions. The following reactions (1)–(3) were used to construct the lead species diagrams. A solution (40 mL) containing the collector(s) combined with a sample powder (2.0 g) was placed in a 100 mL flask. The pH was adjusted to 9.0 by adding HCl and NaOH, and the solution was allowed to settle for 10 min. The pulp was agitated for 25 min at 200 rpm in a constant-temperature incubator shaker. The solutions were centrifuged at 8500 rpm for 20 min, and the concentration of each component in the supernatant was analysed. The amount of surfactants adsorbed on the powders was determined using solution depletion. The amount of surfactants in the supernatant solution was determined using an automated total organic carbon analyser (TOC-VCPH, Shimadzu, Japan). For the CMs, the CPC concentration of the supernatant solution was calculated from the N concentration; then the KAX concentration could be back-calculated from the C concentration of the solution. The amount of surfactants adsorbed on the powder was calculated as The positron, which is the antiparticle of the electron, was predicted by Dirac in 1930 ( The single-positron beam energy was continuously adjustable from 0 to 16 keV, and the target chamber vacuum was better than 1.33 × 10 In the molecular dynamics simulation, the Cambridge Serial Total Energy Package (CASTEP) module was adopted for geometry optimisation of perfect galena and galena with near-surface defects [note that the (1 0 0) edge plane is the main cleavage plane of galena]. The adsorption was simulated on the (1 0 0) surface of an 8 × 8 × 8 supercell with a 40 Å vacuum slab. We considered the perfect galena supercell to represent NG, whereas the crystal with S vacancy defects in the near-surface zone represented AG. A 6.25% S vacancy rate was uniformly obtained by deleting 16 S atoms in the lower 8 atomic layers of the supercell. The supercells are very similar from any external viewpoint, so only one is shown in  Batch rougher flotation tests of Zn residue reduction-roasted with carbon monoxide ( The surface charge is expected to change when charged reagents are adsorbed onto a mineral/water interface. Zeta potential tests of AG and NG before and after interaction with the collector are employed to detect these changes, and the results are shown in The pH-dependent of zeta potential of mineral surface may be ascribed to the decreased Pb(OH)(H The zeta potential of the NG surface is slightly higher than that of the AG surface. When the AG surface is treated with KAX, the surface potential decreases by approximately 30 mV, which indicates adsorption of KAX anions ( To compensate for the inadequacy of zeta potential measurement in the AG/CM system, adsorption tests were conducted to determine more precisely the adsorbed amount of CPC and KAX in each system. The adsorbed amount versus the collector dosage at pH 9 is shown in  The reason for the floatability difference between AG and NG has been clarified using slow positron beam detection. Now the adsorption energy of each reagent is used to explain why the recovery of AG can be enhanced by replacing KAX with the CM as a collector and why KAX and CPC promote adsorption of each other. As shown in As shown in  AG floats poorly compared with NG when KAX is used as the collector. The flotation performance of AG in various collectors is ordered as CM > KAX > CPC. When a CM is used, the flotation recovery of AG can be increased to almost the value for NG when KAX is used, thus solving the problem of poor AG flotation. The AG surface has a slightly lower zeta potential than the NG surface. The amount of KAX adsorbed on AG in the KAX/AG system is lower than that adsorbed on NG in the KAX/NG system owing to the larger electronegativity of the surface Pb active sites resulting from the presence of S vacancy defects in AG. Owing to electrostatic attraction between sulfhydryl and pyridyl groups and hydrophobic attraction between amyl and cetyl groups, CPC and KAX promote adsorption of each other in the CM/AG system.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors acknowledge the support of the