The current study was carried out to investigate the kinetics of reactions for the pressure oxidative leaching of a molybdenite concentrate in less than one hour. The effects of oxygen pressure, stirring speed, pulp density, acid concentration and temperature on the leaching rate of the molybdenum were studied. It was found that about 85% of molybdenite was oxidized to molybdic oxide precipitate with remaining molybdenum dissolved in the leaching liquor. Analysis of experimental data showed that the reaction is chemically controlled with activation energy of 68.8kJ/mol. Furthermore SEM images showed no significant boundary diffusion layer and it was noted that the molybdic oxide precipitates were of fibrous shape.As a result of the well known disadvantages of molybdenum pyrometallurgical extraction, hydrometallurgical processes are the most common processes for its extraction nowadays. Hydrometallurgical processes of molybdenum extraction from molybdenite include: a) leaching in the presence of oxidizing agents ( Nitric acid is a relatively strong oxidizing agent which is used in extraction of metals from sulfide ores ( Reaction Since the solubility of molybdic acid (H If MoS But for its pressure leaching in dilute HNO In study conducted by Smirnova et al. in low concentration of nitric acid at the temperature of 180 The required concentration of nitric acid for Reaction The pressure leaching of MoS As all the processes mentioned above complete in more than one hour, present work focused on investigating the possibility of completion of leaching process in shorter period of time. Furthermore working in one step, at lower temperature, lower oxygen over-pressure and with higher molybdenum conversion to molybdic oxide precipitate which led to lower extractant required for solvent extraction step, are the benefits of the present process over Smirnov's. For the reasons mentioned above, the present study can be interesting from the economical point of view. However, the effect of some important parameters such as time, temperature, acid concentration, oxygen over-pressure, pulp density and stirring speed on the conversion of molybdenite concentrates during the pressure oxidative leaching and possibility of the reaction reaching completion in less than one hour have not been studied yet. Because detailed information on the effect of as mentioned leaching parameters on the kinetics of the pressure leaching of the molybdenite concentrate are still not available, the present research was conducted to study such effects on kinetics of the pressure oxidative leaching of the molybdenite concentrates in nitric acid. The molybdenite concentrate was supplied by Sarcheshmeh Copper Complex. Its chemical composition is shown in The residual flotation oil in the molybdenite concentrate was removed by triple washing of the concentrate in acetone, then in water, and finally drying at 100 All experiments were carried out in a stainless steel pressure vessel (supplied by Autoclave Engineers, USA) equipped with a mechanical stirrer. A schematic of the reactor is shown in The precipitates were characterized by SEM (Tescan VegaII scanning electron microscope) and by X-ray Diffraction analysis (PHILIPS PW1800 diffractometer) in order to investigate the conversion of the molybdenite concentrate into the precipitated molybdic oxide. The well-known Taguchi approach ( The molybdenum content of the molybdic oxide and residual molybdenite was calculated by mass balance. The molybdenum leaching efficiency was calculated as following: Because of the small size of particles in the molybdenite concentrate (80% The effect of stirring rate on molybdenum leaching was studied at 3 levels (500 By applying the pressure at three levels (965.3, 1103.2 and 1241.1 Oxygen here is required for the oxidation of nitrous oxide (Eq.  The effect of nitric acid was studied at three concentrations (25, 35 and 40 Nitrogen dioxide reacts with water to form the nitric acid as below: Also nitrogen mono-oxide oxidized to nitrogen dioxide by the following reaction: It is expected that the efficiency of the nitric acid regeneration was not 100% and that minor amounts of NO or NO When the concentration of nitric acid is too low (about 11 The effect of pulp density (100, 150 and 200 The leaching of molybdenum was investigated at T The reaction of molybdenite with nitric acid is given by Reaction Data analysis showed that liquid film diffusion control is not the governing mechanism for the reaction of molybdenite with nitric acid. During the progress of the reaction no ash or product layer was produced; the particle shrank during reaction, finally disappearing. This meant that the reaction rate was dominated by the chemically-controlled mechanism ( Where: A plot of the right-hand side of Eq. The dependence of reaction rate upon temperature is given by an Arrhenius type equation: Where The X-ray diffraction pattern of the molybdenite concentrates and precipitate is shown in The SEM micrograph of molybdenite and precipitates illustrated in Present work focused on investigating the possibility of completion of leaching process in less than one hour. Furthermore working in one step, at lower temperature, lower oxygen over-pressure and with higher molybdenum conversion to molybdic oxide precipitate which led to lower extractant required for solvent extraction step. For the reasons mentioned above, the present study can be interesting from the economical point of view. The effects of oxygen pressure, stirring speed, pulp density, acid concentration and temperature on the leaching rate of the molybdenum were studied and the following conclusions can be drawn from the study: An increase in stirring rate improved the leaching efficiency of molybdenum from molybdenite. An increase in the amount of oxygen over-pressure had no significant effect on the molybdenite pressure leaching in nitric acid media. Nitric acid concentration was an important parameter in pressure leaching of the molybdenite concentrate. At least 35–40 An increase in the amount of pulp density decreased the leaching efficiency of the molybdenum. Also 85% of reacted molybdenite precipitated as molybdic oxide and remaining 15% is dissolved in the liquor. Data analysis indicated that the rate-controlling step for pressure leaching of molybdenite in nitric acid solution is chemically controlled. The reaction activation energy was calculated to be 68.8 SEM image of the precipitates showed that the synthesized molybdic oxide had a fibrous structure. There is still a chance to investigate the precipitation mechanism of molybdic oxide at further studies. This could help to modify the properties of molybdic oxide precipitates during the precipitation.