The novel vanadium bromide (V/Br) redox flow cell employs a vanadium(II)/vanadium(III) couple in the negative half-cell and a Br−/Br3
                     − couple in the positive half-cell, using a mixture of vanadium bromide, hydrobromic acid and hydrochloric acid as the electrolyte in both half-cells. An ion exchange membrane separates the two V/Br half-cell electrolytes. In this project, small test cell cycling experiments were conducted to evaluate the performance of a range of ion exchange membranes in the V/Br redox flow cell. The features and charge/discharge results of the V/Br redox flow cell will also be discussed in this paper.Batteries and fuel cells are regarded as being among the most efficient devices for the conversion, storage and delivery of electrical energy The major advantage of the UNSW vanadium redox battery (VRB) is that it overcomes a major problem with other redox flow batteries (e.g. Regenessys and the Fe/Cr system) in which diffusion of ions through the membrane causes the cross-contamination of the positive and negative half-cells Despite its considerable advantages, the relatively low specific energy of the VRB, less than 25 A vanadium chloride/polyhalide redox flow battery was recently described The vanadium bromide (V/Br) redox flow cell thus employs a vanadium bromide solution in a mixture of hydrobromic and hydrochloric acid as its supporting electrolyte in each half-cell, with electron transfer taking place at carbon felt electrodes. As with the VRB, the V/Br cell employs the same elements in both half-cell solutions so there are no problems of cross-contamination. In this system however, the V(IV) ions on the positive side do not partake in the electrochemical reaction, i.e. the oxidation of V(IV) to V(V) during cell charging does not occur. Instead, the following overall reactions result At the negative electrode: At the positive electrode: The V/Br redox system thus retains all the advantages of the original vanadium redox flow cell, but the higher solubility of vanadium bromide means that it also has the potential to produce higher energy densities. The possibility of employing 3–4 The ion exchange membrane has been identified as being the most critical component of a redox flow cell, defining its performance as well as its economic viability. It acts as a separator, preventing the mixing and direct chemical reaction of the oxidant and reductant electrolytes. In addition, it provides an ionic conduction path between the electrolytes In this study, various types of experimentally and commercially available ion exchange membranes were assessed to establish their suitability for use in the V/Br flow cell. The initial behaviour of the ion exchange membranes during small-scale cell cycling experiments was investigated. Selected membranes were subsequently evaluated for properties of ion exchange capacity, conductivity, diffusivity, dimensional stability and water content. The membranes evaluated in this study are listed in Cell cycling was performed at a constant current density of 20 It must be noted that all membranes were pre-treated according to their manufacturing specifications. In addition, each membrane was soaked in the vanadium bromide electrolyte for a minimum of 2 The performance of each membrane including chemical stability in the battery electrolyte, cycling behaviour, as well cycling efficiencies was evaluated. Efficiencies were calculated using the following equations: The IEC of the membranes was determined by the method described in Mohammadi and Skyllas-Kazacos The ionic conductivity of the membranes was determined by impedance spectroscopy over a frequency range of 1 to 10 It must be noted that each membrane was soaked in a solution of 2 The diffusivity of the membrane was determined by the rate of diffusion of vanadium (IV) ions across the membrane using the static diffusion test outlined in Grossmith et al. The rate of V(IV) ion diffusion was determined by the rate of change in the absorbance according to the following derivation It has been suggested that the behaviour of a system in which an ion exchange membrane separates two solutions is not exclusively determined by the processes occurring within the membrane In addition to the interruption test cell, the diffusion coefficient of the V(IV) ions in solution was calculated to establish whether the diffusion of ions through the membrane is slower than the diffusion of ions through the bulk. Cyclic voltammograms were thus performed over a range of scan rates using a graphite counter electrode and a saturated calomel electrode as the reference. A sample of each membrane was immersed in distilled water for 24 To determine the dimensional stability of the ion exchange membranes, samples were immersed in solutions of distilled water, 2 A summary of the cycling performance of the membranes tested is given in As seen in The Hipore™ microporous separator was also subjected to cell cycling experiments. It has been cycled for over 100 cycles and is still continuing. Over the first 50 cycles, an average coulombic efficiency of approximately 60% and average voltage of 63%. Preferential crossover of solution from the positive to the negative half-cell was occurring more often than other ion exchange membranes tested. As a result, the cell required more frequent solution re-balancing. The charge times recorded were consistently over a third greater than theoretical, indicating that the vanadium ions of different oxidation states were diffusing through. This low ion selectivity was expected due to the porous nature of the separator and its lack of ion exchange functionality. At cycle number 50, the cell was pulled apart and reassembled with fresh solution. No physical changes were observed for the separator. During the subsequent 50 cycles, the performance of the cell improved, as average coulombic and voltage efficiencies recorded increased to 80% and 70%, respectively. It should also be mentioned that the solution levels did not require re-balancing during the last 50 cycles. At this stage, it is not clear what caused the sudden change in behaviour of the cell, but further studies are underway to optimise the separator properties. The most promising ion exchange membranes tested in this study were the ABT3, L01854, M04494 membranes and the results obtained thus warrant further investigation. In an attempt to understand the behaviour of the membranes during cycling, selected samples were analysed to determine their properties.  The cyclic voltammograms of the 1 Assuming a The IEC refers to the concentration of fixed charges in the exchanger, analogous to the concentration of an electrolyte solution  From the relationships described above, it was assumed that the ion exchange membranes with high IEC would have a high rate of vanadium ion diffusion (due to their decreased selectivity), a low area resistivity and high degree of swelling. This general trend was not observed with all ion exchange membranes. Ion exchange membranes ABT3, ABT4 and ABT5 differ only by the number of functional groups on the surface and by thickness. The IEC of the ABT3 was almost double, whilst measured resistivity was significantly lower than the ABT4 and ABT5 membranes ( The swelling behaviour of the ABT range of membranes is consistent with the properties listed in The SZ membrane showed a high IEC, high rate of V(IV) diffusion and a high area resistance. These properties are consistent with the low voltage efficiency (44%) and high rate of solution crossover observed during the cycling of the membrane (see Section The Gore L01854 and M04494 membranes produced the lowest values of IEC and V(IV) ion diffusivity, whilst retaining the lowest values of area resistance. Small dimensional changes were observed in the acidic solutions, however the M04494 membrane showed the greatest dimensional changes in length and width in distilled water (6.5%). Changes were consistently larger than the L01854 membrane, possibly due to the greater IEC (and thus higher diffusivity) of Gore M044994. Very small thickness changes were detected for both membranes. Although the Hipore™ microporous separator has no ion exchange functionality, an IEC value of 1.14 The dimensional changes of the Hipore™ microporous separator were expected to be significant as the ability of the separator to uptake solution was demonstrated in the IEC and water content tests. Interestingly, the separator showed a slight decrease in length and width, however showed a 0.03  A major limiting factor in the lifetime of the V/Br system is the chemical stability of the ion exchange membrane in the highly oxidising electrolyte. Membranes such as the SELEMION Other membranes such as the HSV, ABT1 and ABT2 did not show good cycling properties or chemical stability. Although their immersion time in the battery electrolyte was limited (less than 10 cycles), it was sufficient to demonstrate their lack of chemical resistance. The HSV membrane blistered and its dark brown colour faded to a light brown. Both the ABT1 and ABT2 membranes delaminated, as the backing material used to increase the mechanical stability of the membranes detached from the ion exchange layer. The ion exchange layer was too thin and fragile to act as a separator and thus a large volumetric transfer of solution from the positive to the negative side occurred. The ABT4 and ABT5 membranes were characterised by relatively low coulombic efficiencies (63% and 45%) and higher rate of solution crossover. No physical changes after cycling were however observed. During long term cycling, however, the coulombic efficiency of the ABT3 membrane increased, while the voltage efficiency steadily decreased. This is thought to be the fouling of the membrane, leading to the blockage of the pores and reduced transfer rates of the redox ions across the membrane. Although the L01854 membrane lasted at least 160 cycles, when removed from the cell it was found to have blistered. It is not known at what stage the blistering began, or how much longer the membrane would last in this condition. Long term stability testing will review these questions. The M04494 membrane was also found to have blistered at some stage during the 30 cycles completed thus far, however the effect of this on the cycling behaviour has not yet been apparent. The cell testing is still continuing for this membrane. Most of the ion exchange membranes tested to date are not suitable for use in a V/Br flow cell. A high resistance was shown by a large number of membranes, some too high to allow any cell cycling to occur with the set voltage limits. Other membranes have shown a low chemical stability in the highly oxidising electrolyte. The membranes that have shown positive results in the V/Br system are the ABT3, L01854 and M04494 membranes. Over 160 cycles, the ABT3 membrane has shown average coulombic and voltage efficiencies of 80% and 64%, whilst the L01854 membrane, 86% and 62%, respectively. Considerable improvements in voltage efficiencies can be achieved by the optimisation of cell design. The stability of the Hipore™ microporous separator in the cell electrolyte and the improved cycling behaviour is promising. Studies will endeavour to optimise its selectivity and IEC. Further investigations are also needed to understand the unusual cycling behaviour seen with the discharge of the ABT3 membrane and the blistering of the L01854 and M04494 membranes. These investigations are currently being conducted in parallel to the screening of further membrane materials as candidates for the V/Br redox flow cell. The authors are grateful to W.L Gore and Associates for the samples of M04494; to the Australian Battery and Technology Trading Company for the ABT membrane samples; to Guangzhou Delong Technologies Pty Ltd for the SZ membrane samples and to Mitsubishi Australia for the Hipore™ microporous separator.