The main objective of this work was to determine the effectiveness and kinetics of hydrogen peroxide in destroying cyanide in the tailings slurry from a gold mine with low sulphide and heavy metal content. The impacts of catalyst (Cu) and hydrogen peroxide concentrations, temperature and pH on the extent and rate of weak acid dissociable (WAD) cyanide destruction were investigated. Experiments were conducted using the variable-dose completely mixed batch reactor bottle-point method. Both the rate and extent of CNWAD destruction generally increased with increasing peroxide doses for either absence or presence of Cu catalyst. Catalyst addition was very effective in terms of not only enhancing the cyanide destruction rate but also significantly reducing the required peroxide dosages to achieve CNWAD concentrations of about 1 mg/l, independent of the temperatures tested (10, 20 and 30 °C). The initial cyanide destruction rates increased between 1.2 and 3 folds with the addition of 30 mg/l of Cu. Kinetic experiments showed that in most cases little CNWAD destruction occurred after a reaction time of 2–4 h. The impact of slurry pH on cyanide destruction varied depending upon the dosages of Cu catalyst. Relatively lower peroxide dose/CNWAD ratios required to achieve less than 1 mg/l of CNWAD may be due to lower heavy metals and sulphide content of the ore, resulting in lower peroxide requirement for metal bound cyanides. During cyanide destruction, nitrate was initially formed as a by-product and then possibly converted to other some volatile nitrogen-containing species, as supported by the mass balance calculations.Gold and silver recovery by cyanidation is widely used in mining operations. Other industrial applications of cyanide include metal processing, electroplating, steel hardening, photographic applications, and synthetic rubber production ( Several destruction or recovery processes are well proven and can produce treated solutions or slurries with low levels of cyanide and its related compounds ( As an oxidation-based process, hydrogen peroxide has been tested and used worldwide for cyanide removal in mining operations ( Hydrogen peroxide can oxidize free and weakly complexed metal cyanides (i.e., nickel, copper, cadmium, and zinc cyanides) as following ( Cyanate produced in the reactions will hydrolyze to form ammonia and bicarbonate, with the rate of hydrolysis being more rapid at lower pH values. Normally, about 10–20% of the cyanide is converted to ammonia during treatment ( Overall, the advantages of the hydrogen peroxide process can be summarized as follows: capital costs are comparable (or less) to other chemical treatments; the process is relatively simple in design and operation; all forms of cyanide can be removed; heavy metals are significantly reduced through precipitation; close pH control is not required; the process is adaptable for batch and continuous flow operations; no production of high quantities of waste sludge and dissolved solids; and the process has been shown effective in bench-, pilot- and full-scale operations. On the other hand, the disadvantages are as follows: the process may not be generally suitable for treatment of tailings slurries; chemical costs may be relatively high; high concentrations of cyanate can be produced, potentially increasing the ammonia concentration in the solution; the process does not remove ammonia or thiocyanate; and cyanide is not recovered ( Although it is suggested in the literature that hydrogen peroxide may not be efficient for slurries due to high consumption resulting from auto-catalytic destruction on solid surfaces or from high heavy metals content, there is a need to investigate the efficacy of hydrogen peroxide in destroying cyanide for tailings slurries from ores with relatively low sulphide and heavy metals content. The main objective of this work was to determine the effectiveness and kinetics of hydrogen peroxide in destroying cyanide in the tailings slurry from a gold mine (Ovacik Gold Mine, Turkey) with low sulphide and heavy metals content compared with other refractory and sulphidic ores. The impacts of catalyst (Cu) and hydrogen peroxide concentrations, temperature and pH on the extent and rate of cyanide destruction were investigated. The tailings slurry samples (after cyanidation process) were taken from the Ovacik Gold Mine. The samples were shipped overnight to the laboratory in the headspace free, high-density polyethylene containers. The pH values of the samples were kept at about 10.5 to minimize the loss of cyanide as HCN gas. The Ovacik gold mine is located near the western coast of Turkey. The ore contains less than 0.02% S During the experiments, the tailings slurry samples were stored in containers headspace free in the dark at about 8 All hydrogen peroxide oxidation experiments were performed in two phase: kinetic and constant reaction time experiments with variable hydrogen peroxide and catalyst concentrations, pH and temperature. Experiments were conducted using the variable dose completely mixed batch reactor (CMBR) bottle-point method. For each experimental matrix, after dosing hydrogen peroxide and/or Cu catalyst, the slurries in headspace free CMBRs (100-ml pyrex glass bottles sealed with PTFE screw-caps) were kept well mixed (100 rpm) in a temperature-controlled orbital shaker and incubator (Gallenkamp). The bottles were covered with aluminum foil to prevent photodegradation of cyanide during mixing. After the pre-selected reaction time terminated, the bottles were opened in a vacuum hood and quickly dosed with sodium sulfite (Na For the kinetic experiments, reaction times selected were 0.5, 1, 2, 4, 8, and 24 h. As discussed in the results section, kinetic experiments showed that in most cases, little reduction in cyanide concentration occurred after a reaction time of 4 h; therefore, 4 h of reaction time was selected for the following constant reaction time experiments. Tested hydrogen peroxide doses were 10, 20, 50, 75, 100, 150, 200, 300, 500, and 1000 mg/l. Tested Cu catalyst concentrations were 0, 10 and 30 mg/l. Temperature and pH values investigated in the experimental matrix were 10, 20 and 30 °C and 7.5, 8.5, 9.5, and 10.3 Weak acid dissociable (WAD) cyanide parameter was selected to quantify the cyanide concentration in the experiments. It represents the total concentration of free cyanide (CN Total dissolved solids, conductivity, turbidity, alkalinity, total hardness, pH, solids content, nitrite, nitrate, ammonia, total Kjeldahl nitrogen, and total nitrogen were measured according to Standard Methods ( A 30% hydrogen peroxide aqueous solution (Merck) was used as the stock solution for all experiments. Copper sulfate (CuSO Kinetic experiments for the destruction of CN In terms of achieving CN Consistent with the literature for tailings slurries from typical ores ( Addition of Cu catalyst significantly increased cyanide removals independent of temperature ( The required hydrogen peroxide doses per amount of CN Reaction times necessary to achieve CN Hydrogen peroxide reacts with cyanide to produce cyanate and, when added in excess, nitrite and carbonate and, eventually, nitrate form ( Kinetics experiments showed that in most cases little reduction in cyanide concentration occurred after a reaction time of 4 h; therefore, 4 h of reaction time was selected for the constant reaction time experiments to investigate the impacts of peroxide and Cu doses, temperature and pH on the extent of cyanide destruction. A peroxide dose of 100 mg/l with 30 mg/l Cu concentration resulted in CN Similar with results of pH 9.5 ( The pH of slurries is important in terms of two main aspects: effects on cyanide destruction and precipitation of released metals after destruction. With hydrogen peroxide, metals complexed with cyanide are precipitated as metal hydroxides depending on the pH of the solution, with an optimum pH of about 9.0–9.5. However, a pH below about 9.0 is optimal for precipitation of iron cyanides. In addition, cyanate produced in the reactions hydrolyzes to form ammonia and bicarbonate, with the rate of hydrolysis being more rapid at lower pH values. Furthermore, final effluents to be discharged should be in the pH range of 7.5–8.5 to minimize the toxic effects of ammonia ( Both the rate and extent of CN The initial cyanide destruction rates increased between 1.2 and 3 folds with the addition of 30 mg/l of Cu. Reaction times necessary to achieve CN In the absence of catalyst, only peroxide dose of 300 mg/l was able to achieve less than 1 mg/l CN This manuscript is resulted from the M.Sc. studies of Emine Karakaya at the Dept. of Environmental Eng. in the Suleyman Demirel University. The authors would like thank the Newmont Mining Co., Turkey, for kindly providing the slurry samples and Hasan Ciftci (Suleyman Demirel University) for his technical support. The authors would like to specially thank Dr. Terry Mudder (TIMES Ltd., USA) for suggestions during manuscript preparation.