The production of oxygen from lunar regolith is analogous to metal production from ore in a terrestrial mine. The process flowsheets both include excavation, haulage and beneficiation of the regolith or ore to provide the feedstock for the chemical extraction of oxygen or metal. The production rate of oxygen depends on the mass rate of regolith treated and the efficiency of converting the regolith to oxygen. To date, the development of Space Resource Utilisation (SRU) has been concerned with the technological development of the process, particularly the excavation and oxygen extraction. However, the required operating mass rates of the mine operation and the oxygen extraction stage have not been considered in any great detail.
                  Previous estimates of mining scale for lunar oxygen production are reviewed, and converted to a comparable regolith mining rate of kg/h. Beneficiation of the regolith before oxygen extraction is considered, and the effects of pre-sizing and removal of a specific component, agglutinates, are considered. The oxygen yield and operational availability are also included. It is estimated that the minimum mining rate to produce 1000 kg of oxygen per annum is at least five times higher than previous estimates, 30 kg/h, for equivalent efficiency assumptions.
                  Monte-Carlo simulations were performed for statistical confidence in the estimates of the mining mass rate and the required oxygen extraction feedstock rate. To be 95% confident that the 1000 kg/y O2 will be met, the designed mining rate should be at least 65 kg/h, and the beneficiated feedstock rate 16 kg/h.
                  This study has revised and increased the estimate of the lunar regolith mining scale required for the production of a given amount of oxygen. It has also estimated the mass rate of feedstock required for oxygen extraction, if the regolith is first beneficiated.
                  The findings have a significant impact on the practical implementation of lunar mining and oxygen extraction, particularly the process design and whether the operation will be by batch- or continuous processing. The mass scale and beneficiation approaches bring terrestrial mining and processing concepts to SRU, and for the first time estimates the effect that regolith beneficiation and uncertainty have on the estimated scale of both the mining and extraction operations.Lunar SRU was proposed by The commodities of interest are oxygen and water, both of which have numerous economic and technological applications. In a recent and comprehensive report, While the use- and business cases for lunar SRU have been well-considered, the scale of mining operations required to produce the projected amount of oxygen (1000 kg/y, following To estimate the scale to produce a specified target of 1000 kg/y of O The extraction of space resources follows the same basic flowsheet as that of terrestrial mineral extraction. This is shown in There are several, critical, differences between terrestrial operations and those for space resources, namely the environmental differences (low gravity, vacuum and no available water for transport and separation of particles), fault tolerance levels and system design. On Earth, processing operations are overseen by teams of operators, to resolve frequent interruptions in operation caused by the handling of large streams of slurry with variable feed properties. The flowsheets are typically complex, to enable one, or several, products to be produced to a target specification. For space resources, reliability and process simplicity must be taken into account, in addition to process optimisation. While over 20 technologies have been proposed for this step ( The hydrogen reduction of regolith is primarily dependent on the ilmenite content ( While the FeO component of ilmenite is preferentially reduced, oxygen can also be extracted (with varying efficiencies) by the reduction of TiO Each hydrogen reduction reactor has been designed to operate with an ideal feed. There is, however, comparatively little research on how these feeds would actually be produced in situ, and how this would feed into the reactor. For example, a design patented by Lunar regolith contains around 40% oxygen, however this is bound in minerals. Of the minerals on the Moon, ilmenite (FeTiO Two of the most significant uncertainties in the SRU flowsheet are the material properties and the spatial variability of the regolith. According to Lunar simulant JSC-1A has a TiO The variability in the TiO A comprehensive petrological and geochemical study of 12 particles from the Apollo 12 soil samples is presented in The variability of the feedstock, and the subsequent effect on processing, is a feature of both terrestrial and space resource extraction. The estimation of mining and extraction rates can therefore be performed in two ways. First, by using the average properties of the regolith, a single estimate is obtained, and which can be altered by changing the process variables, such as particle sizing and decontamination to assess the range. Second, this can be repeated by taking also the regolith property variance into account and performing numerous Monte Carlo simulations, where many estimates are made by repeatedly drawing from the property and variable distributions. This yields a confidence estimate for the predictions, which is useful for mission-critical production of oxygen. Both these approaches will be used here. While a great deal of research effort has been allocated to the technologies that produce oxygen in situ, the feed preparation stage has generally been oversimplified or overlooked entirely. The preparation of a suitable feedstock for a given reduction process, hydrogen or otherwise, will directly impact the design of the reduction technology, and will govern the scale of the mining operation itself. Here, we consider two lunar oxygen production facilities, each capable of generating 1000 kg/y of oxygen via a hydrogen reduction process. The first uses a regolith run-of-mine feedstock that has been well characterised, and the second uses a variable feedstock with regolith from various locations. For each of these facilities, the impact of feed preparation, namely sizing and decontamination, on the overall scale of the mine are evaluated. The estimation of the scale of a mine depends on a number of variables. For lunar applications, the estimation equations are most appropriately scaled to the mass rate of oxygen required. The fraction of time that the complete oxygen production operation is in production is called the The oxygen extraction process treats a feedstock. This feedstock is the product from the beneficiation stage ( The mass rate of feedstock required (kg feedstock/h) for oxygen extraction can be estimated from the mass rate of oxygen required (kg oxygen/h), divided by the yield of oxygen from the feedstock (kg oxygen/kg feedstock) and the operational availability: The mined regolith may be beneficiated, for example, to remove first particles that are too fine and too coarse, and subsequently, specific deleterious components such as agglutinates. The removed material is the regolith waste. The mass rate of mined regolith required to meet the required feedstock mass rate is determined by the fraction of the mined regolith that is not removed by beneficiation. These two equations can be extended to include any beneficiation processes, for example that may be mineral specific, or using different operational availabilities for the mining and beneficiation and oxygen extraction stages. In order to estimate the mining scale for lunar oxygen production from regolith, the efficiency of the reactor and the resultant yield of oxygen must be considered, but also the effect of beneficiation on the mining rate required, the oxygen yield, and the operational availability. Previous studies have addressed several of these aspects in their mine scale estimations (for example   As noted previously, the mined regolith and oxygen extraction feedstock mass rate estimates here are all scaled to the same required oxygen mass rate of 1000 kg/y or 0.114 kg oxygen/h. The estimated 12.6 kg/h regolith mined mass rate of It is evident that the impact of regolith beneficiation on oxygen production must be examined in greater detail. This study estimates the oxygen extraction and regolith mining scales required to produce 1000 kg/y of oxygen, considering: Regolith particle sizing, and the effect of removing the fine and coarse materials that are likely to cause blockages, material handling issues and dust. Regolith decontamination. Oxygen yield from regolith (conversion efficiency). Operational availability. The first estimations establish the mine scale for a given specified feedstock that takes into account variation in the beneficiation stage and oxygen yields. As an exemplar of a mined lunar material that could be used as a feedstock, consider sample 71061,1, which is regarded as a typical Apollo 17 mare soil ( It is highly likely that some regolith pre-treatment will be required to reduce operational problems primarily associated with dust and abrasiveness. These pre-treatment (beneficiation) stages will reduce the mass of feedstock available for oxygen production, and therefore increase the required mine scale. It will be necessary to remove material that is either too coarse or too fine, to reduce possible blockages, equipment damage and dust issues during materials handling and oxygen extraction. The regolith material greater than 1 mm constitutes 32.2% (22.8% is 1 mm–10 mm and 9.4% greater than 10 mm) of the total mass ( From Agglutinates are considered the most abrasive part of the feedstock and should not be handled extensively, as it will rapidly cause extensive equipment wear. Furthermore, the glass fraction is likely to cause issues in the high-temperature furnace due to sintering ( Using the data in An additional benefit of sizing and removing both glass and agglutinates is that the ilmenite content is increased from 2.2% in the full size distribution up to 5.9% in the remaining sized and decontaminated fraction. The effect on the mass fraction remaining and the ilmenite proportion can be estimated by assuming a perfect separator that removes only non-ilmenite minerals, as shown in It can be noted that the effect of selective mineral upgrading on the mine scale is significant, and that even a modest doubling of the proportion of ilmenite in the feedstock for chemical extraction (from 5.9% to 12.2%, for example) will halve the mass remaining as feedstock (from 20.9% to 10.0%) and therefore double the mine regolith mass rate required. The impact of the ilmenite content on the oxygen yield must therefore be very significant to offset the increase in the amount of regolith that will be required. We will not consider further in this paper the effect on the mine scale of selectively upgrading specific minerals. As mentioned, NASA’s ROxygen demonstration reactor, for example, employs hydrogen reduction. Experiments on small-scale reduction systems showed the yield of O As noted by The experimental hydrogen reduction results of It has been assumed that the data follow a linear trend for total oxygen production versus grade, as was used by  It is notable from The mining rates estimated in  It is of interest that the required mining mass rate increases linearly, while the required oxygen production feedstock mass rate decreases linearly ( It is evident from these estimates that the required lunar mining mass rate, for even limited oxygen production, may be significant. The mine mass rate depends on the combination of assumptions made about the regolith size range used, any decontamination or selective upgrading and the operational availability. There is also a balance between the oxygen extraction feedstock mass rate and the mining mass rate that allows optimisation. In the following section, a statistical estimation will be used to estimate the confidence levels in the required feedstock rate and mining rate to produce 1000 kg/y oxygen. In the calculations above, the very specific properties of lunar regolith sample 71061,1 were used to estimate the mine scale. The size distribution and proportion of agglutinates varies across the Moon, however. In order to estimate more comprehensively the range of mine scales that are likely, Monte-Carlo simulations were performed, using a range of values and their distributions. Monte-Carlo simulations make repeated, random draws from known distributions of variables and combine them to make a prediction. This is repeated a large number of times to generate a probability distribution of the likely outcome. The results can be interpreted as the confidence that can be placed in the predicted value. The size range between 90 μm and 1 mm is well characterised for many lunar samples. It is also considered to be a range likely to reduce operational problems caused by very fine or coarse regolith. The mass fraction of regolith between 90 μm and 1 mm was estimated from distributions compiled by Interpolating from the graphical lunar soil size distributions reported (  An average of 66.6% of the total mass of the 90 μm to 1 mm fraction remained after agglutinate decontamination, with a standard deviation of 12.6%. The distribution of values is assumed to be lognormal to eliminate negative values. The operational availability estimate of 42.2% by The data from The mass of oxygen per mass of regolith into the reduction process was therefore assumed to have a mean of 2.5% and a standard deviation of 0.7%, lognormally distributed to eliminate negative yields.  The mine scale estimated directly from the mean values of all the variables in The Monte-Carlo simulations were run 10000 times. First, each variable was varied individually, to assess the magnitude of its effect and to determine which variable had the largest influence on the range of estimates. A simulation output is shown in The results taken from the simulation of each variable individually, and all variables simultaneously are summarised in It can be observed that the interquartile range (25%–75%) is widest for oxygen yield, and shows that gaining confidence in technology to produce, consistently, high yields of oxygen will significantly lower and narrow the mine scale estimates. Sizing, agglutinate removal and operational availability produce similar interquartile estimates. This highlights the importance of quantifying the performance of the hydrogen reduction process, and its performance variability to varying feedstock properties. When designing a lunar oxygen production facility on which will depend the survival and transport of humans, a high confidence level of adequate scale is essential. For a 90% confidence that the mine rate will be adequate, a mine must be designed to produce at least 63.9 kg/h of regolith. This is almost double the estimate not taking the variance into account. For a 95% confidence, this increases to 72.6 kg/h. These Monte-Carlo simulation estimates are orders of magnitude greater than the bare minimum that is obtained from single point calculations without taking onto account the variance. The scale of the reduction operation is also required to design the complete oxygen production flowsheet from mine to product. The average size distribution and agglutinate content for a range of lunar samples was used to calculate the mine rate. Comparable data for ilmenite content was not available to relate it to the oxygen yield and the latter was treated as an independent variable in the Monte-Carlo simulations to estimate the scale required of the reduction stage. The average scale of the reduction operation to produce 1000 kg/y O The Monte-Carlo simulation was run 10000 times. First, the operational availability and oxygen yield were varied individually to assess the magnitude of their effects and to determine which of these two variables had the largest influence on the range of estimates. Thereafter, they were varied simultaneously. The results taken from the simulation of each variable individually and both simultaneously are summarised in It can be observed that the interquartile range (25%–75%) is widest for oxygen yield, and shows that gaining confidence in technology to produce, consistently, high yields of oxygen will significantly lower and narrow the reduction process scale estimates. From the Monte-Carlo simulations under the assumptions made, there is a 90% confidence that a reduction rate of 16.1 kg/hr of feedstock, produced from sized and decontaminated regolith, will deliver the annual requirement of 1000 kg of O The mining rate estimates are significant. The estimated minimum lunar mining mass rate of 30 kg/h will require substantial infrastructure and logistics. If the range of possible values is considered, this rate is likely to be more than double to have sufficient confidence in the estimate, at least 65 kg/h. The required mining mass rate determines whether the mineral sizing and decontamination can be performed in batches, or as a continuous process. This has very significant design implications. A batch process design may allow integration of mining and sizing equipment, so that the majority of the unwanted material is rejected at the mining stage. This will reduce significantly the tonnages that must be transported from the mine to the centralised beneficiation and extraction points. Continuous operation may require satellite operations to prepare the feedstock, which is then transported, possibly to a single extraction point. In both cases, operation may have to pause during the lunar night. The specific details of the process engineering clearly depends significantly on the regolith tonnage rate that has to be mined, sized, beneficiated and transported. Considering the reduction stage to produce oxygen, there is evidence that the oxygen yield is enhanced when the ilmenite concentration in the feedstock is increased. This is an effect of sizing and agglutinate decontamination of the mined regolith, but can also be further enhanced by mineral beneficiation. This reduces significantly the mass scale of the reduction process, but increase the mined tonnage required. This aspect of the overall oxygen production flowsheet will require significant further investigation, as the relative scales will require optimisation to determine the most efficient combination. This study has produced a range of possible values for the lunar regolith mining rate required. Estimates were based on data from lunar samples, and reasonable assumptions from terrestrial mining and the hydrogen reduction extraction process. The estimated minimum mining rate required is approximately 30 kg/h, which is as much as five-fold higher than previous estimates. Monte-Carlo simulations were performed to take into account uncertainty in the values. These indicated that to have 95% confidence that adequate O The impact of ilmenite content on oxygen yield is significant, as it determines both the increase in the mine tonnage required and the decrease in tonnage to be treated during the reduction stage. More accurate estimates can be made once there is greater confidence in the oxygen yields from various beneficiated feedstocks, as well as the requirements of alternative reduction processes. This is probably the source of the greatest uncertainty, and which can only be reduced by further experimentation. In the mining scale estimate above, no allowance has been made for activities such as preparing the mine area by removing boulders, smoothing out small craters and preparing roadways. It is estimated that such activity could add a significant burden to the mining tonnages that must be planned for. On behalf of all authors, the corresponding author states that there is no conflict of interest. The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at