The prediction of the magnitude and development of the expected displacements has an important impact on a large number of issues during tunnel construction. Convergence confinement method (CCM) is based on the analysis of the stress and strain state that develops in the rock around a circular tunnel capable of determining wall displacement. The radial displacement given by RocSupport that is based on convergence-confinement method (CCM) is valid for the tunnel circular cross section driven in the hydrostatic state of stress. In this paper several equations and graphs are presented using numerical modeling (FLAC3D) to obtain corrective coefficients to be applied to the values of wall displacement of circular tunnels in hydrostatic state of stress given by analytical method (RocSupport) for the prediction of maximum wall displacement and displacements of different parts of circular, D shaped and modified horseshoe tunnels in non-hydrostatic stress fields.Excavation and support methods are influenced by the magnitude of displacements. The over excavation has to be adjusted to the expected displacements to guarantee the clearance after stabilization. To allow for a safe and economic construction, the prediction of displacements is essential. Convergence confinement method (CCM) is based on the analysis of the stress and strain state that develops in the rock around a tunnel. It was developed initially in the1930s, was further refined by various researchers and has been comprehensively reviewed by Carranza-Torres and Fairhurst ( The convergence confinement method is based on four main assumptions ( The state of stress is hydrostatic and constant with depth. The tunnel cross section is circular. Rock mass is continuous, homogeneous and isotropic. Stress field is planar and problem is bi-dimensional. Assume that a circular tunnel of radius For plastic failure, the total inward radial displacement of the walls of the tunnel is ( Critical support pressure ( It is possible that some of the conditions required in the convergence confinement method (CCM) differ from real conditions that may end to significant error in the final results of this approach. Different authors have done many attempts to describe and modify convergence confinement method and applied CCM for different purposes. RocSupport is a quick and simple to use program for estimating the deformation of circular tunnel in an elasto-plastic rock mass under a hydrostatic stress field. The analysis method used in RocSupport is based on convergence confinement method. RocSupport uses Kirsh’s equations for the elastic displacements and stresses in the elastic state, while it uses two solutions based on the incremental theory of plasticity for the plastic range (Duncan Fama for the Mohr–Coulomb or the Carranza-Torres solution for the Generalized Hoek–Brown failure criterion). In this paper several equations and graphs are presented using numerical modeling (FLAC3D) to obtain corrective coefficients to be applied to the values of wall displacement of unlined ( A fair quality rock mass according to RMR classification range was chosen and wall displacement of circular tunnel of 3  About 1500 numerical modeling of hypothetical different cases (different rock mass properties, state of stress, tunnel radius and tunnel cross section) were done by FLAC3D and percent error of the predicted displacement values by Eqs. Obtaining percent error of less than 5% demonstrated that the proposed Eqs. Recording wall displacements of different points on the perimeter of the tunnels showed that the overall maximum tunnel displacement and maximum displacement for different parts of the tunnels in different states of stress occur in different positions shown in  For maximum plastic displacement of circular tunnel:  For maximum plastic displacement of circular tunnel  For maximum arc part plastic displacement of D shaped tunnel:  For maximum bottom plastic displacement of D shaped tunnel:  Predicted and observed maximum wall displacement of circular part of three water conveyance tunnel all in Iran are compared in this study ( In this paper several equations and graphs are presented using numerical modeling (FLAC3D) to estimate wall displacement of different points and maximum wall displacements of different parts of circular, D shaped and modified horseshoe tunnels in non-hydrostatic stress fields based on analytical method (RocSupport) results for circular tunnels in hydrostatic stress field. The equations and charts are valid for prediction of elastic and plastic wall displacements of the stated tunnels. Error analysis results obtained from this approach compared well against real case studies and numerical method results, shows the capability of the equations in estimating wall displacement of the considered tunnels.