The electrochemical characteristics of alumina dielectric layers were studied using a surface roughness factor and an impedance spectroscopy. From the limiting diffusion current method, the surface area factor of the dielectric anodic layer with low electrical conductivity was estimated to be 1.03. As alumina dielectric films on Al have a variable stoichiometry, the electrochemical behavior of Al2O3 layer can be monitored by evaluating an equivalent circuit with Young impedance of dielectric constant with a vertical decay of conductivity.The electrolytic capacitor generally consists of foils separated by thin layers of an insulating medium. The barrier-type anodic oxide layers on aluminum are used as dielectric layers in aluminum electrolytic capacitors and the electrical properties of capacitors depend on the characteristics of the dielectric. Thus, it is important in designing the electrolytic capacitor with high performance to characterize the dielectric properties of anodic oxide films. The electrical properties of a capacitor in relation to the dielectric dimensions are generally expressed using the conventional equation, as given in For the evaluation of the dielectric properties of oxide layers on aluminum, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) has been used. In most investigations of EIS these properties of anodic oxide films have been characterized with electrical equivalent circuits consisting of series and parallel combinations of resistances and capacitances for an ideal parallel plate capacitor. But for anodic oxide films on Al, Ti, Nb and Ta, it is well known that the oxide layer adjacent to the metal–oxide interface is characterized by a variable stoichiometry with gradual reduction of oxygen deficiency towards the oxide–electrolyte interface A sheet of aluminum (99.99 To apply the electrochemical measurement to nonconductive Al The measurement of limiting diffusion current density was performed in 0.5 M K The behavior of these oxide films was studied by impedance spectroscopy at 25 °C in 0.5 M K After the measurement of the complex impedance as a function of frequency the electrochemical behavior of the oxide layer on aluminum can be analyzed with fitting of the equivalent circuit. This is performed by a computer simulation and fitting program In order to compare the oxide film thickness with the value calculated from impedance spectroscopy and investigate the microstructures, the cross-sections of the aluminum substrate and its attached aluminum oxide layer were examined. The specimens sectioned by ultramicrotomy were observed at an accelerating voltage of 100 kV, using TEM (JEM 1210). The RBS measurements were carried out by irradiating with 4He  The average of the product Although the test was performed for a sputter-deposited platinum layer on the Al For an ideal parallel plate capacitor, the layer impedance can be described by an electrical equivalent circuit consisting of a parallel combination of resistance and capacitance. From integration of homogeneous slices with thickness But, if the oxide layer of the capacitor has an inhomogeneous dielectric properties, i.e. the From Eq.  Capacitance These Young impedances are given in Eq. The measured impedance spectrum for Al The impedance characteristic of equivalent circuit model A in However, the impedance of circuit model B can be determined by frequency range. According to Eq. Thus, at very low frequencies, the circuit impedance according to Eq. But in higher frequency ranges, the circuit impedance according to Eq. The measured spectrum is fitted by the frequency response of the defined equivalent circuit using a computer simulation and fitting program. If the measured data agree with the assumed equivalent model, only random variations due to scatter of the experimental data are observed. The fitted spectra evaluated with circuit A in The large deviations for the impedance and the phase angle in fit results of circuit A, indicate that model A in  It can be analyzed that the oxide layer has a composition almost equivalent to Al From the evaluated capacitance Taking To validate this calculation, the oxide film thicknesses from impedance spectroscopy were compared with the values determined from TEM and RBS on the barrier-type anodic films.  The calculated film thickness by interpretation of Young model for ammonium dihydrogen phosphate solution and for ammonium adipate solution, as shown in The surface area factor of Al For representing the impedance characteristics of the Al