The present study describes the use of watermelon rind for the removal of Ni2+ and Co2+ ions from aqueous solution. Batch experiments were performed by varying pH, adsorbent dose, contact time, and initial metal ion concentration. Desorption and regeneration studies were performed to consider the reusability of watermelon rind. The maximum sorption capacity of watermelon rind was found to be 35.3 and 23.3mgg−1 for Ni2+ and Co2+ ions, respectively. Ni2+ ions showed higher affinity and adsorption rate compared with Co2+ ions under the experimental conditions. Extraction of Ni2+ and Co2+ ions was significantly affected by the presence of other metals due to competition.A wide range of sorbents is available for metal removal from effluents. Activated carbon is the most used sorbent for removal, but its application is limited due to high cost for activation and incomplete regeneration ( Ni WRs were obtained from local fruit market and washed with tap water followed by double distilled water. After thorough washing, WR was cut into small pieces and dried under sunlight for 7 The stock solution of Ni Flame atomic absorption spectrophotometer (AA240; Varian, Victoria, Australia) was used to determine the concentration of the metals. Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy (AVATAR 330; Thermo Nicolet, Madison, WI, USA) was used to identify the functional groups and functional molecules that facilitate metal ion uptake in the WR. Batch adsorption studies were performed in 100-ml conical flasks by varying pH, WR dose, contact time, and initial metal ion concentration. In each test, accurately weighed WR was added to 20 Where To investigate the possibility of repeated use of the adsorbent, desorption and regeneration experiments were conducted for WR. Metal-loaded WR sorbent (0.1 In order to know the approximate ion exchange capacity of WR, the release of alkali and alkaline earth metals (K The effect of pH on removal of Ni The study of WR dosages for the removal of Ni The desorption percentage for Ni WRs are known to be rich in alkali and alkaline earth metals such as K FTIR spectra of WR displayed several peaks pertaining to different functional groups. The comparisons of FTIR spectra of native and metal-loaded WR are presented in Waste waters or industrial effluents contain a broad range of different cations as well as other organic and inorganic contaminants that could interfere in the sorption mechanisms, including competitive sorption among metals. Therefore, a study was executed to evaluate the effect of the presence of other cationic metal ions on the sorption process of Ni From The present study reports the removal of Ni  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at