This study examines the effect of redox potential on silver-catalyzed chalcopyrite leaching. Leaching tests were carried out in stirred Erlenmeyer flasks with 0.5 g chalcopyrite mineral, 1 g Ag/kg Cu and 100 mL of a sulphate solution of Fe3+/Fe2+ (with redox potential ranging between 300 and 600 mV Ag/AgCl) at pH 1.8, 180 rpm and 35°C or 68 °C. Unlike uncatalyzed leaching, an increase of the redox potential increased copper dissolution in the presence of silver ions, as the regeneration of Ag+ requires a high concentration of oxidizing agent, Fe3+. Additionally, the high reactivity of the mineral surface when silver was present could have been responsible for inhibiting the nucleation of hydrolysis products of Fe3+ on it. Excessive addition of silver transformed the chalcopyrite surface into copper-rich sulphides such as covellite, CuS, and geerite, Cu8S5, preventing the formation of CuFeS2/Ag2S galvanic couple and the recycling of silver ions.Despite efforts over the past thirty years to promote hydrometallurgical methods for the industrial extraction of copper from chalcopyrite, the results continue to be discouraging ( In the previous part ( The above observation is a major step forward in our comprehension of the mechanism involved in chalcopyrite dissolution, but it is only valid when the experimental conditions (high temperature, fine mineral grinding, etc.) promote the dissolution process. Otherwise, factors such as the concentration of oxidizing agent or the redox potential will have little effect ( Of the different ways to improve the dissolution rate of chalcopyrite, besides raising the temperature or grinding fine, the most effective has been the addition of Ag  The dissolution rate of copper ions is faster in the presence of silver ions because the product layer of those reactions, a mixture of sulphur and Ag Considering that silver-catalyzed chalcopyrite leaching involves a different kinetic mechanism from uncatalyzed leaching, the aim of the present study was to investigate the effect of the redox potential on the catalysis process. All tests were performed with a chalcopyrite-rich mineral (approximately 80% CuFeS The mineral was dry ground to an average particle size of 70 μm using a ball mill ( The different redox potentials of solutions were calculated by mixing ferric and ferrous sulphates, maintaining a constant total iron concentration of 5 g/L (in some tests 0.5 g/L) and pH 1.8. The stock solutions of ferric sulphate were prepared with 0K (modified 9K medium of All leaching tests were performed in an orbital shaker at 180 rpm and 35 or 68 °C using 250 mL Erlenmeyer flasks covered with hydrophobic cotton which admitted oxygen but reduced water loss through evaporation. A low pulp density of 0.5% (100 mL of leaching solution and 0.5 g of mineral) was chosen to avoid sharp changes of the redox potential of the liquid medium during the first instant of leaching. Silver was added in the form of silver sulphate solution at the start of each test, at an initial concentration of 1 g Ag/kg Cu in the mineral. Periodically, water evaporation was restored, pH adjusted when above the initial value, redox potential recorded and 1 mL samples removed from the liquid to obtain kinetic information on the metal dissolution by atomic absorption spectroscopy (Cu and Fe This section discusses the results of catalyzed chalcopyrite chemical leaching at an initial controlled potential and two different temperatures (35 and 68 °C). All tests were carried out with a pulp density of 0.5%, a total iron concentration of 5 g/L and the addition of 1 g Ag/kg Cu as silver sulphate. The catalytic effect of silver at 35 °C was dependent on the [Fe At 35 °C, the equilibrium potential was rapidly established at around 400 mV in the presence of silver in solution ( The SEM micrograph ( The SEM micrograph in EDS microanalysis of residues revealed the presence of silver, but this was not detected by XRD. Silver could be lost in the precipitate that forms jarosites, as several authors have reported ( Short-time leaching tests (1 h, 5 h and 1 day) were started to detect the formation of intermediate products during dissolution of chalcopyrite. There is still little formation of leaching products or hydrolysis of Fe  The initial heterogeneity of the silver deposition confirms the importance of reaction  After 1 day of leaching ( On the other hand, the diffractogram of the leaching residue shows the formation of elemental sulphur after 1 day ( Then, the covellite would be dissolved by ferric ion: As at 35 °C, an increase of the initial redox potential or the [Fe However, a high initial redox potential (i.e. 600 mV or [Fe The equilibrium potential of the solution at 68 °C was around 480 mV, very similar to the figure for uncatalyzed chemical leaching at the same temperature. The results suggest that silver catalysis affects not only the formation of a galvanic couple on the chalcopyrite surface (Ag The SEM micrographs ( Another factor possibly negatively affecting mineral reactivity is loss of silver in the reaction products due to the tendency for Ag On the other hand, The evolution of the chalcopyrite surface over short attack times (1, 5 and 24 h) during catalyzed chemical leaching at 68 °C at an initial potential of 500 mV is shown in EDS microanalyses ( The above observations would therefore seem to validate the reaction Again, XRD analysis ( After 5 h ( Our results are consistent with the observations cited above. The preferential dissolution of chalcopyrite through crystal planes is presumably related to preferential iron and copper dissolution from the crystal lattice and its enrichment in sulphur. Finally, after 1 day of attack, the remaining chalcopyrite particles were covered with a globular precipitate ( The effect of temperature on silver-catalyzed chalcopyrite leaching was investigated within a range of 35 to 68 °C. Four different temperatures (35, 46, 57 and 68 °C) were assayed while all other experimental conditions were constant: 0.5% of solids, The fraction of reacted chalcopyrite, The last experimental data for the kinetic curves showed a zero slope for all temperatures, and therefore these data were removed from the linear regression. It was assumed that the passivation of chalcopyrite by nucleation of jarosites on its surface is a parallel mechanism to the chalcopyrite leaching. The following kinetic constants were derived from the slopes of the straight lines shown in  An activation energy value of 29.25 kJ/mol was calculated from the Arrhenius plot (  In addition, the elemental sulphur formed is very porous, as several of the SEM micrographs in this study show. This product is therefore presumably not involved in the kinetic control of the reaction. In view of our activation energy calculations and microscopic observations, we propose a mixed (electrochemical, chemical and diffusion) kinetic control for silver-catalyzed chalcopyrite chemical leaching. We propose the following conclusions: An increase of the initial redox potential or the concentration of Fe Silver catalysis does not only affect the chalcopyrite surface directly but also affects the [Fe The products of catalyzed chalcopyrite dissolution are the same as in non-catalyzed leaching: elemental sulphur and goethite, ferric hydroxyphosphate and jarosite as hydrolysis products of iron in solution. The chemical dissolution of chalcopyrite in the presence of silver may be described by the following sequence of reactions: Chalcopyrite leaching requires almost five times less activation energy with catalysis (29.25 kJ/mol) than without (130.7 kJ/mol). This means that silver ions improve the electrical conductivity of the system. The factor controlling silver-catalyzed chalcopyrite leaching are mixed: electrochemical, chemical and diffusion.