Two South African coals similar in rank and age, but different in maceral composition, were studied using solvent swelling. Inertinite-rich Highveld coal (dominated by semifusinite) and vitrinite-rich Waterberg coal were evaluated for swelling extent and swelling rate using N-methylpyrrolidone (NMP) and CS2/NMP. A stop-motion videography method was developed to study individual particle swelling behavior. This method allowed observation of overshoot and climbing-type swelling, as well as swelling kinetics. Single-particle swelling experiments showed that both coals exhibited overshoot-type and climbing-type swelling. The inertinite-rich coal swelled much faster (in both solvents) than the vitrinite-rich coal. The swelling in CS2/NMP was faster for both coals. Kinetic parameters showed that solvent swelling was governed by relaxation (super-Case II relaxation) of the coal structure. X-ray computed tomography was conducted over a 50h swelling period in NMP for single particles of each coal. Anisotropic swelling was observed in all the particles (swelling greater perpendicular to the bedding plane than parallel to it). The subtle changes in molecular structure, fine structural and physical differences resulted in significant differences in solvent swelling behavior.Solvent swelling of coal has been extensively used to study the nature of coal’s macromolecular network structure. Solvent swelling has been used to determine the average molecular weight between crosslinks, the crosslink density and solubility parameters of coal Various methods have been utilized to study coal solvent swelling. The pack-bed method In overshoot swelling, the coal expands to a maximum extent (the metastable swollen state) and then shrinks again slightly to a stable equilibrium state What is missing is an inexpensive and efficient method to study the solvent swelling diversity of individual particles. In this study a novel time-lapse videography method was used to determine the solvent swelling behavior and extent of individual particles using the solvents N-methylpyrrolidone (NMP) and carbon disulphide/N-methylpyrrolidone (CS Run-of-mine inertinite-rich Highveld coal and a commercially cleaned (density separated) vitrinite-rich Waterberg coal were collected in South Africa. Mean-maximum vitrinite reflectance (ASTM D 2798-06) Individual handpicked raw coal particles (30–40 The individual particles were extracted from the multi-particle images ( CT scanning was conducted on an OMNI-X industrial computer tomography scanner with a pixel resolution of 1024 Maceral analysis ( Elemental analyses ( A novel method was developed to study the swelling of single coal particles in NMP and CS The various swelling behaviors (overshoot- or climbing-type swelling) were identified and grouped. Overshoot swelling was identified as coal expansion to a maximum extent and then shrinking (approximately 10%) to a stable equilibrium state. Climbing-type swelling was identified as coal expansion to equilibrium (maximum swelling is equal to the equilibrium state). All particles, in both coals and solvents, exhibit climbing or overshoot swelling behavior ( It was observed from Fewer CS Studying the rate of solvent swelling can provide important information regarding the swelling mechanism. Various groups have found that coal solvent swelling is governed by either classical diffusion (Fickian diffusion) or structural relaxation (Case-II diffusion) The values of The On average, coal particles that exhibited overshoot-type swelling swelled faster than climbing-type swelling. This observation was consistent with literature X-ray computed tomography (CT) was conducted on three Waterberg and three Highveld particles and the volumetric reconstructions are shown in While the density of the coal ( Analysis of the CT data showed that the coal particles swelled more perpendicular to the bedding plane than parallel to it. This method showed the swelling diversity of individual particles within the same coal and correlates well with observed results from the single-particle swelling videography experiments. The inertinite-rich coal swelled faster than the vitrinite-rich coal, but both swell more perpendicular to the bedding plane. The swelling extent was not correlated with that of the videography results due to the differences in experimental swelling time; videography was conducted over a six-day period and the CT experiment over a 50 Two maceral different coals, vitrinite-rich Waterberg and inertinite-rich Highveld, were studied using a novel single-particle stop-motion videography swelling method. The two coals were similar in carbon composition (∼84%), but significantly different in their hydrogen composition (6.2% for Waterberg and 4.5% for Highveld). The solvents used were NMP and CS