Defining the ideal material for frontal sinus obliteration remains controversial. Autogenous cancellous bone is effective because of its biological properties: it undergoes fast revascularization acting as an active scaffold for bone healing, but is linked to additional donor site morbidity. Bone dust harvesting from the skull surface produces no sequelae but availability is limited. Many efforts have been made to overcome these drawbacks, and an ideal bone substitute sought. Demineralized Bone Matrix (DBX; Musculoskeletal Transplant Foundation, Edison, NJ, USA) is a commercially available product composed of demineralized bone particles reduced after proper processing of human bone in combination with sodium hyaluronate. It generates an osteoconductive surface and it is also a source of osteoinductive factors. Radiological follow-up using computed tomography is a very reliable method of following-up ossification and detecting the early signs of possible complications. The authors present their clinical series of postraumatic frontal sinus obliteration using a mixture of calvarial bone dust and DBX shell, with long-term radiological monitoring. The technique was demonstrated to be effective, reliable, stable in the long term and associated with minimal morbidity.Frontal sinus fractures represent 2–12% of skull fractures and around 8% (5–15%) of all facial fractures according to different series. Key points in frontal sinus fracture treatment include: the avoidance of residual dead space; prevention of possible continuous contamination of the intracranial space from the nasal cavity-ethmoidal cells; and the suppression of the natural tendency of the frontal sinus mucosa to proliferate in a pathological manner after sustaining trauma. Aggressive surgical techniques are proposed to prevent possible complications seeking a ‘one step’ resolution, including sinus obliteration. Basic principles of frontal sinus obliteration have been developed over the last 50 years. This procedure has become one of the key points in the management of frontal sinus fracture treatment, chronic infection and benign tumours. Obliteration has been proved to reduce the risk of most common complications (mucocele, mucopyocele, osteomyelitis, meningitis and brain abscess). The goal is to eliminate the sinus as a functional unit, avoiding epithelial regeneration. It is an alternative to more radical operations previously described as frontal sinus ‘exenteration’ (Reidel procedure, including removal of the anterior sinus wall and supraorbital ridges), or frontal sinus ablation (Killian procedure, similar to the previous one but preserving the supraorbital rim). Both procedures were associated with a high recurrence rate and significant cosmetic deformity. The coronal approach allows excellent surgical access for the procedure and calvarial bone harvesting without additional morbidity. Best long-term results are obtained when obliteration is made with autogenous bone. Alternative materials described for sinus obliteration are autogenous fat and muscle. Unlimited availability and no donor site morbidity make biomaterials a very attractive option for frontal sinus obliteration. Inadequate frontal sinus fracture treatment may lead to serious complications even several years after the injury. Patients require long term clinical and radiological follow-up for early detection. Recurrent infection after sinus obliteration is usually associated with incomplete excision of the mucosa and inadequate nasofrontal duct sealing. The use of fat or muscle for obliteration may also facilitate infection as a result of a series of events starting with material resorption and creation of a dead space in the sinus cavity. The objective of this article is to demonstrate that frontal sinus obliteration with autologous calvarial bone dust and demineralized bone matrix (DBX; Musculoskeletal Transplant Foundation, Edison, NJ, USA) is an effective and stable method, with minimal complications and morbidity. It prevents dead space formation and promotes effective nasofrontal duct sealing to prevent bacterial colonization. Long-term computed tomography (CT) monitoring facilitates early diagnosis of complications. In this paper the authors also discuss alternative materials used for obliteration. This is a prospective study including 18 patients with surgically treated frontal sinus fractures and a total of 30 sinus cavities obliterated with bone chips plus DBX at the authors’ department between 1 July 2005 and 1 July 2008. Inclusion criteria for this study were: patients with acute traumatic pathology of the frontal sinus (anterior and/or posterior wall affected) with nasofrontal duct involvement, medically suitable for the proposed surgical procedure. Patients with isolated fractures of the anterior wall without involvement of the nasofrontal duct and severely comminuted/displaced fractures of the posterior wall requiring cranialization were excluded from this series. All patients were treated with the aim of preserving a safe non-functional frontal sinus through a bicoronal incision and subcranial approach. Surgical procedure included frontal sinus approach through the fractured anterior wall, excision of the sinus mucosa, sinus walls drilling, nasofrontal duct sealing, obliteration of the frontal sinus ( If the existing anterior wall fracture did not allow adequate management of the sinus cavity, the approach was completed with an osteotomy of the anterior sinus wall (subcranial approach). Posterior wall fracture osteosynthesis was done if possible ( Nasofrontal duct sealing was carried out either with fractured bone fragments or calvarial bone grafts. In every patient, sinus obliteration was performed with skull bone dust and DBX. Autogenous bone dust was harvested from the exposed calvarial surface using a scraper device (Autogenous, Mozo-Grau Co. Valladolid, Spain). The bone was mixed with DBX in a 1/1 proportion, thus obtaining the necessary amount of filler material for sinus obliteration ( After sinus obliteration, proper repositioning and fixation of the fractured or osteotomized anterior sinus wall was done with titanium miniplates and screws (1.3 Mean patient follow up was 36 months (range 24–60 months). Radiological follow-up was carried out with high resolution multi-slice CT scans (1 Bilateral sinus obliteration was carried out in 12 patients; 6 underwent a unilateral procedure. 15 patients were male (83.3%) and 3 female (16.7%). The age range was 15–69 years (average 36 years). The most common mechanism of injury was a direct high energy impact in the frontal bone in a motor vehicle accident. The most usual fracture pattern was a bilateral, displaced anterior wall associated with non-displaced posterior wall fracture (44.4%), followed by bilateral fractures with displacement of both anterior and posterior walls (22.2%). Other patterns included unilateral fractures with displacement of the anterior wall and posterior linear fracture (16.7%) and unilateral fractures with displacement of both anterior and posterior walls (16.7%). Mean hospitalization time was 13 days (including intensive care unit stay). There was no perioperative mortality. 6 patients (33%) developed complications. All occurred at an early stage (within 6 months of treatment) and none were related to the material used for sinus obliteration. Three patients presented persistent frontal pain controlled with basic analgesic treatment. Two patients with comminuted fractures showed mild cosmetic deformity: one underwent reoperation with frontal cranioplasty and the other refused additional surgical treatment. The last complication was frontoorbital cellulitis, treated initially with intravenous antibiotics and later by surgical removal of the osteosynthesis material. Radiological CT scans from the 30 obliterated sinuses (obtained 6 and 24 months after surgery) were analyzed to assess bone density and complications. No radiological evidence of sinus inflammatory disease or mucocele/mucopyocele was found in any case. Sinusal radiopacity was significantly higher in the studies carried out 24 months postoperatively ( Creation of a ‘safe sinus’ Most authors think that the key for successful treatment of patients with frontal sinus fractures is correct assessment of the sinus drainage function. Sinus preservation is considered in cases with displaced fractures of the anterior table, without ductal involvement and without posterior table displacement. If the underlying disease affects a single sinusal cavity and the intersinusal septum is not affected there is no indication for septum removal. The surgical approach should favour complete frontal sinus exposure and its proper handling. Once the sinus cavity has been exposed, the mucosa is thoroughly removed from the sinus walls, The anatomical basis for drilling elimination of the internal cortical bone was defined by Mosher and Judd. Basic principles for obtaining successful sinus obliteration are Surgical attempts at restoring sinus function after significant fracture have a high failure rate (approximately 30%) due to the subsequent scarring and stricture of the nasofrontal duct. One of the major controversies about frontal sinus management is the filling material when obliteration is carried out. Decades after the first frontal sinus obliteration procedure, the optimal filling material remains undefined and under discussion. The experimental basis of sinus obliteration with spontaneous osteogenesis was established by Walsh. This technique avoids donor site morbidity. It is not known how long it takes to induce bone formation in every specific case, specially in large frontal sinuses. Sinus occupation by fibro-osseous tissue is very different depending on the series. Newman and Travis The use of autogenous abdominal fat for sinus filling was first described by Bergara and Itoiz Weber et al. Radiological evaluation of fat grafts is difficult because fat atrophy, infection and/or mucocele formation are not easily differentiated. Autologous muscle has been also described as a valid method for frontal sinus obliteration. Nadell and Kline An ideal filling material should have the following characteristics: to strengthen the resistance and restore the continuity of bone (mechanical stability); short physiological ossification time; technically simple in its use; extensive favourable clinical experience; biocompatibility with no adverse inflammatory response; availability; bioactivity with osteogenic, osteoconductive and osteoinductive properties; shape and volume maintenance over time; radiopacity; thermally non-conductive; sterile or sterilizable; and available at reasonable cost. Autologous corticocancellous bone graft is probably the best reconstructive material because its total biocompatibility with high osteogenic potential, high resistance to mechanical injuries and infection also promote rapid reossification. The use of autogenous bone for frontal sinus obliteration was initially described by Knauf The use of autogenous bone in frontal sinus obliteration has become an effective technique according to different studies conducted in the past decades (Ioannides et al. When comparing frontal sinus obliteration using autogenous bone versus fat, there are several points in favour of the election of bone. First, from a biological perspective, it makes more sense to obliterate a cranial cavity with bone rather than fat. Radiological evaluation of fat grafts is cumbersome when trying to distinguish between fat and infections or mucocele. Using autogenous bone, any of these complications can be diagnosed much more easily. CT-based follow-up is very reliable, since bone density in the radiological image facilitates early detection of possible complications; defect filling and the three-dimensional quality of the regeneration (bone volume and density achieved) are also assessed easily. Autogenous cancellous bone is considered to be the gold standard, but it has major drawbacks such as donor site morbidity, limited amount of available bone and the anatomical shape. To overcome these drawbacks the ideal bone substitute is being constantly investigated. Bone harvesting from the calvarium represents minimal morbidity. Bone chips for sinus obliteration are obtained using a bone scraper under saline irrigation. Calvarial cortical bone chips have demonstrated a clinical success similar to that of cancellous bone. Combination of autogenous bone grafts with other filling materials has been described in multiple papers, none obtaining reliable conclusions. Diverse allogenic and xenogenic materials, bone substitutes, guided bone regeneration techniques and, more recently, bone morphogenetic recombinant human protein (BMP) have been used to regenerate bone in a cavity. Exogenous materials have the advantage of their unlimited availability, and absence of donor site morbidity, but a failure in revascularization and osseointegration may occur, with a high risk of implant infection and extrusion. Demineralized bone matrix is obtained under strict sterile conditions, washed, treated with antibiotics, demineralized with hydrochloric acid and combined with a carrier (4% sodium hyaluronate) prior to final packaging. Sodium hyaluronate plays a fundamental role in the proliferation, migration and cell adhesion, and has been correlated with angiogenesis. In the animal model, DBX obliterated sinus show trabecular bone formation. Histological studies demonstrated significant gradual bone replacement from week 12 (53.3%) to week 36 (78.8%). A dense peripheral rim representing new bone formation can be observed from week 12. This peripheral dense area shows an increased thickness around week 36. Normal trabecular bone growth with residual islands is found in sinus obliterated with DBX. There is a marked progression in the amount of new bone from weeks 12 to 36 with significant bone remodelling. The DBX is completely replaced by new bone over 4–6 months. None of the six complications described in the present series were associated with the materials used. Complete obliteration with sinus volume maintenance was achieved in all cases. Rapid and progressive new bone formation occurred. Progressive bone formation with a significant difference in bone density between the 6 and 24 month CT-based evaluations was found, with a final resulting cortical bone in all cases. The authors conclude that the association of DBX with autogenous cranial bone is a safe and effective material for sinus obliteration without donor site morbidity although accurate long-term studies should be conducted to establish the exact role of this combination. None declared. None. Not required.