The gas-sensing materials, NiFe2O4, were prepared by inverse titrating chemical co-precipitation. After calcinations at 350–700°C for 1h, respectively, p-type semiconductor gas-sensing materials with inverse spinel structure were obtained. Effects of the calcining temperature on the phase constituents and microstructure were studied and characterized by simultaneous differential scanning calorimetry and thermogravimetry analysis (DSC–TGA), X-ray diffraction (XRD) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). NiFe2O4 used as sensitive materials of indirect heating structure sensors were fabricated on an alumna tube with Au electrodes and platinum wires. The gas-sensing properties were determined for using reducing gases. The results demonstrated that the sensors based on NiFe2O4 had good sensitivity and good selectivity to toluene. The difference in response for various tested gases might be attributed to absorption of reducing gases and reaction between these gases and the absorbed oxygen.Nano sized materials, which have high surface activity due to their small particle size and enormous surface area, have been widely used as gas sensors in recent years All the chemical reagents used in the experiments were obtained from commercial sources and used without further purification. The synthetic process of NiFe The simultaneous differential scanning calorimetry and thermogravimetry analysis (DSC–TGA) were carried out using a thermal analyzer (TA-2960). The samples were heated to 700 The sensors of indirect heating were fabricated according to the literature Thermo-emf studies were carried out to determine the type of conductivity in NiFe  XRD results of the precipitate sintered respectively at 350–700  Simply Nickel ferrite or NiFe The most probable reaction routes are  The operating temperature has a great influence on the sensitivity to gas, as shown in As shown in The gas-sensing mechanism is based on the changes in the conductance of the NiFe The reactants of C The preparation of NiFe Funding from the Natural Science Foundation of Yunnan Province, China (No. 2002E0004Q) is gratefully acknowledged.