Introduction
                  Traction orthoses are thought to optimize recovery from intra-articular finger fractures by restoring joint space and allowing early motion. Evidence to date has, however, consisted only of case series.
               
                  Purpose of the study
                  To compare swing traction versus no-traction management of complex fractures of proximal inter-phalangeal (PIP) finger joints. We hypothesized that there is no long-term (i.e. >12 month) difference between swing traction and no-traction (with or without surgical fixation) in terms of motion, pain, function, patient satisfaction, or treatment cost.
               
                  Methods
                  Adults with a history of complex PIP fractures affecting ≥30% of articular surface injury were identified from database searches at three public hospitals and a private clinic and invited to participate. X-rays taken at the time of injury were graded by two blinded assessors, and participants attended a clinic for measurement of range of motion (ROM) and self-reported function, pain, and satisfaction at least one year post injury. Participant data were then were grouped by treatment provided. One group (N = 17) was treated with swing traction and the other group (N = 14) had no-traction. The primary outcome was combined motion of the PIP and distal inter-phalangeal (DIP) joints, expressed as both total active motion and Strickland score. Secondary outcomes were physical function and symptoms as measured by the Disabilities of Arm, Shoulder and Hand (DASH), patient satisfaction, pain, complication rates, and cost of treatment, based on mean resource consumption per group.
               
                  Results
                  Patients treated with swing traction had greater finger motion than those in the no-traction group, which was statistically and clinically significant. There were no differences in patient ratings of function, pain or satisfaction. Complications, such as swan-neck deformity, cold sensitivity, malunion, infection, or adhesions occurred in over half of both groups of participants. During the treatment phase, the swing traction group attended hand therapy an average of 13.3 times, and the no-traction group attended 11.7 times. Average costs for swing traction were less than for surgical fixation with no-traction.
               
                  Discussion
                  The significantly different range of motion found in our study did not translate to better DASH scores. The DASH is designed to measure global upper limb physical functioning and symptoms, but lacks sensitivity in populations with finger injuries.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Patients treated with the swing traction protocol had greater range of motion in the finger, however this did not translate to improved patient ratings of function, pain or satisfaction. A basic cost comparison indicated that swing traction may be less expensive than other forms of surgical repair.
                  Level of evidence: 3.Intra-articular fracture dislocations of the finger commonly involve the base of the middle phalanx usually in impaction, dislocation, and pilon types of injuries. Unstable PIP joint dislocations, and those with significant comminution or fragment displacement, are usually treated surgically. Several different types of traction devices that allow movement at the affected joint have been described. For ease of discussion these can be classified as either finger-based frames (such as the Suzuki frame, Given the injury's low incidence, and resulting difficulty recruiting adequate sample sizes, it is not surprising that there are no prospective clinical trials into the efficacy of traction treatment. In similarly rare health conditions, there is a growing trend to use observational studies, often referred to as comparative effectiveness research (CER) to directly compare the results of different treatment regimens. Our study aimed to compare outcomes by treatment type in patients who had sustained complex PIP fractures at least one year previously. One group of patients (from one hospital) were treated with swing traction; the other (including patients from the first hospital and three other centers) had no-traction. We hypothesized that there would be no difference between groups in terms of motion, pain, function, patient satisfaction, and incidence of complications. This cohort study involved patients from three public hospitals and one private clinic located in Melbourne, Australia. Data was collected between 2009 and 2014 and the study was approved by the Ethics Committees of Monash University, the Alfred Hospital, and Monash Health. Potentially eligible participants were identified by searches of all involved centers' hand surgery databases using ICD codes specific to finger fractures and dislocations. The first or third author then checked patients' x-rays and medical files to ensure inclusion criteria were met. Those eligible were contacted by mail and telephone (where possible) and invited to participate. Informed consent was obtained in writing prior to data collection. Patients eligible for this trial were adults aged >18 years with a diagnosis of complex, comminuted, or unstable intra-articular fracture of the PIP joint sustained at least one year previously. They also needed to be able to give informed written consent in English. Those with co-existing rheumatologic illness were excluded. All participants in this group came from only one of the study hospitals (the others did not offer traction at the time of the patient's injury). Prior to surgery, the hand therapist fabricated a thermoplastic forearm/hand component with a movable hinged outrigger attached at the level of the injured joint. The outrigger was covered at the distal end with thermoplastic material in which two dressmaker's hooks were embedded. After surgical placement of a K-wire through the bone distal to the injured joint, the orthosis was applied to the patient, with rubber bands attaching the K-wire to the hooks in the outrigger, thus providing a distraction force. Early designs were dorsally applied, however in later cases, a volar design was used as it provided greater stability ( Nine participants underwent open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF). Two had a single lag screw inserted, one had two lag-screws, and two had volar plate repair and k-wire fixation. One participant each had: a plate and 4 lag screws; a dorsal blocking k-wire; a bone graft and k-wire; and a hemi-hamate arthroplasty. Two had closed reduction with two crossed k-wires, and two elected to be managed conservatively. All surgery was performed by a specialist hand surgeon or an experienced surgical registrar under supervision from the specialist. All were subsequently seen by a hand therapist who fabricated a hand-based static orthosis, with joints positioned in the safe position of immobilization as far as possible (i.e. metacarpo-phalangeal (MCP) joints at 70–90° flexion, and inter-phalangeal joints fully extended – The second and third authors, both hand surgery registrars (US equivalent: senior/chief residents in surgery) blinded to treatment group, independently graded participants' pre-treatment x-rays. They estimated the percentage of articular surface affected, then coded injuries as either Complex intra Articular Fracture (CIF) or fracture dislocation (FD). Inter-rater reliability was 85% on first assessment and, where opinions differed, results were discussed and a consensus reached. The first and fourth authors (experienced hand therapists) collected data from the participants regarding previous injuries to the hand or finger, hand dominance, finger injured, pain (using the 10 cm Visual Analogue Scale In addition, a post-hoc analysis of average resource cost per treatment was undertaken, encompassing the number of therapy sessions and reviews with the surgeon, direct surgical and hospital costs, and orthosis fabrication cost. Calculations are based on information supplied by the primary hospital's Clinical Costing Manager, and standard hourly pay rates for senior clinician therapists employed in public hospitals in Victoria, Australia. An a-priori power analysis estimated that with 16 per group, this study would have 80% power to detect a difference in range of motion equivalent to one standard deviation with a 2-sided Forty-nine potentially eligible patients were identified from database searches of all study sites. We were unable to establish contact with ten potentially eligible individuals, three were unable to consent (due to cognitive or language barriers) and five declined to be involved. Thirty-one participants underwent evaluations by the researchers, with all swing-traction participants recruited from one hospital. The no-traction group included two individuals (one from the primary hospital, and one from a private clinic) who declined traction, but all others were from the second and third hospitals. Participant demographics and injury characteristics are summarized in The mean combined range of motion of the PIP and DIP in the swing traction group was 141.9°; in the no-traction group it was 100.8°. This was statistically significant ( Results are also presented according to specific finger injured (see The mean DASH scores were 6.23 in the swing traction group and 5.81 in the no-traction group indicating low levels of disability. The difference between groups was not significant. Mean patient satisfaction scores were similar (4.01 and 3.18 out of a best possible score of 5; Overall, pain levels were low, with mean scores on the 10 cm Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) pain measure below 1.8 cm for both groups. There were no significant differences between groups. Nine of the 17 participants in the swing traction group experienced one or more complications, two of them severe enough to require corrective surgery; one had malunion and collapse of fracture requiring open reduction and internal fixation, the other required tenolysis to release adhesions. Other complications in this group include: pin track infection ( A basic cost comparison ( This cohort study aimed to add to the evidence by comparing long-term outcomes in two groups with similar characteristics and injury types who received differing treatments based on the center at which they were treated. We found that those treated with swing traction had greater finger motion than those in the no-traction group, and that this treatment was on average less costly than surgical fixation. We found no differences in patient ratings of function, pain or satisfaction. Combined PIP and DIP motion in our swing traction group (141.9°) was comparable with results reported for the Banjo or Schenck (130° in Ref. DASH, pain, patient satisfaction, and pain VAS results have only been published in one other swing traction study It is interesting that the significant difference in range of motion found in our study did not translate to better DASH scores. The DASH is designed to measure global upper limb physical functioning and symptoms, but its lack of sensitivity in populations with finger injuries has led to calls for an additional digital module. In terms of complications, our finding of complications in 52.9% of the swing traction group is higher than that reported in the other study using this style of orthosis (42% in Ideally, a study comparing two interventions would be conducted as a randomized controlled trial. This methodology was considered unfeasible given the rarity of the injury and strong surgeon and therapist preferences for particular treatment protocols at the respective centers. We chose an observational cohort study where treatment was provided at the individual's own center, however we ensured that assessors not involved in the treatment measured the outcomes. This allowed us to conduct a measure of individual effectiveness in a method similar to that used in studies of treatments for other rare diseases. Unfortunately, numbers enrolled in our study were lower than expected, which may have limited our power to detect a difference between groups on some variables. Due to logistical issues associated with the length of time in the recruitment phase, we were unable to use a blinded assessor for range of motion however both assessors met prior to the study to ensure they applied consistent technique and instruments. Finally, treatment was provided by different hand surgery and therapy teams in the respective hospitals, introducing potentially confounding variables such as surgical technique, and timing of mobilization commencement. Whilst the number of therapy sessions was comparable between groups, the intensity of therapy treatment is unknown. In summary, there are many different methods for treating complex intra-articular finger fractures, and in the absence of strong evidence from comparative studies, treatment is still based on the experience, skill, and preference of individual surgeons and hand therapists. This study showed statistically and clinically significant better range of motion in the swing traction group at a mean of 33 months post injury, and basic cost analysis showed that this treatment may be less expensive than surgical repair. The increased motion, however, did not translate to improved patient ratings of pain, satisfaction, or physical function. The lack of impact on functioning is most likely explained by the DASH's lack of sensitivity in populations with single finger injuries. Complications, such as swan-neck deformity, cold sensitivity, malunion, infection, or adhesions occurred in over half of both groups of participants, reflecting the challenging nature of these complex injuries. Long-term outcomes, in terms of low pain and high function, were encouraging in both groups. The authors wish to acknowledge Ben Cunningham who pioneered distraction treatment at The Alfred. We are also indebted to Marco Luthe (Alfred Health) and Philippa Harrison (Monash Health) for additional costing and treatment data.  The design of the study is RCTs a case series a retrospective cohort a prospective cohort In designing the study the authors hypothesized that there would be ____________ between PIP fractures treated with swing traction and those with no traction no long term difference in outcomes significantly better outcomes slightly better outcomes random differences The authors found less pain in the no-traction group equal ROM in both groups better function, but no better ROM, in the swing traction group better ROM, but no better function, in the swing traction group The swing traction apparatus was fabricated and applied entirely by a CHT was fabricated and applied by a certified orthotist required pin placement by a surgeon was pre fabricated and then fitted by a CHT The complication rate was essentially the same in both groups false true When submitting to the HTCC for re-certification, please batch your JHT RFC certificates in groups of 3 or more to get full credit.