This paper presents a mechanism to explain the attachment of solid particles to air bubbles in surfactant-free aqueous solutions where both solids and air bubbles have the same sign of zeta potential via investigating the mechanical properties of micro air bubbles and the adsorption of hydroxide on air bubble surfaces.
                  Particle–bubble attachment was measured in a Hallimond tube. The results indicate that purified quartz particles attached to air bubbles in surfactant-free deionised water, and the attachment increased with the pH of the aqueous solutions. The mechanical properties of micro air bubbles in aqueous solutions were measured using a novel micromanipulation technique. It was found that the micro air bubbles were pseudo-elastic and spherical in the solutions. The rigidity of the air bubbles decreased with increasing pH of the solutions. When a moving particle with a certain kinetic energy collided with an air bubble in a surfactant-free aqueous solution, the deformation of the air bubble varied with pH of the solution. In an alkaline solution, the micro air bubble was much softer and the deformation was larger than that in an acidic solution. The larger deformation of the softer air bubble resulted in a large contact area between the solid particle and the air bubble, therefore increasing the attachment, and reducing the rebound.
                  The attachment of purified quartz particles to air bubbles in surfactant-free aqueous solutions was possibly due to hydrogen bond formation. The OH− ions on air bubble surfaces formed hydrogen bonds with silicon and oxygen atoms in ≡Si–O–Si≡ or with the adsorbed OH group on quartz surfaces.Capture of solid particles by air bubbles in aqueous solutions is of significant importance in many industrial practices such as waste water treatment, petrochemical refining, mineral processing and paper manufacturing. In practice, it has been found that the attachment of solid particles to air bubbles is a complex process and is affected by numerous factors, such as particle surface chemistry, particle size, hydrophilic and hydrophobic properties of particle surfaces, electrostatic interactions, and hydrodynamic conditions. Overall, the hydrophilic and hydrophobic properties of the surfaces are the dominant factor. Therefore, the activities of froth flotation researchers have concentrated on developing methods to selectively modify mineral surface properties, so that the surface of the particles to be collected is made hydrophobic, while the unwanted particle surface is made hydrophilic. Electrostatic double-layer interaction contributes to particle–bubble attachment only when the particle and the air bubble carry opposite signs of electrostatic potential ( However, in certain circumstances, where no hydrophobic interaction force is present, solid particles can still attach to bubble surfaces even when both surfaces carry the same sign of electrostatic potential ( In this work, we try to understand the mechanism of quartz–bubble attachment in aqueous solutions where surfactant is absent, and the quartz particles and air bubbles bear the same sign of zeta potential, by investigating the effect of bubble properties on quartz–bubble attachment. The force and the energy required to cause a given deformation of micro bubbles in aqueous solutions were measured using a novel micromanipulation technique, which has been developed recently and used to characterise the mechanical properties of animal or plant cells and microcapsules ( The water used in this study was purified by distillation and deionisation, and had a resistance of Experiments for measuring the attachment of quartz particles to air bubbles were performed in a The mechanical rigidity of a single micro air bubble was measured by a modified micromanipulation technique. The experiments were carried out under conditions where surfactant was absent and the airflow rate was In quartz [SiO The zeta potential of quartz particles and air bubbles has been measured as a function of aqueous pH. As the silanol groups (–SiOH) are weakly acidic, quartz shows a negative zeta potential above pH 2.6 as shown in    When a solid particle with a mass The magnitude of the final bubble deformation depends on the particle kinetic energy 0.5 The attachment of purified quartz particles to air bubbles should be different from the attachment of particles with hydrophobic surfaces where a three-phase line of contact is formed. The surface of cleaned quartz is completely wet ( It was observed that purified quartz particles with a size range from 45 to The work required to deform a micro air bubble in an aqueous solution, measured using a micromanipulation technique, was found to depend on the solution pH. In an acidic solution, the work was greater than in an alkaline solution. It is proposed that when a purified quartz particle collides with an air bubble in an aqueous solution, the contact area between them will be larger in an alkaline solution than in an acidic solution. The increasingly negative zeta potential of air bubbles in increasingly alkaline solutions ( The attachment of purified quartz particles to air bubbles in surfactant-free aqueous solutions is considered to be different from the attachment of particles with hydrophobic surfaces. Contact of hydrophobic surfaces to air bubbles causes the liquid film between the particle and the bubble to rupture thus forming a three-phase line of attachment. It is proposed that, in the attachment of purified quartz particles to air bubbles in an surfactant-free aqueous solution, the liquid film remains intact and forms a layer between the particle and the air. The OH groups on the air bubble surfaces could form hydrogen bonds with silicon atoms, oxygen atoms in ≡Si–O–Si≡ or with the adsorbed OH group on the purified quartz surfaces. The formation of hydrogen bonds between OH groups on the air bubble surface and the quartz should increase with increasing contact area and the solution pH. Therefore, there should be more collection of purified quartz by air bubbles in an alkaline aqueous solution than in an acidic aqueous solution.