Pipes have multiple applications in daily life and they are subjected to different types of defects. Nonlinear guided wave has attracted significant attention in detecting microstructural change at early stage of material deterioration. Extensive research using wave mixing with different wave modes has focused on plate-like structures. However, limited experimental studies have been conducted on the detection of material nonlinearity in pipes using two interacting guided waves. This study investigates nonlinear features generated due to mixing of torsional guided waves and material nonlinearity in pipes at low frequency range. The nonlinear theory of elasticity is implemented in a three-dimensional (3D) finite element (FE) method to simulate the effect of material nonlinearity on torsional guided wave mixing. The phenomenon of nonlinear features generated due to torsional guided wave mixing is investigated by 3D FE models. There is good agreement between the data obtained in the laboratory and numerical simulation results. This study demonstrates the existence of the combinational harmonic generation experimentally and provides physical insight into the phenomenon of nonlinear wave mixing. The findings of this study can further advance the damage detection techniques based on material nonlinearity in wave mixing.Non-destructive evaluation (NDE) and damage detection techniques are important for safety-critical structures [ Torsional guided wave has an advantage of long-range damage detection in pipelines. Fundamental axisymmetric torsional mode of guided wave T(0,1) has attracted increasing attention due to its nondispersive characteristic [ Many studies on nonlinear guided waves have focused on contact and material nonlinearity [ Research focused on harmonic generation in cylindrical waveguide has been conducted theoretically and experimentally [ Due to the generation of undesired higher harmonic from equipment, relevant research work has been focused on the feasibility of combinational harmonic generation induced by the mix of two incident waves at different frequencies [ Research on wave mixing has been gradually extended to Lamb waves [ The paper is organised as follows. Section The generation of combinational harmonics requires the interaction of two or more wave sources. Using two wave sources as an example, mixed frequency ( The following FE modelling framework for material nonlinearity not only can be used in simple structures, but also can apply to complicated configurations. In order to gain physical insights of combinational harmonic generation for wave mixing in pipes, this study aims to have experimental validation by a FE model with the aid of nonlinear strain energy function. The derivation of nonlinear guided wave equation is based on continuum mechanics. The interaction of wave propagation is regarded as an infinitesimal deformation. The deformation gradient The right Cauchy-Green strain tensor  The governing equation used in the theory of elasticity (Eq, (6)) refers to the strain energy function The second Piola-Kirchhoff (PK2) stress is obtained by the partial derivation of This section illustrates the mixing of torsional waves at two different excitation frequencies and the details of the excitation using piezoceramic transducers and measurements using 3D scanning laser Doppler vibrometer [ Two excitation signals with low frequencies at The experimental data was collected using Polytec high-frequency 3D scanning laser Doppler vibrometer (PSV-400-3D-M). Low-pass filter with the cut-off frequency of 600 kHz and signal averaging with 2000 acquisitions were applied to enhance the signal-to-noise ratio of the measured data. This 3D laser scanning system is for non-contact optical vibration measurement. It consists of three spatially independent laser scanning heads.   It is expected that no higher harmonics appear in the torsional direction when the two incident waves interact with each other in In this study, a 3D FE model was used to simulate guided wave mixing for the phenomenon of material nonlinearity. The excitation location was the same excitation position in the pipe specimen using in the experiment. The geometry of the pipe model was created and meshed in ABAQUS. The pipe is modelled by eight-node linear brick elements with hourglass control and reduced integration (C3D8R). The in-plane dimension of the element is approximately 0.25 mm × 0.25 mm to ensure the simulation is stable. This ensures that there are at least 20 and 25 FE nodes per wavelength for torsional wave and longitudinal wave. The thickness of the elements is 0.25 mm so there are six layers of elements in the thickness direction ( A layout of the pipe modelled using FE method is shown in  Results calculated by a software DISPERSE [  The generation of primary and combinational harmonics at sum and difference frequencies (i.e. In this section, two FE models were used to simulate the guided wave responses. The FE model with the use of the material subroutine VUMAT [ Since the primary fundamental torsional waves cannot generate second harmonic torsional waves, the second harmonic does not appear in those plots. Only the peaks at the excitation frequencies, which are the fundamental frequency components, appear in the tangential direction. Instead, there are additional peaks at 2 Similarly, This section presents a study to relate the relative nonlinear parameter with the several stages of evenly distributed fatigue damage growth using FE simulations. A material with various fatigue states subjected to the accumulation of dislocation substructures leads to the change in the value of higher harmonics. This can be applied to the combinational harmonics in nonlinear guided wave mixing in pipes to characterise the fatigue damage of a material quantitatively. The relative nonlinear parameter In order to allow direct comparison between the sum and difference harmonics, the data is expressed in percentage change for the relative nonlinear parameter The study of guided wave mixing of two fundamental torsional waves in pipe-like structures has been investigated numerically and experimentally. The 3D scanning laser Doppler vibrometer was used in the experiment. The generation of combinational harmonics due to guided wave mixing in pipes has been measured in experiment. They were induced at the sum and difference frequencies of the incident waves in longitudinal direction when the two T(0,1) mode waves interact with each other. The modified Murnaghan's energy equation to third order terms was implemented in the 3D FE model to capture the combinational harmonic generation in guided wave mixing. There is good agreement between the frequency responses of experimental measurements and numerical simulations. The experimentally validated 3D FE model has been used to investigate the generation of combinational harmonics with increasing percentage of fatigue damage level. Current investigations are focusing on extending the study to higher order harmonic generation due to material nonlinearity using guided wave mixing.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was funded by the In this study, the material nonlinearity is taken into account in the 3D FE model. A set of equations are implemented through a user subroutine VUMAT in ABAQUS/Explicit to analyse the effect of material nonlinearity on guided wave mixing in pipes. The stress in ABAQUS is the Cauchy stress tensor Using Eqs. The values of