My first article appeared in 2005 online and from the very first day it is in the top 25 hottest articles till today either on 1st, 2nd and 3rd standing. The second article was Phytomining, which also from the very first day is in hot 25 articles. This is 3rd article which also enjoys the position in top 25 articles presently at 2nd position. This is the quality of my contribution to the Minerals Engineering, which is judgment by mass of readers not by single author/reader. October to December 2010 Now regarding the comments by Dr. Neculita and Dr. Zagury: Dr. Carmen M. Neculita and Dr. Gerald J. Zagury have the pioneer work in the passive treatment of Acid Mine Drainage. I have high regards for both of them and in the past they were helpful. But this behavior from last couple of months I’m surprised, amazed and sad. Research is a continuous ongoing process and down the corridors of time every one contributes something new to it. For scientific discovery it is not necessary that every one should agree for it but mass acceptance is required which is evident from the article placed in top 25 hot articles. Point wise clarifications of letter dt.: March 28 is as below: A A. It contains several incomplete sentences, inaccurate and confusing information. As a leading example, the objective of the paper is unrealistically stated as “to review all information available on SRP [sulphate-reducing prokaryotes] and their application for the treatment of ARD [acid rock drainage] in bioreactors. E. The above allegation is baseless as the objective of the paper is very precisely stated and fulfilled. A. Yet, comprehensive review articles already published on the same topic, including the authors own article (Sheoran and Sheoran, 2006) are neither mentioned nor discussed. E. As that was limited only to the metal removal mechanism and that to be in wetlands where as this review dealing sulphate-reducing prokaryotes in bioreactors so it was not required when other better references on the topic are available. Secondly I try to quote to the minimum my own paper until and unless it is necessary. A. Another example: the Chapter 4 basic components of sulphate-reducing bioreactors (SRPB), which consists of redundant (first and third sentence), and inaccurate information (“A SRPB is a shallow basin filled with substrate.”), is not concordant with the figure referred to (“Water is introduced at the top/bottom”, whereas the figure indicates only the top). This chapter presents very vague information but definitely not the basic components of SRPB. E. Chapter 4 basic components of SRBR are very much clear. A basin filed with the substrate is very much clear. In figure both the options were not possible to be drawn (as in that case the readers will be confused) so this was explained in the text. The chapter covers very well all the basic components of SRBR in schematic diagram and well elaborated in the text. A. It contains seven figures out of which four (3, 4, 6, and 7) are “after” other papers. In addition, Fig. 1 (inaccurate caption; the diagram presents a wetland) and Fig. 2 (could have been replaced by a sentence) are of little pertinence for the scope of the review, whereas Fig. 5 is identical to Fig. 6. E. All the figures are very much correct and it is there personal opinion that figure could have been replaced by a single sentence but we felt more appropriate by figure. Figs. 5 and 6 are different as one is the break down and other is the chemical characterization and all the captions used are correct. It is a review article which must cover all the previous work contributed by various scientists in this field. A. More important, in our opinion, this article violates Ethical guidelines for publication in Elsevier journals as it reproduces almost entire pages (word-by-word, including the references) from another review paper published in the Journal of Environmental Quality 3 E. Basically what I understand the review papers are collection of published information from different places and than synchronizing and synthesizing them properly under the umbrella, with the updating, and good conclusions so that the readers can get the entire information on the topic at one place. The review paper published in the Journal of Environmental Quality (Neculita et al., 2007) is very good review paper and in fact this paper inspired us to write a review because there were so many aspects which were not covered and quoted in that paper, so we decided to write a review covering all aspects of Bioremediation of acid–rock drainage by sulphate-reducing prokaryotes. This article does not violate Ethical guidelines for publication in Elsevier journals, as each and every single reporting reviewed and referred in the article are dully cited for example Neculita et al. (2007) have been quoted 20 times, Gibert et al. (2004) has been cited 15 times for his findings and also their references have been referred and cited duly. I hope this is not ethical violation and plagiarism. A. Flagrant, the second sentence of the Section 5.2.4, where the authors discuss manganese removal, starting with a plural (“Their […]”) does not make any sense but it does in Neculita et al. (2007)’s paper, where manganese and arsenic were discussed together (at page 12, second paragraph). E. Behavior of various metals in the bioreactors was not discussed in detail previously so in this review each metal separately has been discussed and the Section 5.2.4 covers manganese and this word “their” is just a typological error . A. The conclusions and future research sections of the review paper of Sheoran et al. (2010), which are supposed to be the authors’ original contribution, are mostly identical to Neculita et al. (2007)! As a result, the Future research part becomes outdated and the first two sentences dealing with ecotoxicity of treated AMD are not valid anymore since a research paper (not cited in Sheoran et al., 2010) has been published in 2008 (Neculita et al., 2008). E. Conclusion and future research section of this review article is authors own contribution and their allegation are baseless. Every scientific study needs to be updated continuously with tide and time so the term outdated is really baseless allegation. Its demand by the readers on science direct is the answer in its own. A. The apparent extensive list of references (201) contains 72 (out of 129) references from Neculita et al. (2007) and only 23 new articles (11%) published in the period 2007–2010. The work is hence poorly updated. In addition, there is a clearly visible gap in the quality of added parts by the authors (Sheoran et al., 2010) relative to the integrative parts copied from other works. E. This point itself is self explanatory how updated this article is with 201 references covering almost all the pioneers of this field. The importance of the previous published papers remains the same as the pioneers of the field. But updating by quoting them as reference is not copying their work. A. For your further information, we submitted a discussion on another paper by the same authors (Choudhary and Sheoran, 2010), which overlapped some of our previous research (Neculita and Zagury, 2008) and used similar interpretation of their results with but without citing our work properly. Moreover, the article had several pitfalls and was full of wrong citations. The comments of our discussion have been considered and the paper has been modified but the Editor-in-Chief of the journal (Bioresource Technology) refused to publish our discussion without giving an explanation. In our opinion, such an attitude definitely violates ethical guidelines and should at least be publicized if not condemned. E. Constructive criticism is always helpful as it is a reward for further upliftment but this personal comment I really feel very sad in receiving such type of comment from an eminent, adorable and respected scientist. This paper is result of more then 1 Thank you very much. Inconvenience caused by us is highly regretted. With Kind Regards Sincerely Yours