Between 1991 and 1995 five hundred and twenty tibial diaphyseal fractures were treated with intramedullary nailing in Northern Ireland. We retrospectively reviewed three hundred and thirty eight patients in three out of the four fracture units in Northern Ireland. Within this group there were three hundred and forty fractures and we identified twenty five episodes of implant failure. This group of patients had a higher percentage of open injuries with a higher degree of comminution and had been treated with smaller diameter nails when compared with the group of patients, who had no implant failure. Failure occurred most frequently at the transverse proximal locking screw when a single screw was used. Fractures in the distal third of the tibia had a higher incidence of nail breakage. We would recommend early elective dynamisation and the use of statically locked larger diameter nails, especially in comminuted or distal third fractures.Tibial shaft fractures are the most common long bone fractures in adults Three hundred and thirty eight patients with three hundred and forty tibial shaft fractures treated by intramedullary nailing from 1991 to 1995 in three out of the four fracture units of Northern Ireland were reviewed retrospectively. These patients were identified through the theatre logbooks. Patients notes and radiographs were used to obtain our information. Only complete sets of notes and radiographs were accepted for this study. We defined implant failure as a nail or screw, which was bent or broken. The twenty five patients, in which metal failure was identified were designated as group I, the remainder of patients without metal failure were designated group II (three hundred and thirteen patients). We looked at mechanism, site of the tibial fractures and type of open fracture using the Gustilo and Anderson classification Both groups were similar in respect of gender and age. Group I consisted of 22 males and 3 females (88%:12%) with mean age of 37 years and group II of 250 males and 63 females (80%:20%) with a mean age of 35 years. The majority of fractures occurred in the middle third and junction of middle to distal third of the tibia ( The nails used in group I were 18 Grosse–Kempf, 6 Russell–Taylor and 1 humeral Russell–Taylor (68%:28%:4%) versus 261 Grosse–Kempf and 54 Russell–Taylor nails (83%:17%) in group II. The Russell–Taylor nails used were smaller in diameter and more rigid in configuration and had a higher failure rate (3 out of 61) when compared to Grosse–Kempf nails (3 out of 279). The overall nail failure rate was 1.76%. The humeral nail used in group I was due to the very small size of the patient and because a suitable tibial nail was not available. The failed nails tended to be narrower diameter nails in comparison with those which did not fail ( In both groups 80% of nails were statically locked with one or two proximal screws and two distal screws. We observed that screws, especially the proximal ones, failed more often than nails ( The overall metal failure rate was 7.3% (25 out of 340 tibial nails). Tibial nailing is a widely practised treatment for unstable tibial shaft fractures The majority of failures arose at the proximal locking screws. When analysing our data we found that proximal screws failed mainly in two patterns: A single proximal screw is left to share alone the load of weight-bearing and breaks when one proximal and two distal screws are used or after removing one of the proximal screws leaving behind one proximal and two distal screws ( The nail failure rate was influenced not only by delayed union but also nail size ( In conclusion, we agree that intramedullary nailing is a very satisfactory treatment for unstable tibial diaphyseal fractures with a low rate of serious complications. Our screw failure rate of 5.8% is in keeping with other smaller studies