Mining and mineral processing of sulphide ore deposits produce large quantities of wastes, most of which are characterised as toxic or hazardous, due to the formation of acid drainage, and to their heavy metal content.
                  Samples of pyrite-contaminated soil from a former flotation plant were studied in this work to obtain environmental characterization and rehabilitation.
                  Acid mine drainage prediction by the standard acid base accounting method (ABA) together with speciation techniques, were used in order to determine the potential pollution of the area.
                  The effectiveness of sugar foam as an amendment in preventing acid drainage and metal dissolution was tested in this work.
                  The application of sugar foam results in a neutralizing action, due to the contained calcium carbonate, and in pyrite oxidation inhibition, significantly reducing acid generation and metals release.Pyrite tailings from the flotation of metallic complex sulphide ores consist of fine-grained intimate associations of chalcopyrite, sphalerite and galena disseminated in the dominant pyrite. The average particle size is very small, ranging from 20 to 40 Current static and kinetic tests for determining AMD potential are commonly used or proposed for predicting AMD from mines ( Although many options for remediating pyrite-contaminated soils have been developed, few have been applied successfully. The contaminated soil is usually capped in situ or is excavated and removed. Even if tailings are removed, small amounts remain in the soil, constituting a potential risk of water contamination. Traditionally, the most common method of controlling AMD is through the mixing of alkaline substances, such as limestone, with the AMD producing materials. The addition of other amendments (as silicates, phosphates, carbonates, iron oxides, gypsum, organic matter, etc.) can also reduce the bioavailability of heavy metals ( The use of industrial residues, both to mitigate the acid generation and to retain heavy metals, has recently been studied. This choice has the advantage of reducing waste disposal by transforming industrial wastes into industrial by-products. There have been numerous studies on the heavy metals bioavailability in soils affected by mineral sulphides contamination, following the mine spillage at Aznalcollar (Spain) ( Sugar foam is the sugar-manufacturing residue that remains after beet juice is purified by flocculation of colloid matter with a lime solution, followed by treatment with CO The use of sugar foam for soil acidity amendment and as an amendment for regulating the mobility of Cd, Cu and Pb has been recently reported ( In this work, the authors have explored the potential of sugar foam for mitigating the contamination from pyritic materials on soils at an abandoned mine in Aznalcollar (Spain). Two samples of soil contaminated with pyrite were studied: sample A was taken from the former pyrite tailing storage soil and sample B from the former primary crushing stockpile soil. Mining activity has now been suspended and the area is in a recuperation process. Sugar foam was supplied by the Spanish sugar producer Azucarera Ebro S.L., that markets it as a mineral amendment with the name of Total sulphur content was measured using a Leco Acid-base accounting (ABA) has been used as a screening tool, which can determine the acid-producing nature of these mine spoils. ABA includes a series of chemical analyses and calculated values that provide a preliminary evaluation of the amounts, and relative balance, of the acid generation potential (AP) and neutralization potential (NP). This balance is expressed as the net neutralization potential (NNP AP is calculated under the assumption that all sulphur is present as FeS NP was determined by the Sobek method ( ISO/DIS 10390 and ISO/DIS 11325 were followed to determine pH in water and in KCl and specific electric conductivity respectively.  The The The The Metals content was also determined by aqua regia digestion and mixed acid digestion (HNO The high concentration of Zn in the water-soluble fraction should be noted, as well as Mn and Cu. In sample A, heavy metals concentrations in the exchangeable and bound-to-carbonate fractions are similar to those in the water soluble fraction. Heavy metals concentrations in water are higher in sample B than in sample A. As sulphur is present mainly as sulphate in sample B (see In order to determine the mobility of metals, leaching tests were performed, which simulated the processes of geochemical weathering at an accelerated rate, providing semi-quantitative information on drainage water quality. Triplicated experiments were carried out in 250  Sample A (legend A0) has low pH values, around 2.5 during all tests and sample B (legend B0) has higher pHs than sample A, ranging from 3.75 to 4.5, in accordance with the pH values shown in When sugar foam is added in stoichiometric proportion to sample A (legend ASF), the pH rises from 6.5 to 7.5 in the first 20 days, and then remains constant to the 70th day, eventually decreasing to 7.0, while sample B with stoichiometric sugar foam quantity (BSF) has a constant pH, close to 6.5. Despite sample A being more acidic than sample B, the increase of pH is higher in leachates from sample A, as the amount of sugar foam in A(SF) is higher than in B(SF). With double sugar foam dose, A(SF) Sugar foam inhibits the acidity of leachates in both samples, the stoichiometric dose being sufficient to neutralize the acid produced by the dissolution of the samples in water. In Generally, it is observed that the amount of dissolved metal decreases during the tests, so the soil potential contamination also decreases. The graphs shows that the addition of stoichiometric sugar foam completely avoids the dissolution of Cu, Al and Fe in both samples. These results are consistent with the Pourbaix diagrams ( Sugar foam is a suitable amendment for prevention of Zn and Cd dissolution in sample A. The addition of sugar foam reduces the Zn and Cd dissolution in sample B, the decrease being proportional to the dose of sugar foam. It can be said that Zn dissolution is affected by the mass ratio soil/sugar foam, a double stoichiometric dose being necessary to inhibit it appreciably. The Pourbaix diagram for Zn and Cd and the pH values in the lixiviates explain the results obtained. In the case of Mn, a sugar foam concentration effect is also observed and, in the studied range, Mn dissolution is not inhibited. The soils sampled from two locations at a former complex mineral sulphide flotation plant are contaminant materials due to the acidity and heavy metals content of their leachates. Sugar foam significantly reduces acid generation and metals release. The effect of heavy metals immobilization can be attributed to the alkaline nature of the sugar foam. The stoichiometric dose of sugar foam was enough to prevent or delay the water leaching of copper, aluminium and iron, whereas the release of zinc, manganese and cadmium were influenced by the mass ratio sugar foam/sulphide sulfur of the soil. The authors are grateful to Azucarera Ebro S.L. for providing the sugar foam used in this investigation.