Development of new technologies for the production of various ultra-fine powder has become nowadays one of the most important topics. The pulse energy technology has a number of principal advantages for ultra-fine powder production: In the pulsed mode it is possible to provide high density of energy to a substance with a required dosage which can be controlled precisely. The energy supplied in the pulsed mode is used with higher efficiency. The process proceeds extremely fast. All the process can be regarded as adiabatic. Particle formation with designed characteristics would be possible. In the High Voltage Research Institute (HVRI, Tomsk, Russia) ‘wire electric explosion (WEE) method’ has been developed for the production of ultra-fine powder WEE is a phenomenon of explosive destruction of a metallic wire when passing a high density current (more than 10 Three dimensionless complexes are proposed from the theory. These complexes allow to describe many of characteristics both on the heating stage and on the stage of wire demolition. When exploding a wire made of one component metal, the constants characterizing the metal can be omitted and the following generalized variables can be used: WEE facility designed and constructed by HVRI was used for production of Al powder. After setting up the facility the chamber was evacuated to 0.1Pa range and purged with Ar gas three times, and then filled with Ar gas of 0.2MPa pressure. All experimental conditions used in this study were determined from the pre-experiments and the standard model theory. In   XRD analysis for powder showed that some trace of Al Wire Electric Explosion (WEE) method was introduced, which was developed for the production of ultra-fine powder in the High Voltage Research Institute, TPU, Russia. To confirm the effectiveness of theory for application an experiment of ultra-fine Al powder production was performed. From the results it could be concluded that powder with avg. size of <100nm was produced by varying the ratio of the energy liberated in the wire ( This work was supported by the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF) through the Research Center for Machine Parts and Materials Processing (ReMM) at University of Ulsan.