A systematic review was performed to assess the relative merits of reamed and unreamed antegrade femoral nailing. To be included, a study had to be prospective, randomised or pseudorandomised, comparing reamed and unreamed antegrade femoral nailing in adults. Where more than one study from the same institution was available, only the study with longest follow-up was included. A literature search found 2044 possible articles. Of these, eight studies compared reamed and unreamed femoral nailing. The methodology of these articles was independently assessed by all the three authors. Five studies met the inclusion criteria. Each outcome measure tested was assessed for heterogeneity. If significant heterogeneity was present, the data were not combined. If there was no significant heterogeneity, a combined odds ratio or weighted mean difference was calculated using a fixed effects model, and a Z-test was performed to test the overall effect.
                  Six hundred and forty-seven femoral fractures (315 reamed; 332 unreamed) were entered into the included studies. Unreamed nailing was quicker and associated with significantly less blood loss (P < 0.00001). Reaming significantly reduced the time to union (P = 0.00001), non-union (P = 0.002), delayed union (P = 0.005), technical problems (P = 0.01) and reoperation rate (P = 0.001). The use of reamed femoral nails gives significant advantages over unreamed femoral nails.Intramedullary nailing has become the standard treatment for femoral shaft fractures in most centres in the UK. Whether or not to ream remains controversial. The aim of this study was to examine the best available literature to compare reamed and unreamed antegrade femoral nailing to assess any differences between them. The null hypothesis was that there was no difference between reamed and unreamed antegrade femoral nailing. Medline (1966 onwards) and the Cochrane database were searched for suitable references using the search terms “femoral fracture” and “fracture fixation, intramedullary”. All abstracts were reviewed. Any potentially suitable reference was obtained. The bibliographies of these references were also examined for any other potential studies. From these articles, all studies comparing reamed and unreamed antegrade femoral nailing in adults were collated. The Method sections of these articles were independently assessed by all three authors to decide if the reference was suitable for inclusion. To be included, the study had to be a prospective randomised or pseudorandomised study comparing reamed and unreamed antegrade femoral nailing in adults. Studies where patients were allocated over the same time period to each group by a factor unrelated to their treatment (e.g. alternating, date of birth, hospital number, etc.) were considered pseudorandomised. Studies where patients were allocated to the groups over different time periods were not considered pseudorandomised. Where there was more than one study from the same centre using the same protocol, the study with the longest follow-up was used. Disagreements were resolved by consensus. A kappa test was performed to measure the agreement between the authors. The assessed outcome measures included operation time, blood loss, technical problems, time to union, non-union, delayed union, implant failure and reoperation rate. Data were extracted from each article by all three authors. The data were then compared to ensure accurate data were entered. Any disagreement was resolved by consensus and was usually due to an oversight by one of the authors. For dichotomous data, odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals were calculated comparing reamed and unreamed groups. Each outcome measure tested was assessed for heterogeneity using the Cochran For continuous data, weighted mean difference and 95% confidence intervals were calculated comparing reamed and unreamed groups. Each tested outcome measure was assessed for heterogeneity using the Cochran The literature search retrieved 2044 possible articles including eight studies comparing reamed and unreamed antegrade femoral nailing. Two studies were excluded because they were retrospective. These five studies had included 647 femoral shaft fractures (315 reamed; 332 unreamed), and 624 fractures were followed up (96%). The study details are given in An overview of the results is given in Three studies gave data on operation times. Three studies gave data on blood loss. Three studies gave data on intraoperative technical difficulties. Three studies gave data on the time to union. Only one study clearly defined non-union. Two studies gave data on delayed union. Three studies gave data on implant failure. Three studies gave data on reoperations. Concerns over the physiological effects of reaming led to the development of small-diameter solid nails that are inserted without reaming. Unreamed femoral nails do have some reduced physiological effects. They are quicker to insert (by approximately 30 Reaming has been shown to produce emboli, and these have been demonstrated on transoesophageal echocardiography. Reaming disrupts the blood flow to the inner two-thirds of cortex compared to one-third if nailing is performed without reaming. There are three possible explanations for the improved healing with reamed nailing. Firstly, the debris produced by reaming is deposited at the fracture site and acts like an autologous bone graft. As with any meta-analysis, this study has the potential for publication bias. Only if the included studies are representative of the results after all reamed and unreamed nailings, will the meta-analysis be valid. Selecting only the best available literature keeps any potential bias to a minimum. A large multicentre prospective randomised controlled trial would be best but such a trial would be difficult to set up and has not yet been performed. In the absence of such a trial, this meta-analysis adds weight to the pre-existing literature that supports reamed femoral nailing. Overall, femoral nailing without reaming does seem to cause less physiological impact but this is small and its clinical relevance is not clear. Quicker union, fewer delayed unions, fewer non-unions and fewer subsequent reoperations are the clear advantages of reaming.