We examine underlying conflicts between technological capabilities and global production networks in South Africa's solar photovoltaic (PV) and wind energy industries. This includes an analysis of the complex and multi-scalar relationships that exist between international and local institutions, as well as the embedded nature of renewable energy technology within a national and international political economy. In South Africa's case, this encompasses endogenous factors such as the introduction of a regulatory framework for renewable energy independent power producers as well as international dynamics such as rapidly evolving trends in renewable energy investment, trade, and technology development. While South Africa's wind and solar industries have been celebrated internationally, tensions exist within national government between commercial priorities and requirements for economic development including local content. We provide an empirically rich description to explore how competition and manipulation have posed obstacles to the localisation of renewable energy technologies at the national level.South Africa's utility-scale, renewable electricity from independent power producers now constitutes a small but significant source of generation alongside its coal-fired, crisis-ridden state-owned monopoly electricity utility Eskom. While the country's renewable electricity industry has been celebrated internationally ( Our analytical approach is informed by the literature on technological capabilities ( This paper also draws from and contributes to a growing body of research on technological innovation and the creation of renewable energy manufacturing industries in the emerging markets of China and India ( Our paper's primary source of data is field work undertaken between 2013 and 2015 ( As a secondary method, we also draw from significant content analysis of government documents and policies as well as grey literature on renewable energy technology. One challenge to this is that many of the bid documents for the country's renewable energy independent power producers' procurement programme, the RE IPPPP, are not available in the public domain. For this reason we have drawn from publicly available secondary sources. The research is also informed by a long-term and systematic consultation of media sources on the renewable energy industry in South Africa and globally, including: The paper's structure is as follows. Firstly we outline our analytical framework before setting out the national context from which the country's renewable electricity generation sector has emerged. We then consider the national measures and systems that exist for the support of technological capabilities in renewable energy. We proceed to explore how tensions between the two concepts of global production networks and technological capabilities play out within the South African context, which together with the themes of competition and manipulation, are further illustrated with two case studies of wind and solar PV. Our analytical framework draws from two literature which though related, are rarely combined: technological capabilities and global production networks. In tandem, such concepts—one emphasising the nature of indigenous technological development and innovation, the other the interlinkages between local, national, and international supply chains —enable us to reveal the networks of firms and institutions participating in South Africa's renewable energy sector. We maintain that together these concepts offer a more nuanced and complete picture of the political economy of technological development and allow us to consider dimensions such as the distribution of power within those networks ( Acknowledging the diversity of literature on technological capabilities, The case of South Africa illustrates concepts central to technological capabilities, including the nature of technology transfer to developing countries and related definitions of research and development (R&D); knowledge spill-overs and knowledge leakage ( We engage the concept of GPNs in order to examine how relationships between national dynamics and international forces have influenced technological pathways and renewable energy supply chains in South Africa to date. As a challenge to the related perspectives of Global Value Chains ( However it is only recently that the GPN literature has started to engage with questions of trade and production in renewable energy. Current contributions, to which this paper adds, include While there is limited explicit concern within GPNs for technological capabilities and innovation, with exceptions including ( With a “highly energy intensive economy” compared to its neighbours ( Changes in the country's economic growth path have been paralleled by notable shifts in energy policy. Firstly various stalled attempts in recent decades to introduce both independently procured power and renewable energy eventually culminated in significant national developments for the introduction of renewable energy into the country’s monopoly controlled coal-fired grid. Notably in May 2011 the Department of Energy launched the country's first Integrated Resource Plan for electricity (IRP). While this allows for an increase in coal-fired generation it also allows for 17.8 gigawatts (GW) of capacity to come from renewable energy which will produce approximately nine per cent of electricity supply by 2030. The IRP was swiftly followed by the launch of the Renewable Energy Independent Power Producers' Procurement Programme (RE IPPPP) in 2011 ( South Africa's procurement programme is unique in that the projects in question must structure local communities into their equity share as well as contribute to economic development criteria, including local content as a key focus of this paper. These criteria, which align with the country's ‘broad based black economic empowerment’ legislation, are a key part of government commitments to the green economy and a labour intensive industrialisation path as a way to tackle the country's declining manufacturing sector, high levels of unskilled labour and an unemployment rate of 40 per cent. Local content is defined as a percentage of project expenditure spent in South Africa, specifically, as “the total costs attributed to the project at the commercial operation date, excluding finance charges, land and mobilisation fees of the operations contractor” (DoE 2011:8). Consequently, its accurate measurement has been problematic mainly because it is based on Rand value, which as a floating exchange rate is subject to significant fluctuations over time and in turn affects the cost of imported products ( As As a result of the increase in thresholds and targets for local content, a number of manufacturing and assembly plants have been set up for low technology components as we discuss below. In addition to assisting project developers to meet local content requirements under RE IPPPP, a number of these facilities anticipate the potential export of their products both to the African continent and elsewhere. However as we explore, loopholes in these regulations have resulted in a number of solar PV developers side-stepping them and importing stock from abroad. Furthermore, others have argued that the limited market size created by RE IPPPP to date is inadequate to generate local production and therefore the technological upgrade and job creation impacts will remain at the lower and medium technology levels ( An upper middle income economy in terms of GNI per capita, South Africa faces significant challenges to its national system of innovation, including high levels of inequality, unemployment, and unskilled labour and poor levels of education. By the Department of Science and Technology's (DST) own admission, the concept of a national system of innovation has limited traction, both in the extent to which it is “understood as something wider than the sum of traditional research and development (R&D) activities, and in the extent to which it had been fully absorbed into the strategies of key actors (including government departments and higher education institutions)” ( Despite this, the country has established a number of national commitments in order to enable it to establish technological capabilities for renewable electricity beyond thresholds for local content. Such commitments are included in a number of national plans and documents on growth and industrial policy put together by various different departments. They include the Green Economy Accord of the Department for Economic Development ( This facet is exacerbated by the fact that both wind and solar PV industries involve trajectories of increasingly complex technology and are more knowledge than labour intensive ( Studies for the potential of the localisation of wind ( In parallel to the national policies that facilitated the emergence of a utility-scale renewable electricity sector following the introduction of RE IPPPP in 2011, a number of exogenous factors have played a role. More generally these factors include impacts of the 2008 global financial crisis on renewable electricity markets in Europe and US, which saw the reduction or removal of subsidies by governments and led to policy uncertainty and a slump in project development. Subsequently, renewable electricity development and related investment started to shift to developing countries, including South Africa. This investment was accompanied by a manufacturing surplus, which saw European, US and Chinese companies in particular seeking other markets to absorb this. This surplus has contributed to fierce competition in South Africa as reflected in dramatic tariff drops Essentially the South Africa case reveals a tension between national requirements seeking to enhance and augment technological capabilities, and pressures from GPNs. As we discuss here and in the following section, the implementation of local content requirements under RE IPPPP illustrates how the realisation of national priorities for employment generation, skills development and increased local manufacturing are at odds with the demands by financial institutions for project ‘bankability’. International norms of project finance applied by debt financiers and equity investors have a significant determination over the technology that gets selected for projects approved under South Africa's RE IPPPP and the company that carries out the engineering, procurement and construction (EPC) contract and operation and maintenance (O&M). The EPC phase usually lasts for a two-year term but with liabilities and equipment warrantees generally lasting for five years after construction. On the project's commercial operation date the O&M contract takes over with a tenure length that can vary between the full term of the power purchase agreement or a five-year rolling contract. Given that local content requirements are often considered an investment risk, banks tend to insist on internationally experienced contractors who have carried out a minimum number of analogous projects elsewhere in the world. That the technology in question be ‘proven’ is a fundamental consideration for the lender with regards to a project's commercial viability ( As the EPC contract is generally the largest cost item in the budget at an estimated 60–75 per cent of total project cost ( There was a general sense that in rounds one and two of RE IPPPP EPCs could have used more local products and services than they did, but as foreign companies, lacked the relevant knowledge to procure nationally available supplies and so ended up importing them unnecessarily. Similarly, large international technology supply companies are often bound by their own internal guarantees and are therefore obliged to deploy their own personnel and materials from abroad rather than sourcing locally. While there are national attempts to overcome such restrictions, for instance the South African Renewable Energy Technology Centre plans to train service technicians on how to fix cracks in blades [in interview, December 2014] it is not clear whether this will satisfy the demands of international company warranties. Safety issues were also identified as a constraint. For example, according renewable industry member (4) [in interview November 2014] “for a 75 MW solar PV farm, local electrical contractors do not have the resources to carry the risk of something going wrong in terms of failure to deliver on time and at the right quantity”. A further constraint is the requirement that technologies be certified by the International Electrotechnical Commission. Consequently, small, medium and micro enterprises have been precluded from participating in national renewable energy value as technology and service providers ( However some skills transfer from international to national firms may be evident in that according to some interviewees, large international electrical contractors such as ABB and Schneider are increasingly starting to subcontract to local companies. Furthermore, since round three there has been a shift from a ‘fully wrapped’ EPC to multi-contracting ( The specific dynamics of the EPC and O&M in relation to wind and solar PV are discussed in further depth in section In addition to tensions between GPNs and local content requirements, other conflicts were identified in terms of ideological differences within government, most evidently between the National Treasury and the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI). Essentially, National Treasury places more emphasis on least cost and assumes that locally manufactured goods are more expensive than imported goods. Therefore if local content requirements are too high then the price of the project will not be competitive. The DTI meanwhile prioritises the incentivisation of local manufacturing and associated job creation, and argues that in addition to cost, various factors such as the type of technology, the technological component in question and the scale at which it is manufactured or imported must be taken into account. However while the DTI is responsible for drafting the local content requirements, the RE IPPPP process is ultimately governed by the Treasury supported IPP-unit ( The lack of clarity over local content rules and definitions has also enabled international project developers, particularly of solar PV, to exploit and manipulate loop holes, as discussed in section In order to prevent further manipulation of local content requirements by developers and under pressure from manufacturers, it is understood that the DTI attempted to refine the rules so that installation or balance of plant must constitute a certain percentage of local content and the technology also. However when the bid documents were released for round four in mid-2014, this did not materialise: “Everyone expected that for round four Treasury would issue a clarification note by component that said for instance wind towers 30 per cent, blades 10 per cent … but the bid documents are released and then there is no clarification note” [renewable industry member (3), December 2014]. A final issue is how South Africa's local content requirements align or conflict with international trade rules and agreements, an issue which currently lacks clarity ( Having established the national and international context for such tensions we now examine their impact on the acquisition of technological capabilities in South Africa's emerging wind and solar PV sector. The increasingly protectionist and competitive nature of the global wind industry ( Localisation of wind power technologies can take a variety of forms ( While the construction and maintenance of most components of a wind turbine such as blades, gearboxes and power converters ( Consequently two wind tower manufacturing plants have been set up in South Africa, one run by GRI industries, a subsidiary of Spanish Cooperación Gestamp, in the Atlantis IDZ in the Western Cape and the other by DCD wind towers in the Coega IDZ near Port Elizabeth in the Eastern Cape. Spanish company Acciona has also established concrete tower making facilities on its project site for the Gouda wind farm in the Western Cape. Both GRI and DCD manufacture towers for OEMs e.g Nordex and Vestas from where the equipment and the IPR is sourced. The arrangements between the OEMs and the manufacturers may not only restrict opportunities for innovation spill overs but also prevent the sourcing of services and supplies from other local companies. Firstly manufacturing is done under a non-disclosure agreement with the OEM whereby the local company undertakes only to manufacture and has no involvement in design. Secondly, because different OEMs have different designs, skills acquired from working on one tower will not necessarily be transferrable. Finally the OEMs have an approved list of which suppliers the factory can buy from which need to conform to the OEM's quality standards and specifications. All other wind technology components for supply to projects under RE IPPPP are currently imported. With the exception of the company Adventure Power, which makes small-scale blades, there are no utility-scale blade manufacturing facilities in South Africa and this is not currently anticipated. Far greater market certainty than currently exists would be needed for any blade manufacturer to set up in South Africa. OEMs such as Vestas and Nordex usually outsource blade manufacturing to specialised companies such as LM Blades, headquartered in Denmark. While LM Blades was considering setting up a blade mould factory in South Africa and according to renewable industry member (2) [in interview, December 2014] “was but a signature away”, the company's plans were shelved following the uncertainty created by the reduction of the wind allocation in the draft revised IRP in 2013, which has yet to be concluded ( An early attempt to set up a national wind manufacturing company in anticipation of RE IPPPP folded because it was unable to meet the requirements of project finance for ‘bankability’ and the two years' operational experience. Cape Town-based Isivunguvungu Wind Energy Converter (Pty.) Ltd (I-WEC) was set up in 2009 in the Western Cape. The company imported a blade mould made in China by Swiss company Gurit under licence from the German developer Aerodyn ( While wind is characterised as ‘design-intensive’, meaning that it requires “local knowledge networks of suppliers, manufacturers and users to capture the learning benefits”, solar PV is ‘manufacturing-intensive’, meaning that it requires less local learning and is more dependent on international networks of suppliers ( For this reason, contrary to the case of the wind industry, the company that carries out the EPC contract for solar PV is less often involved in the technology supply. There is also greater potential for innovation in solar PV than wind, given that the latter is more mature as a technology and therefore harder to break into ( While the contractors carrying out the EPC are dominated by European and US companies (see The deep influence that GPNs have on the political economy of technological capabilities in South African renewable electricity is further illustrated by ownership patterns related to intellectual property and hardware associated with solar PV. Chinese solar PV technology hardware deployed in South Africa is either provided directly by state-backed or state-owned Chinese companies with cheap access to capital and strong financial support from government ( The nature of GPNs in solar PV, coupled with the inadequate enforcement and definition of local content rules has resulted in a number of solar PV developers being able to sidestep local content rules through ‘transfer pricing’. Under transfer pricing, a foreign component supplier in coordination with the project developer sets up a local company and imports technological hardware. The price of that hardware is then marked up and sold on to the developer. That mark-up constitutes local content. Transfer pricing has been possible because as described above, local content is measured in financial spend. As renewable industry member (1) described [in interview November 2013]: “… companies like Enel According to the South African Renewable Energy Council, transfer pricing has meant that solar PV module manufacturers in South Africa that were set up with the aim of supplying to projects approved under RE IPPPP (see One solution put forward by the South African solar PV industry association (SAPVIA) and other stakeholders in order to prevent transfer pricing is that the module be assembled, framed and most significantly The EU-China solar dispute, which “represents the most significant anti-dumping complaint the European Commission has ever investigated” ( This paper forms an early contribution to the emerging theme of renewable energy technology capabilities in South Africa. It demonstrates how technology development in these industries has been shaped by the interaction of territorially embedded factors with global dynamics. Such dynamics include: the geographically dispersed nature of global supply chains and production networks in renewable energy technologies; the determination that finance and investment has over technology and innovation pathways; the rise of emerging market companies, particularly China, in renewable energy manufacturing; and trade disputes. It has further highlighted the adequacy or lack thereof of national local content policies and other frameworks in enabling the development of technological capabilities. The extent to which South Africa's local content requirements and related innovation and industrial policy will be redefined and enforced to ensure a more meaningful adherence to local production and the development of national capabilities is as yet unclear, but remains a crucial area for the long-term success of the country's emerging industry and an area for further research. We have used the theoretical literature of technological capabilities and global production networks as a lens. In doing so, it has allowed us to develop an analysis that merges international trends such as trade, finance and technology costs with the complexities of a specific national context, including politics. This is significant given that many studies on technological development are too focussed on national policy and do not consider global dynamics. With this in mind, we offer five conclusions. First, rather than viewing renewable energy technology policy as a set of rational processes or deliberative outcomes, it is in fact much more a series of ‘complex bargaining processes’ ( Second, and relating to the theme of competitive dynamics within GPNs ( Third, this paper has added to two emerging themes in the GPN literature: finance (Coe et al., 2014) and technological development in renewable energy ( Fourth, this study demonstrates the geographic differentiation of renewable energy technology manufacturing and the technology dependent nature of deployment. In other words, it is a mistake to treat renewable electricity systems as “equal” in their type and scope; the political economy of South African wind technology differs markedly from that of solar PV. As discussed in section Fifth, and perhaps most significantly, the paper's findings reflect the ‘deepening international divisions of labour’ ( This work was supported by the Thank you to Stephen Forder of the Energy Blog ( 