To repair damaged bone tissues, osteoconductive bone graft substitutes are required for enhancement of the regenerative potential of osteoblast cells. Nanostructured hydroxyapatite is a bioactive ceramic used for bone tissue engineering purposes. In this study, carbonate hydroxyapatite (cHA) and zinc-magnesium substituted hydroxyapatite (Zn-Mg-HA) nanoparticles were synthesized via biomineralization method using Enterobacter aerogenes. The structural phase composition and the morphology of the samples were analyzed using appropriate powder characterization methods. Next, a composite graft was fabricated by using polyvinyl alcohol and both cHA and Zn-Mg-HA samples. In vivo osteogenic potential of the graft was then investigated in a rabbit tibial osteotomy model. Histological, radiological and morphological studies showed that the graft was mineralized by the newly formed bone tissue without signs of inflammation or infection after 4 weeks of implantation. These histomorphometric results suggest that the fabricated graft can function as a potent osteoconductive bone tissue substitute.There has been an increasing trend toward using nanomaterials, such as nanostructured hydroxyapatite (Ca Biological nHA can be synthesized via mineralization reaction by human or bacterial ALP. Bone graft materials are widely used for biomedical applications to promote new bone formation and bone healing. Over the last few decades, a variety of composite biomaterials have been developed for bone grafting applications. Due to the intrinsic biocompatibility of hydroxyapatite (HA), it has been one of the main components of many synthesized bone grafting composites. To the best of our knowledge, there is no previous report on the bacterial synthesis of trace ions-doped nHA and its application as a bone graft substitute. Hence, the current study aims to fabricate and investigate an osteoconductive bone graft composite based on bacterial synthesized nHA doped with Zn  The mineralization solution consisting of 25 mM of β-glycerophosphate disodium salt dihydrate ((HOCH The inoculated mineralization solution (hereafter, working solution) was used for synthesis of cHA. All working solutions were agitated at 230 rpm at room temperature (~24 °C). At the end of sedimentation process, the bacterial suspensions were filtered through filter paper (Whatman no. 42, Aldrich, USA) and dried at 45 °C for 12 h. To remove the organic content, dried samples were calcined at 600 °C for 2 h. X-ray diffraction analysis (XRD; D8 Advance, Bruker, Germany) was used to study the structural phase composition of the bacterial powder samples after calcination (cHA and Zn-Mg-HA) and the results were compared with a commercially available, chemically-synthesized hydroxyapatite powder (BT-0401G50, MBCP, France) as a control HA powder. The XRD patterns were recorded using CuKα radiation at 35 kV and 30 mA. The XRD patterns were characterized by XRD evaluation software (DiffracPlus V1.01, Bruker, Germany). The chemical functional groups of the samples were characterized using Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR; TENSOR 27, Bruker, Germany) in the wavelength range of 400-4000 cm To fabricate bone grafts for this study, 2 g PVA (Mw: 89,000–98,000 g/mol, 99% hydrolyzed, Sigma-Aldrich, USA) was dissolved in two flasks containing 100 mL of distilled water and homogenized at 97 °C for 1 h using vigorous stirring on a magnetic stirrer to obtain the PVA hydrogel. When the volume of mixture was reduced by more than 50% due to the water evaporation, 2 g of bacterial HA mixed powder (i.e. cHA and Zn-Mg-HA mixed in 1:1 wt.% ratio to obtain biological HA powder containing CO  To determine the tibial bone repair by the implanted grafts and to depict the computed tomography (CT), radiographic analysis was conducted using 2200 X-ray System (Eastman KODAK, USA) after 2, 3 and 4 weeks of implantation and the areas of bone regeneration in the defects were quantified using the ImageJ software. For evaluation of the graft morphology and bone mineralization at the site of implantation, the animals were euthanized 14, 21 and 28 days after implantation. The samples from the same graft/bone tissue areas were collected for the histological and SEM-EDX analyses. Histological assessments were carried out using decalcification and dehydration method formerly reported by Rabiei et al. The bacterial HA powder samples were collected after 8-9 days of biomineralization reaction. Further details about the ALP activity, mineralization process and powder samples are given in supplementary data file, Figure S1 and Table S1. XRD patterns of the cHA, Zn-Mg-HA and control HA powders with two structural phase composition of hydroxyapatite (HA) and tricalcium phosphate (TCP) are displayed at the 2θ range of 10° to 90° in The FTIR spectra of cHA, Zn-Mg-HA and control HA with all characteristic absorption peaks are shown in The SEM micrographs ( The obtained EDX spectra (   The result of EDX analyses in the interface of the grafts before and after 4 weeks of implantation are summarized in The bacterial synthesized HA powders showed appropriate characteristic structural phases. A single phase nanostructured HA in the cHA sample was successfully synthesized at room temperature and stabilized by calcination at 600 °C ( As shown in the SEM and DSD results in Regarding the EDX spectra (  Notably, incorporation of zinc and magnesium in nHA structure, increases ALP activity, improve the host bone healing, and modulate the undesirable inflammatory responses and bacterial infections. In this research, PVA was selected among the biodegradable polymers because it has recently gained attention due of its characteristics in the osteoblast cells activation and ossification enhancement. It should be noted that although the amount of each material in the grafts can be tailored, lacking of bone tissue-control graft integrity and healing of bone lesion, even after 4 weeks, indicated that the type of HA particles play a key role in ossification. On the other hand, the osteogenesis was greatly enhanced using the CZM-HA graft, since both cHA and Zn-Mg-HA with lower particle size were produced by bacterial ALP through the reaction similar to the bone mineralization process. Moreover, ossification of CZM-HA graft in this short period of time indicates the high biological activity of the bacterial synthesized nHA. In the EDX spectra of the grafts ( In conclusion, the present work demonstrated the feasibility of producing a bone graft substitute with excellent properties for short time bone repair made of bacterial synthesized carbonate HA and Zn-Mg incorporated HA powders and PVA. The fabricated grafts were investigated during The authors wish to thank Mr. Morteza Amjadi (MPI-IS) for the proof reading of the manuscript. The following is the Supplementary data to this article. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at