YAG precursors were synthesized via a surfactant-free co-precipitation method using ammonium hydrogen carbonate as precipitant. The effect of final pH on Y/Al molar ratio was investigated. Moreover, the effects of excess aluminum ion content on the phase evolution and characteristics of YAG powders synthesized at pH value of 8 were explored. The chemical composition of the precursor, the phase transformation process and the characterization of the products were investigated by means of ICP, XRD, FTIR, TG-DTA, BET, FESEM, TEM and EDX analysis. The results showed that relatively high Y/Al ratio reduced the kinetics of YAG transformation and decreased homogeneity of the precursor while low Y/Al ratio did not alter the process features. Pure YAG nanopowders with particles mean diameter of 45nm were obtained by calcination at 1000°C for 2h, with the addition of 15% mole of the excess aluminum source at pH value of 8.Yttrium aluminum garnet (Y YAG single crystals are conventionally produced by Czochralski growth technique. This method is however recognized to be relatively pricey and almost impossible to dope more than 1% of rare-earth metal (such as Nd) as a luminescence agent. Hence, an attention is focussed to fabricate poly-crystalline YAG ceramics with similar optical properties to those of single crystals A formal method for the making YAG poly-crystals is the solid-state reaction of the stoichiometric mixture of aluminum and yttrium oxide powders. The solid-state reactions, however, intrinsically involve extensive heating at relatively high temperature (> 1600 Precipitation is the most favorable technique among wet chemical methods because of its various advantages such as low-cost mass production of precursors in water rather than in organic substances as reaction medium such as ethylene glycol, butanediol and ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) which are used by solvo-thermal, sol-gel, polymeric spray pyrolysis, etc. The properties of the resulted product such as phase purity, particle size and agglomeration degree are associated to the process parameters. These interdependent parameters include type of precipitant Besides, the use of electrostatic or steric surfactants such as (NH A relatively high pH value (higher than 8) is required to ensure homogeneity and uniform distribution of the Al In this research, production of pure YAG at relatively high final pH value (> 8) and at different excess Al Yttria (Y Yttrium oxide was dissolved in 1 To investigate the effects of ending pH value on the changing of cation ratio, dissimilar precursors were produced by the halting of the titration process at different pH values of 5, 6, 7 and 8. In an innovative work, to recognize the effect of excess aluminum on the purity of the ultimate products, a variety of an Al X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were taken on a Bruker D8 advance X-ray diffractometer with Cu Kα (λ =0.15406 The pH values of the suspensions before and after 1 The pH value of the suspension was put on 8 and the effect of aluminum ion content on the YAG formation was explored. The samples and respective excess Al   In order to study the effects of excess Al As can be seen in According to The comparison between calcination process for pure YAG formation of the present work and that of other studies may demonstrate useful points.  Regarding these results, unlike the precursor of S6 and the sample synthesized at pH = 5, the S1 precursor crystallized which may be belonged to phase segregation. Li et al. examined the crystallization of aluminum compounds in the form of ammonium dawsonite when separated from yttrium compounds The sample S6 and the sample synthesized at pH=5 demonstrated almost similar phase evolution trends in which YAG phase was directly crystallized. However, the slow phase transformation kinetics of S1 (similar to solid-state reaction For better assignment of the observations, aluminum and yttrium solutions were separately precipitated at the pH value of 8. It was observed that the suspension of Y To study the thermal decomposition and crystallization behavior of the S1 and S6 precursors, simultaneous TG and DTA analyses were carried out. The TG/DTA curve of the sample S1 and S6 with are shown in It should be noted that the Al For the sample S6 ( The diffuse peak of YAG formation in S6 was shifted to the lower temperature (1000 For pure YAG precursor, TG curve point outs a total mass loss of 44.5% as shown in In the pH value of 5, a gel-like suspension created which could hardly be stirred. This is due to the presence of AlOOH precipitates. On the other hand, comparatively high concentrations of AHC (more than 2 Yttrium cations may possibly precipitate as hydroxide (Y(OH) By considering n = 3 in the yttrium carbonates formula  The peaks located at 1530, 1460 and 1390  While pure YAG phase with appropriate Y/Al ratio was formed by calcination of S6, the characteristics of S6 powders calcined at different temperatures were surveyed. The average particle size of the samples (D The more N value is nearer to unity, the weaker agglomeration of the powders The results show that an increase in the particle size and a decrease in the surface area by increasing calcination temperature. Moreover, agglomeration gets heavier by the increase in calcination temperature. As the constituting phase of the powders calcined at 900 YAG nano particles were prepared by the facile co-precipitation method using AHC as precipitant and mixed aluminum and yttrium nitrate solutions. According to the results, the solving and release of aluminum precipitates at final pH values (after 1