Patients older than 55 years presenting with acetabular fractures fulfilling the criteria for acute total hip arthroplasty (THA) were included. Cementless THA was done using the Octopus System and autologous bone grafting. 15 patients were available for latest follow up. The average follow-up was 81.5months (62–122months). Mean Harris Hip Score was 91.1. 10 patients were walking without any support while 5 were using a cane. There were no cases of acetabular or femoral component loosening. This method of treatment is promising in the older population as there is deficiency of bone stock which may lead to fixation failures. It is, therefore, worthwhile to recommend primary THA using the Octopus system in the successful management of selected types of acetabular fractures in the elderly.Open reduction and fixation are the treatment of choice for displaced acetabular fracture(s) following injury/trauma, while total hip arthroplasty (THA) in selected cases has a definite role. The major indications for THA are secondary arthritis and avascular necrosis of femoral head. Moreover, post-traumatic hip arthritis is known to occur even after the restoration of acetabular stock with minimal deformity In all 18 elderly patients of acetabular fractures, from May 2000 to July 2005 fulfilling the criteria ( Of the 18 patients only 15 were available for the follow-up. Their age group varied from 57 to 69 The posterior approach was the mainstay for THA. The femoral head was dislocated in the first instance, after which the acetabular fracture was fixed with screws and/or 3.5-mm reconstruction plates. The femoral head was used as a structural graft in case of a major peripheral acetabular defect due to severe comminution. The reconstructed or grafted acetabulum was then reamed to produce a consistent hemispherical dome, and the trial acetabular ring was used to assess the ideal position of the three legs of the Octopus ring. The inferior leg was engaged in the obturator foramen using the hook positioner. The ring positioner was then used to orient the ring in 45° of abduction and 15° of anteversion. The superior legs were contoured to match the patients’ anatomy and to fit any reconstructed acetabular anatomy. After contouring the legs of the trial ring, the definitive acetabular ring was matched with it fully. The definitive ring was placed over the prepared acetabulum, and fixed with cancellous screws through the fixation holes. The morselized bone grafts, taken from the head of femur were impacted to fill any contained defects. The acetabular shell was fixed to the ring with four connecting screws. A trial liner — standard or lateral offset, which lateralizes the center of rotation of head by 2.8 The patients were mobilized after 48 Post-operative complications were recorded. The patients were regularly evaluated clinically and radiologically after surgery at an interval of 6 Of the 18, one patient was lost to follow-up, while 2 of them died of unrelated causes. The remaining 15 patients were evaluated for an average period of 81.5 Two post-operative patients had superficial infections, which healed following administration of antibiotics. There were no post-operative neurological complications. One patient had a history of pre-operative sciatic nerve injury, which during the latest follow-up had shown only partial recovery. Moreover, sciatic nerve was found to be apparently intact during surgery. There was one case of post-operative dislocation, which had occurred after 6 All the patients were able to walk independently at their latest follow-up. 10 patients were walking without any support, while 5 were using a cane in the hand. At the last follow-up, Harris Hip Score was recorded for each patient. The score was excellent in 10, good in 3, while fair in the remaining 2 patients. The mean score was 91.1 with a range of 72 to 97. 12 patients had pain-free hip movements while 3 had slight pain on walking, and were walking with a slight limp. Bone graft was found to be incorporated completely in all the patients. Though a difficulty was experienced in assessing for any radiolucent lines for the acetabulum due to the cage, there was neither any apparent osteolysis around the acetabular component, nor was there any medial migration or any change in the angulation of the component ( Primary total hip arthroplasty in elderly patients having acetabular fractures is the mainstay of treatment in order to provide a stable hip with early pain free mobilization. Open reduction and internal fixation are the recognized treatment of displaced acetabular fractures in youngsters, however, they are not successful in the elderly In the current study, the Octopus System was used with the objective of achieving a stable construct rather than attempting anatomical reduction of the fracture. The fracture was also stabilized with the screws passing from the acetabular ring holes. Any fracture gaps were filled with the morselized graft taken from the femoral head. It ensured that the centre of rotation was correctly positioned, and aligned relative to Shenton's line. Moreover, the construct offered initial stability, whereas long-term stability was provided by integration of hydroxyapatite (HA) coating on the acetabular shell with the host bone. Initial stability of the system allowed the patient to weight bear early, thus avoiding the complications related to the recumbency. In addition the construct provides a large contact area between the implant and the host bone without intervening cement, thereby decreasing the chances of implant migration. Furthermore, it acts as a hemispherical plate to hold the acetabular fracture in place, and augments bone by protecting the bone grafts during revascularization, incorporation and remodeling. The durability of fixation and good results of the study in the mid term to long term were possible, because of osteo-integration of the host bone with HA coating of the shell. Posterior wall and column fracture pattern were found to be relatively easier to fix in this system in contrast to others. Interestingly, the comminution in the fracture did not pose any problem for achieving the stable construct as the multiple screw hole options in the acetabular ring helped to have a purchase in the normal bone. The ease and efficiency of performing the procedure were reflected in shorter operative time and lesser blood loss Good results have been reported with early THA, and the principal complication was post-operative dislocation in 3.5% In a study of 57 patients, Mears and Velyvis Tidermark et al. There have been a few studies using the Octopus system. The studies favored the use of the system in managing acetabular defects along with the use of bone grafts in the revision THA Conflict of Interest Statements