An iron ore mineral processing plant in Brazil treating Itabirite ore was assessed by sampling a circuit consisting of Wemco 144 mechanical cells, as part of the AMIRA P9P collaborative research project. This paper presents and discusses the results of entrainability, water recovery and quartz and hematite grades associated to hydrodynamic parameters. The results indicated strong correlation between water recovery and hematite losses which was intensified by the operating conditions of the circuit.
                  A potential alternative to reduce the hematite losses through entrainment and to increase quartz removal was to modify the traditional circuit design to treat rougher and cleaner/recleaner tails in different stages. In addition, the scavenger residence time must be matched to the quartz floatability. Changes to design and operation of these circuits are needed to sustain concentrate recovery and grade as iron ores become finer.Froth flotation is an important concentration process in the separation of quartz (SiO The typical feed to a flotation system applied in the cationic reverse flotation of quartz from hematite in the iron ore industry consists of particles in the size range between 10 Many studies have been done to investigate reagents for both collection of quartz and depression of iron oxides for the reverse flotation route (  The particles in the feed to the flotation process will have a distribution of flotation probabilities based on their properties. Studies by Entrainment of particles into the froth phase is another important factor in the performance of the flotation process, especially for fine particle recovery. Entrainment is the unselective entrapment of fine particles into the froth layer with the rising water ( It has been found that the entrained gangue recovery in a direct flotation operation is often proportional to the water recovery (     The entrainment is controlled by: water partition ( The work of Using this model, the recovery by entrainment was predicted as a function of the water recovery, as shown in The model further predicted that the recovery by entrainment for a particular particle size would generally increase as the air rate in the flotation cell was increased and would decrease with an increase in froth depth. This was also observed experimentally in the work of Industrial mechanical cells treating Itabirite ore were sampled as part of the AMIRA P9P collaborative research project, with the aim to evaluate the performance in each flotation stage and to investigate the influence of entrainment on hematite losses in iron ore reverse flotation. Cell hydrodynamic measurements were also carried out during the survey.  The product of the desliming stage was the fresh feed of the mechanical flotation circuit, comprising 5 Wemco 144 cells in rougher duty, 2 Wemco 144 cells in cleaner duty, 2 Wemco 120 cells for recleaning and 2 individual Wemco 144 cells for the scavenger circuit. Rougher and cleaner tailings (froth products), apart from the tailing from the first rougher cell, were the feed to the first scavenger stage. Both scavenger concentrates (pulp products) and the tailings (froth product) from the recleaner were recirculated to the rougher feed. Recleaner concentrate (pulp product) was the final concentrate, with a target of less than 1.5% SiO The following data was collected from all concentrates (pulp) and tailings (froth) streams sampled during the survey: Percent of solids by mass Size distribution Global chemical analyses Chemical analyses per size The slurry mass flow rates of the froth products were also measured. The survey data was mass balanced using JKSimFloat. Recovery by entrainment was calculated from the balanced data using Eq. Bubble sizes and superficial gas velocities were measured using the Anglo American Platinum Bubble Sizer or APBS (shown in  Total recovery of Fe was 91.2%. Of the total Fe lost to the final tailing, 73% originated from rougher 1 tailing (6.45% of 8.8%) and the remaining 27% from scavenger 2 tailing. This result suggests the Fe losses to the final tailing could be reduced if rougher 1 tailing was processed in subsequent flotation stages, aiming to clean out a portion of the Fe primarily entrained into this tailing stream. Fine particles of hematite can be dragged to the froth layer by the ascending flux of water which overflows the flotation cell. The high content of Fe in the rougher 1 tailing can be related to the water recovery as shown in On a size-by-size basis there was a strong correlation between Fe recovery and water recovery from the rougher, cleaner and recleaner banks of the flotation circuit as shown in  The degree of entrainment for Fe in each size class was calculated using the empirical correlation with the water recovery for the rougher, cleaner and recleaner cells as per Eq. Rougher 1 tailing therefore had the highest Fe entrainment as a consequence of the highest water recovery and highest percent of <38 Several possible solutions exist to reduce the loss of Fe to the tailings and these are related to either cleaning the entrained Fe out of the froth or reducing the amount that is entrained in the first instance. In terms of managing water recovery, there are again several options. The amount of water recovered to the froth can be manipulated using reagents and cell operating conditions, and the circuit layout and cell and bank residence time can be managed. The gas rate and froth depth used have been shown to affect the amount of water recovered to the froth phase ( The flotation cells used in the circuit studied were self-aerated mechanical cells and the air rate was therefore a result of the cell operating conditions – impeller speed, submergence of rotor and pulp density. The gas dispersion characteristics measured using the APBS have been compared to others determined previously by Iron ore reverse flotation requires mass recoveries to the froth product in the order of 30–35% whereas traditional sulphide flotation concentrates the values into about 5% of the total mass. It is likely that the mechanical cells used in iron ore flotation have evolved to the conditions measured here (gas rate, froth depth) in order to ensure complete recovery of the SiO A study on the effect of the impeller speed on the hydrodynamic parameters is also recommended as the turbulence inside the flotation cell contributes to the recovery by entrainment. Subsequent flotation stages of the rougher tailings (froth) product will reduce the amount of entrained Fe in proportion to the number of froth cleaning stages. For example, the entrainability, Ent In order to reduce the amount of Fe that is entrained, the size distribution of the feed must be carefully controlled. On many industrial iron ore circuits the run-of-mine ore requires little or no crushing or grinding as there is a large amount of natural fines in the feed. However, the feed size distribution is therefore variable and the desliming stages need to be sufficiently flexible to prevent ultrafine material from reaching the flotation circuit. It has been noted that the selectivity of the iron ore reverse flotation process is dominated by the conflicting requirements of near-complete rejection of SiO Most of the Fe that is lost to the froth product is in the fine sizes, predominantly by entrainment with the water. The more water is recovered to the froth, the more Fe will be lost. Each subsequent stage of re-flotation of the pulp product will allow more Fe to be lost to the tail through the same mechanism but each stage of re-flotation of the froth product will reduce the Fe losses, provided that the volume of the cell is matched to the volumetric flow and floatability distribution of the material feeding it. The SiO A possible circuit configuration that could be used to reduce entrainment while maintaining SiO The SiO A complete survey of an industrial mechanical circuit for iron ore reverse flotation was done to investigate the reasons of Fe losses to the flotation tailings. The results indicated strong correlation between water recovery and Fe entrainment, especially for fine particles (<45 A potential alternative to reduce the Fe losses through entrainment and to increase Fe recovery to the pulp is to treat rougher and cleaner/recleaner tails in different stages and to reduce the residence time of the first scavenger to retain as much of the Fe in the concentrate as possible. The residence time of the second scavenger must be sufficient to be able to re-float the medium and slow floating SiO The authors acknowledge the support and funding of