High gangue entrainment is a major problem in fine particle flotation. In this study, the entrainment of kaolinite Q38 in flotation was examined in tap and saline water. High molecular weight polyethylene oxide (PEO) was used to reduce the entrainment of kaolinite Q38 by enlarging the size of kaolinite particles in flotation. It was found that PEO reduced the entrainment significantly in flotation using tap water, but in saline water, the effect of PEO was less pronounced. The aggregation behaviour of kaolinite Q38 particles in the absence and presence of PEO and its effect on the entrainment of kaolinite Q38 were studied by the in-situ measurement of flocs and the size of enlarged particles, settling tests and the measurement of froth stability in flotation. It is interesting to find that PEO did flocculate kaolinite Q38 particles and enlarge their sizes in flotation despite high agitation. However, the reduction of the entrainment of kaolinite Q38 in flotation was dependent on the type of flocs formed and froth stability which can be modified by electrolytes in water and a high addition of PEO.Flotation which exploits the difference in wettability on valuable and gangue mineral surfaces, is an important technology to concentrate minerals. However, flotation becomes more and more difficult as a result of the need to treat fine and ultrafine mineral particles. One challenge in the flotation of fine and ultrafine mineral particles is the high gangue entrainment resulting in low concentrate quality. Fine hydrophilic gangue particles are easily dragged by the interstitial liquid film between air-bubbles and enter the froth layer with liquids in flotation, resulting in mechanical entrainment. It is the primary recovery mechanism for gangue, especially fines Trahar Clay minerals usually occur at less than 2 Besides clay minerals, saline water that has been widely used in mineral flotation plants as a result of the scarcity of fresh water may cause the high entrainment of fine gangue minerals in flotation. It is well documented that many salts inhibit bubble coalescence Research carried out by Cao and Liu Over the last several decades, polymeric flocculants have gained wide use in thickening and dewatering for solid–liquid separation processes in the mining industry because they can bond colloidal particles together to form sediment flocs In this study, Particle Vision Measurement (PVM) and Focused Beam Reflectance Measurement (FBRM) instruments were installed in the flotation cell to measure the enlarged size of clay minerals by PEO under dynamic flotation conditions. In the previous studies, the enlarged size was measured ex-situ and then correlated with the decrease in gangue mineral flotation recovery. This does not reflect the true size that necessitates the reduction of fine gangue entrainment in flotation. This study will provide a guideline to apply in-situ measurements of PVM and FBRM and polymeric flocculation in flotation to reduce fine gangue mineral entrainment in industry practice. Kaolinite Q38 was purchased from Sibelco Australia Limited Company, South Australia. Quantitative XRD analysis shows that kaolinite Q38 contains 85 PEO with a molecular weight of 8 million was purchased from Sigma–Aldrich. The fresh stock solution of PEO was prepared at a concentration of 1 Batch flotation of kaolinite Q38 was conducted by using a 1.5 Particle Vision Measurement (PVM, model PVM 800, Lasentec Inc., USA) and Focused Beam Reflectance Measurement (FBRM, Lasentec D600L) instruments were installed in the flotation cell to measure the size and morphology change of the enlarged clay particles by polymeric flocculants. They are able to measure particle sizes in the range of 0.25–1000  Settling tests were conducted with 4 The froth was measured by using VisioFroth software developed by Metso Minerals Cisa. The camera was set up above the flotation cell and connected with a laptop. The measurement area was 11 Flotation tests were conducted to determine the entrainment of kaolinite Q38. Since kaolinite Q38 is not hydrophobic, its recovery in flotation was considered through entrainment.  In saline water, however, the reduction of kaolinite Q38 entrainment by PEO was less evident. As shown in In a separate study, FBRM and PVM were employed simultaneously to directly investigate the evolution of floc sizes and shapes under agitation in flotation. The images generated by PVM were used to create a comparison for the chord length data provided by FBRM to help understand the PEO flocculation behaviour and its relationship with the reduction of kaolinite Q38 entrainment in flotation.  At 10 To make a comparison, 20, 50 and 100 The tracking mean chord length in tap water shared a similar trend in saline water. By comparing the endpoint distributions following breakage and dispersion, it was found that the addition of PEO made the size of kaolinite Q38 particles enlarged to some extent in flotation at the final point, which favours the reduction of kaolinite entrainment. A higher PEO amount rendered a greater endpoint mean chord length. However, 50  The measurement of floc formation induced by PEO indicates that PEO has the capability in enlarging the size of kaolinite Q38 particles in both tap and saline water with a similar endpoint mean chord length. However, in saline water, the reduction of kaolinite entrainment by PEO was less pronounced. The reason was examined further below. Ideal kaolinite is composed of a layer of Al–OH octahedral associated with a layer of Si–O tetrahedral, where the basal surface carries a permanent pH-independent negative charge, while the edge surface possesses a pH-dependent charge It is interesting to note that saline water made kaolinite Q38 particles settle even slower than tap water at the same measured time as is confirmed quantitatively by the settling rate indicated in A similar trend was observed when PEO was added in the kaolinite Q38 suspension. As shown in However, settling tests do not consider the shearing encountered in flotation. In flotation, flocs formed by PEO were broken to smaller pieces as a result of shearing ( In flotation, gangue entrainment is also dependent on froth stability besides the particle size. Smaller-bubbled and more stable froth is likely to cause higher gangue entrainment This study indicates that when PEO is used to reduce the entrainment of kaolinite Q38 in flotation by enlarging the size of clay particles, the modification of froth stability by PEO and saline water should be considered as well. Both saline water and a high PEO addition increase froth stability and may mitigate the capability of PEO in reducing the entrainment. High entrainment of kaolinite Q38 occurred in flotation. The entrainment was higher in saline water than in tap water, resulting from higher buoyancy of saline water, less compact aggregation structures of kaolinite particles and more stable froth induced by saline water. The addition of PEO in flotation reduced the entrainment of kaolinite Q38 significantly in tap water as a result of the formation of flocs by particle bridging. A high PEO addition (200 The authors greatly appreciate financial support from