Electrodeposition of zinc in the sodium hydroxide solutions on a stainless steel cathode was systematically investigated by means of cyclic voltammetry, chronoamperometry and chronopotentiometry in this paper. It was revealed that the deposition process was controlled by mass transport, and the diffusion coefficient of Zn(OH)4
                     2− ions was 3.22×10−6
                     cm2/s. Meanwhile, the cathode process was studied at different potentials as well. It was the charging process of electrochemical double layers at potential in a range from −1.1V to −1.4V (vs. SCE). However, nucleation and diffusion of Zn(OH)4
                     2− ions were the dominating processes at potential from −1.47V to −1.56V (vs. SCE). The nucleation process was promoted, and the steady diffusion current improved with the increasing potential. Remarkably, the hydrogen ions were reduced fiercely on cathode at −1.7V and −1.8V (vs. SCE). Furthermore, the current efficiency was also discussed at different electrowinning times and current densities. An energy waste period was found at the beginning of electrowinning, which was caused by hydrogen evolution, and the current efficiency increased to the maximum (current efficiency peak) slowly at 500A/m2. Nevertheless, the results showed that the current efficiency peak was highest and it was fastest to reach the peak when the applied current density was near the limiting diffusion current density, 95.7A/m2.There is a huge demand for zinc due to its wide application in the fields of automobile, construction, marine, battery and light industry, so any effective progress will bring great economic profit. Generally, there are two main kinds of sources for zinc industry. Zinc sulfide ore can be easily separated from gangue and upgraded by flotation, whereas its reserve is now on the edge of depletion. As the secondary mineral, zinc oxide ore has been paid close attention and extensive works have been done to deal with this low-grade ore. For example, it can be upgraded effectively by volatilization, but the heavy pollution and high capital investment problems are associated with this process ( In the last few years, many researchers tried to seek an efficient leaching agent, and alkaline solution (sodium hydroxide) was considered to be a viable option ( Currently, more than 80% amounts of zinc are produced by electrowinning, which is one of the key processes to maximize the factory benefit. It has been reported that the best specific energy can be 1.75 In the present work, we investigated the electrodeposition behavior of zinc in sodium hydroxide solutions on the stainless steel cathode by means of cyclic voltammetry, chronoamperometry and chronopotentiometry. In order to optimize the electrowinning conditions, a series of experiments were carried out with different operating parameters. Besides, some detailed discussions on the cathode process and current efficiency were also included in this study. The present work could give guidance on the practical zinc electrowinning from alkaline solution. All chemicals used in this research were analytical reagent grade. The solutions were prepared with deionized water. The cathode products were washed by ethyl alcohol. The zinc oxide ore (purchased from Lanping town in Yunnan province of China) was ground to less than 150 In order to research the zinc electrodeposition behavior, electrolyte was prepared according to the experimental design and a three-electrode system was employed. The stainless steel working electrode with an area of 1 In the electrowinning procedure, the ore was calcined in a muffle furnace at 400 The current efficiency was calculated according to the following formula:  When the potential was swept towards the positive direction before the crossover potential at The cyclic voltammogram tests were carried out at different sweep rates of 10, 30, 50, 70 and 90 Zinc ions exist in the form of Zn(OH) For this mass transport controlled process, the diffusion coefficient of Zn(OH)  In the concentration polarization system, when the concentration gradient reaches the maximum, the diffusion rate is the largest, and the diffusion current density is exactly the limiting current density of the steady state diffusion process. This limiting diffusion current density ( The electrodeposition of zinc in the electrolyte containing 10 Potential is a crucial factor in the cathode process. At low potential from − In the present system, concentration polarization is considered to be the rate-determining step. There is an energy waste period that the current efficiency increases to the peak slowly at 500 This work was financially supported by the