Lentil contains substantial amount of protein, carbohydrate, fiber and other nutrients like folate and iron but their bioavailability and utilization by human is relatively low and less explored, this is due to the presence of various antinutritional factors such as trypsin inhibitor, phytic acid and tannins. The present study was aimed to evaluate the physicochemical and sensory properties of extruded product by using response surface methodology (RSM), effect of different moisture content in raw material and the temperature of extrusion processing on the inactivation of these antinutritional factors in lentil. The attempts were also made to assess in vitro protein and starch digestibility. The die temperature has been varied from 140 to 180 °C with screw speed of 150–250 rpm at constant feed rate 16 rpm (340 g/min) and the feed moisture of the raw material was in the range of 14–22%. It was observed that extrsion was the best method to abolish trypsin inhibitors (99.54%), phytic acid (99.30%) and tannin (98.83%) without altering the protein content. Furthermore, it was also found that the associated thermal treatment was most effective in improving protein and starch digestibility (up to 89% and 96%, respectively) when it was compared with traditional thermal processes.Lentil ( In recent years, the demand for snacks with improved nutritional and functional properties has been increased. Among these, expanded product has gained preference among both consumers and producers ( Commercial lentil ( Proximate composition of lentil flour was determined in accordance with the Samples were prepared by adding calculated amount of distilled water to obtain the different desired moisture levels (14, 18, and 22%) and allowed to equilibrate for 24 h before extrusion process. The lentil flour was extruded in a co-rotating twin screw extruder (KETSE 20/40 Brabender GmbH and Co. KG, Duisburg, Germany) with four independent heating zones. Twin screw extruder has screw diameter of 2 cm and screw length of 40 cm (L/D ratio of 20:1). Screw speed range is up to 900 rpm. The die diameter was 4 mm and feed rate was kept constant at 16 rpm (20.4 kg/hr). The temperature during extrusion was adjusted according to the experimental design by using electric heaters. Extrudates were produced using temperatures in the range of 140–180 °C and three levels of screw speeds (150, 200 and 250 rpm). Temperatures for different zone were Conveying zone (95, 115 and 135 °C), Mixing zone (110, 130 and 150 °C), Cooking zone (125, 145 and 165 °C), High pressure zone (die) (140, 160 and 180 °C). The extrudates were cooled to room temperature, dried in tray dryer at 45 °C for 2 h, packed in polyethylene bags and stored in a desiccator till further analysis. The response surface methodology was applied using a central composite design (CCD) for three independent variables ( The results from the dependent variables were subjected to multiple regression analysis using design expert software 7.0.0 full version (Stat-Ease, Minneapolis, USA) and coefficients with p values below 0.05 were considered significant. Linear and quadratic models were tested to explain the influence of independent variables on the response variables, because in Response Surface Methodology, the relationship between these variables is unknown and, therefore, it is necessary to find an adequate approximation to the true relationship between the response and the independent variables. Overall expansion was calculated as the ratio of bulk (apparent) specific volume and true specific volume. As per the reported data, for expanded products bulk density is vital physical property of products as well as bulk density is very important quality attribute from the view of commercial production of extruded products. The bulk density was determined from 10 random measurements on the diameter (D, cm) and length (L, cm) of the extrudates using digital calipers, and the weight (m, g) was determined on an analytical balance. The bulk density was obtained from following formula ( The diameters of 10 extruded products were measured using Vernier calipers (Absolute Digimatic Caliper, Series-500, Innox, Japan). Expansion index of the samples was determined by dividing the average diameter of the products by the diameter of the die nozzle ( The porosity of extrudates was determined from the bulk and apparent volumes. Porosity was calculated using the equation: Extrudates were ground to powder and passed through the 60 mesh sieve for uniform size distribution. 2.5 g ground powder was suspended in 25 ml water at room temperature for 30 min, with intermediate stirring and then centrifuged at 3000 × g for 15 min. The supernatant was decanted into the reweighed evaporating dish and water was evaporated till constant weight to get dry solids. The WSI is the weight of dry solids in the supernatant expressed as a percentage of the original weight of sample where as WAI is the weight of residue obtained after removal of the supernatant per unit weight of original dry solids ( Hardness of the extrudate was determined using a Stable Micro System TAXT2i texture analyzer (Serial No.4650, TEE version no.2.64 UK) fitted with a 50 kg load cell. Ten samples of approximately 5 cm in length were placed transversally on a platform over a 1 cm thick metal sheet and penetrating perpendicularly by the probe (2 mm cylindrical) ( Phytic acid was extracted in lentil and extruded samples with 2.4% HCl (1:20 w/v). The obtained mixture was centrifuged at 17,300 g (Sorvalle1 RC-5B) for 30 min at 15 °C and the supernatants collected. Glass barrel Econo-columns 0.7*15 cm (Bio Rad Laboratories) were filled with 0.5 g of AG 1*4 anion-exchange resin to effect phytate purification. To assess total phytic acid content, the simple procedure based on the reaction between ferric chloride and sulfosalicylic acid was followed ( Condensed tannins were extracted with HCl:Methanol (1:100 v/v) for 7 h in lentil and extruded sample with mechanical stirring at room temperature and centrifuged at 5000 g at 15 °C for 15 min. Aliquots were immediately analyzed for tannin using the 0.5% vanillin assay ( Trypsin inhibitor was analyzed as described by The method of the Association of Official Analytical Chemists with some modifications ( A system consisting, 100 mg (0.1 g) dry and defatted samples incubated at 1.5 mg pepsin in 15 ml of 0.1N HCl at 37 °C for 3 h, neutralize with 7.5 ml 0.2N NaOH, Add 4 mg pancreatin in 7.5 ml phosphate buffer (pH 8) incubated for 37 °C for 24 h, then add 5 mg of TCA, centrifugate at 5000 rpm for 10 min. After that discard supernatant dry residue at 40–50 °C and carried out Microkjhaldal. The percent in vitro protein digestibility (IVPD) was calculated using the following equation. The in vitro starch digestibility (IVSD) was determined in flours (50 mg/ml of 0.2 M phosphate buffer, pH 6.9) after amylolysis with 0.5 ml of pancreatic amylase (1260 U/mg) suspension (0.4 mg/ml of 0.2 M phosphate buffer, pH 6.9) at 20 °C for 2 h according to the method of Ten trained students from food engineering department evaluated the extruded snacks for appearance, flavor, texture, taste and overall acceptability in triplicate. Panelists were instructed to eat and swallow each sample and rate the intensity of each attribute using a nine-point scale (1 = dislike extremely and 9 = like extremely) (ISO 11136:2014). The sessions were performed on the same day (with a minimum 2-h break between the sessions) at the sensory laboratory of the Food Engineering and Technology Department (Mumbai, India) designed in accordance with ISO guidelines ( The OE and BD of the extrudates varied between 1.98 to 4.26 and 0.1218 to 0.3864 respectively as shown in From ANOVA, results show that the process variables, singularly or in combination, had a significant influence on the physical properties of extrudate ( The EI of extrudates describes the degree of puffing undergone by the material as it exits the extruder. Sectional EI considers expansion only in the direction perpendicular to extrudate flow, while BD considers expansion in all directions. Several researchers have demonstrated that the EI of extruded depends on the degree of starch gelatinization (  Air cells were created during extrusion giving expanded products with variable pore size and number. Porosity created during extrusion can be used to describe the expansion properties of the extruded products ( The extrudates exhibited WAI in the range of 2.1–4.1 shown in The corresponding second-order response model equation is, WSI measures the amount of soluble components released during extrusion ( Response model equation is, It was observed that the moisture content The effect of extrusion conditions on hardness is shown in The suitability of the model developed for predicting the optimum response values was tested using the recommended optimum conditions of the variables and was also used to validate experimental and predicted values of the responses. Data on phytic acid, condensed tannins and polyphenol contents of raw material (raw lentil seed) and extruded product at different temperature and different moisture are summarized in Extrusion cooking caused a significant reduction in phytic acid content compared to raw lentil as well as condensed tannins and polyphenols were also significantly reduced due to extrusion processing method. Thermal degradation of these molecules, as well as changes in their chemical reactivity or the formation of insoluble complexes, could explain the significant reduction of the antinutrients by thermal processing ( The effect of increase in extrusion temperature from 140 to 180 °C caused to decrease in antinutritional factors more than 93%, such as phytic acid upto 99.30% and tannin upto 98.83%. Also there is considerable change of total polyphenol (upto 65%). Study also observed that, there was significant change occurred when moisture is increased from 14 to 22% during extrusion process. More moisture contain is resulted as high reduction of phytic acid, tannin and polyphenol as compare to less moisture which is shown in  There is also role of moisture content for the inactivation of trypsin inhibitor. From this study it is observed that, increase in moisture content during extrusion process caused the increase in removal of trypsin inhibitor.  An increase in IVPD was observed in extruded products compared to the other processing methods such as traditional cooking methods (ordinary cooking and microwave cooking). This can be related to the higher efficiency of this thermal treatment in reduction of trypsin inhibitory activities. IVPD and IVSD were increased upto 89% and 96% respectively. It was also observed that, there was significant effect of moisture on IVPD and IVSD, which increased with higher in feed moisture. That means higher the feed moisture used for extrusion process gave higher IVPD and IVSD. The sensory scores obtained for extrudates with different trial are summarized in The present studies show the ability of extrusion processing on reducing antinutritional factor such as phytic acid, tannin, trypsin inhibitor and total polyphenol levels and the efficiency of improving IVPD and IVSD. Extrusion caused the significant reduction of protein antinutritional factors and appeared to be the most effective process with improving both IVPD and IVSD. Further, it is revealed that lentil has a great potential for extrusion to produce ready-to-eat snacks with good acceptance. The physicochemical properties and sensory characteristics of lentil-based extrudate were highly dependent on process variables, feed moisture content, die temperature and screw speed. RSM was used to establish the correlation between these process variables, and physical properties of extruded product. It was proved that extrusion process increased nutritional value of extruded product due to the significant reduction in antinutritional factors. The overall best quality product was optimized and obtained at 18% moisture, 160 °C die temperature and 200 rpm screw speed. The sensory evaluation showed that the optimized extrudate was the most acceptable. Thus, results indicate that lentil may be the good candidate to be used as an industrial raw material for the production of extruded snacks with great nutritional value. Theauthors gratefully acknowledge