Two and three-dimensional field scale reservoir models of CO2 mineral sequestration in basalts were developed and calibrated against a large set of field data. Resulting principal hydrological properties are lateral and vertical intrinsic permeabilities of 300 and 1700×10−15
                     m2, respectively, effective matrix porosity of 8.5% and a 25m/year estimate for regional groundwater flow velocity.
                  Reactive chemistry was coupled to calibrated models and predictive mass transport and reactive transport simulations carried out for both a 1200-tonnes pilot CO2 injection and a full-scale 400,000-tonnes CO2 injection scenario. Reactive transport simulations of the pilot injection predict 100% CO2 mineral capture within 10years and cumulative fixation per unit surface area of 5000tonnes/km2. Corresponding values for the full-scale scenario are 80% CO2 mineral capture after 100years and cumulative fixation of 35,000tonnes/km2. CO2 sequestration rate is predicted to range between 1200 and 22,000tonnes/year in both scenarios.
                  The predictive value of mass transport simulations was found to be considerably lower than that of reactive transport simulations. Results from three-dimensional simulations were also in significantly better agreement with field observations than equivalent two-dimensional results.
                  Despite only being indicative, it is concluded from this study that fresh basalts may comprise ideal geological CO2 storage formations.Reducing anthropogenic CO Great advances have been made in geochemical computer simulations in recent years and decades. Numerous geochemical computer codes have been developed, enabling scientists to peer underground and study the complex interplay of dissolved constituents and fluids by other means than are common in the laboratory. Initially, geochemical simulations involved time-independent equilibrium speciation of multi-component systems (e.g. In this article, we present development of two and three-dimensional field scale reactive transport models that simulate mass and reactive transport, along with the mineral alteration associated with injecting dissolved CO CarbFix (e.g.  The wellfield shown in A pilot gas separation station has been built next to Hellisheidi geothermal power plant. The pilot station will separate CO CO The injection site in Hellisheidi is outfitted with ten wells, whose location is shown in Wells HK-12, HK-25, HK-07 and HK-13 serve as monitoring wells and only penetrate the 5–10 Numerical modeling plays an important role in the CarbFix project as it provides tools to predict and optimize long-term management of the injection site as well as to quantify the amount of CO TOUGH2 (   Two slug type tracer tests have been carried out at the injection site since 2007 with the objective of studying regional hydrology in the area and seeing if tracer dispersivity could identify reservoir flow type (fracture or matrix) within the storage formation. When the primary rock comes in contact with the injected weakly acidic, carbonated fluid, dissolution reactions occur, leaching cations out of the rock matrix. As dissolution reactions proceed, protons are consumed, the pH of formation fluids increases, and concentration of leached cations builds up. At certain concentrations, the water becomes supersaturated with respect to secondary minerals like carbonates, which begin to precipitate. The efficiency of this reactive chemical transport is highly sensitive to the surface area available for water-rock interaction. Natural analogs provide important insight into the secondary mineralogy associated with CO In this study, two and three-dimensional models of the CarbFix injection site were developed (models V, VI, VII, VIII and IX in Stratigraphy of the CarbFix model is based on the conceptual model shown in Reaction induced matrix permeability changes are calculated from changes in porosity using ratios of permeabilities calculated from the Carman–Kozeny relation (  Initial water composition of all model elements at time zero is that of well HN-01 in Hellisheidi, which is given in Dissolution and precipitation of all minerals except allophane, Al(OH) Forsterite, albite and diopside dissolution data from Rate constants of all primary minerals and glasses were reduced by 3 orders of magnitude, as simulations with the reported rate constants gave way too rapid dissolution during preconfiguration of model VI in Rate law parameters for moganite and quartz were taken from Mineral reactive surface areas in the subsurface are generally unknown. In the current study, reactive surface area of primary minerals and glasses was assumed to be 20 When the aqueous phase supersaturates with respect to a certain secondary mineral, a small volume fraction of 1 Simulations carried out in this study can roughly be divided into two categories. First, is pure hydrological and tracer recovery modeling aimed at determining primary reservoir properties such as porosity and permeability (model VI in The numerical models were allowed to reach natural state flow by running no injection/production simulations for 10,000–100,000 Hydrological properties of the storage formation were calibrated using iTOUGH2 ( Reactive chemistry was coupled to the calibrated hydrological model and TOUGHREACT used for predictive reactive transport simulations. The TOUGHREACT simulator solves the same fluid and heat flow equations as iTOUGH2 but also solves equations describing chemical reactions. Simulations were carried out in two (models VII and IX) and three dimensions (model VIII) and involved the pilot injection test as well as a full-scale injection of all CO In simulations of the pilot CO Mass transport simulations, equivalent to the reactive transport simulations described above, were carried out in order to identify the difference between aqueous concentrations in mass transport and reactive transport simulations. The mass transport simulations only involve mass and heat transport but do not take chemical reactions into account. Dissolved CO Calibration of the hydrological field model (V) with field data resulted in horizontal permeability of lava flows to be 300  As calibrated hydrological parameters of the storage formation predict groundwater velocity to be low (25 The current version of the TOUGHREACT code only allows for single central processing unit (CPU) simulations, which causes difficulties in field scale reactive transport simulations due to the computational requirements of such simulations. Three dimensional mass transport and reactive transport simulations of the 10  In the case of the pilot injection, three-dimensional reactive transport simulations predict the CO  Dimensionality effects were studied by comparing HCO   Initially, all primary phases dissolve and hydroxides, carbonates and silicon oxides precipitate as the system evolves to its inherent state. Plagioclase and basaltic glass dissolution gradually increases throughout the simulation time, whereas dissolution of pyroxene and olivine levels out. After 5 The abundance of simple hydroxides and SiO Calcite precipitation is most abundant below 500  Basaltic glass dissolution is not observed until after 1 The reactive transport simulations carried out in this study indicate in situ CO Anthropogenic CO Simulated alterations are in agreement with observations from natural analogs. Initial alteration minerals include those commonly found in the CarbFix reservoir at Hellisheidi, which are typical for water–basalt interaction at low CO  Extensive monitoring during and after the CO The current study indicates how reactive transport models can be used for deepening understanding of subsurface processes associated with CO Large uncertainties are generally associated with reactive transport modeling, in part due to uncertainties in laboratory measured values, but also due to significant differences between values measured in the field and those measured in the laboratory. Often one must thus accept significant uncertainties in parameters describing permeability, diffusivity, reactive surface area and mineral dissolution/precipitation rates. Hence, it follows that the results of reactive transport calculations can have uncertainties as high as several orders of magnitude. Much of this uncertainty can, however, be overcome by obtaining extensive and specific system and/or site specific physical and chemical parameters, as was done in the current study. A better understanding of reaction mechanisms, and in particular precipitation mechanisms, is an important factor in decreasing uncertainties associated with reactive transport modeling. Discrepancies between rates measured in the laboratory and those measured in the field also need to be further identified. Information on reactive surface areas in the field is also scarce, and often difficult to measure, as it changes with time due to chemical reactions. A series of modeling studies has been carried out with the objective of quantitatively studying CO Predictive numerical modeling results guide in decision making, indicating, e.g. that it is feasible to pump downstream observation wells in order to expedite recovery of the injected carbonated water. Thereby, the planned pilot CO The predictive value of mass transport simulations was found to be considerably lower than that of equivalent reactive transport simulations as injected CO Despite being only indicative it is concluded from this study that relatively fresh and glassy basaltic formation of high porosity may comprise ideal conditions for geological storage of CO We are grateful to Bergur Sigfússon, Einar Gunnlaugsson, Gretar Ívarsson, Gunnar Gunnarsson and Ingvi Gunnarsson at Reykjavík Energy for helpful discussions and support throughout this work. We also thank Karsten Pruess, Nic Spycher and Stefan Finsterle at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Andri Arnaldsson at Vatnaskil Consulting Engineers, Andri Stefánsson, Helgi A. Alfredsson, Kiflom G. Mesfin, Sigurdur R. Gíslason and Snorri Gudbrandsson at the Institute of Earth Sciences at the University of Iceland, Martin Stute and Juerg M. Matter at Columbia University, Eric H. Oelkers at CNRS in Toulouse, and Gudni Axelsson and Gunnlaugur Einarsson at Iceland GeoSurvey. This work was funded by