Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE) is a heritable disorder characterized by mineralization of connective tissue, which leads to pathology in eye, skin and blood vessels. The disease is caused by mutations in ABCC6. To learn more about PXE eye pathology, we analyzed Bruch's membrane (BM) of the eye of an Abcc6 knockout mouse. With age, BM differences between Abcc6−/− and wild type mice became apparent. At two years of age, von Kossa staining indicated clear calcification of BM in Abcc6−/− mice, and not in healthy controls. Electron microscopy revealed BM changes as early as at 10 months of age: Fibrous structures with abnormal high electron-density were present in the central layers of BM of Abcc6−/− mice. EDX (Energy Dispersive X-ray) analysis demonstrated that these structures contained elevated levels of Ca, P and O. Since some of these electron-dense structures showed a banding pattern with periodicity of about 50 nm, they most likely represent calcified collagen fibers. Immunoelectron microscopy showed that the calcified structures were positive for collagen III. Remarkably, the elastic layer of BM appeared to have a normal ultrastructure, even in 2.5 year old Abcc6−/− mice. Our results suggest that Abcc6 deficiency in the mouse causes calcification of BM. While PXE is considered to affect primarily the elastic fibers, we found predominantly mineralization of collagen fibers.Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE) is a heritable connective tissue disorder with variable clinical expression, often involving the skin, eye and blood vessels ( PXE inherits in an autosomal recessive fashion ( Histopathology and ultrastructural analysis was done on several organs of PXE patients ( In the present study, we employed the This study adhered to the Statement for the Use of Animals in Ophthalmic and Visual Research. Generation and PCR-mediated genotyping of Eyes were prepared for analysis in various ways. For conventional transmission electron microscopy, mice were deeply anesthetized and perfused through the heart with a fixative of 2% glutaraldehyde, 2% paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M Na cacodylate buffer, pH 7.4. Next, eyes were postfixed in 1% OsO For light microscopy, 16 mice ( For Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) and for immunoelectron microscopy (IEM), we used 30 months old mice (2 For ultrastructural EDX analysis, we used LR White embedded eyes of 2 The following antisera were used for IEM: anti-elastin (rabbit polyclonal, kindly provided by Prof. R.J.A. Wanders, Department of Pediatrics, AMC, Amsterdam, The Netherlands), anti-collagen type III (Goat polyclonal, SBA (Southern Biotechnology Associates Inc.), Birmingham, AL). IEM was done on LR Gold sections using the protein A gold method, essentially as described before ( Situated between the RPE and the choriocapillaris, BM is a sheet of extracellular matrix composed of at least 5 layers: In the center is the elastic layer (EL), which is sandwiched between two collagen-rich layers (inner and outer collagenous layer, ICL and OCL) ( We used electron microscopy to analyze the BM of mice of 10–24 months old and noticed progressive differences between We stained cryostat eye sections for calcification using the von Kossa staining protocol. While no staining was observed in BM of eyes of one year old Next, we studied the mineral composition of Bruch's membrane at the ultrastructural level using EDX. We examined 250 nm thick sections that had not been counterstained with OsO In order to further investigate the identity of the calcified structures in BM, we performed IEM with antibodies against elastin and type III collagen, which are known to be present in the central layers of BM ( The anti-collagen III antibodies stained striated collagen fibers in BM (and choroid) ( In sections stained with antibodies against elastin, we found immunogold labeling on a discontinuous band of moderately electron-dense material, sometimes with a fine fibrous appearance, located roughly in the middle of BM. This band most likely represents the elastic layer of Bruch's membrane. Interestingly, in the 2.5 year old In this study, we examined the effect of Abcc6 deficiency on BM in the mouse. We noticed that BM of the The identification of calcium deposition was based on data from two experimental sources, i.e. histochemistry and EDX: Histochemistry showed that BM of old The exact nature of the calcium deposits was not clarified. A recent study suggested that the ectopic calcification of the connective tissue capsule of the vibrissae of the The identification of calcified fibers as collagen fibers is also based on two experimental techniques, morphology and immunoelectron microscopy. First, the ultrastructural EDX analysis showed that the calcified fibrous structures have a periodicity of about 50 nm. Periodicity is typical for striated collagen fibers and is not reported for elastin. In addition, distribution, orientation and size of the fibers agree with reported data on collagen fibers in the BM ( Secondly, immunogold labeling for collagen III identified the electron-dense structures as collagen fibers. The specificity of our staining was illustrated by the labeling of unaffected striated collagen fibers, readily identified on the basis of morphology, that were present in the same sections. Furthermore, similar staining for collagen III has been reported for striated collagen fibers in human BM ( The question as to whether also elastin calcifies in the BM of the In conclusion, in aged The most conspicuous ultrastructural aspect, especially at early stages, was the calcification of the striated collagen fibers in the central layers of BM. The collagen fibers showed an, apparent orderly encrustment of calcium deposits, leaving the periodicity of the collagen fiber still visible. This observation suggests that this ectopic calcification can start at the collagen fibril. Detailed reports of the ultrastructural appearance of PXE pathology in the Reports on PXE pathology in other human tissues (e.g. skin) revealed more details.  These observations on human biopsy material do not lend much support to our suggestion that the pathological calcification starts at the collagen fiber. This discrepancy may be caused by species or tissue differences. Of note, a previous electron microscopy study on Another remarkable finding of our study was the strong preference of calcification for the BM in the eye when compared to, for example, blood vessels of the choroid. Reports on donor eyes of PXE patients also described that the most severe connective tissue calcification was located in Bruch's membrane, with only mild collagen and elastin abnormalities in the choroid ( BM is unique in several aspects: e.g. its composition, its insulated position between two basal membranes, and the absence of cells ( Supported by a grant of