This work compares microstructural and strength properties of ultra-fine grained Al–2.5Mg alloy produced by multi-axial forging in a channel die at room and liquid nitrogen temperatures. The two ultra-fine grained microstructures after total equivalent strain of 2.3 exhibited similar grain sizes and orientation spread but significantly different respective strengths at room temperature. The difference in the strengths has been attributed to the higher dislocation densities in samples pressed at liquid nitrogen temperature. Dislocation densities were measured on the basis of average misorientations within grains measured using electron-back scattered diffractions.In the last two decades severe plastic deformation (SPD) has emerged as the most successful technique in producing ultra-fine grained (UFG) materials in bulk quantity. Severe plastic deformation techniques, namely, equal channel angle pressing (ECAP), accumulative roll bonding, high pressure torsion and multi-axial forging (MAF) have been the most successful because they can impose extremely large strains with ease without changing the dimensions of the sample significantly. The efficiency of refinement, however, may vary for different techniques due to different strain paths associated with them. In all these techniques, coarse grains are continuously sheared by various dislocation activities during SPD. However, grain refinement in all SPD techniques is limited as the efficiency of refinement decreases with strain. This results in a steady-state in grain refinement at very high strain values. The minimum grain size achieved during SPD is found to be related to the temperature and strain rate employed during processing Of several SPD techniques, MAF in a confined channel die (CCD) Commercial grade Al-2.5Mg alloy (AA5052) annealed at 500 The nominal true flow stress required to press a material in a CCD can be given by (   The above reported results confirmed that SPD deformation of alloys at LN2 temperatures imparted significantly more strength to AA5052 alloy though it did not produce microstructure different than that produced at RT. This study also confirmed that the yield strength of the alloy can be increased up to the order of 360 The observed difference in the yield strengths of RT-press and LN2-press samples could be explained on the basis of role of different elements in work-hardening a material. In general, yield stress, On the basis of above work, it could thus be concluded that SPD at cryogenic temperatures definitely offer another parameter in further enhancing the strength of a material. This enhanced strength, however, may not be from further decrease in the grain size and would rather be due to higher density of dislocations that the material would accumulate during cryogenic deformation. Authors wish to acknowledge the Head, Atomic Fuel Division for kindly providing AA5052 alloy samples used in the study. Authors are also grateful to Prof. I. Samajdar for EBSD measurements in his laboratory at IIT Bombay.