The zeta potential of bubbles generated by ultrasonication was determined for a range of frother types. At concentrations close to flotation practice (<20 ppm) the effect of frother was negligible. With increasing concentration (up to 100 ppm) F150 and pentanol decreased charge and MIBC and heptanol increased negative charge but the change remained small. An effect on bubble charge does not appear to contribute to the action of frothers, in particular the reduction in bubble size. The data are briefly discussed in light of models of bubble charging in water and in presence of non-ionic surfactants.Solid particles, gas bubbles, and organic droplets in aqueous solutions acquire a surface charge. Solid particles are the most studied and possible origins of the charge include adsorption of ions, preferential dissolution of constituent ions, and ionization of surface species ( The charge on a gas bubble surface may play a role in bubble coalescence and bubble attachment to particles, events encountered in many industrial processes such as mineral flotation, waste and potable water treatment ( Measurement of surface charge or zeta potential of gas bubbles faces the difficulty of introducing bubbles into a measurement cell and controlling buoyancy (  Some of the contributions in the past 20 years are summarized in The evidence, therefore, is that bubbles are negatively charged in water alone over most of the pH range. The mechanism involves a combination of orientation of the water molecule dipole at the surface ( Frothers are non-ionic surfactants, commonly alcohols and polyglycols, used in flotation to control (reduce) bubble size and provide some froth stabilization. Both these functions imply an impact on the properties of the air–water interface (bubble surface). And the question posed here is whether bubble charging plays any part. There is little information on the role of non-ionic surfactants on bubble charge. The orientation of the frother (polar groups to the water side, non-polar groups to the air side) and the tendency to order water molecules (via hydrogen bonding) around the polar group imply an effect ( There is no consensus as to the action of frothers in helping create small bubbles ( Addressing these possible roles of bubble charging was the motivation for this communication. But, regardless, the study fills a gap in the flotation literature. Based on the work of  Solutions were prepared with 10 Zeta potential of the (air) bubbles in water alone is recorded in   The frothers selected range from weak (pentanol) to strong (F150) in terms of the concentration required to reduce bubble size and provide froth stability. To compare the frothers we used the common practice of referring to the bulk concentration, in this case in ppm as a ‘practical’ measure (plus, the exact chemistry of commercial frothers is not always known). The immediate observation is that the presence of frothers has not altered the general trend in zeta potential with pH exhibited by water alone. The iep remained ca. pH 3 and did not vary significantly with frother type and concentration. Certainly at concentrations typical in flotation systems (usually less than ca. 20 ppm ( The observations that first motivated the study, therefore, do not appear to be related to an impact of frother on surface charge. If an electrostatic component was at play in retarding coalescence it would imply an increase in the negative charge on adding frother over that of water alone but this is not the case. As with salts, an electrostatic model in the bubble formation process is not supported ( While the ambition was not to probe frother uptake mechanisms an observation based on the work of At typical flotation dosages (< The work was supported under the Chair in Mineral Processing sponsored by NSERC (Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada), CVRD Inco, Xstrata Process Support, Teck Cominco, Shell Canada, Agnico-Eagle, Corem, SGS Lakefield Research, and Flottec.