A method is introduced to increase agglomerate strength in an agitated system during spherical agglomeration. Spherical agglomeration is a process wherein the particles of dispersion are held together in aggregates by liquid bridges. The use of surfactants to improve wetting of the particulates by the bridging liquid often leads to lower interfacial tension, and liquid bridges too weak to withstand the levels of agitation required to bring the particles together. The approach suggested herein involves the addition of crosslinkable polymers to the agglomerating agent and effecting gelation as liquid bridge form. The added mechanical strength thus compensates for the reduction in agglomerate strength caused by the wetting agent. The approach is tested in a proof-of-principle practical application, viz., deinking of toner-printed paper. For the cases examined, the gelation of the liquid bridges significantly improves the agglomerate strength, as inferred from measurements of the agglomerate size distributions as functions of time for shear rates commonly encountered in a separation unit. Times required for gelation and for attainment of a steady-state aggregate size distribution are reasonable for this application.Spherical agglomeration is a size enlargement process, which uses as an agglomerating agent, a liquid which is immiscible with the dispersion medium and which preferentially wets the dispersed particles. Liquid bridges are formed between the particles, which are then held together by capillary forces. The strength of the bridges of given size is proportional to the interfacial tension between the bridging liquid and the medium, but also depends on the rheology of the bridging liquid. Spherical agglomeration is used in such processes as granulation, balling, pelletization, tabletting, compaction, flocking, and sintering to produce, e.g., nuclear fuel pellets, ceramic powders, carbon blacks, catalysts, commercial fertilizers, pesticides, and pharmaceutical products An example of a situation in which a surfactant additive is required to effect spherical agglomeration is afforded by the process for deinking ordinary toner-printed paper The objective of this study was to perform proof-of-principle experiments, which explore the feasibility of strengthening agglomerates in a spherical agglomeration process by means of gelation of the liquid bridges. As an example system, aqueous slurries of toner particles were agglomerated at room temperature in the presence and absence of interfacial tension-lowering additives, cationic starch, and of gel-forming agents. The strength of the agglomerates was inferred from examination of the agglomerate size distribution as a function of shearing intensity and time. The process studied in this work involves the spherical agglomeration of aqueous slurries of toner particles with a bridging liquid at room temperature in the presence or absence of cationic starch and gel-forming agents. The bridging liquids in this study consisted of either a simple oil ( Prior to agglomeration experiments, gelation kinetics are determined as a function of the proportion of neutral oil and gel-forming agent. For the cases in which gelation occurs, the appropriate ratio of the bridging oil and gel-forming agent was selected so that gelation was effected near the time agglomerates typically form. The range of rotational rates used was made comparable to that typically encountered in practice. The toner (NP112-115) particles (Canon USA, Inc., Lake Success, NY) were obtained as unprinted toner powder of approximately spherical, 10–15 μm diameter primary particles. From the Material Data Safety Sheet, the predominant component was given as styrene-acrylate copolymer, which constituted from 55 to 65 wt.% of the toner while iron oxide constituted 35–40 wt.%. Toners with this makeup typically exhibit water advancing contact angle of 90–100° and a receding contact angle of approximately 60° The cationic starch used was STA-LOK 400 (A.E. Staley Manufacturing Co., Decatur, IL), a potato starch consisting of α-glucose units with trimethyl ammonium chloride grafted on the monomer units at a degree of substitution of 0.03 (three cationic groups per 100 glucose units). Its purpose in paper is to bind cellulose, fillers, and other additives together. The groups maintain a positive charge at all pHs and salt conditions In order to investigate if the gelation of liquid bridges is effective in enhancing agglomerate size enlargement under shear conditions, the behavior of pure oil was compared with that of 60/40 vol.% ratio of oil/gel-forming agent and that of 60/40 vol.% ratio of oil-surfactant blend/gel-forming agent. Analytical grade The gel-forming agent used in this study was Sylgard® 275 (Dow Corning Corp., Midland, MI). It is a two-part system comprised of Part A/Part B mixed in a 1:1 volume ratio. Vinyl fluid, catalyst, and filler constitute Part A, a black viscous liquid, while a vinyl fluid, crosslinker, and filler constitute Part B, a white viscous liquid. In Sylgard® 275, dimethylvinyl-terminated polydimethylsiloxane is chemically crosslinked by polymethylhydrogensiloxane and hydrogen-terminated polydimethylsiloxane by the hydrosilylation reaction depicted in Before agglomeration experiments were conducted, the appropriate ratios of pure oil (hexadecane in this case) and Sylgard® 275 was selected, based on the bulk gelation times. Sylgard® 275 Parts A and B were separately dispensed by a Mixpac® (MIXPAC Systems AG, Rotkreuz, Switzerland) into its own 50 ml Pyrex beaker. Mixpac® dispensed the two components in a 1:1 volumetric ratio. Desired volumes of hexadecane were then added to each beaker, and the contents from each beaker were mixed. Stirring commenced after a stir bar was introduced. Gelation time was then recorded when the stir bar ceased to rotate. For agglomeration experiments, the useful range of shear was produced at rotational rates from 900 to 2900 rpm. Lower rotational rates did not provide adequate mixing for agglomeration, while higher rates were considered unrealistic for typical agglomeration Once the desired shear rates had been determined, agglomeration experiments were started. Cationic starch (if used), deionized water, dispersed toner, and dispersed oil were combined resulting in a 200 ml dispersion with 0.039 vol.% toner and 0.035 vol.% oil. The total dispersion had either 0 or 1000 ppm cationic starch. Aqueous solutions of 1000 ppm cationic starch were prepared by boiling 1 wt.% dry starch in water for 30 min and diluting to obtain the right concentration. The oil could be The contents were immediately placed in a VirTis “23” Homogenizer (Virtis Corp., Gardiner, NY) for spherical agglomeration at room temperature (23°C). The vessel was a spherical-shaped glass capable of holding 250 mL, with five evenly spaced baffles protruding inward 0.5 cm. The insulated glass vessel was treated for runs without cationic starch with 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane to reduce the adhesion of oil and toner to its surface. A vertical shaft with four stainless steel blades provided agitation. An opposite pair of blades was located at the end of the shaft, and another opposite pair was mounted 1 cm above the end. The propeller-like blades directed flow downward along the shaft. Dimensions of each blade were 2 cm long×1 cm wide, rectangular with rounded corners, and angled 30° from the horizontal. At the end of each run, the contents in the vessel were poured onto a stack of three 12.5 cm diameter Ahlstrom Grade 601 filter papers (Ahlstrom Paper Group, Mt. Holly Springs, PA) and then air-dried for analysis. For runs with cationic starch, the contents were poured onto one 12.5 cm diameter filter paper. Images were taken by a MTI 65 video camera (DAGE-MTI, Inc., Michigan City, IN) attached to a WILD M420 Makroskop (WILD Heerbrugg Ltd., Heerbrugg, Switzerland). At a total magnification of 100×, the macroscope provided a 0.73×0.97 mm Observed gelation times for different volume ratios of hexadecane and Sylgard® 275 are presented in All runs yielded similar agglomerate size distributions, as shown in Agglomerate strength is the most important characteristic in any size enlargement process  In The agglomerate strength depends on interfacial tension, An additional agglomeration experiment was performed at the lowest shear rate to examine the agglomerate structure. Wet agglomerates were transferred from the VirTis mixing vessel to a coverslip chamber. Images were then taken using an Olympus IX70 Inverted System Microscope (Olympus America, Inc., Melville, NY) using differential interference contrast (DIC). The 10× objective was engaged to provide a 0.36×0.48 mm Gelation of liquid bridges increased the agglomerate strength for both the hexadecane and DI225 cases at all applied shear rates. Gelation of liquid bridges, however, was more effective at lower shear rates for the runs with hexadecane as the agglomerant. Although gelation increased agglomerate strength, the results suggested that wetting behavior of the agglomerant on the toner remains a major factor in the resistance to breakup forces. Because the gel formation was desired to be near the time agglomerates form, examination of the agglomerate size as agglomeration proceeds was required. This is presented in Since cationic starch or other cationic polyelectrolyte is added to paper as a retention aid, a significant amount redissolves during repulping stage The runs with Sylgard® 275 once more produced larger agglomerates than those corresponding runs without the effect of gelation. The increase in agglomerate size for DI225 was more significant than that observed for hexadecane. DI225's ability to engulf cationic starch adlayers allows the oil/Sylgard® 275 to wet the toner surface. Thus, the gel formation was allowed to occur to some extent during liquid bridge formation, which resulted in greater agglomerate strength to resist breakup at higher shear rates. The opposite situation could be visualized for hexadecane/Sylgard® 275. The gel-forming agent could not be effective during liquid bridge formation due to hexadecane's inability to overcome the cationic starch adlayers. This inability was apparent in the slight increase in the agglomerate size and the difficulty of determining the gelation time as shown in Gelation of liquid bridges at room temperature improved the agglomerate strength in spherical agglomeration for the systems investigated. Gelation was effective, however, only when the agglomerating agent was able to wet the particles of interest. Wetting of the toner by the agglomerating agent was essential to the development of agglomerate strength by allowing the gelation of the liquid bridges to be effected and controlling the eventual structure of the agglomerates. The technique required gelation to be effected near the time agglomerates typically form. Times for gelation and steady-state attainment were determined to be reasonable for the process of deinking toner-printed paper. In particular, the experiments reported herein have provided new insight into the process of spherical agglomeration and corroborate previous findings on the effect of agitation rate and cationic starch on agglomeration using a simple oil (hexadecane) or a commercial agglomerating agent, Hercules DI225. While both rely on liquid bridges at room temperature, DI225 had the combined advantage of better wettability of the toner while possessing greater viscous resistance to hydrodynamic breakup forces. Images of the wet agglomerate structure and the agglomerate size trends with respect to shear rates confirmed that this advantage resulted in a more compacted structure, tending to prevent breakup. Cationic starch greatly slowed the rate of agglomeration and reduced the ultimate size by blocking oil/toner coalescence, as reported in earlier work. In this work, it rendered the gelation process ineffective in the case of the simple oil because hexadecane could not wet the toner surface. The ability of DI225 to engulf the cationic starch adlayers, however, allowed Sylgard® 275 to wet the toner surface and to permit gelation during liquid bridge formation. As a result, agglomerates bound by DI225/Sylgard® 275 were twice as large than those bound by DI225. The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of the Engineering Center for Surfaces, Polymers, and Colloids at the University of Washington for financial support.