Diphonix resin was used to remove ferric iron from a cobalt sulfate solution. In the pH range of 0.5 to 2.5, the solution pH greatly affected the loading of cobalt while the loading behaviour of iron was little changed. Lower pH values and higher resin concentrations led to a higher separation factor between iron and cobalt. Iron was not eluted at all at low acid concentrations while 96% of cobalt was eluted with 30 g/L sulfuric acid. Addition of Ti(III) to the sulfuric acid eluant greatly enhanced the elution of iron even at low acid concentrations. Elution of iron with an eluant containing 4 g/L Ti(III) and 300 g/L sulfuric acid led to complete elution of iron at room temperature. It was found that the enhancement of iron elution with Ti(III) is due to the combined effects of reduction of Fe(III) and competitive adsorption of Ti(III) and Ti(IV) ions.Laterite ores represent about two-thirds of the worldwide resources of nickel and cobalt ( Although precipitation processes are still widely used for the removal of iron, solvent extraction and ion exchange are increasingly being employed for iron control ( Diphonix is a gel-type sulfonated mono-phosphonic acid resin developed by Eichrom and is used in the selective separation of metal ions from acidic solution ( In aqueous processing, various reducing agents, such as CO, H In this study, we have used Diphonix resin to remove iron from a cobalt sulfate solution. The optimum conditions for the separation of iron from cobalt were investigated by varying solution pH and resin concentration. Elution experiments with titanous sulfate solution were conducted to investigate the possibility of using this reagent as a reducing agent in the elution of iron. Stock solutions of iron and cobalt were prepared by dissolving Fe Batch loading and elution experiments were carried out at ambient temperature on a bottle roller using 250 mL screwed cap bottles. In loading experiments, 100 mL samples of synthetic solutions containing iron and cobalt were bottle rolled for 24 h with various amounts of Diphonix resin (  It is obvious that the extent of loading will increase with increasing pH. Hence, the loading capacity of Diphonix for iron at solution pH 2.0 is 15 times greater than in solutions containing 3 N H For loading experiments, a mixed sulfate solution containing 20 mg/L each of iron and cobalt was prepared and the loading behaviour was investigated by varying both the solution pH and the resin concentration. The loading of iron increased rapidly with increasing resin concentration. But the resin concentration at which iron was effectively completely loaded decreased as the solution pH increased from 1.0 to 2.5. Complete removal of iron was achieved for a resin concentration of 0.55 g/L at a solution pH of 2.5, while at pH 0.5, iron was not completely loaded.  A separation factor between iron and cobalt can be defined as Eq. When the resin concentration is lower than 0.4 g/L, it has a negligible effect on the separation factor regardless of solution pH. In the resin concentration range between 0.4 and 1.0 g/L, the separation factor increased especially at pH values of 1.0 and 1.5. The variation of separation factor with solution pH can be explained on the basis of the data in The loading behaviour of iron and cobalt at high cobalt concentrations was then investigated with a synthetic solution containing 50 g/L cobalt and 20 mg/L iron at a pH of 1.0. In these experiments, the mass of cobalt loaded on the resin was determined by eluting the loaded resin with sulfuric acid solutions. At the high cobalt concentration, the equilibrium loading is more appropriate for describing the loading behaviour of cobalt and Even under optimum conditions for the separation of iron and cobalt, some of the cobalt in the solution is loaded on the resin. Lowering of the pH would reduce the loading of cobalt but would also have an adverse effect on the loading of iron. In order to investigate the elution behaviour of iron and cobalt from the loaded resin, elution experiments were conducted in which the acidity of the eluant was increased. Aliquots of about 0.15 g of loaded resin (from the experiment at pH 2.5 with 1.5 g/L resin and 20 mg/L iron and cobalt) were bottle-rolled with 100 mL of various eluants. In order to increase the elution of iron, Ti(III) was added to the eluant as a reducing agent and elution experiments were conducted by varying the Ti(III) concentration at sulfuric acid concentrations of 100 and 300 g/L. The results in The following reactions can be used to describe the elution of iron with sulfuric acid solutions in the absence and presence of Ti(III) However, the standard reduction potential for the Ti(IV)/Ti(III) couple (Eq. Since the elution of iron from Diphonix resin is a slow process ( In further experiments with nitrogen-purged solutions, the effect of the acid concentration on elution with 2 and 3 g/L Ti(III) solutions was studied and the results are shown in In order to further investigate the role of Ti(III) in elution, experiments were conducted in which 0.2 g/L Ti(III) and Ti(IV) were added at various sulfuric acid concentrations. In the case of elution with Ti(III), nitrogen gas was purged into the solution. Loaded resin was prepared by contacting the resin with a 50 mg/L iron solution at pH 2.0 with a resin concentration of 1.9 g/L and the results are shown in The greater elution of iron with Ti(III) than Ti(IV) suggests that the reductive elution procedure is more effective than the simple competitive adsorption process involving Ti(IV). In concentrated acid eluants, competition between the proton and the titanium ions can be expected to reduce the effect of these ions on the elution of iron as evidenced by the reduced loading of these ions at high acid concentrations. The separation of small amounts of iron(III) as an impurity in cobalt sulfate solutions has been studied using loading and elution experiments with Diphonix resin. Equilibrium loading tests have confirmed that Diphonix had a strong affinity for iron(III) over cobalt. The pH of the solution has a significant effect on the separation of iron(III) and cobalt and from a mixed sulfate solution containing 20 mg/L iron(III) and cobalt. On the other hand, loading of cobalt from a concentrated solution of 50 g/L results in suppression of the loading of iron even at low pH values. Despite this, the loading of iron is adequate for its removal from concentrated cobalt solutions. Selective elution of the cobalt is possible with 96% cobalt eluted with 30 g/L sulfuric acid solution without any measurable elution of iron. However, the elution of iron is as low as 35% even in 300 g/L sulfuric acid solutions. Addition of Ti(III) or Ti(IV) to the eluant increased the elution of iron even at low acid concentrations. Close to 100% elution of iron can be achieved with an eluant containing in excess of 1 g/L Ti(III) and 300 g/L sulfuric acid at room temperature. Enhancement of the elution of iron with Ti(III) can be attributed to reduction of iron(III) and competitive adsorption of Ti(IV). This research was supported in part by Mokpo National University in Korea and by the Parker Centre.