An improved higher order zigzag theory is proposed for the static analysis of laminated sandwich plate with soft compressible core. The variation of in-plane displacements is assumed to be cubic for both the face sheets and the core and transverse displacement is assumed to vary quadratically within the core while it remains constant through the faces. The core is considered to behave as a three-dimensional elastic medium to incorporate the effect of transverse normal deformation. A computationally efficient 
                        
                           
                              C
                           
                           
                              0
                           
                        
                      finite element is also proposed for this model. Numerical examples of laminated composite and sandwich plate are provided for different thickness ratios and aspect ratio to illustrate the accuracy of the present formulation by comparing the present results with the three-dimensional elasticity solutions. Some new results are also presented. The performance of the present model is excellent in calculating displacements and stresses for a wide range of sandwich plate problems with transversely flexible core.Composite laminate and sandwich have been widely used to build large proportions of aerospace, underwater and automotive structures mainly because of their high strength-to-weight and stiffness-to-weight ratios. Laminated composite structures are made up of layers of orthotropic materials that are bonded together. The properties of a laminate can be tailored to meet specific design requirement by altering the material, or orientation, or both, of each layer. On the other hand, the sandwich construction is a special type of laminated structures in which the inner layers are replaced by low strength thicker core and the outer layers are high strength laminated faces. The effect of shear deformation in laminated composite plates is significant due to its low shear modulus compared to extensional rigidity as well as variation of material properties between the layers. The situation is much more severe in sandwich construction where a wide variation of material properties is found between the core and face layers. Actually, simple plate theories, i.e. single layer plate theories To retain the advantage of single layer theories as well as layer wise theories a new type of plate theory has been proposed Therefore, these plate theories are most appropriate for the analysis of sandwich plates as the discontinuity in transverse shear strain at the interfaces is more prominent in comparison to laminated plates. In addition to transverse shear strain jump at core face sheet interfaces, transverse normal strain within the core becomes significant in some situations where the plate thickness/span ratio becomes quite large and core material is transversely soft or flexible. In fact transverse flexibility of low-strength core seriously affects the overall behavior of sandwich construction and also it is crucial for sandwich structures which are subjected to localized loads or concentrated loads. So the conventional modeling techniques adopted by different researchers In the present study, an attempt has been made to propose an improved plate model for the analysis of laminated sandwich plate considering the effect of the transverse normal deformation of the core. The in-plane displacement fields have been assumed as a combination of a linear zigzag model with different slopes in each layer and a cubically varying function over the entire thickness. The out of plane displacement has been assumed to be quadratic within the core and constant throughout the faces. The plate model is implemented with a computationally efficient The in-plane displacement field ( The transverse displacement ( The stress–strain relationship of an orthotropic layer/lamina (say Utilizing the condition of zero transverse shear stress or zero transverse shear strain at the top and bottom surfaces of the plate and imposing the condition of the transverse shear stress continuity at the interfaces between the layers, Using the above equation, the in-plane displacement field as given in The displacement field as expressed in Using linear strain–displacement relation and With the quantities found in the above equations, the total potential energy of the system under the action of transverse load may be expressed as Using In the present problem, a nine-noded quadrilateral With the help of The elemental potential energy as given in Integrations of the In order to demonstrate the accuracy and applicability of the present formulation, several examples of the laminated composite plates and sandwich plates subjected to static load have been analyzed and the results obtained have been compared with the published results. The restrained degrees of freedom for different types of boundary conditions such as clamped and simply supported conditions are as follows.  Simply supported condition: Clamped condition:  Simply supported condition: Clamped condition: The following non-dimensional quantities used in the present analysis are defined as A rectangular sandwich (0/90/ The variations of non-dimensional in-plane normal stress A square sandwich (0/ A sandwich plate (0/90/ A square sandwich (0/ In this problem a single core square sandwich (0/ An improved higher order zigzag theory is presented for the analysis of sandwich plate with soft core. The present zigzag theory satisfies shear free conditions at the top and bottom of the plate, cubic variation of the in-plane displacements, quadratic variation of the transverse displacement and interlaminar shear stress continuity at the layer interfaces. A computationally efficient finite element formulation for the improved sandwich plate model is also presented. A nine noded isoparametric element with 11 dof per node is adopted. The results obtained for the deflection and the stresses of a laminated composite and sandwich plate show excellent performance of the present formulation. Convergence of the results is very good indicating reasonably less number of elements required to get the desired results. The effect of the transverse normal deformation has been shown for soft core sandwich plate under concentrated load. Some new results for the sandwich plates have been presented for future reference in this field of study.  