In this study, effect of ultrasound on silver extraction from a refractory silver ore containing both native silver and various silver sulphide minerals was investigated. Main effects and interaction effects of pulp density, ultrasonic frequency, cyanide concentration, air flow rate and agitation speed on the extraction rate of silver were studied by a two-level fractional factorial experimental design. A few additional cyanidation tests were also conducted to verify the findings of the designed experiments.
                  It was found that the overall extraction yield was varied from 67% to 90% depending on the operating conditions used in the sono-cyanidation tests (48 h). However, it was varied from 63% to 80% by same operating conditions used in the direct cyanidation tests at the same cyanidation time. It was observed that an increase in the ultrasonic frequency has a negligible effect on the silver recovery. More importantly, it was determined that there were insignificant differences between the 24-h sono-cyanidation results and the 48-h direct cyanidation results for each cyanidation conditions. This finding, which is very important from the cyanidation practice standpoint, indicates that the cyanidation time can be reduced up to 50%, or the capacity of an operating silver extraction plant can be increased up to 100% by the sono-cyanidation by the refractory silver ores. In order to describe the rate of silver dissolution in the cyanide solutions, the experimental data were analysed using shrinking core models. It was found that there is a good fit between the experimental data and the models, indicating the rate of silver dissolution in cyanide can be described by a two-stage, porous layer diffusion controlled, shrinking core model.Cyanide leaching or cyanidation is widely used to extract gold and silver from the ores. Most of the silver sulphide minerals are known to have the slow dissolution rate in the dilute cyanide solutions. As a result, the overall extraction yield of silver obtained from cyanide leaching of the ores containing both native silver and various silver sulphide minerals is considerably low. Therefore, the silver ores can be considered moderately refractory or refractory depending on complexity of their mineralogical compositions The sulphide ions in the silver sulphide minerals are the main reason for the refractoriness because the oxidation of the sulphide ions is required for dissolution of silver during cyanidation. Therefore, a high concentration of cyanide and a long leaching time are necessary to obtain an acceptable silver recovery from these types of the ores by the cyanidation Many experimental results reported in the literature show that the ultrasound assisted leaching can provide faster and selective extraction of metals As far as can be ascertained from the literature, there is limited information about the ultrasound assisted leaching of the silver ores (especially for cyanidation of the refractory types). Oncel et al. A representative refractory silver ore sample used in this study was provided from a silver ore processing plant located in Kutahya/Turkey. The sample was crushed to minus 1.7 mm and it was representatively divided to use in the grinding tests by the standard sampling procedure. Prior to the cyanidation tests, each sample was ground to minus 0.106 mm. The chemical composition of the silver ore was determined by ICP–OES (Perkin Elmer Optima 5300DV), and XRF (Rigaku/ZSX Primus 2) analysis was used to determine the major elements (  All tests (the direct cyanidation and the sono-cyanidation) were carried out with a 500-mL cylindrical glass reactor placed in an ultrasonic bath (Elmasonic P 30H, 37 and 80 kHz, 100 W). The temperature of the ultrasonic bath was controlled at room temperature using a heating/cooling circulating bath (Heto TMT 200) connected with the copper pipes mounted in the ultrasonic bath. The experimental setup used in the tests is illustrated schematically in The ground ore was fed into the reactor and pulped for a few minutes. In all tests, the pulp pH was kept between 11 and 11.50 by using hydrated lime and 200 g/t lead nitrate was used. During the each test, the pulp was agitated by a variable speed PFTE impeller and aerated by a flexible air sparger. A 25-mL sample of pulp was taken with a pipette after 1 h, 3 h, 6 h, 24 h and 48 h for the determination of dissolved silver by atomic absorption spectrometry and the free cyanide. The solids were returned to the reactor. Experimental studies were planned in two parts: in the first, to identify the effects of the some important factors such as cyanide concentration (M The results obtained from the sono-cyanidation and direct cyanidation tests are given in As can be seen from the results presented in Another result that confirms these findings is the effect of ultrasound on the cyanidation time. As seen from In the second part, a series of the cyanidation tests was conducted for different levels of the pulp density to verify the detrimental effects of this factor determined in the first part, and the results obtained were presented in It is evident from A comparison of the 48-h direct cyanidation and the 24-h sono-cyanidation results is presented in In addition to consistency of the silver recovery values as a function of the cyanidation time obtained from the second part ( Many experimental reports and discussions focused on the validity of the shrinking core models for the solid–liquid heterogeneous systems can be found in the literature The basis of this approach is that faster dissolution of silver from rapidly leachable or liberated and/or surface exposed silver particles occurs during the first 6 h. This is followed by the slower dissolution rate of silver due to refractoriness of the silver sulphides (miargyrite, argentite and tetrahedrite) remaining in the pulp. In must be noted that these minerals have reported as the slowest soluble silver minerals in the dilute cyanide solutions It must be noted that although ultrasonic reactors provide many advantages over conventional reactors, there are only a few limited applications to industrial chemical processing exist Ultrasound enhanced the dissolution rate of silver and the maximum extraction of ~90% silver was obtained in 48 h, whereas in the same period with direct cyanidation only ~80% silver extraction was obtained. While an increase in the ultrasonic frequency has a negligible effect on the silver recovery, the all experimental results and their statistical evaluation suggest that the dissolution rate of silver in the refractory ore can be increased by use of the ultrasound. More importantly, it was found that the 24-h sono-cyanidation provides almost equal or better silver recovery (up to 15.5%) than those of the 48-h direct cyanidation. In other words, it appears that the cyanidation time can be considerably reduced without affecting the extraction performance by the use of ultrasound. These enhancements provided by the ultrasound are possibly a result of the increasing in the intrinsic mass-transfer coefficient and the increasing in surface area resulting from particle degradation in the pulp. A significant reduction of the initial investment and the operating costs of new plants to be designed/built and also the increasing of the capacity of the currently operating plants can be provided by the use of ultrasound. In addition, the reduction in the cyanidation time will result in a significant increase in capacity, which leads the sono-cyanidation method more competitive and practicable. From the kinetic analysis of data, it can be concluded that the dissolution of silver in the refractory ore is the diffusion through porous layer-controlled. The rate constants for the first 6 h of the cyanidation (k The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the