Aluminum-induced in situ crystallization (AIC) of amorphous silicon films deposited by hot wire chemical vapor deposition (HWCVD) on glass is demonstrated. Aluminum was deposited at temperatures varying from room temperature to 300 °C on HWCVD a-Si:H films. The AIC was observed to take place in situ during the deposition of Al films, when the glass/a-Si:H temperature is kept 300 °C. A 20-nm Al film was effective in inducing crystallization of about 63% in the a-Si:H film. Thus, separate post-deposition annealing step can be avoided. For an Al film thickness comparable to the amorphous silicon film deposited at an optimum deposition rate, crystallization at temperature as low as 200 °C is observed. It was also observed that the growth pattern of c-Si in case of AIC without post-deposition annealing was identical to AIC with annealing step.Thin-film polycrystalline silicon (poly-Si) is nowadays drawing a lot of interest due to its potential use in electronic devices and photovoltaic materials such as thin film transistors and solar cells. Various possibilities have been explored for fabricating poly-Si films, which include direct deposition methods and converting a-Si produced by low-temperature CVD into crystalline silicon The main parameters of AIC which have been intensively studied so far are the annealing temperature In our study, experiments were done on corning 7059 glass. Two types of samples, viz. (a) glass/a-Si:H /Al and (b) glass/Al/ a-Si:H, were prepared. Samples of type (a) were prepared by depositing a-Si:H on glass by HWCVD at a substrate temperature of 300 °C, with silane flow of 10 sccm and pressure of 70 mTorr. Distance between filament and substrate was 5 cm and filament temperature used was 1700 °C and deposition rate was 1 nm/s. Samples with different thicknesses of a-Si:H were prepared by varying the deposition time only and keeping all other parameters same. Aluminum (Al) films of different thicknesses were then deposited on glass/a-Si:H by thermal evaporation with substrate temperature ranging from room temperature to 300 °C. Samples of type (b) were prepared by depositing Al of different thicknesses on corning 7059 glass at room temperature and then by depositing a-Si:H of thickness 600 nm in similar fashion as mentioned above by the HWCVD. Samples with different thicknesses of Al and a-Si:H were then subjected to different annealing conditions under nitrogen flow. Thickness measurements were done by using AMBIOS Technology XP-2 Stylus Profiler. X-ray diffraction (XRD) by Philips Expert and Raman spectroscopy (Jobin Yvon HR 800) were carried out to find the crystal orientation and crystalline fraction of our samples. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was realized to observe the grain morphology in the crystallized samples. Samples of the type (b) were annealed at various temperatures in N Crystalline fraction Samples of type (a) were prepared by depositing a-Si:H of various thicknesses on glass, followed by depositing Al at 300 °C. Raman spectra of films with a-Si:H thicknesses of 350 nm and 450 nm showed crystallization of 75%, for a 50-nm-thick Al film deposited at 300 °C as shown in Further experiments were done to reduce the temperature of Al deposition and samples with a-Si:H thickness of 50 nm were prepared and Al of similar thickness was deposited at various sample temperatures of 150 °C, 200 °C, 250 °C and 300 °C. We see an onset of in situ crystallization at around 200 °C which increases with the increase in the Al deposition temperature as shown in For AIC with a post-annealing step, it has been shown that Si grains grow in a dendritic pattern Through AIC of HWCVD a-Si:H films, it is possible to achieve higher grain sizes in the poly-Si film suitable for electronic devices. By depositing the Al at moderate temperature of about 300 °C, it is possible to avoid ex situ annealing step and also reduce the processing temperature for AIC. We have shown the onset of crystallization by depositing Al at 200 °C without any annealing step. The growth pattern for c-Si in case of in situ AIC was found to be identical to the AIC with post-deposition annealing step. The exact mechanism behind this is still not completely understood and further studies are required to ascertain the mechanism. Also whether a-Si:H films deposited by HWCVD show a different crystallization behavior as compared to the PECVD films also needs to be ascertained.