Synthetic boundary cells were applied for carrying out inorganic nucleation reactions inside the analytical ultracentrifuge. A reactant containing solution was layered onto a more dense solution containing the other reactant when the centrifuge was speeded up so that a very sharp and defined reaction boundary was formed. Due to the acting high centrifugal field, even the smallest colloids formed sediment out of the reaction boundary so that their growth is stopped. Simultaneously, the particle size distribution can be determined via the experimentally accessible sedimentation coefficients reflecting the growth process of the colloidal system. Thus, the whole method makes use of the stopped growth once the particles leave the sharp reaction boundary paired with the observation of their movement in the centrifugal field. This ‘synthetic boundary crystallization method’ is applied to thiol stabilized quantum size cadmium sulfide particles as a model system demonstrating the accessible information. The observed differences of the CdS particle size distributions induced already by chemically quite similar stabilizer molecules not only demonstrate the high resolution of the method, but furthermore suggest it as a fast measuring method for the determination of stabilizer efficiencies and of the impact of modifiers on crystallization at the stage of the primary nuclei.One of the classical questions of colloid chemistry is the determination of the particle size distribution of a colloidal system. Therefore, it is not astonishing that reliable experimental methods for particle size measurements were sought already in the early days of colloid science. Analytical ultracentrifugation for example was invented for the measurement of particle size distributions of gold colloids by Svedberg Another important question is the nucleation of colloids which is very difficult to grab experimentally, especially in solution. Controlled nucleation processes are essential for the tailored design of colloids. Some nice examples of the controlled nucleation of monodisperse colloids are delineated in Ref. Therefore, the determination of the particle size distribution in such a system at a very early stage after nucleation is a potentially powerful analytical tool to study and understand the influence of templating organic substrates on the nucleation and growth of inorganic materials. Observation of the colloid growth in solution already from the very beginning gives access to the critical crystal nucleus as the smallest unit to monitor any possible changes by a template. First attempts towards the determination of highly resolved particle size distributions using the analytical ultracentrifuge were reported for model colloids which were quenched during growth (Pt) or which grew sufficiently slow (ZnO) However, two significant disadvantages of this approach must be considered: As the separation in a centrifugal field is always due to the particle size and density difference between particle and solvent, the observation of critical crystal nuclei in solution is limited to dense inorganic materials ( Usually, nucleation and growth processes are fast and in the order of milliseconds. Carrying out the reaction in an external reactor without quenching, the colloids are already grown to their final size before they are analyzed in the AUC so that nothing is learned about the nucleation process. Furthermore, it is known that due to the fast diffusional broadening of the sedimentation boundary, the determination of sedimentation coefficients of very small particles becomes more complicated Synthetic boundary cells are known in the field of analytical ultracentrifugation since the 1950s. The first types of synthetic boundary cells for analytical ultracentrifugation were developed in 1952 by Kegeles Among the various applications of synthetic boundary cells are the determination of the sedimentation coefficient of a small molecule in the presence of a more rapidly migrating component To our knowledge synthetic boundary cells have never been used to carry out chemical reactions between two components which are themselves not able to sediment considerably but only their reaction product is. Furthermore, the fact that the particle growth is quenched as soon as the reaction boundary is left is an important feature of the described synthetic boundary crystallization method which bears much potential for the observation of inorganic colloid formation. For a better understanding of the developed method and of the obtained results, the particle formation in the synthetic boundary cell as well as the important transport processes (see The nucleation takes place at the sharp reaction boundary between the two reactant-containing solutions. If the nucleated substance has a low solubility product (the here examined cadmium sulfide has K The nuclei can sediment or diffuse out of the reaction zone, going along with a quenching of the reaction. The nuclei remain or diffuse back into the reaction zone, as diffusion proceeds in all directions, and thus they continue growing. Then, the grown colloid has again the option of further or quenched growth. Thus, as illustrated in Even at the very high ultracentrifugal fields at a maximum speed of 60 000 RPM, due to the very small particle sizes, the primary transport factor is not sedimentation but diffusion. This becomes obvious if the time is calculated which the particle needs to leave the sharply defined reaction boundary. This time is called If the particle size/volume is expressed as The sedimentation coefficient If the colloid is assumed to be spherical, its frictional coefficient can be calculated from the diameter The term As the particle which has sedimented exactly its radius away from the reaction boundary, so that its growth is quenched, can diffuse back the same distance, it is important to consider the diffusion process and the time However, as diffusion occurs in all directions with equal probability, the net transport of the particle is determined by sedimentation. Thus, every particle must leave the reaction boundary at some stage so that its growth is quenched. It is important to prevent that the reaction boundary is smeared by ion diffusion from the two layered solutions because otherwise, no defined point would exist where the particles can be assumed to start sedimentation, which is essential for the evaluation. The smearing of the reaction boundary can be effectively prevented by the fact that the volume of the layered solution is very small (15 μl) compared to the lower solution (265 μ1) so that the layered solution column is only 450 μm long directly after layering. After a very short time, which is assumed to be a few seconds at most As the layered solution column height is only 5% of the lower solution column height which is the sedimentation space, this is the maximum error due to smearing of the reaction boundary by diffusion, and a homogeneous starting situation can be assumed. Due to the different sizes of the different generations of grown particles, their sedimentation velocity will be different, so that an effective fractionation due to the particle size can be expected as indicated in Nevertheless, several potential complicating factors for the evaluation of synthetic boundary crystallization experiments exist, which must be taken into account: Boundary spreading due to diffusion: As long as no self-sharpening effects of the sedimenting boundary occur Density of the sedimenting particles: As Concentration dependence of Pressure dependence of Lack of a sedimenting boundary due to too low sedimentation coefficients: as small colloids are expected to sediment very slowly, the sedimentation coefficients of various minerals were calculated in dependence of the number of unit cells (see Even with one unit cell, the sedimentation coefficent is already in the order of one Svedberg which can be well resolved by the ultracentrifuge. Hence, it can be expected that sedimenting boundaries are formed. Even with a stabilizer shell, the density of the inorganic colloids should still be sufficiently high that the sedimentation coefficient even of the smallest species exceeds 1 S. From all these points, point 2 is the most serious problem which may prevent the determination of a correct particle size distribution. Therefore, it would be highly desirable to determine a diffusion coefficient distribution ( This is however out of the scope of this paper which just demonstrates for the first time the principal applicability of a synthetic boundary crystallization experiment. A Beckman Optima XL-I analytical ultracentrifuge (Beckman Instruments, Spinco division, Palo Alto, CA) with a scanning absorption optics (200–800 nm, accuracy±2 nm) and on-line Rayleigh interferometer was used for all measurements. The ultracentrifuge software corrects the measured light intensity Two kinds of experiments were carried out. In sedimentation velocity experiments the absorbance is measured as a function of the radius at a fixed wavelength of Performing wavelength scans the radius was fixed to In this work we applied a home-made 12 mm charcoal filled epon doublesector synthetic boundary cell of the Vinograd type This cell utilizes the centrifugal force to form a reaction boundary by layering Na The synthesis of the colloidal cadmium sulfide particles were performed in presence of thiolactic acid, thioglycerine and The CdS particles were prepared in the synthetic boundary cell at 25°C by layering 15 μl of 10 mM aqeuous solution of Na The pH-values of the solutions were adjusted with an accuracy of 0.1 pH units using a Metrohm 716 DMS Titrino (Metrohm, Switzerland). The chemicals were used as obtained from the supplier. The density of the sedimenting CdS was assumed to be that of bulk CdS (4.82 g ml Cadmium sulfide (CdS) is chosen as a model system for synthetic boundary crystallization experiments for several reasons: CdS has a low solubility product and therefore high velocity of particle formation. CdS is a semiconductor and shows the quantum size effect CdS is a UV/Vis light absorbing system which enables selective observation of the formed particles by the UV/Vis absorption optics of the ultracentrifuge. Simultaneously applied interferometric optical records showed, that here, a selective observation of the formed particles is not directly possible. Hence light absorbing species should serve as model systems for the first experiments. The raw experimental data for thiolactic acid stabilized CdS particles is exemplary presented in  In  However, the particle size distributions presented in In The absorption threshold shifts over a range of 40 nm indicating different sedimenting species with diameter differences of l nm The particle sizes obtained from the wavelength experiment are higher than the particle size calculated from the sedimentation velocity experiment. That is on the one hand due to disregarding the influence of stabilizer on the particle density, since we have calculated these values with a too high density. Again, it has to be pointed out that the lack of knowledge of the correct particle density is the main confinement to the determination of the particle sizes in a synthetic boundary crystallization experiment. On the other hand according to newer literature We have shown that synthetic boundary crystallization experiments in an analytical ultracentrifuge are a tool to analyze the particle size distributions of the crystallizing inorganic colloids. This was demonstrated for the case of three different thiol stabilized CdS quantum sized particles. The fractionation sequence of the sedimenting particles is confirmed in a wavelength experiment employing the shift of the absorption threshold caused by the quantum size effect of CdS. The method is sensitive to very small changes in the particle size distributions in the Angström range. Nevertheless, the quantitative evaluation of such experiments still remains difficult as an independent determination of the particle size distribution is required to avoid the problem with the unknown particle density. However, as this is subject of current investigations it is expected that synthetic boundary crystallization experiments can yield the particle size distribution simultaneously to the density distribution of different kinds of inorganic colloids without density limitations. Summarizing, synthetic boundary crystallization experiments are a new and powerful high resolution method to study particle size distributions of freshly nucleated colloids in solution and in the presence of different stabilizers. The presented method is expected to be capable of studying the influence of any kind of additive onto the particle growth which is of fundamental interest for colloid science. We thank the Max-Planck-Gesellschaft for financial and Erich C. for mental support. L.B. thanks the DFG(SFB448) for financial support.