The Truman Shepherd coal mine fire, Floyd and Knott counties, Kentucky, has been the subject of several field investigations over the last four years. During July and November 2011 and January 2012 field investigations, we measured gas emissions, collected minerals, and characterized the nature of the fire. New vents opened over the course of the study and have continued to open since January 2012, coincident with the eastward advance of the fire. This is the first study of Kentucky coal fires where the original vents were able to be studied in addition to new vents on each subsequent trip. Neoformed minerals associated with the vents are primarily ammonium sulfates and ammonium chlorides with minor zeolites. BTEX emissions, especially benzene, vary considerably, ranging from relatively low to comparable to those from very large fires, such as the Ankney coal fire in Wyoming. Vent emission data collected displays a general trend of decreasing carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide emissions from July through January. The projected annual greenhouse gas and mercury emissions from the fire are 65.69t of CO2, 4.51t of CO, 5.73t of CH4, and 1.667kg Hg. The November 2011 CO/CO2 ratios are indicative of more complete combustion than at any other time during the study, possibly indicative of decreased moisture in the system.Coal fires destroy and isolate energy resources, contribute to water pollution, are a health hazard as sources of potentially toxic gases (CO The Truman Shepherd fire is burning in abandoned mine works in the high volatile A bituminous Pennsylvanian-age Upper Elkhorn No. 3 coalbed in Floyd County, Kentucky ( At the time of our initial 2009 investigation ( Vent gas and soil temperatures were measured, the cross-sectional area of each vent was calculated from the length and width measurements, and the GPS location was determined for each vent during visits in July and November 2011 and January 2012. Owing to the development of the site, the number of vents grew from five in July, to six in November, and to 10 in January (  Gas emissions from coal fires occur by two processes ( Mercury was determined with a differential Zeeman atomic absorption spectrometry Ohio Lumex RX-915 Portable Mercury Analyzer. An S-type Pitot tube ( Volatile organic compound (VOC) gas samples were collected at the same four vents during the July and November 2011 and January 2012 visits in electropolished, stainless steel, evacuated canisters. Gas analyses for a suite of carbon-bearing gases (i.e., CO, CO Mineralogy was conducted at both the Universidade Santiago de Compostela (Spain) and the CAER. The instrumentation at Santiago de Compostela consisted of a Philips-type powder diffractometer fitted with a Philips “PW1710” control unit, vertical Philips “PW1820/00” goniometer, and FR590 Enraf Nonius generator. The instrument was equipped with a graphite diffracted-beam monochromator and copper radiation source (λ(Kα1) Statistical analyses were completed using MVSP® 3.1. For analyses, the data set was restricted to vent flux data for CO As noted above, attempted abatement of the Truman Shepherd fire occurred in fall of 2009 and by spring of 2011, the fire was once again venting from the abatement site. In July of 2011 five active vents were present. By November this had increased to six, as a new vent became active in a new fissure in the highwall to the east of the original vent 5. By January 2012, an additional four vents were active: three along the highwall between vents 1 and 2 and a fourth in the highwall between vents 3 and 4. Vents 7–9 appear to be exhausting through the rubble pile that was used to block fissures addressed during the abatement process. There are not, at this point, visible fissures in the highwall adjacent to these vents. All other vents are through fissures in the highwall. Steam was most apparent from the vents in November. Overall, the fractures which later become the vents seem to have been established in the highwall prior to the time of excavation. The movement and subsequent new venting of the fire takes advantage of the pre-existing fractures. A local resident who met with the team in January 2012 commented that following periods of rain or snow, more emissions are visible. This implies overall good connectivity to the surface water regime. He also commented that when the fire is steaming most, black “stuff” coats cars, houses, etc. The vent 4 temperature varied from about 28 to 44 Data collected displays a general trend of decreasing carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide emissions from July through January. Superimposed upon this overall trend are variations of emissions of individual vents. In July and November, vents 3 and 5 had the greatest CH Principal Component Analysis (PCA) was based on nine variables (vent area, flow rate, T, relative humidity, emission density, barometric pressure, CO Mercury emissions span one order of magnitude, from 0.06 For the November 2011 sampling, vents 1, 3, and 5 had the greatest Hg flux (ng/s/m Gas emissions measured in February 2009 ( The volatile organic compounds encountered in coal fire vent emissions include greenhouse gases (methane) and toxic, carcinogenic, mutagenic, and hallucinogenic compounds. For example, benzene is linked to leukemia, lymphoma, and myeloma. In close proximity to the vents, the NIOSH eight-hour exposure limit of 100 This study is the first among our coal fire investigations in which we could sample the same four vents at each of the analysis times. For some of the Truman Shepherd volatile organics, including CO Identified minerals include those associated with the rocks surrounding the vent (quartz, muscovite/illite, kaolinite, anatase/rutile) and a variety of neoformed combustion-related phases ( The mineral assemblage is the most varied seen to date in the studies of Kentucky coal fires. Deposition of minerals is a function of the chemistry of the burning coal, which we cannot access, and the gas, air, and substrate temperatures at the point of mineral deposition. Overall, a number of variables enter into the nature of measured emissions from coal mine fires; among them being the temperature differential between the fire and the outside air, the proximity of the fire front to the measuring points, and changes in the nature of the vents. The latter can include collapses of the mine entries and of the vent outlets. Internal changes cannot be observed, but we have seen failing of highwalls and the consequent reconfiguration of vent openings at the Ruth Mullins mine fire. The Truman Shepherd coal fire, eastern Kentucky, had been investigated by us in February 2009 ( As in the case of other fires investigated, the temperature versus time of day study indicates that temperature excursions are more frequent, and with greater magnitude, during the daylight hours. Since the temperature-variation study was conducted in the November and December 2011, perhaps it can be argued that the results were more a function of the ambient air temperatures at that time of the year than of any overall trends. However, studies at other fires conducted in September and in December and January ( Although the emissions measured in 2009 were in the same range as those measured in 2011 and 2012, it is difficult to make an exact comparison because the nature of the vents were changed in the excavation accompanying the attempted mitigation of the fire. In general, based on the iBrid measurements, CO and CO The proportions of the volatile organic gases (collected in stainless steel canisters) are similar to what has been found in other studies, with CO Mineral formation at the vent/atmosphere interface is highly temperature dependent; if the outlet vent temperature is too low, it is possible that mineral condensation/precipitation/sublimation occurred within the vent. The mineral assemblages include the zeolite gobbinsite, the ammonium chloride salammoniac, and hydrated and unhydrated ammonium sulfates. Overall, it can be persuasively argued that the emissions from the fire are small, particularly when compared to a coal-fired power plant, but this argument discounts the proximity of residences to the fire. There are several houses along the road facing the fire and several more along Howard Branch Road ( Cody Patrick and Michelle Johnston, University of Kentucky Department of Earth & Environmental Sciences, assisted in the data collection at the fire site.  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at