Supercritical fluid extraction (SFE) is today an important technique for the extraction of a large number of differing analytes from various matrices such as pollutants from soils, fats from food stuffs, active substances from plants, and additives from polymers. The obtained extracts are normally analyzed on a chromatographic system even though other techniques are applied (e.g., gravimetry and spectroscopy). Compared to many methods based on conventional liquid extraction, SFE offers speed and cleaner extracts, decreasing the need for external clean-up steps. This cuts the total costs of analysis due to reduced labor-intensiveness. There is also an environmental advantage, as harmless extraction fluids are normally used. This is important as regulations are getting stricter on the use of certain chlorinated organic solvents, with increasing costs for solvent disposal. The reason for the decreased interest in SFE, starting at the end of the last decade, was mainly caused by an initial over enthusiasm in SFE, when first introduced in the mid-1980s. In some early attempts, SFE was also applied on analytes and matrices for which it was not well suited. Additionally, unsatisfactory extraction efficiencies were often blamed on poor extraction conditions, while the true cause was inadequate collection. Consequently many laboratories regarded SFE as too complex and abandoned the technique despite its excellent features. However, at present there are many well-conducted scientific applications and comprehensive text books that aids in the development of potent and competitive methods for the replacement of many conventional liquid-based methods such as Soxhlet. The basic concepts of SFE and important factors governing the extraction process will be outlined. Several applications suitable for SFE will also be presented. SFE is today not the only hyphenated extraction technique available. Both microwave-assisted solvent extraction (MAE) and pressurized fluid extraction (PFE) have evolved in parallel with SFE during the last decade. A thorough comparison of the different techniques can be found in the analytical literature, and will assist in choosing an appropriate technique for a specific application. These newer techniques offer both speed and simplicity, while some of the main benefits of SFE are still inherent to the usage of supercritical fluids as MAE and PFE utilize liquid solvents. More recently, subcritical water extraction has also been introduced as an environmental friendly alternative but the reader is referred to the analytical literature on this research topic. There are a number of online methods coupling SFE to other analytical techniques such as gas chromatography (GC), capillary or packed column supercritical fluid chromatography (SFC), and liquid chromatography (LC). The online techniques are rather sensitive because the entire portion of extracted components is transferred to the column. A disadvantage with online approaches is that coextracted fat, water, and sometimes modifier may interfere in the final analysis. Additionally overloading of the analytical column must be avoided. Therefore, only small samples are usually extracted with online methods in SFE. A comprehensive discussion of online methods can be found in Further Reading. A supercritical fluid refers to a substance above its critical temperature ( Even though the extraction efficiency for some analytes can be increased by change of extraction fluid, carbon dioxide is by far the most common compound used (98% of all applications). It has low critical parameters, it is nonexplosive, nontoxic, and environmentally benign. Alternatives have been proposed such as alkanes and freons but they have never been widely accepted due to health and safety risks for the former and ozone depletion by the latter. One of the few competitors to carbon dioxide is nitrous oxide, however, it might cause explosion in contact with high amounts of organic material. Supercritical carbon dioxide has a polarity similar to that of n-hexane, and consequently for the extraction of more polar analytes an organic modifier such as methanol or acetonitrile (1–5%) has to be added to increase the polarity (see the section ‘grouped’). To maintain supercriticality for two-component fluids, somewhat different conditions have to be applied, but normally there is no problem at the conditions under which SFE is normally carried out. A simplified picture of an instrumental SFE setup is shown in The SFE instrument consists of a solvent supply, a pump to maintain the pressure and the flow rate, an extraction cell mounted in a heated oven in order to maintain the temperature at the specified value, a restrictor connected to the outlet of the cell, and a collection device. There are different ways of collecting analytes as discussed in the section ‘grouped’. In a representative experiment, the cell has a volume of ∼10 In certain applications, static extractions can be performed. In the static mode, the outlet valve is closed, the cell filled with fluid, and the inlet valve is closed. The fluid is then left in contact with the matrix for 10–30 For analytical SFE, two pumps types are common: syringe pumps and reciprocating pumps. Conventional LC pumps can also be used for SFE. Though syringe pumps are generally reliable with a limited need of maintenance, a disadvantage is the limited capacity and need of refilling regularly. A suitable SFE pump should measure both pressure and flow rate. Additionally, the maximum pressure (at least 400 LC-grade solvents are normally used as modifiers. The modifier can be added directly into the extraction cell prior to extraction. In this case no additional pump is needed. A disadvantage is that the entire volume of modifier is extracted together with the analytes during the dynamic mode of the extraction. Using premixed cylinders is another option. A range of mixtures of carbon dioxide with various modifiers added (1–10%) are commercially available. There are severe drawbacks of premixed cylinders as there is less flexibility in the choice of the solvent used, and the composition of the liquid supplied from mixed cylinders changes over the lifetime of the gas mixture. The most convenient and most commonly preferred way is the use of an additional LC pump for modifier delivery. When using a gradient LC pump in automated SFE systems, several modifiers with different concentrations can easily be tested. Different cell types are available, but the best choice is cells that can be sealed properly without any tools. In commercial systems hand-tightened extraction cells are standard. Cells are available in sizes from 1 to 100 Several different types of restrictors have been used in analytical SFE. The simplest method of providing pressure or flow control is to use a tubing of fused silica capillary as a linear restrictor. Tubing of 20–30 In a needle valve restrictor, the flow rate is controlled by changing the valve position. This can be performed during the extraction to avoid blockage. The drawbacks with needle valves are virtually the same as for capillary restrictors. The preferred choice is electrically controlled restrictors, which maintains a back-pressure or flow rate set by the operator. These devices are not very often subject to blockage, which makes them highly reliable and often form part of commercial SFE instrument. Two types of restrictor designs are shown in A coaxial heated restrictor consisting of a syringe with a movable piston position controls the flow, or alternatively a small metal disk is pushed toward an orifice in order to regulate the flow rate. The former is suitable for collection in organic solvents, while the latter has been utilized for solid-phase trapping. The importance of a proper collection of analytes in SFE has been emphasized by numerous investigations. Faulty collection rather than nonquantitative extraction could explain low extraction recoveries. Collection in a solvent is most commonly achieved by keeping the restrictor outlet immersed into a vessel containing a small volume of an organic solvent ( In solid-phase trapping, the decompressed extraction fluid passes a device filled with a sorbent material (e.g., chromatographic material such as octadecylsilica, diol, silica, and Florisil A number of companies produce SFE equipment offering convenience and easy control of extraction conditions. Other features are simultaneous extraction of samples (2–4) or sequential sample extraction (8–24) as well as direct extraction of liquid samples. In the last few years, smaller lab/pilot-scale extraction units, specialized for certain applications have entered the market. These are designed for the extraction of oils and aroma compounds from natural products, active components from pharmaceuticals, polymer fractionation, and precision parts cleaning. Some of these are also utilizable in the analytical laboratory. Certain devices offer a phase monitor for visual observation of materials under conditions that may be controlled by the researcher. Thereby, the solubility parameters of compounds and mixtures in subcritical and supercritical fluids can be determined. The basic requirement for SFE to be useful is that it should be quantitative. Consequently, reliable methods must be developed based on good understanding of the extraction process. In principle, an extraction method consists of an extraction step (1) and a collection step (2), both equally important ( The collection step is often overlooked but it is the first thing to be evaluated in a new method. Secondly, the extraction step must be considered, since several factors influence analyte recovery. Much is still unknown about the precise mechanisms involved in the extraction process (which applies to all extraction methods) but in principle the analyte must be removed from the matrix (I) followed by elution of the analyte from the extraction cell (II), where both matrix and analyte characteristics (III, IV) will influence the extraction process ( The evaluation of the collection step requires that the analyte is spiked on an inert matrix such as stainless steel beads or sand, and that preliminary extraction conditions are chosen. If low recoveries are achieved it is either caused by insufficient solubility of analytes (often nonvolatiles) or poor trapping conditions (normally volatiles or semivolatiles). This is conveniently verified by reextraction of the residual with an organic solvent to check the presence of remaining analytes in the extraction cell. Once the collection has been set, the extraction step can be evaluated in more detail. Modest solubility of the analyte in the fluid is often sufficient for eluting the analytes from the extraction cell, and consequently for matrices where mild conditions can be applied, the collection step is rather uncomplicated. However, for certain analyte/matrix combinations stronger conditions are needed, and when major changes are made to the initial mild conditions (e.g., rise in temperature or modifier addition), the collection step must be verified once more. For analyte removal to be successful, the applied extraction conditions must be strong enough to overcome analyte/matrix interactions such as adsorption of analytes on active surfaces, and speed up transport processes of analytes within the matrix. Often an increase in temperature or addition of a modifier significantly improves these processes. Analyte transport may be normal diffusion of the solute or may involve diffusion of the analyte through the fluid along pores in the matrix. Adsorption and desorption may take place during transport, but often the precise process will not be known even though a transport process similar to diffusion occurs. The solubility of the analyte is the main factor controlling analyte elution, and to be successful the analyte must be sufficiently soluble in the fluid. Analytes with low affection for the matrix and with high solubility are eluted fast. There are different ways of increasing the solubility to achieve a satisfying transport out of the cell such as decreasing or increasing the temperature and increasing the pressure. Also the addition of modifier may drastically increase solubility, but changes to these factors will also affect the initial removal of analytes from the matrix. Since both the transport of analytes from the matrix to the bulk fluid (removal) and the transport of analytes from the extraction cell to the collection device (elution) govern the extraction process, but to different extents for different analyte/matrix combinations, attempts have been made to classify samples. Two extreme groups of sample types can be identified based on flow rate studies; those were the analytes are recovered at a rate proportional to the fluid flow through the extraction cell, and those completely unaffected by the flow rate. In the former group of samples, the elution of the analytes is controlling the extraction speed, while in the latter group of samples, analyte removal is limiting the overall extraction procedure. In general, samples controlled by the elution process contain high amounts of weakly bound analytes such as oil in oil seeds or bulk fat in pig meat. These samples will gain from increased flow rates and extraction times. Small sample sizes are preferable as is dynamic extraction processes. It is also important to increase analyte solubility. Samples controlled by the removal process often contain trace levels of very hardly bound analytes such as pesticides in soils or flame retardants in sediments. This group of sample will be relatively unaffected by flow rate and extraction time. Sample size is of less importance, and static extraction steps are often as efficient as dynamic. It is, however, important that the cell void volume is satisfactorily swept by the dynamic step. For these sample types, the most important thing to consider is the analyte/matrix interactions and to find ways to break these. This above description is of course a rough simplification. There are examples of fat components present at bulk levels in fishes that are hard to extract, just as there are soil and sediment samples containing trace levels of organic contaminants that are relatively easy to extract. Moreover, sample classification gives some insight into the various problems encountered for different sample types and the reader is referred to the Further Reading section for a more thorough discussion on sample classification and extraction behavior. Solubility depends not only on the nature of the fluid and its density, but also on the temperature. At a given temperature an increase in pressure will cause an increase in density and therefore normally an increase in solubility. However, at a constant pressure an increase in temperature will cause a decrease in density, but not necessarily a decrease in solubility. For analytes with relatively high vapor pressures, the drop in density at increased temperatures is by far outweighed by solubility increases caused by vapor pressure effects at higher temperatures. Only compounds with insignificant vapor pressures will suffer from decreased densities at increased temperatures. A more detailed discussion on this topic can be found in the Further Reading section. Depending on the type of application different combinations of pressure and temperature must be considered. For matrices where analyte elution from the cell is the main controlling factor, an increase in pressure might lead to faster extractions, as more analytes can be dissolved in the fluid when density is increased. However, for other matrices where the transport from the matrix to the bulk fluid is the critical factor, the temperature is often a better parameter to speed up the extraction as it will affect both desorption and diffusion processes. Care must, however, be taken when increasing the temperature so that thermal degradation of heat sensitive analytes is avoided. In some cases, the solvent strength of the supercritical fluid (e.g., carbon dioxide) is too low and, therefore, a modifier (e.g., methanol) can be added. The modifier will then cause increased solubility of more polar analytes. For example, carbon dioxide does not extract phospholipids to a very great extent, but by adding 5–10% methanol to the fluid, quantitative recoveries can easily be achieved. In this case the modifier is improving the transportation of the analyte out of the cell (elution). However, modifiers may also assist in the breaking of strong analyte/matrix interactions for certain applications, thereby, improving the transportation of the analyte from the matrix to the bulk fluid (removal). In these cases the analytes are normally sufficiently soluble in the fluid even without modifier present, and therefore, the main role of the modifier is to interact with certain regions of the matrix to which the analytes are bound by specific bonds. The nature of these interactions is often not known and various modifiers with differing chemical characteristics should preferably be tested. Once an appropriate modifier has been identified it can normally be added in relatively small concentrations (1–2%). It is, however, crucial to understand that the addition of modifiers will cause an increased coelution of unwanted matrix components. Additionally the collection efficiencies might decrease dramatically unless analyte trapping is evaluated separately with these new experimental settings. Especially solid-phase trapping can suffer from severe analyte losses by modifier condensation in the trap. This can often easily be avoided by increasing the trap temperature. Normally solid samples are extracted and it is important to grind them in order to obtain homogeneity. Grinding can conveniently be performed with a mortar and pestle or a kitchen blender. Grinding often facilitates the extraction process, but in certain cases grinding might negatively influence the extraction. There is always a risk of losing analytes on the surface device or by evaporation, and carry-over effects must also be eliminated. Another important factor to consider is the water fraction of the sample. In some applications for more polar analytes, water might act as a modifier, but generally large amounts of water hinder the extraction process. It is common to handle the water fraction by mixing with an adsorbent such as sodium sulfate or Hydromatrix. Another option is freeze drying, but with a risk of losing volatiles. The analyst should consult the analytical chemical literature for specific applications as well as the Further Reading section for a more in-depth discussion of sample pretreatment. Once a method has been developed including a quantitative collection step combined with an exhaustive extraction process, it is necessary to test the method's wider applicability. This is unfortunately a critical step (and applies to all extraction techniques) since it is impossible to know the total amount of a certain analyte present in a real-world sample. There are certain strategies that should be adopted to verify the quantitativeness of the method. The applied extraction conditions can be altered by increasing the temperature for matrices known to bind analytes hard or increase pressure for matrices known to contain bulk levels of analytes. If this improves extraction recoveries, the method is not final. Another important option is to compare SFE recoveries with recoveries obtained with conventional extraction procedures (Soxhlet) or other modern extraction techniques (PFE). If the same results are achieved, it is likely that the developed method is quantitative. It is also possible to reextract the SFE residual with another extraction method, thereby, detecting remaining analyte residues in the matrix. A third alternative is to utilize certified reference materials where concentrations have been independently determined by several laboratories. When considering SFE for a specific application, a literature search is always necessary. SFE has been successfully carried out on a wide variety of matrices as seen in 