In order to prevent sphalerite particles from aggregating in leaching solution, and to reduce the loss of organic solvent, the surface modification of sphalerite with sodium alginate was investigated. The modified sphalerite particles were characterized by dispersion experiments, determination of adsorption rate of oil, FT-IR spectra and X-ray photoelectron spectra. The results showed that the modified sphalerite particles exhibited good dispersibility in water. The contact angle between sphalerite particles and water changed from 86.9° before modification to 0° after modification with sodium alginate. The sedimentation volume reduced from 0.85ml/g to 0.70ml/g. The adsorption rate of oil reduced from 0.15ml/g to 0.07ml/g. The checking results of FT-IR and XPS spectra indicated that some modification reagents were coated on the particle surface. The modifier combined to sphalerite particle surface through the chemical bond, resulting in the comprehensive stability action of static and steric effect.The dispersion technology of fine solid particles in liquid phase has been applied in many fields, such as metallurgy, chemical engineering, food, medicine, paper-making, architecture materials and so on. It becomes an inevitable and important technical way for enhancing quality, characteristic and technological efficiency of product. The dispersion agent is the important part of dispersion system. The property of agent decides the dispersion stability of system in some extent. The dispersion behavior of fine particles in agent follows the principle as that: when the polarities of dispersed particles surface and liquid medium are similar, the dispersity of particles is good. On the contrary, the dispersity is bad In this work, the surface modification of sphalerite with sodium alginate was studied. The modified sphalerite was characterized by means of dispersion experiments, adsorption rate of oil, FT-IR spectra and XPS spectra. In this study, the sphalerite concentrate having the chemical composition shown in Ten grams sphalerite concentrate and 100 Dried sphalerite particles with and without modification were investigated by means of dispersion experiments. 0.5 IR spectra were recorded on Perkin-Elmer Spectrum GX and KBr was used as matrix material. A PHI-5300/ESCA X-Ray Photoelectron Spectrometer was used to measure and analyze the bonding states between the modifier and the particle surface. This instrument operates with a chamber pressure of 2.9 Polar particles easily disperse in polar liquid which can wet them, it is difficult for them to disperse in non-polar liquid and vice versa. Sphalerite particles with and without modification were dispersed in water. The results indicated that the suspending liquid of bare sphalerite in test tube after 0.5 The change of adsorption of oil can indicate the modification degree. Sphalerite samples with and without modification were studied by means of adsorption oil tests. Five grams solid sample and 15   Sodium alginate is the sodium salt of alginic acid and is a water soluble anionic polymer. It contains many –COOH and –OH groups. It has good hydrophilicity. In these experiments, pH 8.0, Na alginate is negatively charged at this pH. Sodium alginate formed anionic group. From the analysis results of FT-IR and XPS spectra, sodium alginate impart hydrophilicity to the minerals upon their adsorption onto the particle surfaces with the anionic group oriented toward bulk solutions. The solvent chain by the action of the hydrophilicity group with solution stretched, formed steric action preventing the particles from aggregating. The molecular layer of charged polymers repulse the particles with the same charge, thus forming the comprehensive stability action of statics and steric effect (shown in  The hydrophilicity of sphalerite concentrate was enhanced evidently after modification. The particles dispersed well in water. The contact angle between particles and water changed from 86.9° to 0°. The sedimentation volume of particles changed from 0.85 The results from FT-IR and XPS spectra analysis indicated that there existed modifier adsorption on the surface of sphalerite particle. The modifier combined to particle surface through the chemical bond. The authors are grateful to the National Natural Science Founda tion of China (No. 20276074) for financial support.