In this work, three N,N′-tetrasubstituted malonamides, namely N,N′-dimethyl-N,N′-dibutylmalonamide (DMDBMA), N,N′-dimethyl-N,N′-diphenylmalonamide (DMDPHMA) and N,N′-dimethyl-N,N′-diphenyltetradecylmalonamide (DMDPHTDMA), are presented as suitable agents for use in a solvent extraction approach to efficiently and selectively remove Fe(III) from concentrated chloride solutions. The efficiency found for Fe(III) extraction from 4 M and higher concentrated hydrochloric acid solutions, the ease of Fe(III) stripping from the loaded solvents with distilled water, the selectivity towards Fe(III) over several other metal ions and the promising results achieved in successive extraction-stripping tests are relevant features that justify further research in view of a practical application.
                  Evidences of the occurrence of different Fe(III) extraction reactions, depending on the malonamide structure, have also been collected and herein summarized.Developments on hydrometallurgical routes involving chloride leaches have been widely carried out over the last 20–30 years. In fact, chloride hydrometallurgy has reached a considerable level of maturity nowadays ( Iron, being one of the most abundant metals in the earth's crust, is frequently present as an impurity in typical chloride leaches ( There are only a few recent fundamental research reports on the use of a solvent extraction approach to recover Fe(III) from chloride solutions. Hence,  In the present work, Details concerning the synthesis and characterization of DMDPHMA, DMDPHTDMA ( Organic solutions were prepared dissolving the respective malonamide derivative either in 1,2-dichloroethane (1,2-DCE) or toluene (T), with a 0.1 or 0.05 M concentration. Aqueous solutions consisted of ~0.01 M FeCl For the selectivity tests, binary mixtures were prepared which contained 0.01 M Fe(III) in addition to ~0.01 M of another metal ion like Cu(II), Zn(II), Co(II), Cd(III) and In(III), added as chloride salts, or Cr(III), Pb(II), Ni(II) and Ag(I) as nitrate salts in 8 M HCl. These aqueous phases were used for equilibration with DMDPHMA solutions. Identical aqueous phases with Cu(II), Zn(II), Ni(II) or In(III), in addition to Fe(III) in 4 M and in 10 M HCl solutions with a 12 M total chloride content achieved by LiCl, were similarly contacted with DMDPHTDMA to evaluate the selectivity characteristics of this specific derivative. For DMDBMA, 8 M HCl aqueous solutions with 0.01 M Fe(III) and 0.005 M of Cu(II), Zn(II), Co(II), Ni(II), Pb(II) or Ag(I) were alternatively used. An additional test with a 8 M HCl aqueous phase containing all the metal ions together was also carried out for this malonamide derivative. In order to evaluate its regeneration characteristics, an organic phase containing DMDBMA in 1,2-DCE was subjected to four successive extraction-stripping contacts with fresh solutions of a 0.01 M Fe(III) in 8 M HCl and with distilled water, respectively. For the extraction and stripping experiments, equal volumes of the aqueous and organic phases (A/O=1) were stirred at a 1000 rpm speed for 15 min. All experiments were carried out at room temperature. The aqueous phases before and after extraction were analysed for their metal ion concentrations by flame atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS). For each sample, three aliquots were considered and the results were critically treated and only accepted if a reasonable standard deviation was achieved. Metal ion concentrations in the organic solutions were found by mass balance. 0.1 M DMDPHMA and DMDPHTDMA solutions in toluene, and 0.05 M DMDBMA in 1,2-DCE, were used as solvents for the extraction of Fe(III) from aqueous phases of different HCl concentrations. The results of the Fe(III) extractions obtained for each system are displayed in In all cases, metal extraction depends on the hydrochloric acid concentration of the aqueous phase: Fe(III) extraction increases as the HCl concentration increases. However, for the experimental conditions adopted, it can be seen that DMDPHTDMA is the malonamide derivative which exhibits a higher affinity for Fe(III) extraction from more dilute HCl solutions, followed by DMDBMA and finally by DMDPHMA. Hence, the Fe(III) extraction becomes nearly quantitative for the first two former extractants from 6 M HCl, whereas the same occurs for DMDPHMA only from 9 M HCl. The use of either toluene or 1,2-DCE as diluents was previously evaluated and no effects on the overall iron(III) extraction behaviours shown by the malonamide derivatives were found ( The existence of chloride Fe(III) species in the aqueous solutions is determinant for an effective affinity of the malonamide extractants towards Fe(III). In fact, despite the use of different iron(III) sources, the Fe(III) extraction was similarly high from a 8 M HCl solution by DMDPHMA or DMDBMA– Evidences collected in previous studies ( Anionic-pair mechanism: Solvation mechanism: For DMDPHMA, the protonation of the extractant seems to occur, thus leading to an extraction process described by Eq. Stripping of Fe(III) from the loaded organic phases has always been quantitative by contact with distilled water, irrespective of the malonamide derivative used. Selectivity results obtained for binary and multi-elemental aqueous solutions after contact with DMDBMA are presented and The selectivity tests carried out with DMDPHMA and DMDPHTDMA using binary metal ion mixtures revealed similar results but Fe(III) extraction was higher than 99%, the only exception occurring for Ni(II), which was 13% extracted by DMDPHMA. In order to collect information on the stability of the tested malonamide derivatives for the adopted experimental conditions, four successive extraction-stripping stages were carried out with DMDBMA, using fresh aqueous solutions of a 0.01 M Fe(III) in HCl 8 M. The results obtained for the Fe(III) extraction in each stage, The results presented in this paper put in evidence the potentialities of the malonamide derivatives to recover Fe(III) from chloride acidic solutions efficiently and selectively, providing a solid basis to further research developments having a practical application in mind. Investigation involving other potential