The utility of heterotopic ossification (HO) classification systems is debatable. The range of motion and Harris hip score (HHS) were calculated in 104 patients with known HO after total hip arthroplasty and 208 matched controls without HO. The patients with HO were radiographically divided into high and low grade HO groups. There was no statistically significant association of HHS with high or low grade HO. High grade HO had a statistically significant 6° loss of terminal hip flexion, 4° loss of abduction, and 6° loss of internal rotation at the hip. The small changes in terminal hip range of motion and lack of association with HHS may be the result of false radiographic continuity resulting in an overestimation of the disability in high grade HO.Heterotopic ossification (HO) is a complication of total hip arthroplasty (THA) The Brooker scale is the most common radiographic classification system for HO around the hip after THA The clinical utility of well-established HO classification systems is subject to debate After receiving institutional review board approval, the charts of 104 patients with documented radiographic HO were reviewed. HO after THA occurs between 4 and 12 weeks after the operation with a peak occurrence at 2 months A control group was created by matching the high and low HO groups 2:1 by age within 5 years, sex exactly, BMI within 5 points, date of THA within 5 years, and time of follow-up within 5 years. A total of 208 hips without documented HO after THA were identified. Statistical comparisons between terminal range, arc of motion, and HHS for each HO grade and the respective matched controls were made using a paired Student’s t-test. Statistical significance was defined as Terminal hip flexion was reduced for patients with high grade HO. Terminal hip flexion was 102° ± 13° with low grade HO and 97° ± 15° in the matched controls without HO ( Terminal hip abduction was reduced for patients with high grade HO. Terminal hip abduction was 27° ± 6° with low grade HO and 28° ± 5° in the matched controls without HO ( Terminal hip internal rotation was reduced for patients with high grade HO. Terminal hip internal rotation was 19° ± 9° with low grade HO and 21° ± 9° in the matched controls without HO ( The abduction-adduction arc was reduced for patients with high grade HO. The abduction-adduction arc was 48° ± 13° with low grade HO and 52° ± 10° in the matched controls without HO ( The internal-external rotation arc was reduced for patients with high grade HO. The internal-external rotation arc was 44° ± 14° with low grade HO and 47° ± 15° in the matched controls without HO ( HHS was not reduced for patients with HO. The HHS was 79 ± 16 with low grade HO and 80 ± 18 in the matched controls without HO ( An important parameter for the usage of a classification system is its relevance to the staging of the clinical situation for which it has been designed. The purpose of this study was to assess the effect of radiographic HO in the Brooker classification system on the terminal range, motion arc, and clinical outcome score after THA. We demonstrated a statistically significant decrease in terminal hip internal rotation as well as a statistically significant decrease in the abduction-adduction arc of motion with high grade HO. The clinical relevance of these differences is debatable given the lack of a statistically significant difference in HHS with HO grade. Additionally, HHS is not sensitive to changes in hip ROM. Only 5% of the HHS is assigned to hip ROM Loss of hip ROM may interfere with activities of daily living, such as tying shoes, using a chair, and picking things up from the floor There are several limitations to our study. Comparisons were made to answer the study questions based on a retrospective review from prospectively maintained registries of clinical and radiographic information. Retrospectively analyzed data have several potential limitations including the fidelity of the record, loss to follow-up, and selection bias. We used a systematic approach to patient selection and a high-fidelity electronic medical record in an attempt to minimize any of these inadvertent biases. Next, the lack of terminal hip extension in the patient record or systematically collected registry information made calculating the arc of motion of the hip in flexion-extension impossible. Finally, HO after THA occurs between 4 and 12 weeks after the operation with a peak occurrence at 2 months A possible explanation for the discrepancy between HO grade and hip ROM or clinical outcome score is the false appearance of bony continuity on the anterior-to-posterior radiograph of the pelvis that is evaluated in each system. While there were many THAs with high grade HO, ankylosis after THA was rare. Our study underestimated the clinical gravity and level of impairment associated with radiographic ankylosing HO. There are several layers of HO at different periarticular depths that are superimposed to create the final image. A composite image is interpreted to generate an HO grade. This prevents any comparison to function or outcome. This notion was originally proposed by Ilahi et al Conflict of Interest Statement