Lisfranc injuries are relatively uncommon injuries but with increasing motor vehicle use their incidence may be increasing. Missed injuries can lead to chronic pain, deformity and disability and this can be avoided by having a high index of suspicion. Subtle injuries are difficult to diagnose and special imaging or stress X-rays are useful in diagnosis. The classification proposed by Hardcastle et al. (J Bone Joint Surg 64-B (1982) 349) is used most commonly and the aim of treatment must be to obtain an anatomical reduction and stable fixation as soon as possible. Treatment after 6 weeks yields poor results and salvage arthrodesis is inferior to primary reduction and stabilisation. Reduction may be by closed or open methods and fixation by K wires, screws or bioabsorbable screws. Complications occur frequently and need to be detected and managed appropriately.Jacques Lisfranc de St. Martin (1790–1847) was a French gynaecologist and surgeon. He served in the Napoleonic army and described amputation through the tarsometatarsal (TMT) joint. During the Napoleonic era cavalry troops frequently sustained a Lisfranc dislocation when the foot became trapped in the stirrup. This often led to a profound vascular insult resulting in a Lisfranc amputation. The amputation was described by the French surgeon and it should be noted that he did not describe the fracture dislocation himself. TMT injuries are rare and can be easily overlooked leading to long term pain and disability. Lisfranc injuries account for 0.2% of all fractures The TMT complex consist of the metatarsals, cuneiforms and cuboid bones with the stability provided by the osseous, capsule and ligamentous attachments. The bases of the metatarsals form a transverse arch, high medially and low laterally. In the frontal plane, the lateral aspect of the arch is 20 The articular capsule consists of a fibrous membrane lined by synovium. The joint capsule divides the TMT complex into columns and this has been proposed as a basis for the classification of these injuries The ligaments of the Lisfranc complex are variable both in course, number and insertion. They are classified into dorsal, plantar and interosseus ligaments. Each has longitudinal and transverse elements. The longitudinal elements connect the TMT joint and the transverse the intermetarsal and intercuneiform bones. There is no intermetatarsal ligament between the 1st and 2nd metatarsal. The dorsal ligaments are short flat ribboned structures numbering 6–8. They are weaker than the plantar and interosseus ligaments; hence, dorsal disruptions or dislocations are more common. The interosseus ligaments are strong and correspond to the first, second and third cuneiform-metatarsal space. The largest is the Lisfranc ligament, which is 8–10 The plantar cuneiform-metatarsal ligaments are well defined medially but variable laterally. They are variable in number. The first cuneiform metatarsal ligament is broad and there is no cuneiform-metatarsal ligament from the middle cuneiform to the second metatatarsal. An oblique ligament connects the medial cuneiform to the base of the second and third metatarsal and is the strongest. In addition to the ligaments, soft tissue structures reinforce the plantar aspect making plantar dislocations unlikely. These include muscle, tendons such as the peroneus longus and also the plantar fascia. Biomechanically the dorsal ligaments are weaker than the plantar and interosseus ligaments and as a result, in indirect injuries, the dorsal ligaments fail in tension before the plantar ligaments, hence dorsal dislocation being more common. Early classifications of the Lisfranc joint were based on the mechanism of injury, which is often complex and variable. Direct force crushes the metatarsal plantarwards with secondary medial or lateral displacment. In indirect injuries rotational forces occur with the foot in a plantarflexed position. A dorsal dislocation results with additional displacement. These classifications help define the deforming force but do not provide information that would guide management. Quénu and Küss During the Napoleonic era Lisfranc injuries were commonly sustained following a fall off a horse with the foot trapped in the stirrup. This mechanism is now rare and most injuries occur following road traffic accidents, a crush injuries e.g. industrial, following a fall or are sports related. Direct injuries as a result of crushing are often associated with significant trauma to surrounding tissues and may be associated with an open injury, compartment syndrome or ischaemia. Indirect injuries occur as a result of longitudinal forces applied with both the foot and ankle in a plantarflexed position. The dorsal ligaments fail in tension and the TMT joint is displaced dorsally primarily and secondary displacement either medial or lateral can occur. Fractures of the tarsal and metatarsal bones frequently occur in association with Lisfranc injuries. They are often associated with high-energy injuries and may involve the cuboid, calcaneus, talus and malleoli. Aitken and Poulson The symptoms and signs following a Lisfranc injury are variable. Subtle injuries with only mild tenderness and minimal swelling of the midfoot may occur in athletes or elderly. In patients with high-energy trauma significant pain, swelling and deformity occur. Open crush injuries are common and will require prompt debridement and stabilisation. Spontaneous reduction of the TMT joint can occur, masking the extent of injury and leading to a delay in diagnosis. Bruising on the plantar aspect may also be a clinical indicator of a Lisfranc injury. For all Lisfranc injuries standard AP, lateral and 30° internal oblique views should be obtained both initially and after reduction. On the AP view the first and second TMT joints are visualised and in the oblique view the lateral 3–5th TMT joints seen. Normal consistent parameters have been established which can help with diagnosis ( Subtle injuries in athletes and elderly may be difficult to diagnose. In these cases, stress views under regional or general anaesthetic may be performed with abduction and pronation stressing of the TMT joint CT scanning is indicated if plain X-rays are normal and suspicion exists of a Lisfranc injury. Fractures of the base of the metatarsal and cuneiforms are easily identified and joint congruity assessed. Any soft tissue interposition can also be detected as well as small flake fragments. The disadvantage of CT scans are that they are static images and may not be as useful in pure ligamentous injuries which need dynamic imaging. MRI has been used to identify subtle and pure ligamentous injuries to the TMT joint. Priedler The major advance in the last decade has been the emphasis on early stable anatomical reduction and stabilisation of these injuries. In displaced fractures and dislocations non-operative management has a limited role. Only two studies have reported satisfactory results with non-anatomic reduction Although most studies have shown that early anatomical reduction and stable fixation leads to the best outcome, no consensus exists on how to achieve this. Reduction may be by closed or open methods, fixation by K wires or screws and the duration of immobilisation is variable. An algorithm showing the principles of management is shown in Closed reduction can be achieved with longitudinal traction, which may be aided by Chinese finger traps. Once reduction is achieved then the TMT joints should be stabilised. Hardcastle Failure to reduce a Lisfranc injury may be due to a fracture fragment, soft tissue or tendon interposition such as the tibialis anterior tendon between the medial cuneiform and first metatarsal. The surgical approach depends on the type of the fracture. A dorsal incision over the second metatarsal allows adequate exposure of the first and second TMT joint. The neurovascular bundle deep to extensor digitorum brevis is carefully protected. The second lateral incision should leave a sufficient bridge to prevent skin necrosis and is usually centred on the fourth metatarsal. The branches of the superficial peroneal nerve should be identified and protected to prevent damage and neuroma formation. Several studies have shown that stabilisation using screws can avoid the complication of K-wires and maintain a stable reduction. Closed reduction and percutaneous use of cannulated screws has been described with good clinical results ( Cuboid crush injuries should be treated to restore the lateral column length with distraction, bone grafting and stabilisation either with a cervical H plate or K-wires. The aim of treatment should be early anatomical reduction and stable fixation within 24 The early complications include vascular injury, compartment syndrome, redislocation, complex regional pain syndrome and skin necrosis. Gisssane Late complications include osteoarthritis of the TMT joints, deformity (pes planus, cavus or planovalgus), chronic pain, prominent exostoses, non-union and abnormal gait. As a result of the mechanism of injury and energy transferred osteoarthritis occurs in many patients despite adequate reduction. Myerson reported a 15% incidence of osteoarthritis in patients with good or excellent quality of reduction. In general, most studies have consistently shown that the clinical and functional outcome following Lisfranc injuries are better if early anatomical reduction and stable fixation is performed. Although anatomical reduction and fixation does not guarantee an excellent outcome the studies have shown that non-anatomical reduction leads to poor results. Stenström Primary arthrodesis has been advocated by Granberry and Lipscomb Persisting pain and discomfort with or without deformity can be treated with functional foot orthoses initially. If this does not alleviate the symptoms then an arthrodesis is indicated. Identification of the painful joint may require further investigations with a bone scan, selective local anaesthetic injections and CT scanning. Arthrodesis for painful osteoarthritis of the TMT may be performed in-situ where there is minimal deformity or a realignment arthrodesis with or without bone grafting may be necessary. Johnson and Johnson Lisfranc injuries are relatively uncommon injuries but with increasing motor vehicle use their incidence may be increasing. Missed injuries can lead to chronic pain, deformity and disability and this can be avoided by having a high index of suspicion for these injuries. Subtle injuries are difficult to diagnose and special imaging or stress X-rays are useful in diagnosis. The classification proposed by Hardcastle et al.