Everyone understands the verbs—to chew, to smell and to swallow. Most people subconsciously take eating for granted. As consumers, we enjoy eating without much need to understand how we succeed. But we do not all succeed equally, adapting as best we can with the teeth we have managed not to lose. Impaired dentitions lead to changes in food selection, style of cooking and other food preparation. The physiology of mastication is briefly reviewed. This process necessarily involves ingestion past the lips where temperature is monitored. Incision provides extremely sensitive detection of internal texture whilst the lips and tip of tongue detect external texture. Videofluorography (VFG) has provided the essential basis for visualizing and analyzing the processes by which food is moved to the cheek teeth and is subsequently manipulated. Data on the process of crushing food between the teeth explains the release of vapor and the sensation of food texture, which change progressively as the mouthful is chewed. Salivary flow rates and salivary proteins are critical for the developing coherence of the food bolus and its adhesion to the tongue prior to swallowing. The movement of odors from the mouth to the olfactory nerves in the roof of the nasal cavity involves the dynamic combination of tongue movement, continuing respiration and, late in the chewing sequence, the adhesion of the bolus to the moving tongue, which can be seen graphically on VFG. These coordinated interactive processes together provide the basis of oral success.The physiology of mastication is a fabulous mix of coordinated processes. The generous sensory innervation of the mouth serves this coordination and at a higher level contributes to the pleasure of eating. Conscious and subconscious expectations of food qualities are developed with experience, including advertising and peer pressure. These play an important part in the selection of foods and provide a ‘profile’ of qualities that are then tested subconsciously by vision, by our fingers as the food is picked up or cut and then assessed at the front of the mouth. Most of the time spent eating is free from any conscious thought about the sensations which can be perceived if we bother to attend to them. The notable exception to this is when a sensation conflicts with unconscious expectation. This paper covers the way that food management in the mouth is effected and contributes to the sensations of texture, taste and smell. As the biological portal for ingestion, the front of the mouth is well designed to evaluate food at the stage when it can be easily rejected; the most sensitive neural acuity is found at the front of the mouth. External texture is monitored by the high touch discrimination found in the lips and tip of tongue, temperature by the lips and internal texture principally by the incisors. The lips monitor the temperature of food with a lower threshold than the rest of the mouth ( Even people who have lost all natural teeth can perceive internal structure from nerve endings in the mucosa supporting their dentures, but with dramatically lower acuity ( In a series of recent studies, the Hiiemae, Palmer, and Mioche collaboration have provided extensive insight into the oral management of food by man with notable contributions by Lucas and Prinz on factors contributing to aspects of bolus formation. The term Stage I Transport is used in descriptions of mammalian mastication to cover the movement of food from the incisors to the cheek teeth ( Coordinated action of the tongue, lips and cheeks control the food bolus throughout the chewing sequence ( The anatomy of the cheek serves this purpose particularly well. It derives stability from its origins on both upper and lower jaws ( As chewing progresses, this process of selection controls how much and which parts of the total food bolus is placed between the teeth to be penetrated during each closing phase. The degree of comminution, and thus increased exposed food surface area, is obviously relevant for digestion and release of flavour. Because many natural uncooked foods fragment progressively in the first few strokes, the degree of comminution of nuts have provided the basis for a series of methods of testing chewing efficiency since 1950 ( To extend the simple analyses of particle size, Records of chewing forces have show that the force and rate of penetration used respond to food quality ( The number of crushing strokes used per mouthful varies with food quality, volume and individual chewing patterns. Each person's rhythmic chewing movements follow their individual pattern controlled by a Central Pattern Generator in the brain stem ( Although chewing gum is not a ‘natural’ food, it can serve as an indicator of the management of a coherent bolus. In one study, the reciprocal action of cheek and tongue squeezed the gum into elongated boli along the occlusal surface tending to maximise the selection function of food compressed in each stroke. The final bolus length of chewed gum increased with increase in the initial weight of the piece of gum, from 0.3 to 4 g, but remained sensibly constant between 4 and 18 g, beyond which the length began to increase once more ( During the mush phase, food is manipulated to expose new surfaces for coating with saliva. Sensations from the surface of this bolus contribute to the monitoring of progressive change. The lingual taste nerves have rapid adaptation so they become habituated to a constant flavour as in a sauce but are sensitive to change (see review by The importance of internal bolus cohesion and adhesion to mucosa has been given prominence by The features of the bolus that contribute to its acceptability for swallowing were characterized by Oral sensation is importantly affected by saliva. The discomfort of a ‘dry mouth’ is a common experience for all public figures, but dramatically impacts on the quality of life of all those who have inadequate saliva for eating, most commonly elderly people on drugs with a xerostomic side effect. Such cases emphasize how much the rest of us take normal salivary secretion for granted. The reflex control of salivation provides another example of physiological effectiveness: parotid saliva is secreted preferentially on the chewing side with some 10-fold increase from resting flow and with low contra-lateral flow. Further, the parotid ducts discharge from the cheek opposite the molar teeth, i.e. directly onto the bolus being chewed. The dramatic output of the ipsi-lateral parotid duct starts in less than a second, that is, during the first closing stroke on the food ( The most obvious function of saliva is to provide lubrication, but for the bolus this surface wetting effect is also importantly affected by salivary proteins which contribute to the adhesiveness of food to teeth and mucosa. Further, the internal consistency of the developing bolus is dramatically effected. The composite bolus is plasticised by incorporation of water. Progressively fragmented food particles are bound in a matrix of released food fluids and dissolved components of the food ( I suggest that the three features shown by The human oropharyngeal complex evolved to benefit from a mixed diet of uncooked foods, so there is considerable freedom for how we chew a ‘modern’ diet. The generous neurological basis for physiological control and functional anatomy explain the success enjoyed even when teeth are replaced with dentures. Because impaired dentitions lead to change in food selection or the style of cooking and other food preparation, understanding the mechanics of the processes of eating is of interest to food scientists, chefs, physiologists, nutritionists, dieticians, farmers and dentists. I thank Professor Karen Hiiemae, Drs Joanne Morris, Jeffery Palmer, Laurence Mioche and Jon Prinz for valuable comments and advice. Further, I thank the following authors and publishers for permission to reproduce figures: Cambridge University Press, Cambridge for