van der Waals interaction is one component of the surface force interactions, which control bubble–particle attachment in flotation. In this paper, approximations to Lifshitz theory are developed to estimate the van der Waals interaction energy vs. separation distance between a bubble and a particle. The dielectric spectrum of the mineral particles is approximately represented using a three-parameter model involving the refractive index and the dielectric constant of minerals. The effects on the van der Waals interaction of electromagnetic retardation and electrolyte screening are estimated. The approximations yield simple predictions for the Hamaker constant and the Hamaker function, which are convenient for the modelling of the micro-processes of the bubble–particle attachment. The approximate predictions agree with the results computed from rigorous Lifshitz theory using the complete dielectric spectra. The analysis shows that van der Waals interaction in the bubble–particle attachment is affected by electromagnetic retardation (the dispersion interaction only) and electrolytes (the dipolar interactions only), and can be predicted using the refractive index of mineral particles.As particles and air bubbles are close to each other at the attachment interaction in flotation, an intervening liquid film is formed between them. The thinning of the liquid film to a critical thickness where the film ruptures, and the formation of a strong three-phase gas–solid–liquid contact have to occur for the bubble–particle attachment interaction to be successful. Now, it is well established that these micro-processes of bubble–particle attachment are controlled by the interaction among molecules, atoms and ions comprising the interacting bodies (the particle and the bubble) and the intervening liquid film generally known as surface force interaction. The name of It is customarily assumed that the net of surface force can be divided into components having different origins, and that these components are entirely independent and thus, additive. The most often considered components are those due to: electrodynamics or van der Waals interactions, electrostatic double layer interactions, and non-DLVO interactions. The first two forces are sometimes referred to as the DLVO forces since these forces are the two basic components of the celebrated Derjaguin–Landau–Verwey–Overbeek theory of the stability of hydrophobic colloids It should be noted further that the interaction between the elementary particles is influenced by nearby elementary particles. Due to this “many-body” effect, the summation of the interactions between the elementary particles is not a simple pair-wise addition, although some of the correct trends in the net force behaviour can be understood by considering the addition as a first approximation. The “additivity” rule used in the celebrated DLVO theory, significantly simplifies the interpretation of different factors affecting the stability of colloid suspension. In this paper, we follow this idea and focus on the van der Waals interactions. As shown in the following, although the van der Waals interaction is already well-understood, the calculation of the interaction relevant to the bubble–particle interaction in flotation remains a problem. This paper aims to show how the van der Waals interaction energy can be calculated for mineral particles, which are assumed to be spheres with a radius There are, essentially, two approaches to the prediction of van der Waals interaction between approaching bodies as a function of their separation distance: the microscopic approach developed by The Hamaker approach appears simple, as it only requires the calculation of a closed integration. However, the Hamaker constant is not always known. It is often estimated from the experimental data of flocculation or the rheological data Another drawback of the Hamaker approach is the assumption of the non-retarded interaction between atoms and molecules, which is valid at short separation distances. At larger separation distances, the interaction is affected by the nearby atoms or molecules and the assumption fails. This many-body effect is known as the electromagnetic retardation. The (non-retarded) Hamaker approach provides a good approximation for an intervening liquid film with a thickness less than about 4 nm. The Lifshitz approach treats each interacting material as a continuum with certain macroscopic electrodynamic properties of the interacting materials such as dielectric permittivities. The electric fields established by the fluctuating dipoles are considered to interact, both constructively and destructively. The result of these fluctuating many-body interactions is the formation of a standing wave between the bodies whereby only certain modes, or frequencies, of electromagnetic radiation may pass. The summation of all fluctuation modes in the electromagnetic field gives the van der Waals interaction energy a function of the separation distances between the macroscopic bodies such as two half-spaces (Mahanty and Ninham, 1976) or two spheres Since the many-body effect is directly taken into account in the continuum approach, the electromagnetic retardation is implicitly involved in the law for the interaction energy vs. the separation distance. For calculating the van der Waals interaction energy, the continuum approach is more rigorous than the microscopic approach. For example, the continuum approach yields a Hamaker-constant-like parameter (also called the effective Hamaker constant) for the van der Waals interaction between two half-spaces 1 and 2, immersed in a medium 3, separated by a distance  Pailthorpe and Russel (1982) compared For the calculation of the Hamaker function, Note that at room temperature, we have Here, For a highly polar liquid such as water, the relaxation in the microwave and infrared appears significant. Thus, in the case of water, the parameters of the three-parameter approximation given by Comparison of the approximation given by In the following, we develop an approximation to the complete formulation given by Inserting these into Because of the discontinuity of the permittivity The zero-frequency part is independent of the separation distance. Denoting The zero-frequency part thus can be calculated using only the dielectric constant of minerals. It represents the Keesom and Debye dipolar contributions to the Hamaker function. Since the dielectric constant of most minerals is much smaller than that of water and the summation term in The dispersion part is, however, no longer independent of separation distance. Replacing outer summation of discrete sampling frequencies by an integral over In the analytical prediction, only the first term in Here, functions The numerical computation shows that Exponent We introduce the characteristic wavelength, In the non-retarded regime, the Hamaker function should be independent of separation distance and reduces simply to the Hamaker constant. This Lifshitz–Hamaker constant predicted on the basis of continuum approach can be obtained from These equations are essentially the same as those of The last expression was used in the numerical computation. The upper limits of infinity of the summation are numerically achieved if the values of the sum do not change significantly with the increase in the summation indexes. This usually requires the summation index to be exceeded about 3000 for the outer sum. The inner sum converges rapidly within a few dozens iterations. We also used the complete spectra to compare the approximated prediction for the Hamaker function given by The modern dispersion force theory contains important subtleties. When the magnitudes of the For air–water–quartz interaction, It should be noted that froth flotation usually takes place in an aqueous medium containing different electrolytes/surfactants. The presence of these electrolytes should be considered in predicting the van der Waals interaction since the zero-frequency contribution The screening effect of electrolytes on the van der Waals interaction results in the decrease in The Debye constant is a function of the concentration For a 1:1 electrolyte solution, Note that the surfactants used as collectors and frothers in flotation can also affect the van der Waals interaction as they adsorb at the gas–liquid and solid–liquid interfaces. As a result of the adsorption, the thickness of the liquid film between the bubble and the particle may be different from the bubble–particle separation distance. The permittivity of the interacting phases may also change. These effects of the adsorption layers on the van der Waals interaction can be analysed and quantified using the continuum approach as shown by As can be seen, the van der Waals interaction predicted in this paper is differentiated based on the electromagnetic nature of mineral particles through their refractive index. This is graphically illustrated in It should be noted that minerals are often optically anisotropic and may display different dielectric responses in different crystal orientations. For these cases, the refractive index is taken as an averaged value in this paper. Full van der Waals theory for optically anisotropic materials, convenient for engineering calculations is awaited. It is anticipated that this paper provides a good start for flotation engineering calculation. There is also great effort in research devoted to the mysterious long-range hydrophobic force(s) as detected by the direct surface force measurements. Now, it appears that the forces might be associated with the capillary forces between gas bubbles of nanometer diameters formed between hydrophobic surfaces during the surface force measurements (e.g. The van der Waals interaction energy vs. separation distance between a bubble and a particle across an electrolyte solution is modelled using the Lifshitz theory. In the modelling, the dielectric spectrum of the mineral particles is approximately represented using a three-parameter model involving the refractive index and the dielectric constant of minerals. The approximations yield simple predictions for the Hamaker constant and the Hamaker function, which are convenient for the modelling of the micro-processes of the bubble–particle attachment. The approximate predictions are in good agreement with the results computed from rigorous Lifshitz theory using the complete dielectric spectra. The detailed analysis shows that only the dispersion interaction is important in the modelling of the bubble–particle attachment micro-processes and that in the modelling, only the refractive index of mineral particle, which is available in the literature, may be sufficient for predicting the van der Waals interactions. The authors gratefully acknowledge the Australian Research Council and the DFG-SFB 285 for financial support.