This is an overview of radiological imaging of the hand highlighting the various imaging modalities used in the work-up and diagnosis of a range of orthopaedic and rheumatological disorders. The biomechanics and anatomy of the human hand is extremely complex, and a good understanding is required to diagnose pathology. In this article we explain the anatomy and highlight pathology of the hand from a radiological perspective with respect to plain film, CT, ultrasound and MR imaging. Trauma of the hand is extremely common and radiology plays an important role in the diagnosis of treatable injuries including fractures, dislocations and ligament tears. Plain radiography and CT are excellent at evaluating bony injury (e.g. Rolondo or Bennett's fracture) whereas ultrasound and MR are better at evaluating soft tissue injury (e.g. Stener lesion). The hands are a common location for degenerate and inflammatory arthropathies which all have hallmark radiological features. Radiology also plays an important role in the diagnosis and work-up of bone lesions in the hand including enchondromas, osteoid osteomas and chondrosarcomas.The human hand is a very complex structure that allows us to perform fine motor skills that are essential to our everyday living. There are a number of conditions that can affect the hand that can lead to significant dysfunction and disability. This article describes the normal radiological anatomy of the hand and the use of various imaging modalities in the diagnosis of a range of hand pathologies. In humans, each hand is composed of 19 bones (five metacarpals and fourteen phalanges). Each finger contains three phalanges (proximal, middle and distal) except for the thumb, which has two phalanges (proximal and distal). In addition, most people have five sesamoid bones in each hand, two at the thumb metacarpophalangeal joint (MCPJ), one at the thumb interphalangeal joint (IPJ), and one each at index and little finger MCPJs. There are multiple small joints in the hands including connection between the carpal bones of the wrist and the proximal ends of the metacarpals called the carpometacarpal joints (CMCJs). Between the metacarpals and proximal phalanges are the MCPJs, and further distally are the proximal interphalangeal joint (PIPJ) and distal interphalangeal joint (DIPJ). The thumb with two phalanges has a single IPJ ( The plain radiograph is an extremely important radiological examination and often the primary investigation performed in the diagnosis of traumatic bone injury and joint pathology. There are multiple muscles and tendons in the hand. These can be divided into two main groups; intrinsic and extrinsic muscles. Intrinsic muscles arise from within the hand itself, whereas extrinsic muscles originate in the forearm and insert onto the bones of the hand via long tendons crossing the wrist joint. These tendons are the volar flexors and dorsal extensors. The volar flexor tendons for each digit are composed of both flexor digitorum profundus (FDP) and flexor digitorum superficialis (FDS) which run parallel together with FDS lying superficial to the FDP tendon. The FDP tendon inserts onto the distal phalanx. The FDS tendon splits at the level of the MCP joint, with each limb passing to the sides of the FDP tendon before inserting onto the basal sides of the middle phalanx. High-frequency ultrasound can be used to evaluate the relationship and insertion of these tendons as demonstrated in Each flexor tendon passes through a fibrosseous tunnel that consists of five annular pulleys (A1-A5) and three cruciform pulleys (C1-C3). They secure the tendon from proximal to distal to the adjacent phalanges to prevent bowstringing on flexion and facilitate smooth gliding of the tendons. If the tendon or pulley becomes thickened this can cause bunching and locking of the tendon known as trigger finger which can be assessed with ultrasound. The dorsal extensors of the digits consist of extensor digitorum communis, extensor indicis proprius, and extensor digiti minimi. The extensor digitorum tendon for each digit has a central slip that inserts onto the base of the middle phalanx and two lateral bands that pass on either side of the central slip and attach to the base of the distal phalanx. Ultrasound can be used to assess these tendons ( For the thumb flexor and extensor tendons. On the volar side is the extrinsic flexor pollicis longus tendon that passes between the two heads of the flexor pollicis brevis muscle and inserts at the distal phalanx. On the dorsal extensor aspect there are three tendons the abductor pollicis longus (APL), extensor pollicis brevis (EPB), and extensor pollicis longus (EPL). The APL and EPB tendons are located within the first extensor compartment of the wrist. APL attaches to the base of the first metacarpal and EPB to the proximal phalanx. EPL lies within the third extensor compartment of the wrist crossing over distally and inserting onto the distal phalanx of the thumb. Other important structures in the hand that can be assessed radiologically include the volar plate and collateral ligaments. The volar plate is a fibrocartilaginous structure located at the volar aspect of the MCPJ and IPJ, it helps to reinforce the joint capsule and limit hyperextension. Collateral ligaments are also important in stabilizing the MCPJ and IPJ. On ultrasound collateral ligaments are usually seen as thin echogenic or on MR low signal bands crossing the joint and inserting onto the adjacent bony boundaries. Trauma of the hand is common and can lead to significant disability and loss of function if not diagnosed and treated early. Fractures of the hand account for 19% of all fractures presenting to the accident and emergency department with the little finger ray being the most commonly injured. The plain radiograph is usually the first-line investigation in the assessment of hand fractures. It can evaluate the fracture morphology (e.g. transverse, oblique or spiral); its location (i.e. neck, shaft or base); any intra-articular extension; comminution; impaction; displacement; angulation and other associated fractures or dislocations. In complex cases and for preoperative planning a CT with multiplanar bone reformats is usually performed to fully assess the fracture and its orientation. Boxer fracture is the most common type of metacarpal fracture; it is typically a transverse fracture through the neck of the little finger metacarpal with palmar angulation of the distal fragment as shown in In the trauma context the base of the fourth and fifth metacarpals are important review areas particularly in a patient following a punch injury with no obvious fracture seen on the plain film. This is because overlap of the metacarpal bases with the carpal bones can be very subtle and easily missed but can indicate significant bony trauma. There are two important eponymous fractures that involve the thumb. A Bennett's fracture is an intra-articular two-part fracture of the base of the first metacarpal bone. It is often a result of forced abduction. A Rolando fracture is similar to Bennett's but the fracture is comminuted i.e. three parts or more ( The plain radiograph can diagnose bony volar plate avulsion injuries that occur at the proximal interphalangeal joint (PIPJ) commonly as a result of forced hyperextension. On radiograph a small avulsed fragment of bone is seen at the base of the volar aspect of the middle phalanx as demonstrated in Whilst the plain radiograph is excellent at demonstrating the majority of fractures in the hand, some fractures are occult or too subtle to detect. In these cases, clinicians will often request further imaging in the form of CT or MR. MR is the most sensitive imaging modality for diagnosing undisplaced or trabecular fractures by demonstrating bone marrow oedema. Fluid-sensitive fat suppressed sequences (e.g. STIR; short tau inversion recovery) are the most sensitive in the detection of bone oedema and therefore diagnosing occult fractures. T1 weighted MR images can also demonstrate low signal fracture lines. CT has an important role in diagnosing occult hand fractures and is very easily available. It can evaluate fracture configuration for preoperative planning and asses for any evidence of healing. For assessment of soft tissue injuries, high-frequency ultrasound and MR are the best imaging modalities. Boxer knuckle is caused by the disruption of sagittal bands as a result of acute direct trauma or chronic repetitive trauma, typically seen in boxers. Sagittal bands are the main stabilizers of the extensor tendon at the MCPJ during flexion and extension. Sagittal bands exert tensile forces during flexion that prevent the tendon from dislocating in either radial or ulnar directions. The third finger is the commonest location for this injury. Ultrasound can be used in the assessment of pulley injuries of the digits which are prevalent amongst extreme rock climbers. On ultrasound a pulley injury will demonstrate abnormal hypoechoic thickening or non-visualization. A practical indirect sign of pulley injury is volar displacement of the flexor tendon, called bowstringing. This can be demonstrated dynamically on forced finger flexion, as the finger is flexed the distance between the flexor tendon and the underlying bone increases. The A2 pulley is the most commonly injured pulley. Trigger finger is another condition in the hand, involving impairment of the gliding movement of the flexor tendons caused by tendon constriction due to thickening of the A1 pulley or tendon sheath. On ultrasound, hypoechoic thickening of the A1 pulley at the level of the MCPJ and buckling of the tendon as it passes beneath the pulley on forced finger flexion can be demonstrated. Collateral ligament injuries of the digits can be evaluated radiologically. A radiograph is usually the first-line investigation as can often give the diagnosis by demonstrating an avulsion fracture, usually at the base of the proximal phalanx. It can also evaluate for any joint instability e.g. joint space widening or subluxation. For X-ray occult injuries MR or US can be used. On ultrasound an injured collateral ligament may appear hypoechoic or swollen, or there may be partial or complete discontinuity of the ligament fibres indicating a partial or full thickness tear. On MR, findings include soft tissue and bone marrow oedema, and discontinuity of ligaments which are seen as low signal linear bands, best seen in the coronal plane. A gamekeeper's or skier's thumb, is an ulnar collateral ligament injury of the thumb caused by forced abduction. An important finding to identify is the presence of a Stener lesion, a displaced full-thickness distal UCL tear at the first MCPJ. The UCL is displaced proximal to the MCPJ and adductor pollicis aponeurosis. Without surgery this lesion will not heal and can lead to permanent instability and dysfunction. On ultrasound a Stener lesion will appear as hypoechoic rounded structure located proximal to MCPJ. A hyperechoic focus attached to the retracted ligament casting an acoustic shadow is characteristic of a bone avulsion. On MR the appearances of a Stener lesion have been compared to a ‘yo-yo on a string’. The string represents the adductor pollicis aponneurosis and yo-yo the retracted and proximally displaced UCL. Radiology plays a very important role in the clinical work-up of patients with suspected joint problems including inflammatory and non-inflammatory arthropathies. The bilateral hand radiograph is usually the first-line investigation as it is very easy to perform and gives an excellent overview of joint pathology in the hands. Osteoarthritis (OA) is the most common joint disease. It is a degenerative condition and therefore tends to occur in older patients. The hallmark radiological features on plain radiograph are joint space loss, subchondral sclerosis and osteophyte formation ( Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a progressive inflammatory disorder that can affect any synovial joint in the body. The radiological hallmarks include soft tissue swelling, osteopenia, joint space loss and marginal erosions In the early stages of inflammatory joint disease, the plain radiograph is often normal. Ultrasound is very sensitive at evaluating the soft tissues and detecting early abnormalities associated with inflammatory arthritis including joint effusions, synovial thickening, and tenosynovitis. Power Doppler can also be used to look for increased vascularity to indicate active synovitis ( The crystal-induced arthritides include gout and calcium pyrophosphate dehydrate disease (CPPD) also known as pseudogout. Gout is a metabolic disorder that results in hyperuricaemia and leads to monosodium urate crystal deposition in articular cartilage. It usually takes 4–6 years before gout is evident radiographically and so the majority of patients are treated before features develop. The hallmark radiographic features of gout include well-defined erosions, with sclerotic margins and over-hanging edges, and high-density soft tissue nodules called gouty tophi. It can affect any joint and has a random distribution in the hands. CPPD is associated with chondrocalcinosis that can be detected on plain film. The triangular fibrocartilage complex (TFCC) in the wrist is a common site and so should be carefully evaluated. A relatively common benign medullary bone lesion in the phalanges of the hand is a cartilage based lesion called an enchondroma. Its typical features on plain film are a well-defined, slightly expansile lucent lesion, centred in the medullary cavity with endosteal scalloping ( It can be difficult to differentiate an enchondroma from a low grade malignant chondrosarcoma. Important features to look out for are periostitis and cortical breach as these are not associated with a benign enchondroma. Also any bone oedema (without fracture) or soft tissue component on MR is concerning for malignancy. Chondrosarcomas are malignant primary cartilaginous bone tumours that most commonly occur in patients older than 40 years of age. Although typically they occur within the long bones they can occur in the hands as a result malignant transformation from a pre-existing cartilagous tumour such as an enchondroma or osteochondroma. They are classically lytic aggressive lesions with associated soft tissue mass with internal amorphous, snowflake calcification. ( Osteoid osteoma is a benign bone-forming tumour that typically occurs in younger patients. Giant cell tumours of the tendon sheath are uncommon soft tissue tumours that tend to occur in the hand and arise from the tendon sheath on the volar surface of the digits ( Radiology plays an important role in the diagnosis and management of a range of pathologies in the hand. The anatomy of the hand is extremely complex and therefore knowledge of this and what the various imaging modalities can offer will help provide patients with the best possible care. Special thanks to the Radiology Department at The Robert Jones & Agnes Hunt Orthopaedic Hospital in Oswestry for permission to use