The mechanism of degradation of maleic acid in presence of Fe(III) in aqueous solution under UV-illumination has been investigated. The nature of detected intermediates depends on the type of the ferric salt being used: malic and malonic acids are detected when using iron sulphate, and acrylic acid when using iron chloride or iron perchlorate. Fumaric acid, generated by cis–trans isomerization process, as well as formic acid are detected in all cases. The degradation rate of maleic acid and its stable intermediates, that have been studied separately, follows a zero-order kinetics; the values of the rate constants depend on the nature of the carboxylic acid considered and on the type of Fe(III) salt used as source of Fe(III) in solution, indicating that the organic acid is reactive when it is co-ordinated with Fe(III). The role of oxygen has also been studied. From these experimental information, the mechanism of maleic acid degradation is discussed.Advanced oxidation processes (AOPs) are, at present, a subject of increasing interest as water treatment methodologies due to their ability to degrade biorecalcitrant organic compounds by means of the production of the OH Fe(III)-photocatalysis is an AOP that plays a significant role in environmental processes due to the ubiquitous character of Fe(III) in natural waters In spite of the fact that the photochemistry of Fe(III)–oxalate systems is well known In the present work, the mechanism of Fe(III) photocatalyzed degradation of maleic acid has been investigated. Particular attention has been paid to the influence of the different Fe(III) salt used on the mechanism of maleic acid degradation. Apart from being a potential intermediate of aromatic degradation, maleic acid is a compound of environmental concern because it is usually released into wastewaters during manufacture of polymer products, and particularly in the production of alkyd and resins, and in the dyeing and finishing of textiles All chemicals mentioned hereafter were, at least, of reagent grade and used as received. The glyoxylic acid used was a 50% (w/w) aqueous solution. Experiments were performed at 25.0±0.1 The concentration of the organic compounds present in solution were followed by HPLC and TOC measurements. The HPLC system was a LC-10 AD Shimadzu Liquid Chromatograph equipped with a LC-10 AT VP pump, a UV-Visible absorbance detector (Applied Absorbance Biosystems 759A) adjusted at 210 TOC determination was carried out with a TOC-5000 Shimadzu total carbon analyser provided with a NDIR detector. The Fe(II) analysis were performed by the Chemical kinetics simulator program (CKS version 1.01 from IBM, Almaden Research Centre) has been used to test mechanistic hypothesis by means of simulation of concentration profiles of those species appearing in the proposed mineralization routes of maleic acid. Aqueous maleic acid is readily degraded at pH There are some evidences in the literature about the influence of the nature of the Fe(III) salt used on the degradation of some organics such as phenol When ferric ions are present in aqueous solution, the photodegradation of an organic compound can proceed by (i) direct oxidation by means of ligand to metal charge transfer (LMCT) from the organic to the metal cation, when the organic molecule is included in the co-ordination sphere of the iron complex In the light of the obtained results ( The mineralization rate and the intermediate products formed during Fe(III) photocatalyzed degradation of maleic acid in the presence of different Fe(III) salts have been investigated. The direct LMCT of the maleate anion to Fe(III) gives an organic radical that readily decarboxylates to form CO The organic radical produced can evolve to acrylic acid (CH Formic acid, which is the intermediate detected at much higher concentration during maleic acid degradation ( In order to give more insight in the mechanism of Fe(III) assisted photocatalytic degradation of maleic acid, both the kinetics and the intermediate products of formic, acrylic, malic and malonic acids oxidation have been investigated. In Along the time course of degradation of formic acid, the organic carbon of this acid coincides with the measured TOC in solution. As it has been previously indicated, this means that no stable intermediates in solution are formed during formic acid mineralization. Direct oxidation of formic acid by LMCT, followed by a decarboxylation process, is expected to be a low efficient process because it implies the formation of a highly unstable H Formic acid is the only intermediate detected during UV-illumination of acrylic acid in the presence of Fe(III) added as Fe The most probable initial step for acrylic acid degradation is OH The time course of the intermediates formed during malic acid photocatalyzed degradation in presence of Fe(III) from Fe When Fe When FeCl Formic and acetic acids are the only intermediates detected during malonic acid photocatalytic degradation in presence of Fe(III) from Fe The experimental results obtained in this work seems to indicate that malic, acrylic and malonic acids are the only stable intermediates that can be formed in the first oxidative steps of maleic acid degradation. However, the detected concentrations of such intermediates are very low. Kinetics simulation models can help us to test the reliability of proposed mineralization routes once degradation rate constants of the species included in such routes have been found ( maleic acid → acrylic acid → formic acid → CO maleic acid → malic acid → malonic acid → acetic acid + formic acid → CO maleic acid → malonic acid → acetic acid + formic acid → CO Comparing the results obtained from the modelling with those from the experiments, it is concluded that the pathway (a) could only be the main route for maleic acid degradation when the Fe(III) source is FeCl Therefore, the information derived from the intermediates detected in solution during maleic acid degradation in the presence of Fe The concentration of Fe(III) in solution used in the experiments was much lower than the concentration needed for maleic acid mineralization. Thus, to sustain the catalytic effect of Fe(III), a way to conduct reoxidation of Fe(II) to Fe(III) is needed. When Fe Oxygen is a possible oxidant agent capable to maintain a constant Fe(II)/Fe(III) ratio. However, the radical species produced along the maleic acid oxidative degradation can also take part in Fe(II) oxidation to Fe(III) (e.g., see The maleic acid photocatalyzed degradation assisted by Fe(III) from FeCl Fe(III) photocatalytic elimination of maleic acid in aqueous solution follows a zero-order kinetics with rate constant values highly dependent on the Fe(III) salt nature. From the studies on both the nature and the degradation rate of the detected intermediates, it is concluded that the mechanism of Fe(III)-assisted photocatalytic degradation of maleic acid depends on the Fe(III) salt source. In the presence of Fe(III) from FeCl The authors wish to thank to CICYT (project no. PPQ2002-04060-C02-01) and to EC (CADOX project) for financial support.