The anodic oxidation of sulfanilic acid solutions has been studied in acidic medium using a divided cell with a boron-doped diamond (BDD) anode and a stainless steel cathode. Overall mineralization was achieved under all experimental conditions tested due to the efficient destruction of sulfanilic acid and all its by-products with hydroxyl radicals generated at the BDD anode from water oxidation. The alternative use of an undivided cell with the same electrodes gave rise to the coating of the cathode with polymeric compounds, thus preventing the complete electrochemical incineration of sulfanilic acid. The solutions treated in the anodic compartment of the divided cell were degraded at similar rate under pH regulation within the pH interval 2.0–6.0. The mineralization current efficiency was enhanced when the applied current decreased and the initial substrate concentration increased. The decay of sulfanilic acid was followed by reversed-phase HPLC, showing a pseudo first-order kinetics. Hydroquinone and p-benzoquinone were identified as aromatic intermediates by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry and/or reversed-phase HPLC. Maleic, acetic, formic, oxalic and oxamic acids were detected as generated carboxylic acids by ion-exclusion HPLC. Ionic chromatographic analysis of electrolyzed solutions revealed that the N content of sulfanilic acid was mainly released as 
                        
                           
                              
                                 NH
                              
                              
                                 4
                              
                              
                                 +
                              
                           
                        
                      ion and in much smaller proportion as 
                        
                           
                              
                                 NO
                              
                              
                                 3
                              
                              
                                 -
                              
                           
                        
                      ion.The contamination of water bodies by man-made organic chemicals is a critical issue that recent water framework directives from all countries are trying to address for achieving good water quality status and healthy ecosystems. A large variety of chemicals, dyes, pesticides and drugs are found as pollutants in industrial wastewaters, as well as at low contents of μg Electro-oxidation or anodic oxidation (AO) is the most popular electrochemical AOP for water remediation. In this procedure, the organic matter contained in a contaminated solution is oxidized by direct charge transfer at the anode (M) and reaction with physisorbed hydroxyl radicals (M( However, the effectiveness of AO depends largely on the anode material. When active anodes like Pt, IrO Sulfanilic acid or 4-aminobenzenesulfonic acid is widely used in the production of sulfonamide pharmaceuticals, pesticides, sulfonated azo dyes, dye mordants, species and food pigments. It is toxic and carcinogenic. Its high water solubility favors its accumulation in rivers and surface waters when it is produced, for example, from the reduction of sulfonated azo dyes under anaerobic conditions ( This paper presents an extensive and careful study on the AO of sulfanilic acid solutions in the anodic compartment of a divided BDD/SS tank reactor. The influence of pH, applied current and substrate concentration on the degradation rate, mineralization degree and mineralization current efficiency (MCE) was examined. The kinetics of sulfanilic acid decay was monitored by HPLC. Stable intermediates were identified by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC–MS) and the evolution of aromatic by-products, generated carboxylic acids and released inorganic nitrogen ions was followed by different LC techniques. From these results, a plausible reaction sequence for sulfanilic acid mineralization involving measured intermediates is proposed. Sulfanilic acid (>99% purity) of reagent grade supplied by Sigma–Aldrich was used without further purification. Oxalic, oxamic, maleic, acetic and formic acids were of reagent grade purchased from Merck and Panreac. Anhydrous sodium sulfate, used as background electrolyte, and sulfuric acid and sodium hydroxide, used to regulate the solution pH, were of analytical grade supplied by Merck. Solutions were prepared with high-purity water obtained from a Millipore Milli-Q system with resistivity >18 A scheme of the system used for the AO treatment of sulfanilic acid is depicted in Solutions of 100 The solution pH was determined on a Crison GLP 22 pH-meter. The aliquots withdrawn from electrolyzed solutions were filtered with 0.45 The formation of sulfate ion is expected from the oxidation behavior of sulfonated compounds ( The kinetics for sulfanilic acid decay and the evolution of aromatic intermediates were followed by reversed-phase HPLC using a Shimadzu LC-10 ADvp fitted with a Thermo Electron Corporation Hypersil ODS 5 To identify the stable intermediates formed during sulfanilic acid degradation, the organic components of short-time electrolyzed solutions were extracted three times with dichloromethane using 15 A first assay was performed by electrolyzing 100 From the above considerations, the AO behavior of sulfanilic acid solutions was investigated in the anodic compartment of the divided BDD/SS tank reactor shown in Since these anodically generated protons are not neutralized by their consumption (or OH In view of the need of pH regulation when a sulfanilic acid solution is treated in a divided cell, a series of trials were made to clarify the role of this parameter over the oxidation power of BDD. The applied current is a key experimental parameter in AO because it regulates the amount of reactive BDD( The increase in current can also yield a lower relative proportion of BDD( The higher The influence of sulfanilic acid concentration on its mineralization process was also checked. To do this, solutions containing between 240 and 2530  The kinetics for the reaction between sulfanilic acid and electrogenerated BDD( The effect of sulfanilic acid concentration on its decay kinetics is exemplified in Several solutions of 240 A different behavior was detected for generated carboxylic acids. Ion-exclusion chromatograms of the above electrolyzed solution displayed defined peaks related to oxalic ( Maleic, acetic and formic acids were poorly accumulated (<0.8 The mineralization of On the basis of by-products detected, the reaction sequence of It has been demonstrated that solutions of sulfanilic acid in acidic medium were completely mineralized in the anodic compartment of a divided BDD/SS tank reactor by the oxidation action of BDD( The authors are grateful to