A comparison between unassisted and calcium fluoride-enhanced leaching demonstrated that calcium fluoride can markedly boost the efficiency and accelerate the rate of vanadium leaching from stone coal. Analysis methods were adopted to identify the mechanism of calcium fluoride-enhanced vanadium leaching from stone coal, including Inductively Coupled Plasma Atomic Emission Spectroscopy (ICP-AES), valence state of vanadium, X-ray Diffractometry (XRD), X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS), 19F liquid Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR), Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) and thermodynamics. The whole calcium fluoride-enhanced vanadium leaching process was that calcium fluoride reacted with sulfuric acid and then generated HF(aq); calcite was dissolved into the acid; chlorite and phlogopite were thoroughly disintegrated and subsequently generated quartz, K+, Mg2+, [SiF6]2−, [AlF5]2− and Al3+; the released V(III) was oxidized to VO2+ by O2 from the air. It is the procedure that fluorine combined with aluminum and silicon in the lattice of vanadium-bearing phlogopite to generate [SiF6]2− and [AlF5]2− that facilitated the vanadium leaching from stone coal. This generation decreased the ∆G° of phlogopite disintegration, declined the effect of chemical reaction on vanadium leaching, accelerated the leaching rate of vanadium and boosted the leaching efficiency of vanadium.Vanadium is an important strategic resource that is almost exclusively used in ferrous and non-ferrous alloys ( Stone coal is a type of inferior anthracite in which the grade of vanadium is low (less than 1% usually). Most of the vanadium in stone coal exists in the crystal lattice of the aluminosilicate minerals and isomorphically replaces Al(III) in vanadium-bearing micas ( However, the present technologies and equipment for extracting vanadium from stone coal are relatively laggard. Most traditional processes neither are inefficient ( The main purpose of this work is to analyze the mechanism of calcium fluoride-enhanced vanadium leaching from stone coal by thermodynamic analyses and the comparison between unassisted and calcium fluoride-assisted vanadium leaching. The stone coal used in this study was obtained from Jiangxi province in China. Prior to the leaching tests, the ore was crushed to a grain size of 0–3 Leaching tests were carried out to determine the effects of sulfuric acid and time on the unassisted and calcium fluoride-assisted vanadium leaching from stone coal. The tests about the effect of sulfuric acid concentration on the efficiency of calcium fluoride-assisted vanadium leaching were carried out in magnetic temperature-controlled stirrers (SZCL-2A) at liquid/solid ratio (L/S) of 1 The leachate and residue obtained from the leaching tests at 15% (v/v) H The vanadium concentration in the aqueous phase was determined by ferrous ammonium sulfate titration using 2-(phenylamino)-benzoic acid as an indicator ( By comparing the analyses of the raw ore with those of the leachate and residue, it is possible to infer the whole leaching process. Furthermore, comparing calcium fluoride-assisted and unassisted leaching behaviors can identify the mechanism of calcium fluoride-enhanced vanadium leaching from stone coal. Thermodynamic analyses were conducted to further confirm the reactions that described calcium fluoride-assisted vanadium leaching from stone coal and the associated mechanism. To study the function of calcium fluoride in the leaching process, the effects of sulfuric acid concentration and leaching time on the vanadium leaching efficiency were tested in the presence and absence of calcium fluoride.  To investigate the reason for the significant differences in the efficiency of unassisted and calcium fluoride-assisted vanadium leaching from stone coal, the leachate was analyzed by ICP-AES, as shown in Due to the strong electronegativity of fluorine, it was necessary to investigate the forms of fluorine present in the leachate obtained from calcium fluoride-assisted leaching process. The The residue was analyzed by XRD and SEM. Therefore, the structures of phlogopite and chlorite were thoroughly disintegrated when calcium fluoride was introduced into the leaching system. In contrast, when the leaching process was carried without the addition of calcium fluoride, only a small fraction of phlogopite and chlorite was dissolved and chlorite was transformed into glauconite. Besides, the increased intensity in the quartz peaks relative to the raw ore can be ascribed to the fact that the phlogopite and chlorite structures disintegrated. However, this increase was less pronounced when the raw ore was leached with calcium fluoride. Thus, a portion of silicon may have entered the leachate, which can be seen in Analyses of the leachate and residue suggest that the leaching process with calcium fluoride can be described as follows: calcium fluoride reacted with sulfuric acid and then generated HF However, the feasibility of the reactions described in these equations should be theoretically discussed using thermodynamic analyses. Thermodynamics were rarely researched in the fields of chemical engineering and hydrometallurgy. Fortunately,  In order to further confirm the leaching process, the leaching kinetics was applied into the analyses. The SEM images of the raw ore ( According to the SCM, leaching kinetics for chemical reaction and internal diffusion control respectively are following: The effect of introducing calcium fluoride into the leaching system on the controlling step was investigated. The results were shown in Therefore, introduction of calcium fluoride transformed vanadium leaching from the control of chemical reaction into the control of internal diffusion in a short time. Calcium fluoride decreased the effect of chemical reaction on vanadium leaching and accelerated the leaching rate of vanadium. Based on the above discussions, the calcium fluoride-assisted leaching process with can be summarized as follows: chlorite and phlogopite were thoroughly disintegrated, and released V, Al, K, Mg, Si etc. The V(III) was oxidized into VO The mechanism of calcium fluoride enhancing vanadium leaching from stone coal is that fluorine combined with aluminum and silicon in the lattice of vanadium-bearing phlogopite to generate [SiF From the results of this study, the following conclusions can be drawn: The whole calcium fluoride-assisted vanadium leaching process from stone coal was that calcium fluoride reacted with sulfuric acid and then generated HF The mechanism of calcium fluoride enhancing vanadium leaching was that fluorine combined with aluminum and silicon in the lattice of vanadium-bearing phlogopite to generate [SiF This study was supported by the key science and technology support program (