The optimum conditions for the extraction of palladium and rhodium from spent automobile catalysts by microwave roasting were determined using response surface methodology (RSM). A central composite design (CCD) was used to investigate the effects of three independent variables (namely proportion (m/m, reagent/material), roasting temperature (°C) and holding time (min)) on the leaching rate of palladium and rhodium. The independent variables were coded at three levels and their actual values based on experimental results. The CCD consisted of 20 experimental points and six replications at the center point. Data were analyzed using design expert and statistical analysis system software. A second-order polynomial model was used for predicting the response. The model explained 53% more variation. Canonical analysis of surface responses shows that the stationary surface was a saddle. The optimal conditions for the leaching rate of palladium and rhodium obtained using ridge analysis were 9.75, 550°C, 60min; 9.00, 540°C, 50min; and 9.96, 550°C, 53.84min, respectively. The predicted leaching rate of palladium is more than 99.29% and the predicted leaching rate of rhodium is more than 95.34% under three optimum conditions. In order to obtain the highest leaching rate, the conditions for the extraction of palladium and rhodium were tuned to 10, 550°C, 60min. The actual leaching rates of palladium and rhodium were 99.33% and 95.48% at the tuned conditions, which are very similar to those predicted by RSM models.Palladium and rhodium were widely applied in the automobile catalytic converter to convert the emission of gaseous pollutants such as carbon monoxide, hydrocarbons and nitrogen to carbon dioxide and moisture ( Natural resources of palladium and rhodium are limited and their demand is increasing because of their extensive uses in automobile catalyst. So, it is necessary to recycle them from the spent automobile catalytic converter ( Microwave heating technique as a novel application was used in many fields. Microwave-assisted leaching has been used to improve the extraction yield of metal and to reduce process time, especially with the environmental-friendly processes ( Response surface methodology (RSM), described originally by The report was to enhance the leaching rate of palladium and rhodium by microwave roasting and to optimize the main influencing factors (roasting temperature, holding time, the proportion of reagent and material) using central composite design (CCD) and response surface methodology (RSM) analysis. The raw materials used in this work were the spent binary catalyst of palladium and rhodium. The spent catalyst was cracked by the bill mill and the main particle size is 2.12 um. The main chemical composition is cordierite, palladium and rhodium located at the surface of the cordierite substrate. The leaching reagents consisted of sodium chlorate (NaClO The microwave roasting equipment used in the study is an industry microwave with automatic control devices. The microwave power is 1.5 The catalytic converter was crushed and milled using a ball mill. A main particle size of 2.12 The appropriate roasting conditions, including roasting temperature, holding time, the proportion of reagent and material, for spent automobile catalyst sample were investigated. Firstly, the leaching rate was tested when the holding time varied from 30 to 150 Optimization for the microwave roasting extraction technique of palladium and rhodium from spent automobile catalysts was carried out using RSM ( The response surface regression (RSREG) procedure of statistical analysis system (SAS) and design expert (version 8.0.5) software were used to analyze the experimental data ( where Optimal conditions for the microwave roasting process of spent automobile catalysts depended on the proportion of reagent and material, the roasting temperature and the holding time which were obtained using the predictive equations of RSM. The leaching rate of palladium and rhodium was determined under optimal conditions. The predicted and experimental values were compared in order to determine the validity of the model. The chemical composition of the catalytic converter samples was confirmed by X-ray fluorescence (XRF). The chemical composition of the spent catalytic converter was showed in In general, the leaching efficiency by microwave roasting is influenced by multiple parameters such as roasting temperature, holding time and the proportion of reagent and material. Their effects may be either interactive or independent ( For roasting temperature, the leaching rate of palladium and rhodium increased with an increasing temperature up to 500 The selection of the proportion of reagent and material was the final step in a series of preliminary experiments. The results showed that leaching rate increased when the proportion of reagent and material increased from 6 to 14, and the leaching rate of palladium reached a maximum at 10. Hence, the lower, middle and upper levels of the proportion chosen for RSM were 9, 10 and 11, respectively. The three factors and lower, middle and upper design points for RSM are shown in The relating response variable to coded levels of the independent variables was obtained by multiple regression equations ( The regression equations obtained after the analysis of variance (ANOVA) give the level of independent variables and leaching rate as a function of the initial values of the proportion of reagent and material, roasting temperature and holding time. The leaching rate of palladium may be best predicted by the model, The leaching rate of rhodium may be best predicted by the model, The calculated coefficient of determination (R The R In general, proceeding with exploration and optimization of a fitted response surface may produce poor or misleading results unless the model exhibits an adequate fit ( An ANOVA of the regression parameters of the predicted response surface quadratic models for the leaching rate was shown in  In the first place, the regression equation was obtained, and the regression models allowed the prediction of the effects of the three parameters on the leaching rate of palladium and rhodium. The relationship between independent and dependent variables was illustrated in three-dimensional representation of the response surface and two-dimensional contour plots generated by the models. Because the holding time exhibited insignificant effects on the leaching rate of palladium and rhodium, the response surface and contour plots were generated as a function of the proportion of reagent and material (9–11) and roasting temperature (450–550 The results showed that the roasting temperature demonstrated quadratic effects on the leaching rate of palladium. With increasing the roasting temperature, the leaching rate of palladium reached a maximum value (99.03%) at 525 Considering the interaction regression coefficients obtained for independent and dependent variables, the proportion of reagent and material and the roasting temperature has also a negative effect. So, the interaction effect of three factors should be considered. The results were shown in The results showed that the proportion and the holding time demonstrated quadratic effects on the leaching rate of palladium. The leaching rate of palladium decreased with the increase of the proportion and reached a minimum value (98.74%) at about 10.2:1, followed by an increase with its further increase. The leaching rate of palladium increased with the increase of the holding time and reached a maximum value (98.77%) at about 53.6 The results showed that the roasting temperature demonstrated quadratic effects on the leaching rate of palladium. The leaching rate of palladium increased with increasing the roasting temperature, reached a maximum value (98.79%) at 504 Through the response surface analysis, the proportion of reagent and material was found to be most effective in the extracting process of palladium and rhodium. The optimized conditions for the extraction of palladium and rhodium were 9.75, 550 Second-order polynomial model could be used to optimize the extraction of palladium and rhodium from spent automobile catalysts for maxing leaching rate. The proportion of reagent and material was found to be most effective in the extracting process of palladium and rhodium. Hence, the conditions for the extraction of palladium and rhodium were 9.75, 550 The authors are grateful for the financial support from the