Tibiotalocalcaneal arthrodesis using intramedullary nail fixation is a technically demanding procedure. Periprosthetic fracture in association with tibiotalocalcaneal arthrodesis is a rare occurrence, with relatively few instances reported. The present report describes 2 such instances that occurred after tibiotalocalcaneal arthrodesis using retrograde femoral intramedullary nail fixation. Studies have suggested that a longer nail might decrease the incidence of periprosthetic fracture. Other factors could also have an influence, including the proximal screw orientation and the presence of medical comorbidities, such as osteopenia.Extensive arthrodesis of the hindfoot and ankle is often necessary in treating patients with significant deformity or end-stage arthritis. Tibiotalocalcaneal arthrodesis can be effective in treating deformity and/or pain due to neurological disorders, Charcot neuroarthropathy, talar avascular necrosis, rheumatoid arthritis, and post-traumatic arthritis. Many fixation options are available to the foot and ankle surgeon. One construct that has gained popularity in recent years is the use of intramedullary (IM) nail fixation. The common complications associated with IM fixation include delayed union, nonunion, malunion, hardware failure, and deep infection. Periprosthetic IM nail fractures are a rare occurrence, with relatively few instances reported in the published literature. This report describes 2 such instances experienced after attempted tibiotalocalcaneal (TTC) arthrodesis using retrograde femoral IM nail fixation (Synthes USA, Paoli, PA). A 38-year-old female with a spastic equinovarus deformity to her right lower extremity with resulting ulceration sub-fifth metatarsal was treated at our institution for deformity correction. The deformity, which was a complication resulting from an upper motor neuron lesion secondary to multiple neurosurgeries, was semirigid and progressive in nature. The patient underwent gradual deformity correction with a dynamic external fixator over the course of 6 weeks to allow gradual manipulation of the soft tissue and neurovascular structures. TTC arthrodesis was then performed using a fibular take-down approach and humeral locking plate and compression screws. The patient, who was a long-time smoker, went on to nonunion. The decision was made to revise her TTC arthrodesis using a retrograde femoral IM nail, 180 mm × 10 mm in size. Intraoperatively, fresh frozen section analysis confirmed aseptic nonunion. After the procedure, radiographic arthrodesis was achieved at 6 weeks with the use of an external bone stimulator. The patient was then instructed to slowly transition to partial weight-bearing in a walking boot. At 8 weeks postoperatively, the patient presented to the emergency department after feeling a sudden “pop,” immediate pain, and swelling while weight-bearing. Radiographs revealed a minimally displaced fracture at the anterior aspect of the tibia, immediately proximal to the most proximal screw ( A 59-year-old male with a long-standing history of diabetes and Charcot neuroarthopathy presented to our institution with a chief complaint of a painful ankle. The patient stated that approximately 3 years before he had undergone attempted TTC arthrodesis with an IM nail at an outside hospital. Physical examination and radiographs confirmed that the patient had a nonunion with hardware failure. The decision was made to remove the hardware and revise the TTC arthrodesis using a retrograde femoral IM nail, 13 mm × 200 mm in size, femoral head autografting, and a circular ring external fixator. Intraoperatively, aseptic nonunion was confirmed using fresh frozen section analysis. The TTC was revised and was tolerated well. The patient remained non–weight-bearing with an external fixator without complications for 7 weeks. The external fixator was then removed, and the patient was placed in a below the knee cast for 4 weeks. He then underwent gradual transition to partial weight-bearing in a CAM boot beginning at 12 weeks. At 14 weeks postoperatively, the patient presented to the emergency department with increased pain about his right tibia. Radiographs revealed a complete transverse fracture, with approximately 20° of sagittal plane angulation and some mild comminution of the tibia just proximal to the most proximal screw ( Arthrodesis of the hindfoot and ankle has considerable effects on the biomechanical function of the lower extremity. The shock absorption and energy transfer provided by a normal functioning subtalar and ankle joint distributes the force efficiently and effectively. When these joints are fused as a solid construct, increased demands are placed both proximally and distally to the arthrodesis sites. In 1995, Mitchell et al Thordarson and Chang Hammett et al Both cases of periprosthetic fracture within our case review occurred with the use of a retrograde femoral nail as described by Grass One potential drawback to the use of femoral nails is the screw orientation. The proximal screws for this particular manufacturer are oriented in an anteroposterior direction when used with lengths less than 220 mm. This screw orientation requires the anterior crest of the tibia to be violated when placing the proximal interlocking screws, which could compromise the strength of the tibia. Posterior-to-anterior placement of the distal IM nail interlocking screws within the calcaneus has been shown to be biomechanically superior to a medial-to-lateral orientation During gait, the proximal end of the nail and tibia interface functions similar to a fulcrum, with the patient’s force acting as a source of stress proximal to the nail. Noonan et al The mechanical bone strength is an important consideration with the use of IM nails. Instrumentation has recently been developed to assess the mechanical strength intraoperatively In conclusion, tibiotalocalcaneal arthrodesis using IM nail fixation is a technically demanding procedure necessitating important patient considerations. We have described 2 periprosthetic fracture complications encountered using retrograde femoral IM nailing for TTC arthrodesis. Studies have suggested that a longer nail length might decrease the incidence of periprosthetic fracture. Also, the orientation of the interlocking screws and patient comorbidities should be carefully considered.