Computer modeling and the microcalorimetry method were employed to investigate the adsorption of xanthate, dithiophosphate (DTP) and dithiocarbamate (DTC) on the galena and pyrite surfaces. The calculated results show that the pyrite surface undergoes greater relaxation than galena, while galena has a more electronegative surface than pyrite. The pyrite Fe atom is more active than the galena Pb atom. The simulations of adsorption show that the adsorbates coordinate mainly to the surfaces through interaction between their S atoms with the surface Pb or Fe atoms. The analysis of the density of states (DOSs) suggests that the adsorption of xanthate on the pyrite surface is stronger than that on the galena surface, while that of DTP and DTC are stronger on the galena surface than on the pyrite surface.
                  The heat of adsorption and kinetics parameters of DTC and DTP at the galena and pyrite surfaces differ greatly, suggesting that DTC and DTP exhibit good selectivity in the separation of pyrite and galena, while these two parameters for xanthate at the two minerals differ little, indicating the poor selectivity of xanthate.The selectivity of a collector is an essential prerequisite to achieve high quality concentrate and great recovery in the separation of complex sulfide ores ( In the adsorption process, the heat of adsorption could characterize the intensity of adsorption between the reagent and mineral ( A computational method such as the density functional theory (DFT) method is an effective tool to acquire the microscopic details of configuration and electronic structure of the reagent adsorption on mineral surface, and to illuminate the fundamental aspects of adsorption at the atomic level. In this paper, simulations of three thiol collectors including xanthate, dithiophosphate (DTP) and dithiocarbamate (DTC) adsorptions on PbS (1 Single crystal galena and pyrite samples obtained from Fankou Mine, Guangdong province, China, were used in this experiment. Multi-element analysis shows that the galena and pyrite samples were of high purity only with a trace of the element Sb and Co. The XRD data ( The microcalorimetric measurements were accomplished with an RD496-III type microcalorimeter. The detailed description about the structure and the technical parameters of this calorimeter has been given elsewhere ( The simulations of collector adsorption have been done using the Cambridge Serial Total Energy Package (CASTEP) developed by After testing the slab thickness and vacuum slab thickness, we constructed a (4 In froth flotation, the mineral surface plays an important role in the process of reagent adsorption, which determines the geometry and strength of adsorption and the difference in properties of mineral surfaces is the premise of mineral separation by flotation. We employed the quantum method to model the galena (1 Surface relaxation of galena (1 The Mulliken electron of each layer of PbS (1 The density of states (DOSs) of the galena Pb and S atoms and the pyrite Fe and S atoms are shown in For the pyrite surface, by comparison with the bulk Fe12 layer, the DOS peak of the outermost Fe3 states is obviously enhanced around −2.0 To further investigate the differences of xanthate, DTP and DTC reacting with galena or pyrite, the adsorption of three thiol collectors on galena or pyrite surface has been simulated by the DFT method.  Electron density maps of DTP adsorption on the PbS and FeS Electron density maps of DTC adsorption on the PbS and the FeS The analysis from density of states (DOSs) could give an insight into the interaction between different collectors and different minerals at the electronic level. The DOSs of the three reagents on the PbS and FeS The DOS of xanthate, DTP and DTC on the PbS and FeS After adsorption on mineral surfaces, DOSs of the three collectors change obviously. For xanthate adsorption, the DOS of xanthate changes more notably on the FeS For DTP adsorbed on the PbS surface, the two peaks of DTP S 3p state combine into one peak and a dramatic change near the Fermi level ( After adsorption on the FeS DOSs of the PbS surface Pb atom and the FeS For the pyrite surface, the DOS of the Fe 3d orbital changes after interaction with the reagent, indicating that the Fe atom participates in the bonding interaction. Before adsorption, Fe 3d orbital splits into two peaks (named as p1 and p2, respectively) at the top of valence band. After adsorption, a significant change of p1 and p2 occurs. After interaction with the DTC, the change of Fe DOS is the largest, then xanthate and DTP. It can be found that the p1 and p2 of Fe DOS almost completely disappeared after the DTC interaction, while the change in p1 and p2 is relatively small for xanthate and DTP. For an adsorption process, the Gibbs free energy can be defined (Eq. The heats of butyl xanthate (BX), dithiophosphate (DTP) and dithiocarbamate (DTC) adsorption on galena and pyrite surfaces are listed in The difference of Δ The reaction rate constant and the reaction order of the adsorption reaction could be calculated by the following equation, according to the reference ( As we all know, the reaction rate constant quantifies the speed of a chemical reaction and the reaction order can tell the relationship between the concentrations of species and the rate of a reaction. It is noted that the reaction order for butyl xanthate on the pyrite surface is 0.58, which is very close to that of 0.60 measured by For DTC, the reaction rate constant on PbS is smaller than that on FeS In this work, the differences of xanthate, DTP and DTC adsorption on galena and pyrite have been discussed from four aspects: the surface electronic structure and properties, adsorption geometry, heat of adsorption and the kinetics of adsorption, and the conclusions can be drawn as following. The electronic structure and surface properties of PbS (1 The results from thermodynamics and kinetics show that the difference in adsorption behaviors of xanthate on the galena and pyrite surfaces is relatively small while that for DTC and DTP differ greatly at the two mineral surfaces, which could explain the difference of these three collectors in selectivity. This research was funded by