This study investigated the recovery of indium from waste liquid crystal display (LCD) panel using vacuum carbon-reduction. First of all, high purity In2O3 was investigated. The results indicated that indium can be reclaimed from In2O3 using vacuum carbon-reduction in thermodynamics and dynamics. The conditions of 1223K, 50wt% carbon addition, 30min, and 1Pa were confirmed as the optimal conditions for pure In2O3 and high purity indium could be selectively recovered on condensing zone. Based on this, the experiment of the recovery of indium from waste LCD power was performed. The best parameters were confirmed as 1223K and 1Pa with 30wt% carbon addition for 30min. The recovery rate of indium from LCD powder could reach to 90wt%. No hazardous materials produced in this process. Therefore, this technique provides the possibility of reutilization of LCD in an environmentally friendly way.With the advantages of small volume, light quality and low power consumption, LCD has replaced cathode ray tube (CRT) display in most of appliances. The total global TV shipments were 233 million in 2012, while LCD TV sheared 87.3%, plasma display panel (PDP) TV and CRT TV shared 5.7%, 6.9%, respectively, according to the latest finding published in the NPD Display Search Indium–tin oxide (ITO), a solid solution of indium(III) oxide (In Various methods for recycling of indium from secondary sources containing indium, particular ITO sputtering waste, have been investigated, mainly based on the hydrometallurgy The recycling of indium scrap has been investigated from ITO through pyrometallurgy, but few from end products. In In addition to leaching-extraction and pyrometallurgy, some researchers have reported the chlorination process of waste LCD panel for the recycling of indium. Takahashi et al. Vacuum metallurgy has been widely used in non-ferrous metal smelting LCD panels were firstly dismantled from discarded computers by hand, and then polymer films (mainly contain (polyvinyl alcohol) PVC and (Triacetyl Cellulose) TAC) were also removed through manual from these panels. Liquid crystal between two glasses was dissolved by acetone. Take TFT-LCD for example, the main structure of LCD panel is shown in Experiments were carried out in a self-assemble vacuum furnace. The schematic diagram of experiment system is shown in Sample and carbon powder were blend well with a certain mass ratio in a quartz boat, and then the quartz boat with mixture was put into a quartz tube. The quartz tube was pushed into furnace heating area, and heated up to experimental temperature in nitrogen atmosphere. After system reached set temperature, it was evacuated to 1 The quantitative analysis of indium in residues was measured by inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometer (ICP-OES, icap6300, US), after being completely dissolved with a 1:1 mixture (v/v) of 37 Pure In In the process of vacuum carbon-reduction, In The reaction between In Relative thermodynamic data were obtained through thermodynamic handbook The relationship between recovery rate of indium and addition of carbon powder is shown in As we can see that InO and In The relationship between recovery rate of indium and time is shown in In general, the recovery rate of indium is increased with the increasing of temperature, addition of carbon powder and heating time under certain condition. The above experiments show that the recovery rate of indium can reach 100 Products produced under optimal conditon were collected and analyzed by XRD. The distribution of condensed product and temperature is shown in The vapor of indium reduced from In The experiments for pure In  The possible reaction between SnO The Gibbs energy is less than 0 at 1223 250 This study investigated the recovery of indium from waste LCD panel using vacuum carbon-reduction. An environmentally friendly vacuum carbon-reduction method for recycling of indium from waste LCD panel has been developed. The results indicated that the indium can be reclaimed from LCD panel by vacuum carbon-reduction. The best parameters were confirmed as 1223 This work was supported by the