Bauxite residue (BR) is a hazardous industrial waste and also becomes an important reserve of rare earth elements (REE). An elegant process for achieving separation of REEs against silica from an iron-removed BR was established in this paper through selective leaching of silica with simultaneous enrichment of REEs. It was found that the phosphoric acid performed better than other acids (HNO3, HCl) for multiple REEs enrichment. The ideal conditions for the leaching process was determined through response surface methodology (RSM) to be H3PO4 concentration of 1.2 mol/L, L/S ratio of 11 mL/g and leaching temperature of 40 °C. 82.3% SiO2 in iron-removed BR was leached out while the REEs (La2O3, Ce2O3, Sc2O3 and Y2O3) remained in the leached residue with recovery of more than 98%. La2O3 and Ce2O3 were proved to be in lattice replacement within the acid-resistant pervoskite and thus remained in the leached residue. Only part of Sc2O3 and Y2O3 entered into pervoskite and the remainder was trapped in the aluminosilicate minerals. The enrichment of Sc2O3 and Y2O3 in phosphoric acid leaching process was related to the low acidity of H3PO4 solution.Rare earth elements (REEs) are essential to modern society with a wide application in the fields of global communications, transportation, medicine, energy and surveillance, etc. Bauxite residue is a hazardous byproduct generated in alumina digestion process of bauxite with about 120 million tons generation annually Selective recovery of REEs has been extensively researched. Some of the processes that have received attention include bioleaching According to literatures, different approaches have been conducted to separate REEs against silica, and this is often achieved by suppressing silica dissolution prior to REEs leaching. The sulfation followed by roasting process Response surface methodology (RSM) is a useful mathematical and statistical technique to optimize and evaluate interactive effects of several independent variables on the response, and has been applied in numerous chemical and biochemical processes At present, it has been recognized that the reductive roasting process followed by magnetic separation is an efficient technique for iron recovery from various types of mineral ores, especially the refractory complex ores such as bauxite residues Based on our previous study The chemical compositions of the original BR and iron-removed BR are shown in An electro-thermostatic water bath equipped with a stir bar was used for acid leaching if the temperature required was below 100 °C, while an autoclave was used if the temperature required was higher than 100 °C. The autoclave was equipped with six 100 mL pots and incorporated a temperature controller The percentage extraction of SiO In our previous study Chemical compositions of the solid samples were determined by an X-ray fluorescence spectrometer (XRF, PANalytical, Axios mAX, Netherlands), while the mineral compositions were confirmed using a X-ray diffraction (XRD, RIGAKU, D/Max 2500, Japan) under the conditions of radiation: Cu Kα, tube current and voltage: 250 mA, 40 kV, scanning range: 10–80° (2θ), step size: 0.02°(2θ) and scanning speed: 8°(2θ)/min. The contents of rare earth elements were ascertained by plasma emission spectrometer (ICP-AES, Icap7400 Radial, America). The effects of different acids on the leaching of SiO The common minerals acids such as HCl, HNO The above results confirmed that the selectively extracting SiO Unlike the traditional factorial experiment which needs to investigate each collocation of experimental factors, a minimum number of experiments are required in RSM to ascertain both of linear and interaction effect of the experimental factors. Through RSM, the results can fit in a second order equation ( In this section, the optimal phosphoric acid leaching conditions for the removal of SiO In response surface modeling, Box-Behnken design (BBD) is typically applied to design the experiments. As confirmed in the previous study The analysis of variance (ANOVA) with F-value test can be used to evaluate the significance of a model Determination coefficient (R In order to obtain further insight of how H Once the optimal conditions were found from the RSM, tests under these conditions were performed to assess the accuracy of the predictions. The leaching ratio of the main components was shown in As confirmed in above sections, the leaching performance of the La The XRD patterns of the iron-removed BR and its leached residues are shown in As shown in previous section that La As confirmed in our previous research On the other hand, it was seen from Meanwhile, through comparing the leaching performance of Y To further validate the proposed enrichment mechanism of REEs, a high-concentration acid leaching process was conducted on the iron-removed BR, and the leaching performance of REEs were analyzed in comparison with that in BR. The conditions were fixed at 8 mol/L of HNO It was found in Also, it was shown in After removal of silica and enrichment of REEs from BR, the obtained leached residues become a superb material for REEs extraction. This material can be further processed with acid leaching and solvent extraction to extract REEs without interference by emulsification primarily caused by silica. An excellent enrichment of multiple rare earth elements and their simultaneous separation against silica from the iron-removed BR was achieved in this study, and the conclusions were as follows: Among the three common acids (HCl, HNO RSM was successfully applied to optimize the phosphoric acid leaching process on iron-removed bauxite residues and the optimal conditions obtained were H La Only about 30% Sc The process used in this study to achieve separation of REEs against silica is low energy consumption and low cost, and convincing to be applicable on other REEs-bearing minerals resources for REEs enrichment and extraction. The authors wish to express their thanks to the None.