The mechanical strength of compacts depends on particle shape, materials properties as well as compaction conditions. This work presented a numerical study on the effects of interparticle friction, yield pressure of particles and consolidation pressure on the mechanical response of compacts formed of non-spherical particles. Non-convexity of the particle shape and interparticle bonding were explicitly considered in a model based on the Discrete Element Method (DEM). In unconfined uniaxial compression, the results showed that compressive strength of compacts increases with interparticle friction, consolidation pressure but decreases with yield pressure of particles. Larger inter-particle friction and consolidation pressure also lead to a more dispersed and uprising failure zones due to the inhomogeneous structure of compacts formed by die compaction. The non-convexity of particle and consolidation pressure enhanced the role of inter-particle friction in the compressive strength. However, failure mechanism during the unconfined compression showed no dependence on the particle characteristics and operational conditions as most of the bonds were broken by shearing. A large compressive strength was linked to an increased average bond size while a more dispersed bond failure corresponds to an increased proportion of horizontally aligned shear-induced bond failure.Die compaction is an important unit operation in the processing of powder materials, in which loose powders form a dense, consolidated powder compact under external pressure. Compact strength is an important property in many industries as it determines the survive rate of powder compacts during downstream operations, such as storage, transportation and sintering. However, compact strength is strongly influenced by particle characteristics and operation conditions, leading to the variations in microstructure, density and strength of compacts ( Discrete Element Method (DEM) has been widely used to model compression of powders ( Limited DEM work on modelling compaction of non-spherical particles has also been conducted. However, the dependence of compressive strength and associated failure patterns on consolidation pressure and particle characteristics of non-spherical particles have yet to be reported. We recently developed a DEM model for non-spherical particle compaction, where the particle geometry was approximated by a clumped sphere approach. A bonded-particle model ( A detailed description of the force models has been given elsewhere ( The translational and rotational motions of a particle are governed by Newton’s second law of motion, given by The particles were modelled as elastic-perfectly plastic material where the normal contact force was governed by the Hertzian theory in the elastic deformation regime and the model of Thornton and Ning ( Liquid or moisture content has a significant impact on powder flowability. Hence, it was expected to affect pressure-density relationship during die compaction, in particular the early stage of die compaction where particle rearrangement was attributed as the main mechanism responsible for densification ( To consider the presence of solid bonding due to mechanisms such as plastic deformation and contact adhesion, a bonded particle model ( In this study, the shape of non-spherical particle was modelled by a clumped sphere approach, in which spheres were rigidly connected to form a non-spherical particle. It should be noted that there are two different concepts, particle and elementary sphere. Here, the particle refers to the cluster formed by the elementary spheres. The particle is considered as non-breakable in the present study. An illustration of the non-spherical particle and interparticle bonding and liquid bridging are shown in The contact detection was conducted based on the elementary spheres (  where In the clumped sphere approach, the shape of a non-spherical particle is defined based on the diameter of each elemental sphere and its position relative to the mass centre of the particle. In this work, a complete simulation consisted of five stages: die filling, die loading, unloading, relaxation and unconfined compression, as illustrated in The die loading stage started by placing an upper punch on top of the packing bed. The powder bed was then compressed by moving the upper punch downward at a constant strain rate until reaching a desired packing density. To ensure a quasi-static loading process, a constant strain rate of 10 To determine the compressive strength of the formed powder compact, the sample was compressed by two platens on of which moved at a constant velocity of 5 mm/s. The load acting on the top punch and its displacement were recorded, from which the peak stress was taken as the compressive strength. To study the effect of consolidation pressure (the pressure reached after die loading on the top punch), the same initial sample formed after die filling was compressed under the same condition (as described above) to three different levels of packing density: 0.68, 0.7 and 0.72, corresponding to different levels of pre-consolidation. These consolidated samples were then subjected to the unconfined compression test to evaluate the compressive strength.  The dependence of the relationship between compaction pressure and packing density on the inter-particle friction is shown in  Apart from the stress response, failure pattern in the unconfined compression is another important characterisation of macroscopic response.  The macroscopic failure pattern is closely related to the breakage of inter-particle bonds at the microscopic level.  In an elastic-plastic contact model, the yield pressure defines the contact pressure beyond which plastic deformation occurs. The effect of yield pressure is more evident in the Heckel plot, as shown in    Failure patterns during the unconfined compression are also affected by the pre-consolidation pressure, as shown in We conducted a DEM modelling of die compaction and unconfined uniaxial compression of non-spherical particles, focusing on the effects of particle characteristics (inter-particle friction and yield pressure) and operation conditions (consolidation pressure) on the compact response. The non-spherical particles were represented by clumped spheres. The results demonstrated that: In the unconfined compression, larger interparticle friction resulted in higher loading stiffness and compressive strength but slower stress drops. The inter-particle friction suppressed the axial inhomogeneity due to the particle-wall friction, leading to more dispersed and uprising failure location. A gradual transition of the mechanical response from brittle to ductile was observed. The compressive strength was proportional to the interparticle friction regardless of the particle shape. The role of interparticle friction on the compressive strength was more significant for the particles with a larger non-convexity. The loading stiffness and compressive strength decreased with increasing yield pressure, due to larger elastic recovery in the die compaction. The rate of bond breakage decreased with the yield pressure before reaching a point when the macroscopic failure was fully developed. An increased proportion of horizontally aligned shear-induced broken bonds resulted in a more dispersed shear bands. Both the compressive strength and the distance to reach the peak stress increased with the consolidation pressure due to stronger solids bonds. Consolidation pressure suppressed the initial inhomogeneity caused by the die wall friction during die compaction, leading to a slower bond failure process. The shear-induced bond breakage dominated the macroscopic failure process regardless of the particle characteristics and operational conditions. A large compressive strength was linked with a large mean bond size while a wider distribution of the bonding size resulted in a more dispersed failure pattern. The support from the Australia Research Council (ARC) through ARC Linkage Projects (LP110201157 and LP160101100) and ARC Research Hub on Computational Particle Technology (IH140100035) is acknowledged.