Lithium and rubidium were extracted from zinnwaldite [KLiFe2+Al(AlSi3)O10(F,OH)2] by (1) its sintering with and CaCO3 powders and (2) water leaching the obtained sinters—the alkali digestion process. The experimental results showed that sintering proceeded in three partly overlapping stages: (1) decomposition of zinnwaldite at temperature up to 800°C, (2) formation of new phases in the temperature range between 750 and 835°C, and (3) formation of amorphous glassy phase at temperature above 835°C. Densification of the reaction mixture occurred via a liquid phase sintering at temperatures above 750°C and diffusion of calcium, potassium, silicon and rubidium resulted in the formation of the new phases. The decomposition of zinnwaldite and the formation of the new phases increased extraction of lithium and rubidium. The formation of glassy phase probably hindered extraction of lithium but did not affect that of rubidium because of its outward diffusion to sinter's surface. The optimal extraction efficiencies of 84% of lithium and 91% of rubidium were achieved at sintering temperature of 825°C and leaching temperature of 95°C. The good fit of the hyperbolic and uniform reaction models to the leaching data indicated that dissolution of lithium and rubidium proceeded through two stages. Application of the shrinking core model showed that dissolution of lithium was controlled by diffusion. The formation of a layer of Ca(OH)2 on surface of sinters apparently slowed and then terminated dissolution of lithium and rubidium in the later stage of leaching.As the lightest metal in nature with the unique electrochemical properties, lithium is becoming the key material in manufacturing of primary and secondary batteries used in various portable devices and hybrid/electric vehicles ( The main commercially viable sources of lithium are natural brines with a high lithium chloride content and the pegmatitic minerals such as spodumene, amblygonite, petalite and lepidolite ( Lithium is extracted from minerals by high-temperature digestion with acid or alkali, or by ion-exchange processes using salt, followed by acid or water leaching. Rubidium is obtained from a solution containing mixed alkali metal carbonates, a by-product of the production of lithium from lepidolite, by precipitation followed by pyrolysis or thermal oxidation ( A zinnwaldite concentrate containing 1.29% of Li and 0.94% of Rb was prepared by dry magnetic separation of the lithium-rich sand, the by-product after Sn–W ore mining in the Czech Republic. According to the results of XRD analysis, the concentrate consisted of two main phases: dominant zinnwaldite KLiFe The leaching programme was followed by sampling of the solution at a chosen time interval and measuring Li and Rb concentrations by a GBC atomic absorption spectrophotometer (model GBC 932 plus). Mineralogical analysis was carried out by X-ray diffractometer PANalytical's X'Pert PRO. SEM-EDX analysis was carried out using Hitachi S4700 Scanning Electron Microscope or Vega 3 Tescan Scanning Electron Microscope. Differential thermal analysis (DTA) was performed by TA Setaram, model Setsys Evolution in a flowing in argon atmosphere at a heating rate of 10 A similar sharp increase in extraction of both lithium and rubidium was found when sintering temperatures increased from 750 X-ray powder pattern analysis of sinters shows a decrease in crystallinity of zinnwaldite with increasing sintering temperatures and a shift of diffraction peaks of zinnwaldite [KLiFe The TG-DTA curves of zinnwaldite show two peaks: an exotherm in the temperature range 450–825 The infrared spectra of zinnwaldite and the sinters obtained at 825 and 870 SEM pictures of cross-section of sinters show that sintering mixture experienced densification starting at 750 The diffusion of calcium, potassium, and silicon indicates a plausible formation mechanism of some phases in sinters. 4CaO Ca As shown in Ca(Fe Iron and magnesium, an impurity in zinnwaldite, were apparently released by the breakdown of zinnwaldite. At sintering temperature above 850 The formation of KCaCO The sinter obtained at 825 The URM with two parameters gave the best fit to the extraction results of both lithium and rubidium. While this model is applicable only for porous materials with the assumption of uniform chemical reaction throughout the solids, the good fit of the model to the leaching data indicates that two different steps controlled the leaching behavior of lithium and rubidium. The hyperbola formula model could be used to describe the leaching behavior of lithium. According to this model, the release of lithium is a nearly first-order initially and rapidly decreases to zero-order with time, confirming that there are 2 different rate-controlling steps. Plots of 1 − (1 − X An SEM-EDX micrograph of a reacted particle shows that its surface was covered by a layer of Ca(OH) Sintering zinnwaldite with CaCO In the initial stage, zinnwaldite decomposes gradually without the formation of any intermediate compounds until temperature reaches 750 The good fit of the hyperbolic and URMs to the leaching data demonstrates that dissolution of lithium and rubidium from sinters proceeds through two stages. Application of the SCM indicates that dissolution of lithium is controlled by diffusion. In the later stage, the formation of Ca(OH) Authors wish to thank the