In this paper, the effect of a probe tip on the contact angle measurements and the formation process of nanobubbles based on line tension and pinning theory was investigated. In this investigation, the images of nanobubbles and micropancakes on mica(001) and molybdenite(0001) surfaces were obtained during an alcohol-water exchange by means of atomic force microscopy (AFM) in tapping mode (TMAFM). Based on the image characteristics and the theory of line tension and pinning, a new point of view is presented: the contact angle of a nanobubble is not always a large obtuse angle but is an uncertain value; its true value is affected by the curvature radius of the AFM probe tip, and the value is close to the macroscopic contact angle. Meanwhile, the formation of nanobubbles is affected by the surface tension, line tension and pinning.Nanobubbles, micropancakes and their complexes are found at the solid-liquid interface [ Because of the limitations of AFM, the different imaging parameters have a great influence on nanobubble observations [ Although previous studies have shown line tension may have an important influence on nanobubbles, the effect hardly explains the abnormal nanobubble contact angle completely. Detlef Lohse and Zhang performed a series of analyses on a nanobubble to show that the pinning effect could make a contact-line “jump contraction” [ In addition, some studies on the contact angle of the nanobubbles and the interaction between the tip and the bubble are based on substrates such as HOPG or polystyrene (PS) films. These substrates are inherently hydrophobic and their microscopic contact angles are more susceptible to the tip effect. Therefore, although the superhydrophilic surface of mica is difficult to image, the nanobubbles generated on the mica can reflect the contact angle of the hydrophilic mineral from another angle, which makes it easier for us to judge the true contact angle of the nanobubbles. In this paper, the images of nanobubbles on the surface of mica and molybdenite are clearly presented for the first time. Furthermore, this paper provides a method of operation making samples of irregular minerals suitable for Multimode series of AFM observation. In previous studies, nanobubble contact angles are always considered to be obtuse (approximately 150°), which is very different from the macroscopic contact angle, and this phenomenon is remains to be properly explained. Meanwhile, the common features of nanobubble morphology are always neglected and are rarely carefully analyzed. In this paper, through the observation of nanobubbles combined with the popular line tension and pinning theory, we propose that the value of a nanobubble contact angle should be close to the macroscopic contact angle. We suggest that this inference is reasonable and can explain some unconventional phenomena of nanobubbles. The mica sample (Ted pella Corp.,) was freshly stripped into the mica sheet to serve as the test sample. Additionally, the molybdenite sample, with a very complete cleavage surface of the (0001), was crushed and then divided into thin slices. A slice with a perfect cleavage surface (smooth and no bending), whose diameter was approximately 1 mm, was selected as the test sample. Afterwards, the test samples were cleaned with ultrapure water and dried with nitrogen. In addition, the calcite sample with a very complete cleavage surface of the ( The nanobubble images were obtained by a Multimode V atomic force microscopy. The equipment was operated in tapping mode AFM (TMAFM) using Veeco OTR8–10 tips (k = 0.57 N/m) with a curvature radius of approximately 10 nm. Prior to the measurement, the fixation method of the molybdenite sample was as follows (The preparation of mica sample needs to skip this step because mica can be observed directly with O-ring): a mold composed of two clean silicone gaskets and a ring washer (diameter = 16 mm, and thickness = 1.5 mm) was used to fasten the test sample. First, the ring washer was fitted onto the one of the silicone gaskets to generate the mold. Then, GORAL cold glue (powder: liquid =1:0.9) was pumped into the mold, and this cold glue was covered with a polyethylene film. Second, the test sample (molybdenite) was placed on the polyethylene film with the surface of the test sample to be measured (the complete cleavage plane) faced upwards. The role of the polyethylene film was to isolate the ethanol and cold glue in the O-ring of the AFM to avoid contamination of the substrate. Third, the other silicone gasket was pressed on the test sample for 10 to 20 min. At this point, the sample, polyethylene film and cold glue were a single unit. Additionally, the test sample was embedded in the “groove” that was composed of the cold glue and polyethylene film. The finished product is shown in Then, the nanobubble images were obtained by atomic force microscopy. The finished material (mica or molybdenite) described above was used as the substrate, and the method of alcohol-water exchange for the imaging of nanobubble formations was carried out. To examine the roughness of the complete cleavage surface of molybdenite(0001), the substrate was prepared using the above fixation method. The macroscopic contact angles of the mica(001) and the molybdenite(0001) were measured as 0° and 71°, respectively. Afterwards, they were placed in chromatographically pure alcohol, and the images were obtained by the atomic force microscopy in tapping mode, respectively. The images shown in      To further confirm the effect of the probe on the contact angle measurement of nanobubbles, the ex situ imaging of nanobubbles on the surface of molybdenum(0001) was performed. Additionally, the “amplitude setpoint” value was adjusted from 37 mV to 250 mV to reach the maximum tapping force between the tip and nanobubble surface [ If a nanobubble contact angle was a smooth large obtuse angle, no matter how the tapping intensity increased, the image detection value should have been an even variable. Therefore, the nanobubble morphology in According to the line tension theory, the modified Young equation is as follows: In general, the τ value varies greatly depending on the solution and substrate properties [ The deformation process of a nanobubble in water is similar to that achieved by capillary action, and it could be regarded as a result of the pressure difference ( To date, researchers have proposed several theories for nanobubbles, including the line tension theory, impurity layer theory, three-phase contact line (TPCL) theory, dynamic equilibrium model, and dense gas layer theory. In this work, the theory of pinning and line tension is assumed and speculated upon by means of experimental images: a nanobubble is produced due to the differences in the dissolved gas quantity in a liquid, which is not related to the substrate. The adsorption of a nanobubble on a substrate produced by the difference in dissolved gas quantities is concerned with the substrate features. As stated by the previous theory, the more hydrophobic a substrate surface is, the easier the nanobubble generates. This is the main reason why the nanobubbles on the mica surface are difficult to image or are imaged with poor repeatability. According to our opinion on the nanobubble contact angle, the whole process a nanobubble in liquid experiences is as follows: first, nanobubbles or gas nuclei are adsorbed on the substrate. Second, because of the effect of the line tension, surface tension and pinning, they are accompanied by deformation at the same time as they expand with the absorption of some other gas. Third, they are compressed and continue to deform until a metastable equilibrium is reached. Finally, the internal gas slowly dissolves and disappears. The gas slowly dissolves, instead of floating up in increasing sequentially, in the absence of external energy (such as mixing, ultrasonication, etc.). We suggest that the formation process of the nanobubble is shown in Then, the following processes fall into two categories: If the macroscopic contact angle (θ If the macroscopic contact angle of the substrate is an obtuse angle (hydrophobic substrate), the nanobubble in We also consider that when the macroscopic contact angle (θ Therefore, the true contact angle of the nanobubble is difficult to measure accurately and is affected by the three-phase interfacial tension, line tension and pinning. Meanwhile, the image authenticity of a nanobubble is affected by the probe tip. Therefore, we hold that the current viewpoint that the nanobubble contact angle is always an obtuse angle is due to a lack of evidence. In this paper, the images of nanobubbles and micropancakes on the mica(001) and molybdenite(0001) surfaces were obtained during an alcohol-water exchange by means of atomic force microscopy (AFM) operated in tapping mode (TMAFM). A nanobubble on the natural mineral molybdenite was observed for the first time. By comparing the images of nanobubbles on the mica and molybdenite surfaces, we make the following main conclusions: It can be speculated from the straight line uniformly appearing on the irregular nanobubble on the surface of mica that there may be a hidden acute contact angle at the bottom of the nanobubble that cannot be detected by the probe tip of the AFM. The results that the nanobubbles convert from the convex “hill-like” morphology into a flat “terraced” structure after increasing the tapping intensity prove that the true contact angle of a nanobubble may not be a large obtuse angle, which is in accordance with the structure yielding a macroscopic contact angle (71°) on molybdenite(0001). Therefore, in view of the curvature radius of probe tip, the topography of a nanobubble obtained by AFM cannot reflect the true value of the nanobubble contact angle. We believe that the formation of nanobubbles is affected by the surface tension, the line tension and the pinning effect of the three-phase interface. The line tension in the transition state of the nanobubble cannot be neglected, and it directly affects the contact radius, which may be related to the hydrophilicity of the substrate. The surface tension and pinning effects exist constantly, but the effect is not evident when the line tension acts as the main force. Thus, the line tension can be considered as a strong-short-range force, surface tension can be considered as a weak-whole-range force, and the pinning effect is related to the surface roughness and hydrophilicity of the substrate. When the contact radius is extended to its critical range by the line tension, the effect of surface tension and the pinning effect on the contact angle of the nanobubble becomes prominent. Under this assumption, the contact angle of a nanobubble remains close to the contact angle of a macroscopic bubble, and this conclusion also agrees with some previous research results [ Nanobubbles occupy >70% of the area ( The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from