The subject of the investigation is the response of geo-materials, namely rocks and cementitious composites, to the impact of liquid drops at very high velocities. A single drop impact jet apparatus is utilized for the simulation of drop impacts with a velocity of 885 m/s. The response of six materials (igneous, sedimentary and metamorphic rocks; concretes) with defined mechanical parameters is investigated. The removed volume is measured, and it is related to material parameters, namely uniaxial compressive strength, splitting tensile strength, Young's modulus, mode-I fracture toughness, and elastic strain energy density. The highest correlation exists between removed volume and fracture toughness. SEM inspections revealed a variation of brittle failure features, but barely any signs of plastic response. Threshold criteria are derived, which indicate that hard and brittle rocks respond entirely elastically to the impact in the investigated loading case. A brittle material resistance function is derived, which combines fracture toughness, Young's modulus and density. The results of this study can be used to approximate the resistance of geo-material against high-speed liquid impact, when brittle fracture dominates the material removal process.speed of sound in water speed of sound in target material shock wave velocity target material shock wave velocity water drop diameter drop kinetic energy Young's modulus target material cracking energy target material parameter function process parameter function stress wave transfer coefficient plastic target parameter function indentation hardness target material sound impedance target material energy transfer coefficient fracture toughness target material power coefficient target material parameter drop mass power exponent stagnation pressure impact pressure radial direction vector contact radius drop radius stress magnification factor elastic strain energy density target material exposure time pulse stage duration radial flow stage duration pulse period threshold impact velocity drop velocity threshold velocity crack formation removed volume removed volume (plastic) removed volume (brittle) threshold velocity plastic deformation axial direction vector mass loss strain rate specific surface energy erosion model parameter drop density density target material compressive strength target material pulse stress tensile strength target material yield strength target material The impingement of high-speed liquid jets is a promising non-conventional method for rock excavation and concrete fragmentation The terms “ The material removal due to drop impact may generally be described as follows: This situation is simplified in Investigations for f(M) for rocks and rocklike materials for the situation v Analysis of No investigation has been performed for a wider variation of geo-materials, including cement-based composites and layered rocks. No investigation has been performed that covers the situations t ≤ t The objectives of this paper are: to quantify target material property effects on the material removal process; to quantify material failure modes for geo-materials; and to introduce a detailed expression for the target material function f(M). Drop impact can be considered a tribological process, and it can be expressed in a tribological system. The tribological system for water drop impact is schematically shown in the upper image of Comprehensive reviews about liquid impact theory applied to brittle materials are provided in reference In the equation, p Results of calculations for the conditions and materials in this study are provided in In the equation, r In the equation, t In the equation, t In the equation, t In the equation, p In the equation, R The strain rate associated with water drop impact can be approximated as follows. Hook's law delivers: Here, The term σ  Strain rate is linearly proportional to contact stress, and inversely proportional to pulse duration. The material parameters influencing the stress rate are specimen density and longitudinal wave speed (or any other wave speed if Poisson's ratio is known). Calculated results for the condition and materials in this paper are provided in Six geo-materials were used for the investigation: four rock materials and two concrete materials. Their properties are listed in Here, c In the equation, σ The impact experiments were performed with the Single Drop Impact Jet Apparatus (SIJA), developed at the Cavendish Laboratory, Cambridge, UK. A scheme of this set-up is shown in In the equation, Δm is the removed target material mass. An example for an impinged specimen is provided in A cavity formed in granite is shown in A cavity formed in rhyolite is shown in A cavity formed in limestone is shown in A cavity formed in schist is shown in In the cementitious materials, the material removal mode depended on the size of the structural elements. For the fine-grained concrete CI, material removal was always intergranular, and it started at the interfacial zones between matrix and aggregate. This zone is assumed to be the weakest link in the concrete structure. This result agrees with the results of mercury intrusion measurements performed in reference  Results of the material removal measurements are shown in In the equation, M is the target material property and n is a power exponent. The estimated power exponents and correlation coefficients are listed in The relationship between removed volume and splitting tensile strength is shown in The relationship between removed volume The relationship between removed volume and elastic strain energy density is shown in In the equation, E The relationship between removed volume and sound impedance is shown in The relationship between removed volume and Young's modulus is shown in The relationship between removed volume and fracture toughness is shown in The relationship between removed volume and target material density is shown in A criterion for crack formation in brittle rocks can be derived from Eq. The 2/3rd power relationship between threshold velocity and fracture toughness is experimentally proven A simple yield criterion for contact situations reads as follows In that equation, σ In the equation, v The solution to Eq. Results of calculations are provided in It can be assumed that the volume removal process consists of two parts, namely brittle material removal due to propagating elastic waves (V The constant η balances the two material removal modes. For η = 1, the process is solely determined by brittle fracture mechanisms. For η = 0, ductile modes dominate the material removal process. The volume V The constant f Equations The proportionality factor f A model for the volume removal in rather soft geo-materials is suggested in references For water drops, the density term can be approximated with 2.2ρ In contrast to Eq. The results can be summarized as follows: The material removal process is governed by interfaces between matrix and inclusions in structure-sensitive geo-materials, such as rhyolite or concrete. The material removal process is governed by features of brittle failure. Material resistance functions for brittle and plastic response are derived. The brittle function exhibits a strong correlation to the removed volume, and it can be used to approximate the resistance of geo-material against high-speed liquid impingement as long as particular threshold criteria are met. Compressive strength cannot characterize the resistance of geo-materials for the impact situation in this paper (t ≤ t Threshold criteria are derived, which indicate that hard and brittle rocks (granite and rhyolite) responded entirely elastically to the impact. The investigations were funded by the