Extraction of nickel from Western Australian laterite ores via sulphuric acid leaching at 250°C has been optimised by the addition of sodium sulphate. Leaching of a nontronitic nickel laterite ore in fresh water, with a sulphuric acid loading of 420kg/t ore extracted 93% of nickel from the ore. When limonitic nickel laterite ore was leached in fresh water with an acid loading of 310kg/t ore, 92% of the total nickel was extracted. The nickel extractions were optimised at 96% for the nontronitic ore and 95% for the limonitic ore, at the above acid loadings, when process water sodium ion levels were increased to 4g/L and 2g/L, respectively. Further addition of sodium ion resulted in a gradual decrease in overall nickel extraction, as the leach liquor free acidity decreased. At higher acid loadings, the process water sodium ion levels required for optimum extraction were also higher, so as to prevent dissolution of aluminium.High temperature pressure acid leaching of nickel laterite ores is currently used to recover nickel and cobalt at Moa Bay, Cuba and at Cawse and Murrin Murrin in Western Australia ( Nickel laterite ores can be broadly characterised as dry-land (e.g. deposits found in Albania, Greece, Western Australia) or tropical (e.g. deposits found in Cuba, New Caledonia, Brazil) ( The effects (both beneficial and detrimental) of leaching nickel laterite ores in saline process water have been noted in several studies using both tropical nickel laterite ores ( Whilst the benefits of improved nickel extraction in mildly saline water have been demonstrated, the amount of added sodium salt required to optimise nickel extraction, at a given acid loading, is yet to be determined. This paper specifically examines the effect of varying the process water sodium ion levels between 0 and 10 Laterite ores from both the Bulong (nontronite-rich laterite ore) and Cawse (goethite-rich laterite ore, referred from hereon as limonitic ore) operations in Western Australia were provided for this work. It is noted that since late 2003, only the Cawse operation remains an active nickel laterite processing plant. In the case of limonitic ore, the sample was supplied as a feed slurry in process water. To obtain the dry ore, a sub-sample of slurry was filtered, washed with fresh water and dried at 40 Quantitative X-Ray diffraction analysis of both ores showed the Bulong nontronite-rich laterite ore to consist mainly of nontronite (50%), with amounts of serpentine (10%) and goethite (30%), together with unreactive minerals such as quartz (2%) and maghemite (7%) ( Tap water was used to make up ore slurries to be fed to the autoclave, with the required amount of Na All reactions were conducted at 250 The sealed autoclave was heated to 235 Initial acid loadings (310 For the two base case runs in fresh water, 92% nickel was extracted from the limonitic ore and 93% from the nontronitic ores. Addition of a small amount of Na Addition of Na However, a similar decrease in final free acidity was not observed when nontronitic ore was leached with 2 Final aluminium extraction from the limonitic and nontronitic ores was 12% and 18% respectively, although initial aluminium dissolution from both ores was significantly higher. For example, with the nontronitic ore, over 25% of the total aluminium was in solution after 15 The aluminium chemistry during sulphuric acid dissolution of nickel laterite ores has been extensively summarised by Based on Eqs. A consequence of the rapid precipitation of sodium alunite, as shown in Eq. A further feature of the leach liquor free acidities during the leaching reactions, especially with nontronitic ore, is the rise in free acidities after 30 The improvement in nickel extraction, in mildly saline process water has been attributed to the prevention of nickel adsorption onto amorphous silica by the presence of Na The acid loading was varied both above and below the recommended plant level with both ores, at given solution Na As expected, based on previous leaching work ( Unlike the limonitic ore, increasing the acid loading with the nontronitic ore from 420 When the nontronitic ore was leached at a higher acid loading (450 At the recommended plant acid loadings, the overall extraction of nickel from nontronitic ore was optimised at a process water Na The precipitation of aluminium in low level Na The authors gratefully acknowledge David Muir of CSIRO Minerals for helpful comments. Milan Chovancek and Darren Atheis (CSIRO Minerals) are thanked for providing analytical support. Peter Hosking, formerly of Bulong Nickel Operation and Simon Walsh, formerly of Cawse Nickel Operation are acknowledged for supplying ore samples.