The extension of Kynch's kinematical theory of ideal suspensions to polydisperse suspensions of spheres leads to a nonlinear system of conservation laws for the volumetric concentration of each species. In this work, we consider particle species different in sizes and densities, including the buoyant case. We show that modern shock-capturing numerical schemes for the solution of systems of conservation laws can be employed as an efficient tool for the simulation of the settling and separation of polydisperse suspensions. This is demonstrated by comparison with published experimental and theoretical results and by simulating some hypothetical configurations. Particular attention is focused on the emergence of rarefaction waves.The one-dimensional sedimentation of ideal suspensions of monosized spheres under the influence of gravity can be described quite well by Kynch's sedimentation theory Kynch's theory has also been applied to continuous sedimentation, where a convective term is added to the flux density function While the settling of ideal and flocculated suspensions of monosized particles has been studied extensively, the implications of the mathematical models proposed for the settling of polydisperse suspensions, containing two or more particle species differing in size or density, are not yet well understood. In particular, a complete analytical solution of batch settling processes for initially homogeneous polydisperse suspensions, as an analogue of Bustos and Concha's classification Several authors have formulated constitutive equations for such polydisperse suspensions. Smith Concha et al. We emphasize that all models considered in As mentioned before (see also Several authors, including Greenspan and Ungarish The first zone (counted from above to below) would contain only clear liquid, the second only liquid and the particle species of smallest (in modulus) final settling velocity; the third liquid and solid particles with the smallest and with the second smallest final velocities, and so on, until a zone is reached in which all solid species are present at their initial concentration. At the same time, one discontinuity emerges from the bottom of the vessel below which the total solids volume fraction is assumed to attain its maximum value. This rising discontinuity will intersect at some time the fastest discontinuity traveling downwards, yielding a change of propagation velocity of the rising sediment level and a change of the sediment composition. This solution procedure will be briefly outlined in mathematical terms later. However, to our view, the major shortcoming of this construction is its inability to describe continuous transitions described by rarefaction waves. It is the purpose of the present work to extend the study by Concha et al. The solution of these equations by analytical techniques, in particular, of the Riemann problem consisting of two different adjacing constant states, still seems difficult, therefore numerical schemes should be employed. In a separate paper with emphasis on numerical analysis Consider an ideal suspension of a fluid with spherical particles of We denote by  In the monodisperse case ( In this work, we also employ a modification of With the necessary terminology available now, we shall briefly describe the abovementioned kinematic shock tracking method, as suggested, for example, by Greenspan and Ungarish Consider now the settling of an initially homogeneous polydisperse suspension of This construction is valid until the fastest of the Of course, this construction presupposes that the solution of interest consists only of shock waves. In general, however, the correct solution of A mathematically complete proof of this statement requires a detailed study of the behaviour of eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the functional matrix of the system The problem of non-uniqueness is not of purely theoretical interest. It is also directly related to the numerical solution of systems of conservation laws such as We shall write out the system of The last three decades have seen a tremendous progress in the development of shock-capturing schemes for nonlinear systems of conservation laws. The term shock-capturing refers to schemes that will produce accurate approximations to discontinuous solutions without explicitly using jump conditions and shock-tracking techniques. A concise introduction to these schemes is given in To approximate the solution We divide the description of the scheme into an interior part and a boundary part. We start with the interior part, which provides updating formulas for The interior scheme consists of a first order predictor step followed by a second order corrector step:   A brief derivation of the updating formulas We next detail the boundary scheme that complements the interior schemes (i) (ii) It is a well accepted practice to utilize conservative methods when solving numerically systems of conservation laws In the following, we first present numerical simulations of published experimental data of the settling of polydisperse suspensions, and then simulate sedimentation of polydisperse suspensions in some hypothetical configurations exhibiting interesting settling behaviour. The spatial discretization parameter used was Δ Consider the experiment performed by Schneider et al.  Following Gaudin and Fuerstenau In addition to the original initial data used by Schneider et al. The numerical results are shown in Fessas and Weiland The experimental sedimentation container used by Law et al. was rather narrow such that wall effects could not be neglected. Thus, the final settling velocities resulting from insertion of these parameters into the Stokes formula In The results illustrate that the numerical scheme predicts correctly the expected separation behaviour. We also simulate a second experiment performed by Law et al. By the behaviour of the iso-concentration lines corresponding to It should be mentioned that our numerical results differ substantially from the behaviour of this suspension observed by Law et al. In Greenspan and Ungarish This example illustrates that the scheme is able to treat systems of more than two particle species. The preceding examples illustrate what is well known from the theory of monodisperse ideal suspensions: sediment is not only composed by kinematic shocks and their interactions; rather, the effect of rarefaction waves has to be taken into account. We present now two examples imposing initial conditions which, in view of comparable results known from the sedimentation behaviour of monodisperse suspensions, can be expected to produce rarefaction waves. In the first case, consider a ‘membrane problem’: we assume that the upper half of the settling column is initially filled with a bidisperse suspension, while its lower half contains pure liquid: In the second example, we illustrate the effect obtained if the initial concentration distribution is chosen such that the larger particles will ‘overtake’ the smaller ones: It can be seen in So far, we have considered only mixtures in which the particle species differ either in size or in density. However, the model equations permit that particles differ in both properties. To demonstrate the effects occurring in such a system, we chose an example of four different particle species ( The parameters have been selected such that all four species have different particle mass while the second and third heaviest species possess equal final settling velocity. A classical experiment with one pair of particle species differing in size and density, but having the same final settling velocity, was conducted by Richardson and Meikle The numerical solution of this example is depicted in The main reason for this undesirable effect is the coexistence of physical phenomena within the sedimentation model which propagate both at very small and at large velocities. That is, some of the concentrations quickly tend to develop stationary or almost stationary shocks, while this takes much longer time for others. With explicit schemes as the one employed here, however, the time step is limited by the fastest moving concentration component. Consequently, explicit schemes limit the time step to a much smaller value than is actually sufficient to accurately resolve the transient behaviour of the slowly moving components. For the particular scheme used here, this becomes apparent by the excessive diffusion in the concentration isolines corresponding to the lightest or smallest particle species when performing long time integration. A detailed study of this phenomenon produced by the numerical scheme and possible strategies for its correction are presented in We have shown that the use of modern shock-capturing schemes represents a serious alternative to the shock-tracking techniques that have been proposed for the simulation of settling of polydisperse suspensions. This is illustrated by the agreement with experimental data and the fact that there are no principal problems in treating large numbers of particle species. Moreover, these schemes obey an entropy principle and therefore approximate the unique physically relevant solution. This becomes apparent by several test cases in which the scheme replaces a constructed kinematic shock by a rarefaction wave. The scheme used in this paper is a high-resolution scheme which is particularly easy to implement. For completeness, the (few) necessary formulas for implementing the scheme have been included in this paper. It is also possible to consider other schemes. A comparative study of some modern shock-capturing schemes for simulating the settling of polydisperse suspensions is presented in We suggest employing these schemes for the study of several additional problems that could not be considered here, for example, for the study of fluidization problems such as bed inversion  KKF and KHK are grateful to the group of Prof. Dr.-Ing. Dr. H.C.W.L. Wendland at the Institute of Mathematics A, University of Stuttgart, for hospitality. The preparation of this paper was made possible by travel grants awarded by the European Science Foundation (ESF) through the Applied Mathematics in Industrial Flow Problems (AMIF) programme. Support by the Sonderforschungsbereich 404 at the University of Stuttgart is also gratefully acknowledged. We also acknowledge support of Fondef project D97-I2042. In this appendix, we briefly derive the difference formulas introduced in At time level For a sufficiently small time step Δ We next derive the Integrating the conservation law Let us now derive This concludes the discussion of the boundary scheme.