There is considerable anecdotal evidence from industry that poor wetting and liquid distribution can lead to broad granule size distributions in mixer granulators. Current scale-up scenarios lead to poor liquid distribution and a wider product size distribution. There are two issues to consider when scaling up: the size and nature of the spray zone and the powder flow patterns as a function of granulator scale.
                  Short, nucleation-only experiments in a 25L PMA Fielder mixer using lactose powder with water and HPC solutions demonstrated the existence of different nucleation regimes depending on the spray flux Ψ
                     a—from drop-controlled nucleation to caking. In the drop-controlled regime at low Ψ
                     a values, each drop forms a single nucleus and the nuclei distribution is controlled by the spray droplet size distribution. As Ψ
                     a increases, the distribution broadens rapidly as the droplets overlap and coalesce in the spray zone. The results are in excellent agreement with previous experiments and confirm that for drop-controlled nucleation, Ψ
                     a should be less than 0.1.
                  Granulator flow studies showed that there are two powder flow regimes—bumping and roping. The powder flow goes through a transition from bumping to roping as impeller speed is increased. The roping regime gives good bed turn over and stable flow patterns. This regime is recommended for good liquid distribution and nucleation. Powder surface velocities as a function of impeller speed were measured using high-speed video equipment and MetaMorph image analysis software. Powder surface velocities were 0.2 to 1 ms−1—an order of magnitude lower than the impeller tip speed. Assuming geometrically similar granulators, impeller speed should be set to maintain constant Froude number during scale-up rather than constant tip speed to ensure operation in the roping regime.Granulation is the process of agglomerating fine powdery materials using a liquid binder to give larger granules. This can be achieved in a range of different processing equipment including drums, pans, fluid beds and high shear mixers. It is an important process in a range of industries including agricultural chemicals, pharmaceuticals, mineral processing, food and detergents. Wet granulation is complex. Many phenomena occur simultaneously in the granulator which will influence the granule attributes. We divide these into three groups Granule nucleation and binder distribution Granule consolidation and growth Granule attrition and breakage This paper focuses on the first mechanism of nucleation and binder distribution. An understanding of binder dispersion is a crucial step towards controlling granule properties. The degree of binder dispersion indicates the quality of the mixing between the powder and the binder fluid, and is reflected in the product size distribution There is considerable anecdotal evidence from industry that poor wetting and liquid distribution can lead to broad granule size distributions in mixer granulators. Current scale-up scenarios lead to poor liquid distribution and a wider product size distribution. There are two issues to consider when scaling up: the size and nature of the spray zone and the powder flow patterns as a function of granulator scale. Many variables affecting binder dispersion and nucleation have already been identified. Binder dispersion is aided by lower binder flowrate An attempt to describe the nucleation zone conditions across equipment scales has been made by Tardos et al. Effective liquid distribution must be quantified over a range of scales to maintain good wetting. In the case of atomised binder addition, the three main operating variables in the spray zone are flowrate, drop size and powder flux through the spray zone. A dimensionless group involving three parameters was defined in a previous paper The Lactose monohydrate powder (Foremost Farms, Barbaroo, WI, USA) was prepared by screening over a 150-μm screen and discarding the +150-μm material. This allowed complete separation of granules (+180 μm) from the unwet powder (−150 μm) during sieve size analysis. Particle size analysis using a Microtrac SRA150 (Leeds and Northrup) gave a volume mean particle diameter of Two different binders were used: water and a 7-wt.% hydroxy propyl cellulose (HPC) solution. The HPC solution was prepared by slowly dissolving 70 g of HPC in 930 g of cold USP water. The solution was left to stir overnight covered in foil to minimise evaporation. Liquid properties were measured the following day. A Brookfield DV-III programmable rheometer was used to measure the viscosity using a SC-18 spindle. Surface tension was measured using a Krüs K122 CMC surface tensiometer with the Wilhelmy plate attachment. Liquid properties are summarised in A PharmaMATRIX PMA25 25 l mixer (Aeromatic Fielder, Hampshire, UK) was used in all experiments. The PMA-25 is a batch mixer granulator with a simple impeller on a vertical shaft, variable speed drive (100–500 rpm), a chopper and a non-standard plexiglass lid for observing granulation behaviour. The bowl was 0.40 m in diameter and approximately 0.1 m high before tapering off at the top. For the powder velocity experiments, the plastic lid of the granulator was removed and powder flow was filmed using a high speed video camera at 500 frames per second. The camera was placed looking down on the bowl at an angle of approximately 45° so that a view of about half the bowl was obtained, centred on the spray zone. A large spotlight was used to illuminate the powder surface. Granulator flow patterns were measured with 6-kg dry lactose powder at impeller speeds between 100 and 500 rpm with chopper speeds of either 360 or 3600 rpm. Wet lactose (approximately 6% moisture) flow patterns were also analysed qualitatively. All powder velocity experiments were performed with the spray nozzle removed and no liquid addition. MetaMorph® image processing software (Universal Imaging, PA, USA) was used to measure powder surface velocity at impeller speeds of 100–500 rpm. The powder bed did not fluidise and powder movement could be followed by using the natural bed structure (lumps and cracks in the packed bed). The software captured approximately 200 frames at a time. The position of a lump of powder was tracked over a number of frames and its position and scalar velocity calculated by the software. The radial variation in velocity was not considered—an average of all velocity results regardless of radial position was used. A 6-kg charge of lactose was dry mixed for 30 s. A spray nozzle (Spraying Systems pressurised spray pot, TP650017 fan nozzle) was placed manually through a 30-mm diameter hole in the plastic lid and held in position approximately 90 mm above the powder surface for 5 s only before being removed. Drop size distributions were measured at five positions 90 mm from the nozzle tip using a Malvern ST1800 at Spraying System laboratories in Chicago. The average median droplet sizes as a function of fluid and pressure are shown in The spray nozzle was placed opposite the chopper with the fan spray in the radial direction, approximately perpendicular to the direction of powder flow. In the first set of experiments, the impeller and chopper were turned off simultaneously with the spray. In the second set, the impeller and chopper were left on for 1 min after removing the nozzle. Care was taken to remove the bed without disturbing the wet and fragile granules and clumps that may have formed. Scoops were used to remove approximately two thirds of the charge from the top of the granulator. The discharge chute was then opened and most of the remainder discharged with the impeller operating at minimum speed. Finally, the impeller was removed and the remaining powder brushed out of the discharge chute. After spraying, each tray of powder was dried, undisturbed, overnight in an oven set at 60 °C and ambient humidity. Once dry, the entire 6-kg powder was riffle split to give two samples of approximately 200 g which were rehumidified (60% relative humidity using a magnesium chloride solution to avoid static electricity problems) and sieved for 1 min using a standard sieve series (2, 1, 0.7, 0.5, 0.355, 0.25, 0.18 mm). This analysis gives between 0.5 and 5 g of nuclei granules with the unwet powder reporting to the pan. This procedure has been successfully used before Granulator flow patterns were measured for 6-kg dry lactose powder with impeller speeds from 100 to 500 rpm with chopper speeds of either 360 or 3600 rpm. We found that the powder bed did not fluidise and it was easy to follow a packet of powder by using the natural bed structure (lumps and cracks in the packed bed). Two distinct flow regimes were observed. At low impeller speeds, the powder surface remained horizontal and the bed “bumped” up and down as the impeller passed underneath. Hiseman et al.  Initially in the bumping flow regime the powder surface velocity increases in proportion to impeller speed. Once the flow regime enters the transition stage the surface velocities stabilise and are less sensitive to impeller speed. There is a break in the curve corresponding to the change in regime from bumping to roping. However, further experiments with several powders in a range of mixer granulator designs are required to confirm these results. Both dry and wet lactose showed qualitatively similar behaviour although powder flow changes in for wet lactose were observed by eye only and quantitative data was unavailable. For dry lactose, the transition between bumping and roping regimes occurred at 250 to 300 rpm in the 25L Fielder granulator. The transition for wet lactose was at lower speeds (150 to 200 rpm). In the bumping regime, the amplitude of each bump was greater for wet lactose. In the roping regime, the bed surface was steeper, nearly vertical at 500 rpm. These effects are probably due to the cohesive nature of the wet lactose. Experimental work by Mugumara et al. Powder surface velocities were relatively insensitive to impeller speed in the roping regime and all velocities were an order of magnitude lower than the corresponding impeller tip speed (approximately 4–20 m/s) which agrees with previous observations The chopper was immersed in the powder but the chopper speed (360 or 3600 rpm) had no discernible effect on overall flow regime behaviour although high chopper speed runs have not been analysed quantitatively. The surface velocity is a function of the powder and its properties, the amount of liquid present and the impeller design and the impeller speed. At least two flow patterns have been observed in high shear granulators. A stroboscope and a camera where used to measure the flow profile of tracer pellets in a coffee grinder and a Gral 10 high shear mixer Powder flow patterns beneath the powder surface are completely unknown, and characterising powder flow patterns in all granulation devices, including high shear mixers, is an area requiring further research. Particle emission positron tracking (e.g.  Nuclei size distributions after 1 min mixing time The powder velocity results were used to calculate As the powder moves radially around the mixer, the powder at the outside edge of the mixer passes beneath the spray at a higher velocity than the powder at the centre of the mixer. A distribution of The nuclei size distribution results all For water and HPC sprays, 0.5 and 1 mm were chosen for  These results confirm that the dimensionless spray flux characterises the spray characteristics in the nucleation zone and may be a good basis for design and scale-up. For Most granulation operations require a set volume of binder to be added to the powder. Low Both the powder flow regime (bumping or roping) and spray flux Clearly, the roping flow regime is best for good nucleation and liquid distribution. Powder surface velocity is highest in the roping regime and the improved bed turnover continuously presents fresh powder to the spray zone. In contrast, the bumping regime will recycle the same wet powder surface to the spray as the bed rotates because vertical turnover of the powder is poor. The transition from bumping to roping is due to a change in the balance between the powder rotational inertia, which tends to push it towards the outside of the bowl, and gravity which tend to keep the bed surface horizontal. This balance between rotational inertia and gravity is given by the Froude number: In addition to maintaining the Froude number, the dimensionless bed height should be held constant, i.e. same fraction of the bowl filled in small and large scale. Such scale-up rules are well established for tumbling granulators (drums and discs) This scale-up rule decreases the Froude number as scale increases. In addition, full scale granulators are often filled much higher than the laboratory scale granulators. A combination of these two trends could lead to a product developed in the roping regime during small scale operation being run at full scale in the bumping regime. The above scale-up analysis assumes geometrically similar granulator designs. This is frequently not the case in industrial mixer granulator design Maintaining constant tip speed or relative swept volume during scale-up will be successful provided the flow patterns remain the same. This will occur if the small- and large-scale process conditions are Some general work on the effect of Froude number on flow patterns Finally, the powder properties also influence the flow in the granulator. Momentum is more easily transferred from the impeller to the bed for cohesive powders. Thus, cohesive powders will move to the roping regime at lower impeller speeds. The cohesiveness of the powder generally increases as the moisture content of the bed increases. Interestingly, this offers scope to optimise the impeller speed during a large scale operation. Initially, the granulator may be run at high speed to ensure good nucleation in the roping regime. As the bed becomes wetter, the speed may be dropped to minimise the granule compaction while still remaining in the roping regime. However, a much better understanding of the flow behaviour of cohesive powders in mixer granulators is necessary before the effect of powders properties can be accurately predicted. Current standard scale-up practice is to keep total spraying time constant and simply use a larger flowrate in the large scale granulator. Consider the implications on the dimensionless spray flux of this scale-up procedure for scaling from a 60- to a 600-l geometrically similar granulator. These results show there is likely to be a substantial increase in the dimensionless spray flux during scale-up which may push the nucleation out of the drop-controlled regime. Possible strategies to keep the dimensionless spray flux low on scale-up include increasing the spray time in the large scale granulator or increasing the spray area by using multiple nozzles spaced evenly around the granulator. The latter option requires most industrial mixer granulators to redesigned, as most designs currently tend to have only one nozzle entry port. Flexible operation and scale-up of mixer granulators is currently limited by empirical equipment design. Short, nucleation-only experiments demonstrated the existence of different nucleation regimes depending on the spray flux Flow studies identified two powder flow regimes: bumping and roping. Powder surface velocities increased linearly with impeller speed in the bumping flow regime but were independent of impeller speed in the roping regime. All velocities were several orders of magnitude lower than the impeller tip speed. Increasing impeller speed increases the powder flux and decreases Dimensionless spray flux is a useful tool for design, operation and scale-up of granulation. These experiments demonstrate its use as a quantitative method to describe and set liquid distribution conditions independently of equipment scale and design. However, dimensionless spray flux only describes the process parameters that determine the flux of drops onto the powder surface during nucleation. The wetting kinetics and drop penetration time, both determined by the formulation properties, must also be favourable to remain in the drop-controlled regime. This project was funded by an Australian Research Council grant, International Fine Particles Research Institute, and by Merck & Co. Thanks to Reid Zeigler, of Merck & Co., for assistance with high speed video imaging of powder flow. Thanks also to Maria Cruanes, Larry Rosen, Jim Zega and Udit Batra of Merck & Co. for their discussion and ideas during the project.