Effectiveness of trimming external carcass surfaces from subprimals during fabrication to reduce Escherichia coli O157:H7 surrogates was evaluated. Carcass sides (n
                     =10 sides) were inoculated along the hide pattern opening before entering the blast chill cooler with a gelatin slurry containing a bacterial cocktail of three rifampicin-resistant, nonpathogenic E. coli biotype I strains. Following a 48h chill, sides were fabricated to produce eight subprimals. Microbiological samples were taken from the original carcass fat surface area, initial lean surface area, trimmed fat surface area (where applicable), and trimmed lean surface area (where applicable). Newly exposed lean surfaces had lower (P
                     <0.05) counts of rifampicin-resistant E. coli than did the external fat surfaces. However, fat and lean surfaces that were not inoculated became contaminated during the fabrication process. Trimming external surfaces reduced levels of pathogens, but under normal fabrication processes, pathogens were still spread to newly exposed surfaces.During 2007 and 2008, the beef industry suffered from an increased number of positive Many further processors utilize purchase specifications that require the application of a validated microbial intervention to support the decision that The beef industry has continued to search for ways to improve the safety of beef by reducing Previous studies have evaluated the efficacy of trimming ( The purpose of this study was to determine if trimming during the fabrication process would reduce or eliminate the number of pathogens present on newly exposed lean and fat surfaces of subprimals. To accomplish this purpose, a bacterial cocktail containing three surrogate microorganisms was applied to carcass surfaces during the harvest process to allow for a known quantity of microorganisms to be present before fabrication. Surrogate microorganisms are non-pathogenic microorganisms that grow, survive, and have resistant properties similar to specific pathogens ( Three nonpathogenic These three rif-resistant strains were designed to be utilized in a “cocktail” to represent possible contamination with enteric pathogens of fecal origin such as Each rif-resistant On each harvest day, the prepared gelatin slurry (5.4 A total of five head of cattle were harvested at the Rosenthal Meat Science and Technology Center at Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, on two different dates (two head the first day and three head the second day). The beef slaughter process at this facility is an on-the-rail gravity-flow procedure ( Before entering the blast chill cooler (− A refrigerated room equipped with two cutting tables with removable polyethylene cutting boards (one table used for forequarters and one table used for hindquarters), a band saw, hand saws, and knives, hooks, and steels were used to fabricate the carcasses. Fabrication followed general laboratory procedures outlined in During the fabrication process, microbiological samples were taken from lean and fat surfaces categorized as either before trimming (BT) or after trimming (AT). The BT fat samples generally were those from exterior subprimal surfaces and the BT lean samples generally were surfaces that were revealed during the initial removal of the subprimal from the forequarters or hindquarters. The AT fat samples generally were those from the remaining fat surfaces that had been exposed to meet the final external fat trim specifications for that subprimal. The AT lean samples were those from the lean surfaces exposed during the final processing of the subprimal. Not all subprimals had the full complement of BT and AT fat and lean samples because of the fabrication method. The beef band (rib and plate section) was separated from the arm chuck section with a cut between the 5th and 6th ribs. The BT rib fat samples were taken from the exterior carcass fat surfaces over the The brisket was removed from the arm chuck by making a straight cut 2.5 The foreshank of the arm chuck was suspended with a j-hook and trolley to allow for on-the-rail removal of the shoulder clod. The shoulder clod included the The remaining portion of the arm chuck section was placed back on the boning table for removal of the chuck roll. The BT fat samples for the chuck roll were taken on the external fat surface near the dorsal anterior portion of the chuck primal that was removed during production of the chuck roll. The BT lean sample for the chuck roll was taken on the The round was separated from the full loin between 4th and 5th sacral vertebrae and about 2.5 The sirloin was separated through the natural seam to obtain a top sirloin and bottom sirloin. The BT fat samples for the top sirloin were taken from the exterior carcass fat surfaces. The remaining portions of the ilium and sacral bones were removed. The BT lean samples for the top sirloin were taken on the ventral lean surfaces exposed after the bones were removed. The external fat surface of the top sirloin was trimmed to 0.6 The round was suspended with a j-hook and trolley for on-the-rail removal of the knuckle, inside round, and gooseneck. The inside round was separated from the bottom round and knuckle through the natural seam and was placed on the cutting table. The BT fat samples for the inside round were taken from the exterior carcass fat surfaces. The BT lean samples were taken on the ventral lean surface where the inside round was separated through the natural seam. Because lean surfaces remained the same before and after fabrication, AT lean samples were not taken from the ventral surface. Instead, the exposed medial portion of the For the gooseneck (IMPS 170) ( During fabrication of the carcass sides, worker's knives, hooks, and steels were sanitized in a chemical sanitizer (Biquat, Birko Corporation, Henderson, CO) every 5 To ensure that cleaning and sanitizing practices removed any residual surrogate microorganisms, environmental samples were taken using sponges on randomly selected places on the slaughter floor, blast chill cooler, and cutting lab. Before sampling, the sponge was moistened with 25 Microbiological samples from subprimals were obtained by excising two 10-cm Plate counts were converted to log CFU per ml or cm This study used rif-resistant surrogate microorganisms that would not typically be found in a commercial beef-processing establishment. No detectable counts of rif-resistant microorganisms were found on the non-inoculated sides (data not shown). Environmental samples taken to ensure that the rif-resistant microorganisms were removed from the facility were below detectable levels (data not shown). There were no differences ( The before and after trimming effects for the lean and fat surfaces for each of the subprimals evaluated are presented in Although there are a number of studies that report the efficacy of trimming hot carcasses as a decontamination method ( Although there were variations in the microbiological counts from the impact of trimming exterior carcass surfaces during fabrication, this project showed that there was a general trend that counts from trimmed surfaces were lower than initially exposed surfaces. However, fat and lean surfaces that were not inoculated became contaminated during the fabrication process, which indicates that trimming external surfaces results in reduced, but not completely eliminated, pathogens on the finished products. The beef industry continues to be criticized by USDA-FSIS and consumer groups for not preventing illnesses associated with This project was funded, in part, by