In this paper, sodium phytate, a phosphate ester salt rich in phosphate groups, was evaluated as a flotation depressant for selective separation of scheelite from calcite. Its adsorption mechanism on the mineral surface was also investigated through zeta potential and FTIR spectra analysis. The micro flotation results of both single and mixed binary minerals showed that sodium phytate exhibited strong depressant effect on calcite flotation while had little influence on scheelite flotation, when it was added before the collector sodium oleate. Using sodium phytate as depressant improved the flotation separation of scheelite from calcite in the pH range of 7–12. The results of zeta potential measurements and FTIR spectra analysis demonstrated that sodium phytate adsorbed on the calcite surface and hindered the subsequent chemisorption of sodium oleate. The chelating adsorption mainly consisted of the interactions between Ca2+ on calcite surface and the PO tetrahedron in sodium phytate. Sodium phytate did not adsorb on the surface of scheelite and did not hinder the subsequent coverage by the collector sodium oleate. Based on these findings, sodium phytate has the potential to act as an effective depressant in flotation separation of scheelite from calcite.Tungsten is an important rare metal and has wide application in modern industry. Scheelite, a typical tungsten-containing mineral (CaWO In scheelite flotation, fatty acids and their derivatives are the most commonly used collectors. However, due to the same active Ca Depressants, aiming at reducing the flotability of calcite under scheelite flotation conditions, are widely used in scheelite flotation plants to improve the flotation selectivity. The depressant effect is mostly realized through the selective interactions between the Ca Of all the reported depressants in Phytic acid (C In this paper, a sodium salt of phytic acid named sodium phytate (SP) was evaluated as a novel phosphates depressant for calcite in scheelite flotation using sodium oleate (NaOl) as collector. The effects of SP on the flotation performance of scheelite and calcite were investigated. The adsorption mechanism of SP and NaOl on mineral surfaces was evaluated by zeta potential and FTIR spectra. Based on the micro flotation results and surface analysis, the depressant-collector scheme (sequencing and dosage) and a chelating adsorption model of SP at the particle/water interface were proposed. The samples of scheelite and calcite were all obtained from Xintianling mine, Hunan, China. Hand-selected crystals were crushed to −1 mm with a laboratory roll crusher and were ground in a ceramic ball mill. The ground samples were wet- sieved and the −74 + 38 μm-size fraction was collected for micro-flotation test. A portion of  38 μm-size fraction was further ground in an agate mortar to obtain −2 μm-size particles for zeta potential measurements and FTIR spectra studies. The purities of the samples of scheelite and calcite were 98.79% and 98.43% according to their X-ray diffraction results (see SP used in this research was purchased from LAIYANG WANJIWEI BIO-ENGINEERING CO., LTD, Shandong, China. NaOl was bought from Tianjing Kermil Chemical Reagents Development Centre, Tianjin, China. SP is white powder with a M.W of 924. It is easy to get dissolved in water. The molecular structures of SP and NaOl are shown in Micro-flotation tests were performed with a XFG laboratory flotation machine with a 40 mL plexiglass cell ( For mixed binary mineral micro-flotation test, the concentrate and tailing were weighted and assayed (for Ca and W). The scheelite recovery was calculated based on CaWO Zeta potentials of scheelite and calcite treated with SP and NaOl were measured with a Delsa 440sx Zeta Potential Analyzer (Malvern Instruments Ltd, United Kingdom) in 1 × 10 The infrared spectra of mineral samples treated with flotation reagents were recorded with an IRAffinity-1 Fourier Transform Infrared Spectrometer (shimadzu, Japan) by KBr diffuse reflection method. 30 mg pure samples (−2 μm) was ultrasonically dispersed in 100 mL deionized water. Then the flotation reagents were added in sequence to a desired concentration (c(SP) = 2 × 10 Flotation studies of scheelite and calcite as a function of pulp pH, NaOl concentration, SP concentration and addition order of reagents were investigated, and the results are shown in  The effect of SP concentration on the flotation performance of scheelite and calcite is shown in  The single mineral floatation results above suggest that it may be possible to selectively float scheelite from calcite by depressing the latter using SP as inhibitor in the pH range of 7–12. Then the flotation tests on artificial mixed binary minerals were conducted under natural pH 9.2 of the mixed binary mineral slurry. The best results of three reagent schemes were shown in When NaOl was used alone, the scheelite grade in concentrate (40.52%) and tailing (39.08%) were almost the same as that in original mixture (40%), showing that there existed none selectivity with the scheme. With the addition of SP after NaOl, a concentrate with scheelite grade of 56.33% and recovery of 73.23% was obtained. When SP was added before NaOl, the scheelite grade increased to 63.28% at the same recovery level. The results of these reagent schemes confirm that the higher enrichment ratio (1.04 for NaOl alone and 2.67 for NaOl + SP scheme) can be obtained with the SP + NaOl scheme (3.40) in micro-flotation scale. The increased enrichment ratio also demonstrates that the depressant effect of SP still exists in the flotation of mixed minerals and could potentially be used to improve the flotation selectivity in calcitic scheelite ores. The flotation results above have confirmed that the reagent scheme, i.e., SP (2 × 10 It is first noted that bare scheelite and calcite are both negatively charged at pH 9.2. In the absence of SP pre-treatment, remarkable drops in zeta potentials were observed for scheelite (from −21.1 mV to 50.2 mV) and calcite (from −1.6 mV to −42.0 mV) as NaOl concentration increased from 0 to 3.5 × 10 To gain a better understanding of how SP selectively hinders the interactions between NaOl and calcite, FTIR spectrometry was applied as the method to detect the new species formed on particle surfaces and therefore determine the types of adsorption. The FTIR spectra of reagents and the two minerals treated with different reagent schemes were measured and the results are shown in In the FTIR spectrum of SP presented in IR spectra of scheelite treated with SP, NaOl and both are shown in IR spectra of calcite treated with SP, NaOl and both are shown in On the basis of the flotation results and the surface analysis, it can be concluded that SP can selectively and chemically adsorb on the calcite surface. In the spectroscopic analysis, the obvious shifts of P For the SP molecule, there is a sp However, due to different crystal structures of the two individual minerals, the ions exposed on particle surface were also different, which further influenced the reactivity of Ca Sodium phytate was found to be a depressant for selectively flotation of scheelite from calcite. The flotation results of both single and mixed binary minerals indicated that scheelite presented good flotability while calcite exhibited poor flotability by using sodium phytate as depressant and sodium oleate as collector. A reagent scheme, i.e., 2 × 10 The interactions of sodium phytate with scheelite and calcite surfaces were investigated through zeta potential measurements and FTIR spectra analysis. Sodium phytate could remarkably decrease the zeta potential of calcite through chelating adsorption, which could efficiently hinder the subsequent coverage by the collector sodium oleate. Addition of sodium phytate before sodium oleate had little influence on the zeta potential and the surface property of scheelite, and could not interfere with the coverage of sodium oleate on scheelite surface. The chelating adsorption probably occurred between Ca This work was supported by the