The present investigation has been carried out in order to propose a new model for the determination of the surface hardness of thin films, employing data easily obtained from standard micro-indentation tests. The model is based on the consideration that the substrate has a predominant behavior at the highest indentation loads, whereas at low indentation loads the predominant behavior is that of the film. Such a description is achieved by combining a series and parallel additive laws associated to each behavior, respectively. This approach has been applied for the computation of the hardness of a number of films, including Al2O3, Cr, diamond like carbon, Ti, TiC, TiCN, TiN, TiN
                        x
                      and ZrN
                        x
                     , deposited onto different substrates. It is shown that the results obtained are in good agreement with the predictions provided by other models reported in the literature.Composite hardness or measured hardness Substrate hardness Film hardness Film influence coefficient Film thickness Indent diagonal Indentation depth Constant of Jönsson model Volume of the plastic zone Volume of the plastic zone in the film Volume of the plastic zone in the substrate Young modulus of the film Young modulus of the substrate Exponent for parameter Interface parameter Half angle between the opposite edges (74°) of the indent Fitting parameter for Korsunsky model Relative indentation depth ( Fitting parameter for Puchi-Cabrera model Fitting parameter for Puchi-Cabrera model Upper limit for elastic modulus Lower limit for elastic modulus Elastic modulus of the matrix Elastic modulus of the reinforcement Volume fraction of reinforcement Upper limit for composite hardness Lower limit for composite hardness Applied load Coefficient of Meyer Index of Meyer Vickers hardness number Coefficient of Meyer for composite hardness Index of Meyer for composite hardness Factors for composite hardness Influence factor for the new model Slope of the ln Coefficients of the polynomial for film hardness In order to improve the resistance to surface damage of materials by mechanical actions, considerable research has been conducted to increase the hardness of the superficial zone of mechanical parts. This is achieved, for example, by physical vapor deposition of hard thin films at their surface. The objective of designing films possessing optimum mechanical properties cannot avoid the determination of their hardness as precisely as possible. Unfortunately, direct measurement of the film hardness, using conventional micro-hardness testers, is not possible for a large range of indentation loads because, for these loads, the substrate undergoes part of the plastic deformation during the indentation process. It is often assumed that this phenomenon, which involves the two materials, begins to be noticeable for loads such that the depth of the indent exceeds one tenth of the film thickness It is seen that the difference between the models comes only from the expression used to describe the variation of coefficient Considering that this model does not represent the real deformation behavior during indentation, numerous authors have searched to link the coefficient In order to avoid the use of a parameter such as In the two cases, provided that On the basis of geometrical considerations about the dimension of the indent, very recently, Puchi-Cabrera Some of the models listed above require the knowledge or the choice of data that have to be deduced from other experiments or literature. Some others, which need a fitting method to describe the variations of The objective of the present work is to propose a model which avoids the knowledge or choice of any other data (Young modulus of the film in particular) than that obtained easily from standard measurements (e.g. thickness and apparent hardness). The basic idea on which we will now build this model found its origin in the analogy between the variation of the Young modulus of reinforced composites with the volume fraction of particles, and the variation of the composite hardness with the indentation load. The global behavior exhibits similar features since the apparent Young modulus or the hardness tends to two distinct limits: the matrix and the reinforcement material elastic modulus on one hand, and the substrate and film hardness on the other hand. Although it is clear that there is no relation between the elastic deformation of composites and the elasto-plastic deformation of the film and the substrate during indentation, the mathematics used to describe the variations can be considered in a similar way. In order to discuss the validity of the new model, the calculated hardness of various films on several substrates will be compared to the predictions given by a set of representative models applied to experimental values coming either from our laboratory or from literature. The films tested in our laboratory were prepared by an industrial vapor deposition process. Two types of films were deposited on a low carbon steel after careful polishing: TiN and diamond like carbon (DLC) films of thickness of 1.4 and 1.6 μm, respectively. Vickers indentations were then performed on the as-deposited samples using a Leco micro-hardness tester with loads ranging from 0.25 to 20 N. Five tests were performed at each load level in order to get a reasonable confidence in the calculated average hardness value. The thickness of the film was measured directly either by microscopy on a cross-section of a coated sample or using the ball cratering technique. Another set of data was collected from the literature, for films produced by different physical and chemical vapor deposition techniques on various steel substrates. Most of the models available in the literature express the composite hardness It is observed that the variation of For higher indentation loads, If we consider the analogy with the elastic modulus of reinforced composites for which: A first approach is to consider the relation known as Meyer's law This relation is traditionally used for a single material. Applied to the particular case of a film substrate couple ( We have just seen that Direct comparison of the models could not be done easily under the form of relations deduced from  In order to validate the new model, we compare its predictions to the average predictions of all the other models for each film. If the standard errors on this average are examined, we note that for some models the predictions (in italic in Observation of We have shown in this paper that, starting from an analogy with reinforced composites, it is possible to represent the behavior of a film–substrate couple under indentation, from the higher loads, when the couple tends to behave like the substrate, to the lower loads, when it tends to behave like the film. The new model proposes to combine these two tendencies according to the apparent Meyer's law, which describes how the apparent composite hardness varies as a function of the applied load. The predictions for the film hardness, calculated using this model, are of the same order than those obtained with more complicated or delicate models proposed in literature. Another interesting feature of this model is that it applies well even when the number of available data is small, contrary to other models which need a fitting method to derive the film hardness. The hardness of a material, as deduced from indentation tests, is definitely not an intrinsic property such as its elastic modulus or its melting temperature. The hardness number is in fact a representation of the resistance to indentation of a material under a given load and a given indenter. As a consequence, it is not possible to state that one model should give more accurate values for The recent developments of depth sensing indentation equipment