The routine variations of metal flotation recovery always exist in every concentrator due to existing fluctuations in daily operations. It should be taken into consideration when conducting a plant trial of evaluating a reagent. The reference distribution was used in this paper to quantify these existing variations and to plan a plant trial. Finally, paired T-test was employed to analyze the trial results.
                  The trial results showed that the average Cu recovery was increased by 3% for the tested collector or 1.8% after taking into consideration the routine Cu recovery variation of 1.2% during the trial.
                  With the application of these statistical tools in planning a plant trial and analyzing the results, a more convincing and accurate conclusion about the real benefit of selecting a collector can be drawn.Evaluation of reagents in a mineral processing plant is more challenging than in a lab due to the changes of many operating variables involved (e.g. grind size distribution, mineralogy, and chemistry of the pulp) and difficulty in maintaining a steady state in the plant. These fluctuations result in normal metal recovery variations. Therefore, it is necessary to quantify the variations or “background noise” before a plant trial. Otherwise, the conclusions based on the plant test will be risky. For example, how do we know that the recovery increase (e.g. 2.8%) is truly due to the tested reagent or just within the range of normal routine variation? In order to answer this question correctly, it is necessary to define the variations first (e.g. copper and molybdenum recoveries) before any plant trials. The use of statistical tools to quantify variations, plan trials, and analyze the data then becomes very important for a successful plant trial. A plant trial of evaluating a reagent in flotation circuits usually involves changing from the normal (“control” regime) operating condition (e.g. the existing reagent and dosage) to a test (“test” regime) operating condition (e.g. switching to the reagent to be tested at certain dosage). Relevant data (e.g. metal recovery) are then collected for periods of operation time (e.g. per shifts or days) under both control and test regimes. Finally, the collected data are then paired and analyzed by using the paired Xanthates are commonly used collectors in plants. However, when xanthate is used, typically both selectivity and metal recovery are low without the use of additional reagents. In the Bagdad concentrator located in Arizona, USA, sodium ethyl xanthate has been used as a primary copper mineral collector for a long time. In order to improve flotation performance, another collector with a high selectivity for chalcopyrite was evaluated in one of the two flotation circuits. Its chemical formula is C The reference distribution (REFDIST) approach to analyzing accumulated data (e.g. the shift Cu recovery) from plant operations for planning the reagent plant trials was pioneered by Cytec. It provides not only an objective criterion for trial success, but also for designing a trial pattern that is most powerful for testing the effect of a tested reagent in the presence of routine variation ( These criteria will be valid regardless of whether or not the variation conforms to the assumptions of standard statistical tests (  Various possible trial patterns can be designed and the calculated critical values are different for various patterns at the same confidence level ( The critical value of 95% confidence level is 1.2% for the trial pattern of 40 shifts shown in Two types of similar plant trials were used for this tested reagent. One is called the The ore delivery to grinding was strictly monitored and controlled to deliver a steady feed-rate to the flotation circuit. The density of the rougher and pH were strictly monitored, measured and stabilized in the target range. The expert control system was running to keep the cell pulp and froth level control consistent during the stabilization and test period. A 90 minute period was allowed for the plant to stabilize and during this period the process conditions were monitored using the process trends, graphically displayed on the process information (PI) system. After establishing steady conditions, density and pH measurements were carried out. Once the measurements were completed, metallurgical sampling was then carried out around the Bag I flotation circuit. These sampled streams are rougher feed, rougher concentrate, rougher tail, cleaner concentrate, and scavenger tail. Every sample was collected at 15 min intervals at the same time for a period of 1 h to form a composite sample. All samples were then filtered, dried and prepared in a standard manner at the metallurgical lab. As mentioned in the previous section, the Several batch “control-and-test” plant trials were carried out during 2006. For example, the following reagent dosage scheme was used for the trial on February 22. The reagent dosages for the 3 h period batch “control-and-test” plant trial are listed in  Several additional batch “control-and-test” plant trials were carried out during the months of March and April, 2006. Assuming the difference (test–control) follows a normal distribution with The following is the analysis results by using the Minitab tool: 1). Paired 2). Paired The results of the Following the batch “control-and-test” plant trials, the continuous “control-and-test” plant trials were conducted using the same pattern determined by the reference distribution analysis shown on  The second continuous “control-and-test” trial was carried out from July 7 to August 6 2006. The shift data were analyzed using both methods: comparing the average of all the “control” trial data to all the corresponding “test” trial data which are presented in The second row in It is evident through this analysis that the Cu recovery was increased by 3% with 0.78% higher concentrate Cu grade when the tested collector was added to the flotation system. The average Cu recovery is still 1.5% higher when compared to the average of the whole data set (40 shifts). Mo grade in the bulk Cu–Mo concentrate is lower (1.919% vs 2.056%) with the tested collector “on” while the Mo recovery was increased by 3.9%.  The paired Paired The probability value Based on the reference distribution analysis shown on Metal recovery variations in actual plant operations can be quantified using the reference distribution for different trial patterns. This quantified background “noise” was taken into consideration for analyzing the plant trials for the tested collector. The The The reference distribution and paired The authors would like to thank Freeport McMoran Copper & Gold for the permission to publish this paper. The assistance offered by employees involved in this project at the Bagdad mill operations, the support and encouragement of the mill management at the time of testing is also gratefully acknowledged. The authors also thank Paul Gupta, Kevin Purdy, D. R. Nagaraj and other reviewers’ valuable input and comments.