The reaction mechanism of the organic reagent removing VOCl3 from crude TiCl4 has been explored, which is key to optimize industrial application. In this study, a comprehensive reaction mechanism is conducted via various characterization techniques and computational studies, such as XRD, XPS, Raman, SEM, density functional theory calculations and thermodynamic calculation etc. The results show that the main substance in the residue, which derives from the reaction of organic reagent and crude TiCl4 is amorphous carbon. It is created from organic reagent catalyzied by TiCl4, undergoing reactions including the aromatization, polycondensation and carbonization. Then, the amorphous carbon adsorbs VOCl3 and converts it into insoluble VOCl2 and VCl3. Finally, the insoluble particles are removed via adsorbing by amorphous carbon.In some countries, the industry which produces titanium of high purity is deemed to be the top of all the industries ( At present, in order to solve the technical difficulties in removing the VOCl In this study, a detailed chemical reaction mechanism has been proposed, through various characterization techniques and computational studies in lab-scale experiments. The focus of the work can be summarized as: (1) the chemical reaction experiment between organic reagent and crude TiCl The TiCl In this experiment, the TiCl The calculations for binding energy between amorphous carbon and adsorbed matter were performed using the DMol The X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern of residue was obtained by using Bruker D8 Advance diffractometer with a Cu-Kα X-ray source. The Raman spectrum of residue was recorded by LabRAM HR Evolution Confocal Raman spectrometer with an excitation wavelength of 514 nm. The X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) of residue was tested by AXIS NOVA X-ray photoelectron spectrometer. The High-resolution TEM (HRTEM) image of residue was characterized by JEM-2000FXII microscope. The microscopic morphology of residue was observed using Hitachi S-4800 microscope (SEM). Elemental analysis of residue was obtained with an energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS). The experimental schematic representation of the organic reagent and crude TiCl   The physical property parameters of organic reagent are listed in Table S4. The above results show that the organic reagent catalizing by TiCl The reaction equations, that remove VOCl  The above results indicate that produced amorphous carbon could play the role as reducing agents to converse VOCl To explore the adsorption performance of amorphous carbon, the N Density functional theory calculations (DFT) are a kind of method used to study molecular properties, especially for predicting properties of adsorption or chemical reaction. It is not enough to only use the above conclusion to prove the adsorption properties of amorphous carbon. Therefore, in order to further explore the adsorption mechanism, preliminary DFT calculations are conducted. To reduce time-consuming calculations and simplify calculation steps, the molecular structures of VOCl The In order to verify the above adsorption mechanism, SEM images of the residue are observed ( As mentioned above, the organic reagent exhibits outstanding ability to remove VOCl The organic reagent and crude TiCl Catalyzied by TiCl The results of DFT calculation show that the binding energy of VOCl The results of DFT calculation suggest that the binding energy of VOCl We declare that we have no financial and personal relationships with other people or organizations that can inappropriately influence our work, there is no professional or other personal interest of any nature or kind in any product, service and/or company that could be construed as influencing the position presented in, or the review of, the manuscript entitled. The research was supported by  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at