If reconstruction of the distal humerus, after complex distal humeral fractures in the elderly, can not adequately be achieved with open reduction and internal fixation, a hemi-arthroplasty of the distal humerus can be an option; the results after 2 years are promising. Gold standard for distal humeral fractures (DHF) in the elderly is open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF). In selected cases with severe comminution of the fracture in combination with osteopenia, primary total elbow arthroplasty (TEA) can be an option. The survival the TEA remains a point of concern, with early loosening of especially the ulnar component. Hemi-arthroplasty of the distal humerus has been developed to overcome this problem. In this case series the medium term results of Distal Humeral Hemi-arthroplasty (DHH) are reported. Eight patients with a mean age of 64 (50-77) years, 1 male and 7 females with a distal humeral fracture were treated with a DHH using a Latitude® Elbow replacement system (Tornier, Stafford, TX). In 3 patients the hemi-arthroplasty was placed shortly after trauma, in 5 patients the DHH was placed shortly after failure of an ORIF. Evaluation took place after 12 and 24 months and consisted of the range of motion (ROM), Mayo Elbow Performance Score (MEPS) and standard radiographs in AP and lateral direction. Preoperatively all patients had a non-functional elbow, which necessitated immobilisation in splint. Functional outcome after 12 months: The mean flexion after 12 months was 124° (range 105°-135°), the mean extension 27° (range 20°-45°), mean pronation 68° (range 60°-85°) and mean supination 68° (range 60°-80°). The categorical rating according to MEPS score was as follows: 3 patients had an excellent score (90-100 points), 2 patients a good score (75-89 points) and 3 patients fair (60-74 points). There was no significant difference between the outcomes after 12 and 24 months. All patients were satisfied with the result. No complications were noticed. If reconstruction of the distal humerus, after complex distal humeral fractures in the elderly, can not adequately be achieved with open reduction and internal fixation, a hemi-arthroplasty of the distal humerus can be an option; the results after 2 years are promising.