This study focused on the application of microbubbles (Mbs) to microfiltration (MF) pretreatment for reverse osmosis (RO) desalination. Experiments were performed using seawater as the feed water to a microfiltration system. Mbs, which were generated by a pump under 4bars of pressure, were applied prior to MF treatment. The MF flux was adjusted from 15L/m2/h to 45L/m2/h. The effect of coagulant addition to the Mbs reactor on the MF efficiency was also examined. Results indicated that Mbs without using coagulant were not effective to regard MF fouling. Although the turbidity of the water decreased, the fouling rate increased after the Mbs treatment. This is attributed to an increase in the fraction of small particles, which lead to an increase in specific cake resistance by decreasing the particle size. Combined with coagulation, microbubbles showed a higher ability to control MF fouling. The removal of small particles (<10μm) was also improved and the formation of cake layer was suppressed. The SDI5 was maintained low when seawater was pretreated with a combination of coagulation–microbubble–microfiltration.As water resources are being depleted, seawater desalination has attracted increasing interest during the last decades The pretreatment method must be selected according to the quality of the seawater to be treated One of the available treatment processes is flotation, which is useful for fine particle separation Although several studies have demonstrated the effectiveness of floatation in minimizing the fouling of wastewater when combined with MF Seawater was collected from the western coast of Korea at Wolmido Island and stored at room temperature (22  The Mbs treatment system consists of a feed tank, a floatation tank, a high-pressure gas cylinder, and an Mbs generator. An acrylic column with an internal diameter of 30 Two series of Mbs tests, without and with coagulant addition, were also conducted. Ferric chloride (FeCl A schematic diagram of the experimental setup for MF used in this study is shown in The operating conditions for the MF test are summarized in The filtration experiments were conducted under the constant flux mode. The transmembrane pressure (TMP) was monitored by a pressure transducer attached to each membrane module. The MF system was operated at three different fluxes. The flux was first set at 15 Membrane fouling is a common problem in most membrane processes, which results in loss of permeability By combining Eqs. The fouling rate The pH and turbidity were determined using a pH meter and a turbidimeter (TURIB 430 IR; Germany), respectively. Samples were filtered through a 0.45 A field-enhanced scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM, Hitachi S-4700) was used to examine the membrane surface of the scale phenomena on the membrane structure after the experiments. Membrane samples were completely dried at 50 The silt density index (SDI) is a widely used pretreatment criterion of the acceptability of water applied to RO membranes. It is a measure of colloidal/particle fouling To investigate the effect of particle removal by Mbs depending on the time of flotation treatment, the water quality of different samples throughout the treatment was tested. During the preliminary test, 15 It should be noted that the reaction time of 15 To investigate fouling behavior after Mbs pretreatment, the fouling rate behavior throughout pretreatment was observed. Membrane fouling was recorded at three different fluxes and the graphs were plotted. We expressed the fouling rate as the transmembrane pressure (TMP) and fouling rate behavior over time, which is a good indicator for determining the fouling potential of membranes  It should be noted that the fouling rate increases after Mbs treatment while the water quality parameter decreases slightly throughout the treatment (   As shown in the experimental results, Mbs can remove relatively large particles, resulting in a reduction in average particle size. This can explain why Mbs increases fouling rate. Since the particle size decreases by the Mbs treatment, it results in an increase in specific cake resistance according to Carman–Kozeny equation where Another explanation for the fouling rate increase may be pore clogging by small particles during the MF operation. If the feed water contains both large and small particle, the large particles may form a cake layer and prevent pore clogging by the small particles. Without the large particles, the pore clogging by the small particles will increase, leading to an increase in fouling rate. Similar results were reported in the literature On the basis of these investigations, we can conclude that Mbs seems to remove relatively large particles on the one hand, and on the other hand, the fouling rate behavior could be significantly affected by the pretreatment time, particle charges, and the smaller particles (< The second step of this study was to add FeCl  For the first stage of Mbs flotation (15  The relationship between particle size and removal efficiency by Mbs with FeCl Using the data in The membrane surfaces after the filtration experiments were examined with scanning electron microscopy (SEM) to compare the properties of foulant layers under different pretreatment conditions. The results are shown in The SEM image for the intact membrane ( SDI is one of the most commonly used measurements to estimate treated water quality  In this work, a combined system consisting of Mbs floatation and MF membrane was examined as pretreatment for SWRO with a focus on the effect of Mbs on the reduction of fouling of the MF membrane. The following conclusions were withdrawn: When Mbs was applied without using coagulant (FeCl On the other hand, Mbs treatment with coagulant (FeCl The analysis of membrane surface using SEM confirms that the Mbs treatment with coagulant can retard MF fouling. A significant reduction in cake layer formation was observed. The SDI This research was supported by