A feasible approach to fabricate an Al(Cu)-based hybrid nanocomposite reinforced with TiC and Al2O3 based on mechanical activation and post heat treatment was proposed. Structural and phase evolution during mechanical alloying were studied by employing X-ray diffraction (XRD), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), filed emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) and differential thermal analysis (DTA) techniques. Mechanical alloying method was used in order to formation of Al(Cu), TiO2/Al3Ti, Al4C3 powder. It was found that a powder mixture of Al(Cu), TiO2/Al3Ti, Al4C3 is formed after 30h of milling. The XRD analysis showed that Al(Cu)/TiC-Al2O3 is synthesized after heat treating of powder mixture at 1000°C for 1h via reaction between Al3Ti, Al4C3 and TiO2. DTA analysis showed that Al(Cu)/TiC-Al2O3 cannot be synthesized without mechanical activation and only based on heat treating. It was shown that heat treating of the as-milled powder mixture for 50h at 500°C doesn’t lead to formation of Al(Cu)/ TiC-Al2O3 composite and a minimum temperature of about 1000°C is needed for synthesis of Al(Cu)/ TiC-Al2O3 hybrid composite.Stringent engineering requirements, difficult environmental regulations and focus on energy conservation are three main motivations that drive the development of lightweight, high-performance structural materials with excellent mechanical properties Aluminum matrix composites (AMCs) which have low density, high hardness, high strength and high-specific elastic modulus, etc., are being extensively used in the automobile and aerospace industries Traditionally, AMCs have been produced by some processing techniques such as spray deposition, powder metallurgy, performs infiltration, hot isostatic pressing, vapor liquid synthesis and various casting techniques, (e.g. compocasting, squeeze casting and rheocasting) For choosing the suitable reinforcements for Al matrix, compatible thermal expansion coefficients are required to reduce the thermal stress concentrations, which can lead to cracking of the composite and severe decrease in mechanical properties. Al Based on obtained data from the literature, the main aim of this research work is to study the feasibility formation of Al(Cu)/TiC-Al The powders of aluminum (99.5% purity, average particle size of 50 The extra Al content (x=10 The powders mixture was milled in a planetary ball mill using hard chromium steel vial and balls under Ar atmosphere. Mechanical alloying was done with rotation speed of 350 Differential thermal analysis (DTA) was performed using a Reometric STA 503 differential thermal analyzer, with a temperature accuracy of±0.1 The crystallite size of produced samples was estimated by analyzing broadening of XRD peaks using Williamson-Hall formula Regarding the negative Gibbs free energy and enthalpy changing at ambient temperature, Al(Cu)/TiC-Al The XRD patterns of powder mixture (according to reaction According to the Al-Ti phase diagram, Ti would react with Al to form Al So, the reactions For reaction It means that the reaction To investigate which reaction is energetically favorable, the standard Gibbs free energy change of formation at ambient temperature for Al In order to investigate the effect of heat treatment on the mechanically activated powder mixture, an attempt was done to activate the un-reacted powders. For this purpose, the milled powder mixture for 30 As shown in So, it can be summarized that Al/Al Al: 2θ=38.377, 44.609, 64.923. TiC: 2θ=41.808, 35.998, 60.609. Al  In order to elucidate the mechanism of reactions between the constituents of powder mixture and the effect of milling on the possible reactions, thermal analysis of the as-blended and mechanically alloyed powders was carried out.  According to the above discussions, the preparation procedure of Al(Cu)/TiC-Al Based on the studies on the Al(Cu)/ TiC-Al DTA analysis showed that Al(Cu)/TiC-Al After 15 Al Annealing of the milled powder mixture for 50 A minimum temperature of about 1000 After annealing of 30 Two exothermic peaks at 782 and 940