Acetabular protrusio is a rare deformity where the femoral head has moved medial to Kohler's line, a line from the lateral border of the sciatic notch to the lateral border of the obturator foramen demonstrated on an anteroposterior pelvis x-ray. A 76-year-old female with a history of Type 2 diabetes, end stage renal disease on hemodialysis, adrenal insufficiency and secondary hyperparathyroidism presented to the ED after a fall. She denied any head trauma or loss of consciousness.  She had been having pain in the left hip and had not been able to bear weight on the left leg. Her vital signs were unremarkable. Examination of the left lower extremity revealed no discoloration, no boney tenderness or deformity. The extremity had normal pulses and normal sensation. AP pelvis and left hip radiographs demonstrated osteoarthritis but no evidence of fracture ( The patient returned to the ED four days after discharge complaining of left hip pain. She had progressively worsening pain in her left hip that was not controlled by oral medications. Physical exam revealed tenderness to palpation of the left hip without swelling or deformity. She exhibited decreased range of motion about her left hip secondary to pain, but was able to actively flex and extend her knee and all toes without pain, crepitus, or block. Plain radiograph of the pelvis demonstrated acetabular protrusio of the left hip ( What is the most common cause of acetabular protrosio? a) Ankylosing Spondylitis b) Osteoarthritis c) Osteomalacia d) Paget's Disease e) Trauma  All of the answers are known causes, but osteoarthritis is the most common cause of acetabular protrusio. What is the best imaging modality to diagnose acetabular protrosuio in the ED? a) AP Pelvis radiograph b) Hip x-ray c) Ultrasound d) Pelvis CT e) Pelvis MRI  While pelvis CT demonstrates greater detail to plan operative management, the most efficient and readily available imaging modality for the emergency physician to make the diagnosis is the AP pelvis radiograph. We wish to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome. Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 