In this paper, the CLAM steel strengthened by micro-scale Y–Zr–O was prepared by vacuum induction melting followed by electroslag remelting (VIM-ESR). Yttrium (Y) and zirconium (Zr) were easy to aggregates into massive yttrium-zirconium-rich inclusions in the steel melted by vacuum induction melting (VIM), which would interrupt the continuity of the matrix and reduce the mechanical properties of steel. Micron-sized Y–Zr–O inclusions would be produced with the removal of original blocky Y–Zr-rich inclusions and the submicron-sized inclusions smaller than 0.2 μm could be retained in the steel. The small grain size and the better refinement and distribution uniformity of Y–Zr–O inclusions after remelting would be responsible for the better yield strength and toughness. For VIM-ESR alloy, the ultimate tensile strength is 749 MPa and the yield strength is 642  MPa at room temperature, meanwhile they are 391 MPa and 367 MPa at 600 °C, respectively. Meanwhile, the ductile-brittle transition temperature (DBTT) reduced from −43 °C (VIM) to-76 °C (VIM-ESR).One of the reduced activation ferritic/martensitic (RAFM) steels, China Low Activation Martensitic (CLAM) steel (Fe–9Cr-1.5W-0.45Mn-0.2V-0.15Ta), has been presently recognized as the primary candidate structural material for fusion blankets In general, the melting process is not a common method to produce the oxide dispersion strengthened (ODS) alloys owing to the agglomeration and coarsening of the oxide particles. Shi and Han Two CLAM steels with the same Y and Zr contents were first melted in a vacuum induction furnace to form 30-kg ingots (VIM), and then one was forged into a φ55 mm-electrode for ESR. The electrode was remelted by Electroslag Remelting (ESR) at argon atmosphere named VIM- ESR. 55 wt%CaF A scanning electron microscopy (SEM, FEI-Quanta250FEG) with an Energy Dispersive Spectrometer (EDS) was employed to observe inclusions in the VIM and VIM-ESR ingots. AG-X250kN electronic universal material testing machine was employed for tensile tests. Cylindrical specimens (φ5.0 mm × 25 mm) and dog bone shaped and subsized flat specimens (6.0 mm × 2.0 mm × 30 mm) were used for tensile tests at room temperature and high temperature (300, 500, 550, 600, 650 °C) in air at a strain rate of 2 mm/min. Impact property of the alloys were tested at a range of temperature −140 °C to 25 °C with full-size V-notched Charpy specimens (10 mm × 10 mm × 55 mm) using an MTS-ZBC2452-B pendulum impact tester. The hardness of the sample was measured by a FV-800 hardness tester. The samples for optical microscopy (OM) and electron probe micro analyzer (EPMA, JEOL JXA-8530F) were etched using a 1% picral solution (5 ml HCl+1 g picric acid+100 ml ethyl alcohol). The sub-micron inclusions and nano-scale carbides were observed via transmission electron microscopy (TEM, FEI-G20). TEM samples were prepared via mechanical polishing, followed by twin-jet-polishing with a solution of 5 vol% perchloric acid in acetic acid. The back scattered electron images of the inclusions in the ingots were shown in The TEM images of typical inclusions smaller than 0.5 μm in VIM and VIM-ESR alloys are shown in The OM micrographs are shown in  The tensile properties of the steels tested from room temperature (RT) to 650 °C are shown in Liu. et al. The fracture morphology of VIM and VIM-ESR steel at room temperature are shown in The Charpy impact transition curves of the samples, fitted with a Boltzmann function A CLAM steel strengthened by micro-scale Y–Zr–O was produced via vacuum casting and electroslag remelting and the mechanical properties of the steels were studied. The following conclusions were obtained: Some blocky Y–Zr-rich inclusions lager than 10 μm were observed in the VIM alloy and no evidence for the presence of inclusions lager than 10 μm in VIM-ESR. TEM results show that the submicron-sized inclusions smaller than 0.2 μm generated in the vacuum casting would be remained after refining. There are serious segregations of Y and Zr elements in the VIM alloy and the distributions of Y and Zr elements are more uniform comparing with the VIM specimen and no evidence for the segregations of other elements are observed in the VIM-ERS. The high yield strength and toughness would be obtained with a finer grain size, the suitable size distribution and volume fraction of inclusions and high Ta content by refining with electroslag. The research confirmed that the process of vacuum induction melting followed by electro-slag remelting (VIM + ESR) would be employed as a promising method to produce micro-scale oxide dispersed alloys. The authors are grateful for the support from the