A discrete element method (DEM) model of the crushing process of a toothed double-roll crusher (TDRC) is established using the bonded particle model. DEM results and experimental data are compared quantitatively and a relatively good agreement is observed. The effects of rotation speed and structure of crushing rolls on the performance of TDRC are investigated numerically. The results show that when the rolls' speed is relatively high, the nipping condition would be improved, and more cracks could be created to release the increasing strain energy, generating more fractions of small sizes in the products. But, when rolls' speed exceeds 150 rpm, the crushing performance would not be significantly improved. A reasonable working gap and better nipping behaviour are obtained using the spiral-tooth-roll or the staggered-tooth-roll. The validated DEM model could be applied to gain a fundamental understanding of the crushing mechanisms of TDRC.A toothed double-roll crusher (referred to hereafter as TDRC) consists of a pair of oppositely rotating rolls, which have a series of intermeshing teeth protruding from the roll surfaces. The crushing action of TDRC is a combination of compression and ripping, where the teeth can dig into the rock and larger pieces than the roll diameter can be handled. The TDRC is typically employed in the primary (coarse) crushing stage of soft materials such as ore coal, limestone, and soft or sticky iron ores. The particle flow and breakage behaviour during the crushing process are important for the performance of TDRC. But, the understanding of these fundamentals is limited at present. The failure mechanisms of particles during the crushing process with different types of crushers are generally different. Currently, the crushers applied in the industries could be roughly divided into two categories: compression and impact-based crushers [ Most of the current crushing models are based on experimental and industrial data or empirical equations, which lack insightful understanding of the crushing process and fail to implement the effect of operating parameters on the particle flow and crushing behaviour. Thus, it is very helpful to understand the crushing phenomena at a particle scale. However, it is difficult to study particle breakage with the current experimental techniques. To overcome the above limitation, numerical methods based on the discrete element method (DEM), originally proposed by Cundall and Strack [ To date, there is an increasing number of reports of DEM simulations of particle breakage for both the crushable granular materials and the comminution machines (crushers and grinding mills) in the literature [ PRM, which is initially introduced by Cleary [ Compared to the other type of crushers, the crushing mechanism of toothed roll crusher is far less understood. There are only limited studies about the crushing process of roll crushers in the literature. For predicting the product size distribution after breakage, a breakage model of particles in a smooth double-roll crusher was developed, based on a framework proposed decade ago. The breakage was predicted based on an empirical relationship between particle properties and breakage parameters [ DEM is becoming a popular method for the study of crushing processes. However, DEM studies about the crushing mechanism of particles in different types of crushers were commonly conducted without a detailed discussion of the reliability of the models [ In this work, the DEM model of the crushing process of TDRC is established using the BPM. The corresponding laboratory-scale experiments with coal particles are conducted using a specially designed TDRC model. DEM simulation results and experimental data are compared quantitatively under a range of operating conditions. Overall good agreement is observed in the crushing performance quantities. Then, comprehensive simulations of the crushing process are performed to provide a fundamental understanding of the effects of operational and structural parameters on the crushing performance. It is expected that this work could provide a concrete base for further development and study of TDRC based on the numerical method. A specially designed laboratory-scale TDRC was constructed, allowing the observation of the crushing process and precise control of the rotation speed of rolls.   Based on the structures of crushing toothed-ring and shafts, the relative installation angle between two crushing toothed-ring can be adjusted conveniently. There are three different structures of toothed-rolls used in this work, as shown in  The typical Hertz-Mindlin particle contact model is adopted in this work. As shown in The bonded particle model (BPM), originally proposed by Potyondy and Cundall [ The criterion of rupture of the bond is defined by comparing the critical normal stress Either when A CAD model of the TDRC used in the simulations was constructed, which matches the main structure of the laboratory-scale device shown in  The DEM model of the crushing process of TDRC is established and a series of simulations are conducted with the same conditions to those of laboratory experiments. The size fractions of the crushed particles are compared between the results from experiments and DEM simulations, in which a single-feeding particle is adopted. The effects of the rotation speed of the rolls and structures of the toothed rolls on the crushing processes are discussed based on DEM simulations with multi-feeding particles.  In the present work, three different structures of toothed rolls are adopted to carry out the validation of the DEM model of TDRC. During the simulations and the corresponding experiments, only one large coal particle was fed into the crusher for each case (repeated three times in experiments), due to the difficulty of manual measurement of the size of crushed particles in the experiments.  For the experiment case with a rotation speed of 100 rpm, the mass proportions of the first two size fractions are still small, whose values are 6% (<10 mm) and 5% (10–15 mm), respectively. The mass proportion increases to 12% for the size fraction of 15–25 mm. The mass proportions of the last three are all above 20%, in which the maximum value is 28% for the size fraction of 35–45 mm. The corresponding values of relative error for both the size fractions of <10 mm and 15–25 mm are about 17%, while the former is under-predicted and the latter is over-predicted. For the size fraction of 10–15 mm, the largest relative error is observed with the value of 60%. But, it should be noticed that the mass proportion of this size fraction is very small both for the experiment (5%) and simulation (8%). Hence, a small difference between experiment and simulation might cause a large relative error. The relative errors for the last three size fractions are very small ranging from around −4% to −7%, which are under-predicted. When the rotation speed of the rolls increases to 150 rpm, there are no large particles with the size fraction of 45–55 mm obtained both in the experiments and simulations. The mass proportions of the small particles with the size fractions of <10 mm and 10–15 mm are 9% and 10%, respectively. The crushing product mainly consists of the last three size fractions of particles, whose mass proportions are 25%, 21% and 31%, respectively. The relative error of the size fraction of 10–15 mm is the largest with the value being 20%, and the rest values are under 11%, in which the value of the size fraction of 35–45 mm is just about 3%. Similar results are observed when the rotation speed of the rolls further increases to 200 rpm. There are no large particles (45–55 mm) in the crushing product and the size fraction of the main product is between 15 and 45 mm. The mass proportions of the first two small size of particles are 10% and 12%, and that of the last three size fractions of particles are ranging from 21% to 31%. The relative errors of all the size fraction of particles are around 10%, in which the largest value is only about 14% for the size fraction of 15–25 mm. The crushing results of the TDRC with spiral-tooth-roll are shown in When the rotation speed of the rolls is 100 rpm, only the mass proportion of size fraction <10 mm is under 10%, while the values of the rest size fractions are all above 10% ranging from 13% to 23%. The largest relative error between the simulations and tests is about 23% for the size fraction of 15–25 mm, and the smallest error is only about −6% for the size fraction of 45–55 mm. The values of relative error for the rest size fractions are around 10%. When the rotation speed of the rolls increases to 150 rpm, there are no large particles with the size fraction of 45–55 mm in the crushing products. The mass proportions of all the rest size fractions are above 10%, in which the proportions of the first two size fractions are 11% and 18%, while that of the last three size fractions are ranging from 21% to 26%. The largest relative error is about 22% observed for the size fraction of 10–15 mm, while the smallest error is only about −4% for the size fraction of 25–35 mm. The values of the relative errors of the rest size fractions are ranging from 9% to 14%. Similarly, when the rotation speed of rolls further increases to 200 rpm, there is also no products with the size fraction of 45–55 mm and the mass proportion of the size fraction of <10 mm is 10%. The proportions of the rest size fractions evenly distribute between 19%–24%. The proportion of the size fraction of <10 mm is over-predicted by 20% and that of the size fraction of 35–45 mm is under-predicted by about 16%. The relative errors of the rest size fractions are under 10%, among which the smallest value is just about 5% for the size fraction of 25–35 mm. The validation results for the TDRC with staggered-tooth-roll are shown in As noted above, the size fractions of crushing products predicted by the simulations are generally consistent with the corresponding experimental results. DEM model of the crushing process of the TDRC based on the BPM can be potentially used to study the crushing process of particulate materials. The mismatch between simulations and tests mainly comes from the errors of physical parameters of particles, the random collision behaviours between the teeth and particles, the difference of geometric and mechanical properties of the real coal particles. Moreover, the validation results also illustrated that the breakage behaviour of coal particle during the crushing should be mainly induced by tensile strength, which was in agreement with the micromechanical properties of coal presented in references [ The rotation speed and the structure of crushing rolls of the TDRC are two critical factors for the crushing performance. Generally, it is known that the rolls' speed has a direct influence on the throughput, and the structure of the roll has a significant effect on crushing behaviour. It would be helpful for understanding the fundamental mechanism to study the crushing process at particle-scale. So, numerical studies based on the above validated DEM model of the TDRC are conducted to investigate the effect of the two factors on the crushing process of coal particles. In the simulation works, all the three different structures of crushing rolls are adopted and ten virtual coal particles fed sequentially into the crusher in each simulation case. The simulation results shown in The above results obtained by the simulations could be preliminarily explained based on the crushing principle of TDRC. It should be noticed that each toothed ring of the TDRC only has four crushing teeth evenly distributed on the crushing ring. When the rolls' speed was relatively low, the contact between the feeding particle and the toothed ring could be reduced during this short time event. Moreover, a working gap would be formed between the two parallel-tooth-rolls at a certain time during the crushing process, into which the particle or the large size of fractions could be trapped but without any effective contact with the crushing teeth. Then, the feeding particle would not be broken completely causing more large size fractions and less small size fractions in the product. On the contrary, when the rolls' speed increased, the nipping condition between the particle and the rolls could be improved [   When the rotation speed of crushing rolls is 50 rpm, the mass proportions of the first two fine fractions of particles are about 5% and 12%, respectively, which are higher than that of the cases with parallel-tooth-roll (about 4% and 8%). The mass proportions for the intermediate two size fractions are also higher than that of the cases with parallel-tooth-roll (about 10% and 14%), whose values are about 14% and 18%, respectively. The last two large size particles are still the main crushing products, which mass proportions are about 26% and 24%, respectively. But, the large size of products is relatively less than the first group of cases with parallel-tooth-roll (about 35% and 30%). When the rotation speed increases to 100 rpm, both the mass proportions of the first two (fine product) and the middle two (intermediate product) size fractions increase, while that of the last two size fractions (large product) decrease to about 21% and 17%, respectively. As the rotation speed further increases to 150 rpm, the mass proportions of the fine and intermediate products increase continuously, while that of the large products further fall to about 9% and 8%, respectively. Again, when the rotation speed further increases to 200 rpm or 250 rpm, only minor changes of the mass proportions for each size fractions are observed. Overall, the changes in the mass proportion for each size fraction of the product are similar to that of the last group of cases with parallel-tooth-roll. However, there are generally more fine and intermediate products and less large products obtained in each case. With the increase of rotation speed of the rolls, the total number of broken bonds for each case also shows an increasing trend, as shown in  The total numbers of broken bonds during the crushing process of the TDRC with staggered-tooth-roll at different rotation speeds displayed in In summary, both the rolls' speed and the structure of crushing rolls of the TDRC have a significant effect on the crushing process. When the rotation speed of the crushing rolls is under 150 rpm, the mass proportions of fine and intermediate products show an overall increasing trend with the increase of the rotation speed. However, the proportions of the large products show an opposite trend, whose values decrease gradually with the increase of the rotation speed. Moreover, when the rotation speeds further rise to 200 rpm and 250 rpm, the mass proportion of each size fraction will fluctuate slightly for the cases with different structures of crushing rolls. Generally, there are more products of fine and intermediate sizes, but fewer products of large sizes obtained when the structure of spiral-tooth-roll is adopted compared to that of the other two structures. The changes in the total numbers of broken bonds during the crushing processes are overall consistent with the product size distributions of the three groups of cases with different structures of rolls. The increase of the broken number means that there are more small pieces of crushed particles produced during the crushing processes. When the rotation speed of crushing rolls is under 150 rpm, the final number of broken bonds increase rapidly. But the growth will slow down when the rotation speed is higher than 150 rpm. For the three groups of cases with different structures of rolls, both the total number of broken bonds and the increase between two adjacent cases are the largest for the crushing processes with spiral-tooth-roll, while the values of the crushing processes with staggered-tooth-roll are relatively higher than that of cases with parallel-tooth-roll. In addition, the numerical results obtained in the present work could be preliminarily explained based on both the crushing principle of TDRC and the fracture dynamics of particles. The effects of rolls' speed on the crushing mechanism agreed with the results reported in the works [ The crushing processes of the TDRC were modelled based on the DEM-BPM model. The corresponding laboratory-scale experiments with coal ore particles were conducted. The simulation and experiment results were compared quantitatively under a range of operating conditions. The effect of the rotation speed and the structure of toothed rolls on the crushing performance were discussed based on the simulation results. The following conclusions can be drawn from the present study: The general good agreements observed in the results of simulations and tests in terms of the product size distribution are evidence of the validity of the DEM model of the crushing process of TDRC based on BPM. The validated DEM model demonstrates that it can be potentially used for prediction of the crushing behaviour of the crushable materials and probing optimal performance and better operation of crushers. The rolls' speed is a key operational parameter of TDRC. The effect of rolls' speed on the crushing performance could be preliminarily explained based on both the crushing principle of TDRC and the fracture dynamics of particles. When the rolls' speed (equivalent to the loading rate) is relatively high, the nipping condition would be improved and more cracks could be created to release the increasing strain energy causing more fractions of small size in the products. Furthermore, a critical rolls' speed is obtained, which value is 150 rpm in the present work. With a further increase of the rolls' speed, both the nipping behaviour and the fracture mechanics of materials would not be significantly improved. The structure of the crushing rolls has a significant influence on the quality of the crushing product. A reasonable working gap between the rolls and a better nipping behaviour of particles in TDRC with the spiral-tooth-roll or the staggered-tooth-roll are helpful for improving the crushing performance. For the crushing processes of the TDRC with spiral-tooth-roll, both the total number of broken bonds and the increase between two adjacent cases are the largest for the three structures. The values of the crushing processes with staggered-tooth-roll are relatively higher than that of cases with parallel-tooth-roll. Compared to the other two structures, there are more products of fine and intermediate sizes but fewer products with large sizes obtained for the TDRC with spiral-tooth-roll. The fundamental knowledge about breakage behaviour during the crushing process of TDRC is still limited at present. In future works, the crushing mechanism of TDRC should be further analysed based on the fracture dynamics of particles. The investigation about the energy efficiency of TDRC should be conducted both experimentally and numerically aiming to reduce the energy and costs consumed by the crusher. In addition, the effect of particle shape on the quantitative prediction of the product size distribution should be further examined. Moreover, the optimisation study of the structure of the roll and the operational parameters also need extended research. This work is financially supported by the