Kinetics of zinc leaching from electric arc furnace dust from a strip mill plant in Thailand was investigated. The studied variables were stirring speeds, sodium hydroxide concentrations, reaction temperatures and percent solid. The experimental results indicate that the rate of zinc leaching from the electric arc furnace dust increases with increasing sodium hydroxide concentration. The order of reaction with respect to sodium hydroxide concentration was determined by initial rate method and found to be 0.76 at 60°C. At higher temperature, the rate of zinc leaching increases. Plot of 1−(1−F)1/3 versus reaction time giving linear relationship indicating that a chemical reaction is the rate-determining step. The apparent activation energy was measured to be 10.78kcalmol−1 (45.28kJmol−1). With increasing percent solid in the leaching solution, the rate of zinc leaching decreases. At high percent solid, the maximum zinc extraction obtained depends on the zinc solubility in sodium hydroxide solution, which is lower at lower concentration of sodium hydroxide.In the steel-making plant, 1–2% of dust are produced per ton of steel by electric arc furnace There were many works studied zinc leaching from the electric arc furnace dust, but the kinetic aspect has not been investigated. Cruells et al. This work investigates the kinetic parameters of zinc leaching of electric arc furnace dust from a Thai steel company using sodium hydroxide solution. Sodium hydroxide is selected because it is a basic leachant which only zinc but not iron will be in the leaching solution. The electric arc furnace dust used in this work was dried at 120 The leaching experiments were conducted in a glass reaction vessel heated by a heating mantle. The temperature was controlled by an autotransformer to be in the interval of ±2 The effect of stirring speed at 500, 750 and 850 The studied conditions were sodium hydroxide concentrations of 1.0, 1.5, 2.0, 2.5, 3.0 and 4.0 The studied temperatures were 32, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80 and 95 The 0.2, 10 and 20 percent solid was experimented with sodium hydroxide concentrations of 3.0 and 4.0  The effect of sodium hydroxide concentration on the zinc extraction with time at 60 Increasing the leaching temperature from 32 to 95 The effect of percent solid on the leaching rate at 95 To investigate the reaction order, the initial rate method was applied The activation energy was evaluated from the leaching curves for various temperatures as shown in If the leaching kinetics were controlled by chemical reaction, the following rate equation would apply The kinetics of zinc leaching from the electric arc furnace dust by sodium hydroxide solution were investigated. The leaching conditions were sodium hydroxide concentration in the range of 1.0–4.0 The authors would like to express their sincere thanks to the Nakorn Thai Strip Mill Public Co. Ltd., for the electric arc furnace dust, the National Science and Technology Development Agency and the Faculty of Engineering, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand for the financial support.