Adsorption of CO and CO2 in mixtures of H2/CO/CO2 was achieved using compact pressure swing adsorption (CPSA) system to produce purified hydrogen for use in fuel cell. A CPSA system was designed by combining four adsorption beds that simultaneously operate at different processes in the pressure swing adsorption (PSA) process cycle. The overall diameter of the cylindrical shell of the CPSA is 35cm and its height is 40cm. Several suitable adsorbent materials for CO and CO2 adsorption in a hydrogen stream were identified and their adsorption properties were tested. Activated carbon from Sigma–Aldrich was the adsorbent chosen. It has a surface area of 695.07m2/g. CO adsorption capacity (STP) of 0.55mmol/g and CO2 at 2.05mmol/g were obtained. The CPSA system has a rapid process cycle that can supply hydrogen continuously without disruption by the regeneration process of the adsorbent. The process cycle in each column of the CPSA consists of pressurization, adsorption, blowdown and purging processes. CPSA is capable of reducing the CO concentration in a H2/CO/CO2 mixture from 4000ppm to 1.4ppm and the CO2 concentration from 5% to 7.0ppm CO2 in 60 cycles and 3600s. Based on the mixture used in the experimental work, the H2 purity obtained was 99.999%, product throughput of 0.04kg H2/kg adsorbent with purge/feed ratio was 0.001 and vent loss/feed ratio was 0.02. It is therefore concluded that the CPSA system met the required specifications of hydrogen purity for fuel cell applications.Fuel cells are electrochemical devices that convert the chemical energy of a reaction directly into electrical energy, heat and water. The basic physical structure of a fuel cell consists of an electrolyte layer, which is in contact with a porous anode and cathode on either side. In a typical fuel cell, gaseous fuels are fed continuously to the anode (negative electrode) and an oxidant (i.e., oxygen from air) is fed continuously to the cathode (positive electrode) In a case which requires high purity, the hydrogen product stream is passed on to a separation zone, which comprises a thermal swing adsorption system or a pressure swing adsorption (PSA) system to produce a high purity hydrogen stream (95–99.999 The main objective of this purification process is to remove or reduce the concentration of CO gas from the hydrogen stream to as low as 10 The CPSA system was designed according to White and Barkley The compact design incorporates four beds in one cylinder, while the conventional design of PSA has a separate bed for each adsorber ( The CPSA operates in five steps: (1) pressurization, (2) adsorption I (feed from previous bed), (3) adsorption II (direct feed), (4) blowdown, and (5) purging. On the other hand the PSA steps in the cycle process are run simultaneously whereas they are run intermittently on alternate adsorbers in a conventional PSA. For adsorption step in the CPSA system, feed for second bed is from product of first bed. Mixtures of hydrogen and CO will enter two beds in series before they exit from the CPSA. CO is adsorbed in the first and second beds, and purified hydrogen will exit through the CPSA as a product. The valves and process cycles control system were designed for manual and automatic operation. The performance of the PSA cycle is measured in terms of three main parameters, namely, product impurity content, product recovery and product throughput. It should be noted that the term “product” in this work refers to the purified H CO adsorption was tested on three types of adsorbents, which are commercial activated carbon (AC), composite adsorbent and AC impregnated with Sn. The composite adsorbents used were modified original adsorbents ( Pyridine compound is added from 0.2 to 5.0 The above-obtained solution of binary complex was added to 1–100% by weight of the binary complex solution, of a porous inorganic carrier. The resultant mixture was stirred at 90 activated carbon composite: Sigma–Aldrich (AC-S-C); activated carbon composite: BDH Lab. (AC-BDH-C); activated carbon composite: Mindong Lianyl (AC-H15-C); silica gel composite (SG-C). Adsorbents impregnated with Sn were prepared according to the literature activated carbon: BDH Lab. (AC-BDH-I); activated carbon: Mindong Lianyl (AC-H11-I); activated carbon: Mindong Lianyl (AC-H15-I). The gases used were supplied by Malaysian Oxygen (MOX) Berhad. CO and nitrogen of purified grade gases are the adsorbates. Purified grade He was used as a carrier gas. The adsorbent capacity analysis was done by using the BET-AUTOSORB-1C equipment (Quanta Chrome Corp., USA). In this experiment, the temperature was set at 302 Adsorption was done on one bed while the other beds were regenerated or prepared for another adsorption process after the first bed saturated. The cyclic processes for every bed were: pressurization, adsorption process at high pressure, blowdown and purging. The single bed process cycle has been presented earlier by Iyuke et al The dual bed process in the CPSA cycling system was an adsorption process which used two beds in series. At one time, there were two columns going through adsorption. The cyclic processes for every bed are listed below, as depicted in pressurization; adsorptions 1, feeder from the product of another column (refers to cycle II column 2, which receives feed from column 1) ( adsorption 2, feeder from the initial mixture gas (refers to cycle II column 1) ( blowdown; purging. Non-dispersive infrared gas filter correlation, with solid state detector (7000FM – Signal UK), was used as the online CO and CO The adsorbent that was used in the hydrogen purification was chosen based on the adsorption capacity and the selectivity for CO.  From There were two processes that could have taken place at the adsorbent layer during adsorption of CO The adsorption processes involved two components, namely, the strong and weak adsorption forces, whose concentration history is shown in  The adsorption process was stopped when the CO concentration in the hydrogen product from the second bed reached 10  The pressure and temperature profiles in the CO–CO The temperature in Bed 3 is slightly higher compared to Bed 4, during either adsorption or desorption. The highest temperature achieved by Bed 3 was 36 For continuous adsorption, similar feed conditions were used. The adsorption cycle is shown in Activated carbon from Sigma–Aldrich has been successfully used to adsorb CO. The adsorption capacity was 0.13 The authors would like to express their gratitude to the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation of Malaysia for the financial support through IRPA grant: IRPA 02-02-02-0001-PR0023 11-06.