A new type micro-gas sensor array and its operating mode were proposed in this paper. Sensor array has a heater, and three sensing electrode and temperature sensor pairs. Three different sensing materials, Fe2O3+V2O5, SnO2/Au+Pd and nanocrystalline SnO2, were synthesized by coprecipitation method and used for selective gas sensing. Even though fabricated sensor array has three sensing materials, 12 sensing responses in an array were implemented by using heating power-control method as a sensor operating mode. The gas-sensing characteristics were investigated as a function of the heating powers (35, 40, 45, and 50mW). Principal component analysis (PCA) was employed to discriminate the various kinds of gases, which is known as one of the most effective sensing signal analysis methods. From the PCA result, we could confirm that the gas sensor array with excellent gas discriminating ability could be obtained by using a heating power-controlled method.Several gas sensor arrays have been developed for selectively recognizing the various gas species by many researchers during last decade In this paper, we study unique gas sensor array that consists of one heater, and three sensing electrodes and temperature sensor pairs on a thermal-isolated and stress-relieved dielectric membrane. In conventional micro-gas sensor, there is an insulator such as silicon dioxide or silicon nitride for electrical isolation between a heater and upper sensing electrodes, but in the proposed structure, there is no insulator, but a heater and sensing electrodes on the same plane. The first advantage is that the proposed type can employ simpler photolithography process than conventional type has, and the second, the structure maintains the stress-balanced membrane. Heating power-controlled method that employs fast thermal response of the thermal-isolated dielectric membrane was selected to acquire various gas-sensing patterns for gas species at certain critical operating temperatures. Finally, principal component analysis (PCA)  A substrate was 5  Fe The 2 The circuit for heater input voltage variation was designed with pulse width modulation (PWM) function of i8097BH micro-controller. Heating power-control method was used to present different sensing patterns to each sensor in an array. Since sensing signal of sensors in gas ambient exhibits as the resistance variation of sensing film in proportion to gas concentration, resistance variation must be converted to voltage variation to systemically measure the sensing characteristics of sensors. Because metal oxide sensing films are usually operated at elevated temperature range of 150–450°C, it is important to monitor precious temperature profile of sensing material area. Heating characteristics of a thin platinum heater were examined. The resistance of a heater was measured as a function of temperature to acquire the temperature coefficient of platinum heater, as shown in  Because heating power-controlled method was selected as the operating mode of device, we examined temperature distribution along the line from the center of membrane to the dielectric window edge by measuring the resistance changes of the temperature sensor at various heating powers. Proper operating powers (35, 40, 45, and 50  After applying the operating power, transient time response of temperature sensor was measured to obtain minimum time to reach a stabilized temperature by measuring the voltage at the load resistance through a digital oscilloscope. CO (300  In The first two principal components could be used to 99% of the variance in the data. The loadings of the first two principal components were also plotted, as shown in  A micro-sensor array that consists of one heater, and three sensing electrodes was fabricated. Three different sensing materials (Fe