The crystallization kinetics of FeSiCr amorphous alloy, characterized by the crystallization activation energy, Avrami exponent and frequency factor, was studied by non-isothermal differential scanning calorimetric (DSC) measurements. The crystallization activation energy and frequency factor of amorphous alloy calculated from Augis–Bennett model were 476kJ/mol and 5.5×1018
                     s−1, respectively. The Avrami exponent n was calculated to be 2.2 from the Johnson–Mehl–Avrami (JMA) equation. Toroid-shaped Fe-base amorphous powder cores were prepared from the commercial FeSiCr amorphous alloy powder and subsequent cold pressing using binder and insulation. The characteristics of FeSiCr amorphous alloy powder and the effects of compaction pressure and insulation content on the magnetic properties, i.e., effective permeability μe
                     , quality factor Q and DC-bias properties of FeSiCr amorphous alloy powder cores, were investigated. The FeSiCr amorphous alloy powder cores exhibit a high value of quality factor and a stable permeability in the frequency range up to 1MHz, showing superior DC-bias properties with a “percent permeability” of more than 82% at H=100Oe.Soft magnetic composites (SMCs) offer an interesting alternative to the traditional laminated silicon iron sheets as core material in electrical machines. SMCs are components made of ferromagnetic powder particles that initially are insulated electrically from each other by an organic and/or inorganic insulation layer at the powder surface before powder metallurgy process. The insulation layer most commonly coated on the powder is magnesium oxide and phosphate glass. The phosphate insulation coating has high electrical resistivity, permeability, saturation magnetic flux density, and firm adhesiveness to powder surface; furthermore, it can be fabricated easily FeSiCr ternary alloy, as one of the most promising ferroalloy, has attracted much attention over the past years The basal powders used in this study were commercially available Fe The XRD analysis was carried out for the commercial FeSiCr alloy powders used in this work. It consists of a main peak followed by a shoulder which is an aspect of typical metallic glass structure. The corresponding continuous heating DSC curves performed at different heating rates from 5 to 20 Crystallization kinetics of glassy materials can be described through three kinetic parameters, namely: the activation energy for crystallization, the Avrami exponent which reflects the mechanism of nucleation and growth process and the frequency factor. In calorimetric measurements, isothermal and non-isothermal methods can be used to obtain these parameters. In the isothermal method, the sample is brought quickly to a temperature near the crystallization temperature and the heat produced during the crystallization process at constant temperature is recorded as a function of time. In the non-isothermal method, the sample is heated at a constant heating rate and the heat produced is recorded as a function of temperature or time. The theoretical basis for interpreting DSC data for isothermal crystallization is provided by the classical JMA model  In the fabrication of soft magnetic powder cores, interparticle insulation is important to improve the high-frequency magnetic properties of the cores. We attempted to synthesize a phosphate layer as an insulator on the surface of the FeSiCr amorphous alloy powders by the phosphoric acid treatment.   The kinetics of transformation from amorphous to crystalline phase in FeSiCr amorphous alloy was investigated using non-isothermal model by means of DSC technique. The crystallization activation energy and frequency factor of amorphous alloy calculated from Augis–Bennett model were 476 This research was supported by the