Rock bolts are subjected to different loading conditions along their lengths such as axial, bending, and/or shear forces, which can cause failure at lower loads than those considered for design purposes. The common existing methodologies do not consider the actual loading of the rock bolts and assume it is only pure axial or pure shear. This study was conducted to investigate the un-grouted rock bolt performance under combined load conditions. Two loading regimes were evaluated: the effect of initial shear displacement on axial load capacity and displacement, and the effect of axial displacement on the shear load capacity. The first regime was also conducted for shear with a gap, when there is a spacing between the shear interfaces. The results of this study showed that the rock bolt can resist higher axial loads than shear under pure or combined load conditions. Under combined load conditions, the rock bolt capacity decreased significantly for both regimes. However, when applying the shear load with a gap, the rock bolt load capacity was not affected significantly. Also, the total bar deformation was improved for shear and axial. The findings of this study show the need to improve the rock bolt design considering the complex loading conditions in situ with/without a gap.Rock bolts are used worldwide to reinforce potentially unstable rocks around excavations. The excavation reinforcement and support system plays an important role in mine safety since it is directly correlated to the fall of ground. Potvin and Nedin conducted a study that pointed out the risks and causes of rock fall focused during 1998–2003 period; according to their study, mining areas away from the working face are considered as “low risk” of injury The loading conditions in situ can vary from mine to mine, and they require different reinforcement mechanisms. Tunnel support requirements depend on: the stress regime around the tunnel, stresses change during its lifetime, the shape and size of excavation and geological features Studies have been conducted to understand the rock bolt response of each possible load condition. Freeman was the first to investigate axial loadings along the rock bolt length using strain gauges In situ observations in hard rock have pointed out the rock mass condition and discontinuities characteristics in shallow and deep mines. Li observed that at deep conditions, the rock mass presented a higher quality because the induced stresses are higher The gap conditions can also occur in rock with no spacing between the discontinuities, in both shallow and deep mines, when the rock strength is low, as in coal mines. In this condition, as the rock bolt deforms, the rock at the discontinuity interface will break generating a spacing/gap The effect of a gap between discontinuities was first considered by Stimpson to evaluate the rock bolt performance; his study was conducted to develop an analytical method to better understand the rock bolt performance considering the bolt inclination, hole and bolt diameter, grout, Young’s modulus of rock and spacing of the discontinuities Pellet and Egger applied the beam theory to understand the shear behaviour of the rock bolt across discontinuities and determined that the two endpoints of the gap (points A and O in In situ observations have shown the effect of combined load on the rock bolt performance as identified in the basic support mechanisms (i.e. key block, beam building, and suspension). Li conducted in situ observations of ground support in high-stress conditions at advance faces of cut-and-fill mining; his findings evidenced a combination of load mechanisms in situ as presented in Few studies have been conducted to understand the effect of combined load on the rock bolt mechanical properties in which shear and axial loads are applied at the same time to the rock bolt with/without a gap Tests were conducted to evaluate the rock bolt steel performance under combined load. The first set of tests were conducted using single loading conditions: pure tensile and pure shear. The pure conditions were used as a reference for applying complex load conditions as shear tests with a gap and combined load conditions. In total, 131 tests were conducted using three different steel types (  Tensile tests were performed to evaluate the properties and behaviours of a material under a uniaxial load condition. In these tests, tensile loads against displacement were recorded. Pure shear/guillotine tests and shear tests with a gap were conducted using the apparatus shown in A new laboratory test was designed to evaluate the effect of combined load on the rock bolt performance. Two regimes were conducted to evaluate the effect of shear displacement on axial load capacity and the effect of axial displacement on shear load capacity. The Instron machine was used to apply the shear load to the rock bolt placed inside the shear test rig as shown in Two regimes of combined load were conducted as follows. Axial displacement was applied to the rock bolt, using the hydraulic cylinder. The axial displacement was kept, and the shear load was applied to failure. The axial displacement applied to the bar varied according to the maximum displacement the bar can undergo under pure loading conditions. The percentages of displacements applied compared to the bar maximum displacement capacity are given in parentheses. Two steel types were evaluated on this regime: (1) for AUS R27, axial displacements applied were 20 mm (16%), 30 mm (25%), 40 mm (33%), 45 mm (37%), 50 mm (41%), 60 mm (49%), 70 mm (58%), 80 mm (66%) and 100 mm (82%); and (2) for SA M24, axial displacements applied were 20 mm (12%), 30 mm (17%), 40 mm (23%), 50 mm (26%), and 60 mm (33%). Shear displacement was applied to the rock bolt by the Instron machine. The load was kept to the bar, and the axial load was applied to failure, using the hydraulic cylinder. The percentages of the shear displacements applied compared to the maximum shear displacement the bar can undergo are given in parentheses. For this condition, only AUS R27 was used since SA M24 was failing at the threads. In addition to the tests with pure shear displacement, some tests were conducted with a gap. For AUS A27, shear displacements applied were 2 mm (20%), 4 mm (39%), 6 mm (59%), 7.5 mm (74%), and 9 mm (88%). This method was also conducted for shear with a 5 or 10 mm gap. The shear displacements applied were 7 mm (65%) and 9 mm (86%) for 5 mm gap and 9 mm (50%) and 12.5 mm (69%) shear displacements for 10 mm gap. Two different types of equipments were used to apply axial load to the rock bolt: Instron machine and Enerpac hydraulic cylinder using hand pump and foot pump. Thus, the hydraulic cylinder used for combined load tests was calibrated with the Instron machine for the accuracy. The calibration curve is shown in The first set of tests were conducted under only axial or only shear loading to benchmark the two extremes of the loading. These results were then used as a reference to compare rock bolt performance under combined load mechanisms (axial then shear to failure and shear then axial to failure). Based on the ultimate load, the ratio of shear load to tension was found to be: (1) 0.73 for AUS R27 hard rock; (2) 0.73 for SA R27 hard rock; (3) 0.67 for SA M24 coal.  Failure mechanisms in pure shear and pure tension are representd in Gap shear tests were conducted to evaluate the rock bolt performance of two rock bolt types, AUS R27, and SA M24. 26 tests were conducted in which 16 tests were on AUS R27, and 10 were on SA M24. The AUS R27 and SA M24 shear capacity was evaluated under different gap sizes, 5, 10, and 15 mm gap for both steels and 20 mm gap for AUS R27. The tests conducted with 20 mm gap were not repeated because as the rock bolt deformation increased for this gap size, the bar started to touch the steel rig at point A ( The load and displacement capacity were evaluated under shear load varying the gap size. The increase in gap size resulted in a decrease of shear capacity and an increase in total displacement ( In the shear tests with a gap, the displacement capacity was the most affected. The displacement needed to reach the maximum shear capacity of the rock bolt increased with gap size ( The combined load condition in the gap tests can be identified in the bar failure mechanism for AUS R27 from Due to the steel composition difference (i.e. content of C, P, Mn, Si, S, Ni, Cr, Mo, etc.) between SA M24 and AUS R27 ( For both steel types, AUS R27 and SA M24, the shear displacement at failure did not vary as the gap size increased. However, the total displacement increased because as the gap increased, the bar underwent bending and axial, compression and tension (on different sides of the bolt as it bends, Evidence of combined load acting on the bar has also been given by the angle These results found in the gap tests also illustrate the effect of the gap on the ratio of shear load to axial load. The AUS R27 shear load to axial load ratio dropped from 0.73 to 0.59 ( From the anova statistical analysis, it was found that there is a significant difference in the ultimate loads between the guillotine shear test and gapped test. Thus, the gap had a significant influence on the rock bolt performance. Overall, the SA M24 performance was more affected by the gap in load comparing to the rock bolt AUS R27.  Effect of shear displacement on the axial load and displacement performance for AUS R27 hard rock with/without a gap In total, 29 tests were conducted to understand the influence of a shear displacement on the tensile strength. Applying a shear displacement first from 2 to 6 mm had a minimal effect on the ultimate tensile capacity but it had a major effect on the displacement capacity of the bar. However, as the shear displacement increased, the tensile capacity and displacement were affected. Applying a shear displacement of 9 mm (88% of the ultimate shear displacement), the axial elongation decreased by 92%, which shows that the shearing of the rock bolt significantly decreases the ability to elongate axially. This behaviour is explained because when the bar is under shear, the load will concentrate at the weakest point, which is the shear interface for 9 mm shear displacement. Thus, when applying tensile load, the load will be distributed on half of the bar, from the source of axial load to the shear interface. As a consequence, the total bar displacement will be most affected as it is affected by the decrease in bar length under tension. The failure mechanism for each scenario varied as shown in 13 tests were therefore conducted to try and understand the influence of shear with 5 and 10 mm gap on tensile strength for AUS R27. In the tests with a 5 mm gap, the shear displacements of 7.5 mm (69%) and 9 mm (86%) were applied and with 10 mm gap, 9 mm (50%) and 12 mm (66%) shear displacements were applied, as the rock bolt can undergo more shear displacement with the increase in gap. Tensile load and displacement at failure are shown in The shear displacement over a gap had a minimal effect on the tensile capacity of the bolt, while the elongation needed to achieve the tensile capacity decreased significantly. For 5 mm gap, in one of the tests with 7.5 mm shear displacement, the bar broke at the threads and in the other tests it broke at the shear interface. For 10 mm gap, the bar broke at the shear interface for all the tests. Shear tests with the gap, in combined load condition, allows the bar to deform more before breaking. They resulted in failure at the threads at higher shear displacement (7.5 mm) compared to the condition without a gap (6.0 mm). To understand the effect of shear load with a gap on the axial capacity, the tensile capacity and the displacement were compared at 9 mm shear displacement with gap of 0, 5 and 10 mm. The ultimate tensile capacity for pure tensile load condition was found to be 314 kN and total displacement 121.5 mm (1280 mm bar length) when using the hand pump. When using the foot pump, the tensile capacity was found to be 299 kN and displacement 133.3 mm (1297 mm bar length). These values were calibrated with those from the Instron machine. The tests conducted with 0 and 10 mm gap were conducted with the hand pump, and for 5 mm gap, the foot pump was used. Thus, the pure tests are the reference values for these findings. The findings for axial performance with 9 mm of shear displacement were: (a) with no gap: the tensile capacity dropped to 30%, and displacement decreased by 91%; (b) for 5 mm gap, the load capacity increased by 0.67% and decreased by 59% in displacement; (c) for 10 mm gap, it decreased in load capacity by 3% and displacement by 49%. Applying a combined load with a gap means that two combined load mechanisms are acting on the rock bolt ( Effect of axial displacement on the shear load and displacement performance for AUS R27 and SA M24 In total, 47 tests were conducted under initial axial displacement to investigate the rock bolt shear performance for AUS R27 and SA M24. 32 tests were conducted to understand the influence of axial on shear capacity of AUS R27. The axial displacements applied to the steel were 20 mm (16%), 30 mm (25%), 40 mm (33%), 45 mm (37%), 50 mm (41%), 60 mm (49%), 70 mm (58%), 80 mm (66%), and 100 mm (82%). The SA M24 was also evaluated for this combined load condition. 15 tests were conducted using SA M24 to investigate its shear capacity under tension. The rock bolt was subjected to 20 mm (12%), 30 mm (17%), 40 mm (23%), 50 mm (26%), and 60 mm (33%) axial displacement. The higher axial displacements were not tested as the rock bolt failed on threads at 80 mm axial displacement. The shear capacity decreased as the axial displacement increased from 20 to 60 mm axial displacement ( The rock bolts AUS R27 and SA M24 bars have presented similar behaviour under combined load ( As a result of these findings, the load capacity and also displacement was affected by a combination of loads. Thus, the total displacement recorded by the Instron machine was a sum of the combined load (shear and axial/bending) being applied to the rock bolt. The increase in displacement by the Instron is explained by this combination of loads acting on the bar. Similarly to what happens when applying shear with a gap, before failing by shear the bar bends increasing the total displacement. Comparing AUS R27 and SA M24, the AUS bar deformed slightly more, when applying axial load then shear to failure, compared to the SA ( These results showed that both rock bolts underwent a similar failure mechanism, shear or axial/bending. However, on the SA M24, a structural failure was identified due to its difference in composition and mechanical properties as presented in the previous method.  The effect of the axial displacement on the shear load has also affected the ratio of shear load to axial load ( The load conditions in situ play an important role when designing ground support. This study has shown that in-situ load conditions such as shear with a gap and combined load have a major effect on the rock bolt capacity. Moreover, the rock bolt shear capacity has presented to be lower than axial capacity in every regime evaluated in this study (i.e. pure, with a gap and combined). In pure conditions, the ratio of shear load to axial load was found to be around 0.7, in conditions with a gap it dropped up to 0.58, and in combined load conditions (axial load then shear to failure), it dropped up to 0.55. Considering that the rock bolt capacity is based on the axial capacity, in a situation where the rock bolt capacity required is calculated to be 100 kN and a safety factor of 2 is used, a rock bolt of 200 kN capacity will be chosen. However, if the rock bolt is subjected to shear, the safety factor can be decreased to 1.4, considering the shear load to axial load ratio of 0.7. Under combined load conditions, this ratio can decrease up to 0.55. Thus, the safety factor can decrease up to 1.1. Considering the axial capacity in the support design could lead to an underestimation of loads to which the rock bolt can be subjected in situ. Under combined load conditions with a gap, the gap has also shown to have a significant influence on the rock bolt performance. In the combined regime, without a gap, load capacity and displacement decreased. Nevertheless, when applying shear with a gap and then axial load to failure, the rock bolt axial displacement increased as the gap increased. The findings of this study have suggested that in a gap and combined load conditions with a gap, which are common situations in situ, the rock bolt undergoes more deformation before failure. Then, when identifying these loads conditions, a rock bolt that can undergo more deformation should be considered in the support design. These results show evidence of the need in creating a support design capable of considering the impact of shear as well as combined load conditions and conditions with a gap. It is necessary to implement the laboratory-based combined load studies into the reinforcement design to increase the safety and optimize the ground support design. Rock bolts have shown to be subjected to complex loading conditions, e.g. combined load. The early stage of this study was developed to understand the complexity of failure mechanism of the rock bolt and its response to complex loading conditions. Laboratory tests were conducted using un-grouted rock bolts steels because they are useful to help understand the response of rock bolt under different loading conditions. Every combined load test performed showed an influence on the rock bolts performance differently. However, different steel types have shown to perform similarly under the same load conditions. Based on the research and the lab tests to date, the following conclusions can be made: Current rock bolt support design methodologies consider only the axial capacity. For typical rock bolt steel in Australia, the shear capacity is about 70% of the axial (tensile) capacity. Most of the rock bolts are loaded along their length under varying combinations of axial, shear, and bending. Under both shear and combined load with a gap condition, a low-stiff bar is suggested in the design since it can undergo more displacement. Combined load conditions are still not considered in the rock bolt design; however, it could decrease the rock bolt shear and axial capacity by 30% and 18%, respectively. To suggest improvements on the rock bolt design, further investigations will be undertaken to evaluate the effect of combined load on the system (i.e. rock bolt, grout, and cement block) with/without instrumentations. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors would like to thank