This research was aimed at using image analysis to describe the effects of rapid cyclic heating on mild steel. AISI 1021 steel sample used in this study was subjected to quenching heat treatment followed by 1, 2, 3, and 4-cycles of rapid heat treatment. The as-treated steel samples were characterized by Brinell hardness tests, Charpy V-notch impact tests, optical microscopy, and image analysis using Image J software. The results revealed that the grain size decreased from 1.07 μm in the control sample to 0.79 μm in the third cycle sample and increased to 0.86 μm in the fourth cycle sample. However, the results revealed that two-cycles of rapid heat treatment was enough to produce ultra-fine grains and impact ductility in mild carbon steel.Heat treating of steel requires a combination of timed heating and cooling operations. This process is to incorporate better desirable properties into the material, thereby improving the microstructure of the material [ AISI 1021 steel sample was obtained in a local market in Ilorin, Nigeria. The steel sample was characterized to obtain the elemental compositions (See Each cycle of rapid heat treatment requires fast heating (heating rate of above 20 °C/min) to austenitic temperature and fast cooling (quenching) to room temperature. This process was achieved by charging the samples into an electric resistance furnace, preheated to 900 °C for 10 mins, and then quenching in water. The samples were exposed to 1, 2, 3, and 4-cycles of rapid heat treatment. These samples were prepared for metallographic examination using an accuscope optical microscope (Serial No. 0524011) and were further analyzed with Image J analysis (version K 1.45) software [ The chemical compositions of the AISI 1021 steel sample are displayed in The authors declare that there is no conflict of interest. The authors appreciate the assistance rendered by Materials and Metallurgical laboratory of Obafemi Awolowo University, Ile Ife and University of Ilorin, Nigeria. Also, our appreciation goes to the management of