Zinc oxide (ZnO) fiber was prepared from the precursor bis(acetylacetonato)zinc (Zn(acac)2). Fine polycrystalline Zn(acac)2 fiber was obtained by the sublimation of Zn(acac)2 powder. When the Zn(acac)2 fiber was decomposed with superheated steam, it was converted to ZnO fiber, while maintaining the original shape of the Zn(acac)2 fiber. At this stage, polycrystalline ZnO, aggregated ZnO single crystal grains, which had diameters of a few nanometers, were present along with relatively large amounts of carbon (C) and hydrogen (H). The ZnO fiber sample produced after crystal grain growth by heat treatment contained almost no C and H, and nearly complete mineralization had been achieved. This ZnO fiber consisted of ZnO microrods, and these microrods consisted of ZnO nanorods. The surface of the ZnO nanorods was covered with scale-like nanosized-single-crystal grains, which had high crystallinity, clean surfaces, and diameters of a few tens of nanometers. The visible-light photocatalytic ability of the ZnO fiber may be strongly related to the nanosized-single-crystal grains located on the surface that have diameters of a few tens of nanometers.Recently, research into air purification using photocatalysts has been actively pursued “Organic–inorganic conversion” is an excellent method for synthesizing material because the desired shape and fine structure of the material can be produced The ZnO fiber was prepared by the following three steps: Zn(acac) The Zn(acac) The ZnO fiber obtained in (2) was heated in oxygen at 800 The organic–inorganic conversion process was investigated by obtaining the X-ray diffraction (XRD) powder pattern using a Cu Kα radiation. The C content that remained in the ZnO fiber was analyzed by the infrared absorption method after the sample had been combusted in a stream of oxygen. The H content was analyzed by the Ar carrier fusion thermal conductivity method. In addition, the appearance of the fiber and the structure in the micro- and nano-ranges were investigated with a scanning electron microscope (SEM; HITACHI S-800) operated at 15   The fine structure of the fibers was investigated and is discussed in this section. For discussing the generating mechanism of material properties, nano-scale morphological observation is important. It was found from the TEM observations for the ZnO fiber that it is an aggregate of single crystals having diameters of a few tens of nanometers. This is considered to be one of the reasons why xylene can be decomposed under irradiation by visible light by the fiber, as described in the introduction of this paper. ZnO is essentially a direct-gap semiconductor with a wide bandgap of 3.37 The following conclusions were drawn from the present study: Material synthesis based on the “organic–inorganic conversion” has been described. An inorganic ZnO fiber was synthesized from the precursor, Zn(acac) The Zn(acac) When the Zn(acac) The final ZnO fiber sample obtained after growing grains by further heating the ZnO fiber at 800 This study was partly supported by NEDO.