Tin free steel plate (TFS) that is substrate of the PET-laminated steel has been treated by atmospheric pressure plasma at room temperature in order to enhance the surface adhesive properties. After plasma treatment, the water-contact angle measurement was conducted and the surface-free energy of the TFS plate was proved to be increased. Besides, the peel-off test for adhesive property of PET-laminated steel also was conducted and the adhesion between TFS and polymer (PET) was enhanced remarkably. From the results of XPS and SEM analysis, we could confirm that new functional groups causing the adhesion enhancement were generated under the carbon cleaning effect and surface oxidation effect by reactive species in the plasma, such as atomic oxygen etc.PET(Polyethylene terephthalate)-laminated steel is fabricated through adhering PET film on the steel sheet with heat using laminate roll. This is a superior metal with high corrosion resistance, environmental safety and beautiful appearance, which has a wide range of application. In this field, the adhesive property between film and substrate is one of the most important properties because the film delamination should be suppressed during manufacturing process The technique of atmospheric pressure plasma treatment is an effective surface adhesion enhancement way to save processing cost and to escape from environmental pollution problem In the present study, steel was treated in air plasma in order to enhance adhesion between PET-film and steel substrate, and surface analysis was performed to look into mechanism of the adhesion enhancement between the film and the substrate. The experimental apparatus is schematically shown in The substrate was TFS plate(Tin Free Steel, made by TCC Steel, thickness: 0.2 mm) with a dimension of 3 cm The contact angles were measured with de-ionized water using a contact angle meter (Phoenix-300, S.E.O Co., Ltd.) at 25 °C in an air-conditioned room. We compared the wetting characteristics of plasma treated samples with non-treated samples. In addition, we measured contact angle of TFS plates with changing treatment time i.e. 3 s, 6 s, 9 s, respectively. In this experiment five-point measurements on each sample were performed at regions selected at random, and the average value of the five-point measurements was regarded as the contact angle of the sample. A SEM was used to examine the surface morphology of the TFS plates. After plasma treatment, the TFS plates were exposed to air for over 30 min and then the FESEM (s-4200, Hitachi) examination was performed. After plasma treatment, the TFS plates treated for 3 s and 9 s were exposed to air for 30 min and then the XPS (ESCAlab 220i-XL, Scientific instrument) examination was conducted to analyze the surface chemical compositions of the plasma-treated TFS. For film laminating, TFS plates were laminated with PET film by laminator on 160 °C and then laminated steel was cooled with water. For surface modification, only TFS plates were treated by plasma before laminating with PET film. The laminating process speed was 1 mpm. In order to compare adhesion of plasma treated laminated steel with that of no treated laminated steel, two kinds of peel-off test were conducted. First one was peel-off test using tensile strength tester, the other was peel-off test after the laminated steel was crosscut to 1 The contact angle images of water-drop are shown in Showing in In order to investigate the influence of plasma treatment on the surface morphology of TFS, SEM examination was conducted to compare the surface morphology of TFS before and after plasma treatment. The SEM images of TFS surface are shown in Usually after treatment, the surface of the substrate could be oxidized and become more hydrophilic The results of these XPS measurements are shown in The decrease of carbon and the increase of oxygen by plasma treatment were due to carbon cleaning effect and surface oxidation effect, respectively From the above XPS analysis, we could conclude that the wettability was better and surface free energy of TFS increased after plasma treatment, because active species in plasma modified the TFS surface due to carbon cleaning effect and surface oxidation effect. From the above experimental results, we concluded that plasma treatment could improve adhesion property of TFS surface, so we expected that adhesion property of PET-laminated steel which had TFS as substrate might be improved by plasma treatment. Actually, the substrates were attached by melting PET-film in the PET-laminating process. In contrast to general case of using a liquid adhesive, it might not give significant improvement of adhesion in the PET-laminating. Nevertheless, viewing in the concept of adhesion mechanism, it was able to aid improvement of adhesion property due to increases of functional groups after plasma treatment. Tanaka et al.  The results of the peel-off test after crosscutting are shown in Consequently, we convinced that adhesion property of PET laminated steel was improved by atmospheric pressure plasma treatment through these results of two peel-off tests. The TFS substrates were successfully modified into hydrophilic surfaces by atmospheric pressure plasma treatment. The results of contact angle test demonstrated that more wettable surface was obtained after plasma treatment and the longer treatment time gave the higher adhesion property of TFS surface. The result of SEM image and XPS analysis revealed that activated species in the plasma modified the surface of TFS due to carbon cleaning effect and surface oxidation effect, resulting in the improved adhesion property. Finally, we confirmed that the PET-laminated steel has successfully improved adhesion between substrate and film by plasma treatment method. This is a research result of the project for the Research Paper Award in POSCO. This work was supported by grant No.R01-2003-000-10476-0 from the Basic Research Program of the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation.