Interactions between fine subbituminous coal particles and micron size bubbles generated by hydrodynamic cavitation were investigated. The experimental results showed that increasing fluid velocity increases the number counts of micron size bubbles. The number counts of microns size bubbles were found to increase with increasing the dissolved gas content. At a given fluid flow velocity, reducing the dissolved gas content by heating the liquid for 2h at 80°C reduced the number counts of micron size bubbles while saturating the liquid with CO2 led to a significant increase in the number counts of micron size bubbles. However, change in fluid velocity or dissolved gas content had little effect on the bubble size. Introducing micron size bubbles generated by hydrodynamic cavitation into flotation column was found to be a promising method to enhance the recovery of fine coal particles. The micron size bubbles were found to attach to the solids with contact angle of 45° or larger. The micron size bubbles frosted on the solid surface were proven to enhance the bubble–solid attachment. These findings further improved our understanding of the role of hydrodynamic cavitation in the attachment of flotation size bubbles to gas-nucleated fine particles and hence in fine particle flotation. The conclusions derived from this study provide scientific basis for the design of hydrodynamic cavitation assisted flotation devices.Froth flotation, a solid wettability based separation process is widely used in mineral processing or waste water treatment industries to extract the targeted minerals from a multi-phase system or to remove waste solid particulates/precipitates from industrial effluents and municipal water. Although froth flotation has been shown to be effective in treating solids of a relatively wide particle size range, generally from tens of micron meter to hundreds of micron meter ( Various flotation models were developed to understand the cause of the low recovery of fine particle flotation ( Many methods, such as hydrodynamic cavitation, optical focus, ultrasonic oscillation and electrolysis, could be used to generate micron or even submicron size bubbles. In practice, the high-energy consumption, installation inconvenience and maintenance difficulty encountered in ultrasonic, optical focus and electrolysis methods prevented them from being used in practical flotation operations ( The objective of the current work is to investigate the generation of micron or submicron size bubbles by hydrodynamic cavitation and to study their interactions with fine subbituminous coal. In this paper, the size and counts of bubbles generated by hydrodynamic cavitation under variable system conditions (fluid flow speed, gas saturation, water chemistry and solid surface wettability) were determined. To examine whether the introduction of micron size bubbles would affect the flotation selectivity, the attachment between micron size bubbles and silicon surfaces of decreasing hydrophobicity was investigated. From the application point of view, it is important to know whether the presence of micron size bubbles formed in situ on solid surfaces would enhance the attachment between solid surface and flotation size bubbles. Considering the presence of electrolytes and organics in the process water of industrial-relevant practical systems, the effect of bubble aging on bubble–particle attachment was determined. To accomplish this objective, we studied (a) gas nucleation conditions in bulk fluid by hydrodynamic cavitation; (b) in situ gas nucleation on fine coal surfaces by hydrodynamic cavitation; (c) bubble–particle interactions the flotation with gas dissolved; (d) the flotation with “flotation size bubbles”; (e) role of in situ generated gas bubbles on solid surfaces by hydrodynamic cavitation in the attachment of flotation size bubbles to solid surfaces; and (f) the effect of bubble aging on the attachment of flotation size bubbles on in situ gas nucleated solid surfaces. The conclusions derived from this study provide scientific basis for the design of hydrodynamic cavitation assisted flotation devices. In this study, a venturi style cavitation tube is integrated in a circulation flow loop and used to generate micron or submicron size bubbles. The schematic diagram of the circulation flow loop and the details of the venturi type of cavitation tube are shown in The venturi type of cavitation tube invented by The Focused Beam Reflectance Measurement (FBRM, G400), which is immersed in the liquid or slurry in the container, is used to determine in-situ the size and the number of micron size bubbles. FBRM was chosen for the micron size bubble characterization because this method not only measures the bubble size, but also quantitatively determines the variation of the number of bubbles in the system. To obtain optimum accuracy of measurement, the FBRM probe was placed into the liquid container at an angle of 75°, relative to horizontal axis, as per instructions of the instrument manufacturer. The FBRM detects the chord length rather than the diameter of bubbles. It is known that for a given particle, the average of its chord lengths measured by FBRM often underestimates slightly the actual average diameter of particles. However, from the statistical point of view, such a difference is small and negligible for spherical objectives ( In this study, de-ionized water (DI water) with resistivity of 10 To prevent the oxidization of the ground coal, the coal samples after grinding were immediately sealed in plastic sample bags and stored in freezer at −18 Two aspects of the gas nucleation were investigated in this study: 1) the micron size bubbles generated using hydrodynamic cavitation in de-ionized water (DI water) to characterize homogeneous nucleation, and 2) the interaction between micron size bubbles and solid surface was investigated using a model flotation system. To investigate the minimum hydrophobicity of solid surface required for the attachment of micron size bubbles on solid, silicon wafers with different hydrophobicity were used to collect the micron size bubbles in DI water. The silicon wafers were cleaned by immersing them in Piranha solution (1:3 of 98% H Sub-bituminous coal obtained from Teck Resources Ltd. was used to study the interaction between particle and micron size bubbles using the circulation loop as shown in The hydrophobicity of the fine coal is crucial to its recovery. To characterize the hydrophobicity of the fine coal, the static contact angles of water droplets placed on both polished fine coal chunk and compressed fine coal pellet were measured using DSA ( To quantify the effect of the micron size bubbles on the bubble attachment to solids, the induction time was measured using an in-house built induction timer for solid surface with and without coatings of micron size bubbles. The detailed information on the setup and experimental procedures of the induction timer has been given by The size and number counts of bubbles generated by hydrodynamic cavitation in de-ionized (DI) water at various throat velocities were determined. Sauter mean of bubble diameter, The effect of degassing DI water on average bubble diameter and number counts of micron size bubbles is shown in The effect of increasing dissolved gas content on the bubble size and bubble number counts was further investigated. To increase the dissolved gas content, the solution was mixed with a given volume of CO Since increasing CO  To confirm whether the increase in the dissolved gas content would increase the recovery rate, the fine coal flotation kinetics from slurries containing variable amount of dissolved CO To confirm that the fine coal recovery is indeed limited by available micron size bubbles generated by hydrodynamic cavitation, the residual dissolved CO It is hypothesized that the depleted dissolved gas could be replenished by injecting a small amount of air into the cavitation tube during the operation. To test whether the dissolved gas content would increase the recovery rate, air at a flow rate from 0 The effect of the hydrophobicity on recovery of fine sub-bituminous coal is shown in The induction time for bubble attachment to silicon wafers with and without the frosted micron size bubbles is shown in Previous studies showed that the bubble aging is detrimental to the bubble/solid attachment ( The bubble size and number counts of micron size bubbles generated by hydrodynamic cavitation in a circulation flow loop were measured using FBRM. Increasing throat velocity and dissolved gas content had little effect on the size of the micron size bubbles, but significantly increased the number of bubbles generated. The interaction between micron size bubble and fine coal was investigated by fine sub-bituminous coal flotation under hydrodynamic cavitation conditions. The results showed that increasing the throat velocity and/or dissolved gas content increased recovery of fine sub-bituminous coal as a result of increasing the number of micron size bubbles generated. The dissolved gas content in the slurry was found to deplete gradually with flotation time. Decreasing the hydrophobicity of fine coal by controlled oxidation was also found to reduce the recovery of fine sub-bituminous coal. A critical hydrophobicity with a contact angle greater than 45° was required for the attachment of micron size bubbles to fine coal particles. The induction time measurement proved that the presence of micron size bubbles on the solid surfaces greatly enhanced the bubble-solid attachment, but only for solids of contact angle greater than 45°, illustrating the selectivity of enhancing fine particle flotation by hydrodynamic cavitation. Finally, the attachment between flotation size bubbles and solid surfaces decreased significantly when both micron size and flotation size bubbles were aged in surfactant or frother containing aqueous solutions, e.g., the process water used in the current study, diminishing the benefit of hydrodynamic cavitation on fine particle flotation. The authors would like to thank the financial support from