The difference in dissolution between germanium and zinc during oxidative pressure leaching of germanium-bearing sphalerite was evaluated in laboratory-scale experiments. The effect of temperature and time on germanium hydrolysis, coprecipitation with silica, and coprecipitation with iron oxides was investigated. Experimental results show coprecipitation with silica is the most important factor, followed by coprecipitaion with iron, and finally germanium hydrolysis, causing germanium losses of 9%, 5% and 2%, respectively.The Yunnan Chihong Zinc & Germanium Co., Ltd, is currently the largest germanium supplier in the world producing about 10% of the world's germanium. The company is planning to convert its conventional Roast–Leach–Electrowinning (RLE) process to acid pressure oxidation. A previous study ( There are three possible mechanisms for germanium loss, hydrolysis of the germanium ions ( The work was divided into three parts. Firstly, the loss due to germanium hydrolysis was evaluated. In the second part, coprecipitation with silica was evaluated. Finally, the effect of three different iron precipitation processes was investigated. All reagents were chemically pure and used as received; distilled water was used. The changes of solution pH and germanium concentration were measured continuously. The solution pH was measured by pHs-2 m. Germanium and total dissolved iron were measured by flame atomic absorption using a Perkin-Elmer 5100 PC spectrometer. Hydrolysis of germanium sulfate will lead to loss of germanium. Therefore it is necessary to investigate hydrolysis of germanium sulfate with temperature and time. Fresh solutions of 50 mg Ge/L and free sulfuric acid concentration ranging from 5–300 g/L were hydrolysed at 20–90 °C for half an hour. A second series of solutions were hydrolysed at 20 °C for 1–10 days. Silica and germanium were precipitated in a single compartment titanium autoclave, 10.9 cm diameter and 21.5 cm long, with a working volume of about 2 L. Different amounts of zinc silicate (Zn The loss of germanium during the precipitation of iron as jarosite, goethite and hematite was investigated. In the three experiments of iron precipitation, a solution containing 3 g Fe (Ш)/L and 20 g H The coprecipitation of germanium with jarosite was investigated in 2.5-L glass reactors. The reactors had openings for an agitator, a thermometer and for sampling and were placed in heating mantles with thermostatic control. The goethite precipitation method involved adjusting pH to 2.15 and heating until the pH remained stable ( Hematite precipitation experiments were conducted in the same autoclave as the silica precipitation tests, with the solution being held at 150 °C for 1 h in every run. The relationship between germanium precipitation and temperature is shown in  The increase in germanium precipitation with time may be due to a slow hydrolytic polymerization of germanium ions into a colloid, as summarized by the following two equations. The presence of colloids was confirmed by the presence of flocs in the solutions left for the longer times. When talking about germanium loss, germanium hydrolysis due to time isn't considered because of continuous analysis. Since in the past pressure leaching of sphalerite, the final sulfuric acid concentration is about 50 g/L. From The relationship between germanium precipitation and initial zinc silicate mass is shown in From this data it is obvious that the coprecipitation of Ge increased dramatically as the weight of zinc silicate added increased. This indicates that content of silicate in the sphalerite concentrate will significantly affect the recovery of germanium. The most likely mechanism for this is the formation of mixed Ge–Si polymers which hydrolyse more readily than the Ge-polymers to form a germanium rich silica gel. Common-used sphalerite contains 0.7%Si, which corresponds to 5 g zinc silicate added in In the three standard methods for iron removal, the coprecipitation of Ge as a function of the extent of iron precipitation is shown in At this stage, the mechanism of germanium removal is not clear, although Similar, but less extensive replacement may also occur during precipitation of hematite and goethite. There is also good evidence that adsorption of germanium onto the surface of iron oxides also occurs. Further work is required to distinguish the relative importance of these two mechanisms for germanium loss. After pressure leaching at Yunnan, the solution contained about 1.8 g iron (> There are many factors which influence the overall difference in dissolution between germanium and zinc during oxidative pressure leaching of germanium-bearing sphalerite. From the data obtained, coprecipitation with silica is the most important factor, followed by coprecipitaion with iron, and finally germanium hydrolysis during cooling, causing germanium losses of 9%, 5% and 2%, respectively. Of the three industrial methods of iron precipitation, jarosite will lead to the greatest loss of germanium whilst hematite showed the lowest losses. To mitigate the combination of these negative effects it is recommended that: the pregnant solution be kept at high temperature to minimize germanium hydrolysis; high acidity be maintained after leaching to minimize germanium hydrolysis; separation processes, such as solvent exaction, be performed as soon as possible after leaching; the silicon and iron contents of the sphalerite concentrate be minimized to prevent coprecipitation of germanium with silica and iron; and hematite be the method by which iron is removed from solution. The authors wish to thank YU Deqing, the director of Technology Center of Yunnan metallurgy group Co., Ltd, Kunming for providing the facilities to carry out this work.