Using a crushed rock compaction permeation apparatus and a self-designed seepage circuit, we tested the permeability of crushed gangues with six different particle sizes during compaction on the CMT5305 electronic universal testing machine and analyzed the relationships of seepage velocity, permeability and non-Darcy β factor to the porosity, particle size and diameter distribution. The results show that 1) The seepage flow of crushed gangues during compaction is nonlinear, and their compactability after compaction is related to their final porosity; 2) the seepage velocity of crushed gangues of same size decreases with pressure gradient increase and with porosity decrease, and varies less than that of crushed gangues of same porosity and mixed size or size between 10 and 15mm. Moreover, the greater the single particle size is, the greater the pressure gradient. In addition, the mixed gangues have the lowest pressure gradient; 3) the permeability of gangues of same size decreases with their size increase and that of the mixed gangues is the largest; 4) the relationship of permeability to porosity can be divided into two stages with porosity decrease. At the stage II, permeability decreases significantly by the magnitude of 2 to 3 compared to that at the stage I. After stage II, the permeability of crushed gangue decreases to the magnitude of 10−15
                     m2, while the impermeability increases; 5) the non-Darcy β factor is negative for gangues with size larger than 10mm, while that gradually becomes positive with porosity decrease for mixed gangues and gangues with size less than 10mm. Moreover, non-Darcyβ factors affect the impermeability of gangues. The results will provide references for gangues as filling materials.Gangues are solid waste during the production process of coal industry. But its utilization prospect at home and abroad has been more optimistic especially as filling materials for goaf, embankment (dike) and water dams. Thus, their compaction bearer, strength, deformation, impermeability, drainage and seepage have become key issues to be solved urgently. Many scholars at home and abroad have tested the gangues' compaction characteristics experimentally. However, the permeability of gangues during compaction is not well studied. The study used a self-designed seepage circuit composed of a permeability tester, a gear pump, a pressure relief valve and the CMT5305 electronic universal testing machine, measured the permeability characteristics of crushed gangues with six different sizes during compaction, and provided a theoretical guidance for permeability and impermeability characteristics of gangues as filling materials in engineering projects. The test system for the permeability characteristics of the crushed gangues under compaction mainly consists of a CMT5305 electronic universal testing machine, crushed rock compaction containing cylinder ( The gangues used in this test were collected from LuAn Mine in Shanxi Province. Their mass density The permeability of crushed gangues was tested in triplicates and the average was used for analysis. In brief, a certain amount ( With the pore pressure of the relief valve changes, the pressure gradient     The results that the crushed gangues with larger diameter have smaller seepage velocity could be explained as follows. After several compaction stages at certain porosity, the crushed gangues are fragmented. The larger the diameter is, the wider the diameter distributes after compaction. Those crushed gangues with smaller diameter could effectively fill the void spaces between the larger crushed gangues. After further compaction, the crushed gangues become denser and denser, so that the seepage velocity becomes smaller and smaller. By comparison, the fragmentation of the crushed gangues with smaller diameter is limited, thus the void space between the crushed gangues with similar diameter may form effective channels, enhancing seepage velocity. For the crushed gangues with mixed diameter, the smaller ones can fully fill the space at the initial stage of charging, which leads to smaller initial porosity compared to those with uniform diameter. With continuous loading, they have higher randomness and uncertainty than those with uniform diameter and probably form a temporary channel in the process of pore structure adjustment under a certain porosity level, leading to larger flow and faster seepage velocity, which could leap two magnitudes with the pore pressure of the relief valve increasing. The seepage velocity of the crushed gangues with diameter in range of 10–15 As shown in  It can also be seen from  The piecewise point porosities of the crushed gangues with other five diameters also can be conformed similarly and are listed in At the stage I, the porosity of the crushed gangues decreases to the piecewise point porosity, at which the crushed gangues start to be compacted. First, the edges and corners of the crushed gangues are crushed off and then the particles are crushed to much finer particles, which then rearrange and fill into the spaces between the larger particles. At this time, the crushed gangues have relatively larger porosity and relatively higher permeability. As the porosity decreases, the permeability reduces greatly from the magnitude of 10 At the stage II, the porosity of the crushed gangues decreases from the piecewise point porosity to that at the last level, at which the crushed gangues remain under pressure, and particles fragment more severely. During this compaction process, small particles are squeezed and become denser and denser. Thus, the porosity is relatively small, and the permeability decreases with the porosity decrease. However, the permeability varies only slightly in the magnitude range of 10 The permeability of crushed gangues decreases obviously and significantly to 10  From literature ( In this paper, we changed the pore structure by controlling the axial compression force on the crushed gangues in the cylinder by which further correspondingly changed its seepage velocity, permeability and non-Darcy By observing and analyzing the experimental phenomena of permeability property crushed gangues in 6 different sizes under different compact pressure, we conclude that: The seepage of the crushed gangues under compaction is nonlinear. The seepage velocity of the crushed gangues is related to their particle size, proportion of mixture, pore pressure of the relief valve, compaction degree in the previous stage and porosity, and in the range of 10 The permeability of the crushed gangues is related to their porosity, particle diameter, particle diameter distribution, and pore structure. The larger the single particle diameter is, the smaller the permeability is. The permeability of the crushed gangues with mixed diameter is the largest. As the porosity decreases, the permeability decreases and is in the range of 10 The curve of permeability The non-Darcy flow The compaction seepage process of the crushed gangues is associated with fragmentation and reorganization of the particles. With porosity decrease, the shape of the crushed gangues is basically unrelated with their diameter, but is related with their final porosity: the smaller the final porosity, the denser and more compact the crushed gangues are. The work was financially supported by the