Mineral liberation analysis (MLA) provides detailed information on the composition of single particles as well as particle populations exposed on the cross-sectioned surface of a grain mount. This information can be used to evaluate process efficiency related to the liberation distribution of valuables or to the distribution of a feature used for separation of valuable from barren particles. When separation processes are studied, the separation feature has to be added to the particle population data. In case of density separation (particle size and particle density) this is already been done by MLA software. For magnetic separation, however, the MLA data has to be combined with mineral susceptibilities using additional software.
                  This contribution describes the calculation of partition curves for magnetic separation based on the liberation analysis of the feed and the products. Magnetic susceptibility data from measurements of pure minerals and from literature are combined with particle composition data from liberation analysis. Using sieved fractions in magnetic separation experiments the evolution of cut susceptibility and separation efficiency with particle size is studied. The effects of a stereological correction and of the width of susceptibility classes as well as of the mineral susceptibilities used in calculation are discussed.Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) - based automated mineralogy ( While the application of SEM-based image analysis has become a very valuable analytical tool, it has to be kept in mind that analysis is limited to two dimensions (polished surfaces), but that the data are used to describe three dimensional sample characteristics, such as particle sizes, shapes and compositions. The data do thus carry an inherent stereological bias ( SEM-based image analysis is known to be a precise method for sample characterization. In latest research In classification and screening processes partition curves are typically used to describe the success of sizing. These curves can be adapted to every separation process, if the products can be separated into classes differing in at least one physical separation parameter. Laboratory equipment to split material into classes of different parameters is available only for the physical parameters particle size (analytical sieving or particle size measurement), density (heavy liquids) and magnetic susceptibility (isodynamic separators). Especially density and magnetic susceptibility methods for separation are time consuming to assess at the laboratory scale. However, time and amount of material needed can be shortened effectively by the use of virtual partition curves ( Partition curves for the magnetic separation of a greisen-type ore were first presented by In the present investigation sieved fractions from the same greisen-type ore were magnetically separated. Mineral liberation analysis was performed on feed, concentrates and tailings. The resulting data is taken and combined with mineral susceptibility data to calculate partition curves. By bootstrap resampling with replacement the variation in calculated parameters is estimated. To prove the comparability of directly measured and calculated curves, particle susceptibility distributions analyzed by an isodynamic magnetic separator are used. Based on calculated partition curves the cut susceptibility as well as the separation efficiency were extracted from the results of all experiments. Finally, these parameters are presented as a function of particle size helping to describe the performance of a separator. The material used in this study is a greisen-type ore from the Zinnwald/Cinovec deposit located in the Erzgebirge at the German/Czech border. Tin mining took place in Zinnwald until 1945. During the Second World War the ore was used to extract lithium from the zinnwaldite mica. The greisen-type ore studied here comprises of 67 In recent years, renewed exploration was undertaken, focusing on the lithium resource contained in the deposit. The only lithium-bearing mineral is zinnwaldite ( A greisen sample of about 2 In one set of experiments for the present study the cone crusher product was used as feed material to be comminuted to product size of −1 The finely ground materials from the ball mill, the pin mill and the grinding roll as well as fines of the cone crusher product were screened into the following six size fractions: −0.1 The magnetic separation was done using a ring-type separator. The magnetic flux and the gap between conveyer belt and iron ring were set fixed for all experiments to 1.2 To enable a comparison between calculated and measured particle susceptibility distributions, size classified material was split into susceptibility classes using an isodynamic separator based on a Frantz-Isodynamic Separator ( Unlike the usual way to describe a samples susceptibility based on a calibration curve of the isodynamic separator, the susceptibility of the created fractions was measured directly using a susceptibility balance. In this manner, a mean susceptibility of the sample is obtained rather than just knowing the fractions susceptibility range from the lower and the upper class limit. A total of sixty-one samples was analyzed by a mineral liberation analyzer (MLA). Of nine samples two epoxy were analyzed to assure reproducibility of results obtained. For the epoxy blocks, aliquots of 3 The evaluation of the MLA measurements provides information on the qualitative and quantitative mineralogy as well as the grain size distribution and mineral liberation. In this study, grain size distribution and liberation are the main attributes assessed. Data processing by the MLA software does not consider stereological transformation ( A Johnson Matthey MSB MK II auto was used for magnetic susceptibility measurements. To ensure optimum measurement conditions with respect to sample mass and sample height, 350–400 Calculations were done using the software National Instruments DIAdem together with self-developed Visual Basic for Applications (VBA) code. Raw data from MLA were imported into DIAdem as Microsoft Access databases. The calculations described below can also be performed in standard data processing software like Microsoft Excel but will be limited, when the database comprises of a large number of particles and mineral grains. The calculation of partition curves for magnetic separation is based on the magnetic susceptibility of the particles. This particle susceptibility is related to the mass specific susceptibility of phases To run the calculation on an ore comprising of several minerals the susceptibilities of all minerals must be known. For simplicity, non-magnetic mineral of only minor and trace abundance are neglected. Minerals with high magnetic susceptibility will have a strong influence on the particle susceptibility even when they just account for a small proportion of the total material (see Eq. Partition curves are calculated using a two-step procedure. The first step is to split the particle data of the MLA for concentrate and tailings into classes of equal susceptibility. When the particle susceptibility lies in between the lower and the upper limit of a class the particle is attributed to this class. In the second step the T-values (separation coefficient, which is defined as percentage of valuable mineral reporting to concentrate) are calculated based on the susceptibility classes of concentrate (c) and tailings (t) following Eq.  Two parameters were taken from the partition curves to describe the trends of different experiments. These parameters are the cut susceptibility As the experiments were done on size classed material, the The stereological bias of two-dimensional liberation analysis is related to the ore texture. The less liberated the particles are and the less complex their intergrowth texture is, the larger is the magnitude of stereological bias ( As there is no proper stereological correction method available in literature ( As the large section correction just terminates particles appearing to be too small in the analyzed section, the stereological bias cannot totally be corrected. Nevertheless, this procedure helps to reduce the bias and to improve results with respect to small particles detected as liberated ( Due to the large number of samples and costs for MLA only one grain mount was produced for most of the samples (c.f. The potential of error analysis based on the bootstrap resampling method was tested and compared to other methods available in literature by 20 subsets were created from each particle population. The number of individual particles per class is linked to the number of particles in the original population (c.f. To illustrate the comparability of MLA-based calculated and measured (Frantz-type isodynamic separator combined with MSB) values, susceptibility distributions created by both methods were constructed for each size fraction of the PM product. An example is given in Similar conformance was found for all fractions. Small differences are explained as follows: The fractions at both ends of the susceptibility distribution just have one defined boundary value. Susceptibilities measured using the MSB MK II auto represent mean values of the samples. Therefore, they are strongly dependent to the composition of the samples. The end point of the measured susceptibility distributions to small values is defined by the maximum possible current attainable at the isodynamic separator (Eq. The side slope Two important attributes are invoked to explain apparent minor differences in the shapes of the measured vs. the calculated susceptibility distribution. Firstly, there is a small amount of strongly paramagnetic material (columbite and limonite) that reports to the strongly magnetic fraction (see Eq. The second important attribute is the anisotropy of magnetic susceptibility of micas. The anisotropy of magnetic susceptibility was reported to be around 1.5 for sheet silicates, where the susceptibility perpendicular to the cleavage plane ( This effect is illustrated in The statistical reliability of the measured susceptibility data can be taken from The calculation of the confidence interval by Eq. As mentioned above, a large section correction (LS) terminates all particles of the size-classed material that appear to be too small. For the coarse grained ore investigated in this study, small particle sections typically represent liberated particles. Therefore, the large section correction mainly influences results of high grade and liberated valuables as well as low grade and liberated gangue. This is displayed in Differences can be seen on both sides of the liberation distributions from concentrate and tailings. A large section correction of the concentrate data leads to a significant reduction of the mass fraction of liberated zinnwaldite in favor of the susceptibility class of high-grade particles (neighboring class to the left) as well as a reduction of barren particles in favor of the low-grade particles (neighboring class to the right). The same behavior is recorded for a large section correction of the tailings data. These results indicate that non-corrected data should not be used, when calculations are performed based on two different sets of data. Doing so would lead to partition curves showing misplaced material caused by particles measured as liberated due to stereological bias. Following the method to combine MLA and mineral susceptibility data as described above, the partition curves can easily be calculated based on defined susceptibility fractions of concentrate and tailing. All experiments were done with fixed parameters of the magnetic separator, thus the particle size is a main feature effecting the separation. Therefore, the shape and the position of the partition curves have to be size dependent. Large particles report to concentrate at lower particle susceptibilities as their center of gravity is located closer to the iron ring of the separator resulting in a treatment by a stronger magnetic field. For small particles it is vice versa. The sharpness in separation of coarse particles is influenced by their liberation distribution and the orientation of locked particles on top of the conveyor belt. The partition curve of the material smaller than 0.1 Uncertainty in the calculated partition curves is higher for coarse size classes. This is due to the smaller number of particle sections analyzes by MLA. Variations in partition curves for different subsets from bootstrap resampling are very low for classes below 0.5 Taking the parameters cut susceptibility and separation efficiency from the partition curves of size-classed material, their evolution with particle size can be studied. The cut susceptibility ( The cut susceptibility has to increase with decreasing particle size. This is due to the design of experiments described in Section As a change in grinding technology does not affect the physical properties (magnetic susceptibility) of the minerals, there should be no difference in separator performance. Results from size fractions of the BM, GR and CCF should therefore be equal to each other. Differences in The influence of mineral susceptibility on the calculated partition curves can be explained using Eq. minerals of high weight percent in the particle and strongly magnetic minerals (minerals of high susceptibility). The magnetic susceptibility of the main minerals has to be known accurately. If there is an uncertainty in the susceptibility value, partition curves and the calculated parameters will inherit a bias. An example showing variations in cut susceptibility and separation efficiency by modifying the mineral susceptibilities of Zinnwaldite ( Minerals of high magnetic susceptibility will have a major influence on magnetic separation. If these minerals are locked with other, weakly magnetic minerals, the particle susceptibility may become very high. This is due to the fact that the difference in magnetic susceptibility of different minerals can be in a range of some orders of magnitude ( When susceptibility classes were formed by calculations based on automated mineralogical analysis, the classes have to be broad enough to prevent fluctuations caused by statistical variations. Otherwise small variations in the number of detected particles per class can lead to significant changes in the calculated partition curves. This can be seen in Assuming that all particles of an individual class have the same size, the number of particles can be used to estimate the error caused by statistical uncertainties.  When samples are split into susceptibility classes using an isodynamic separator a sample mass high enough to allow further analysis must be produced even for the minor classes. Due to the low throughput of an isodynamic separator, this easily leads to a preparation time of one day per class. Having two products and at least 7 classes per product a preparation time of 14 The accuracy of results based on the preparation of susceptibility classes in laboratory is lower than one would expect. This is due to the isodynamic separator itself and the experimental procedure. When two products (concentrate and tailings) have to be split into classes equal in magnetic susceptibility, the parameters of the device need to be stable over the time of separation. For example the magnetic field strength changes with the applied power (current). The isodynamic separator’s current is sensitive to the warming of the coils. Thus, a control of the electric current is needed. In the experiments done during this investigation the separation with the isodynamic separator was started, when the effect of warming was small (4 When the susceptibility classes of both products cannot directly be compared a more complex way to determine the partition curves is needed. In this case the susceptibility distributions of the products must be created. These susceptibility distributions can then be fitted by approximation functions. The approximation functions, in turn, can be binned and used for calculation of the partition curves. Sample masses can be smaller for MLA analysis compared to the required laboratory test (cf. This study illustrates the applicability of MLA data for the in-depth analysis of a magnetic separation process. Partition curves are easily calculated from MLA data when the magnetic susceptibility of the minerals concerned is known. Furthermore, parameters affecting the separation result like mineral liberation, particle size and machine parameters can be investigated based on a small number of samples. In this way, time-consuming test work using isodynamic magnetic separators to split the products of separation tests into susceptibility classes is avoided. At the moment, there is a lack of tabulated mineral susceptibility data in literature. It has to be mentioned that the magnetic susceptibility of minerals strongly depends on their actual chemical composition ( A stereological correction procedure should be applied to reduce the effect of stereological bias on the data and calculated parameters. Even a simple correction method like the large section correction can improve the quality of data as shown in the results and described in literature ( The width of virtually created susceptibility classes has to be broad enough to prevent fluctuations in the calculated partition curve. Fluctuations are caused by small numbers of particles per class. Therefore, the classes have to be broadened until the minimum number or particles is at least 25 ( When the number of particle sections per mount is small, e.g. below 2000 (typically for coarse particles) a bootstrap resampling with replacement should be applied to the data ( If the separation parameter can be defined properly for the minerals of an ore, the method of combining particle composition data with separation features can be transferred to other separation processes. Thus, automated mineralogy offers a way to evaluate the efficiency of separation processes, even when there is no lab-based method available. Data used in this study was performed within the project “