The effect of nepheline syenite on porosity–soaking time relationship of porcelain stoneware bodies has been studied using the experimentally measured total porosity. A new kinetic model was applied to quantify porosity as function of temperature and soaking time. In the first part of work, the effect of nepheline syenite was evaluated on the kinetic parameters and the porosity variations were found to be related to surface tension/viscosity ratio of melted phase which influences the minimum porosity of ceramic body. The kinetic analysis of data indicated that the optimum soaking time to achieve minimum porosity in ceramic body is controlled by amount of nepheline syenite and milling time. The validity of presented theory to predict the experimental results was substantiated by computing total porosity at other temperatures and soaking times. The proposed model can be used to describe the sintering process of ceramic bodies that are sintered by diffusing melted phase.Porcelain stoneware bodies are of prominent importance in building applications because of special attributes namely, lower water absorption, greater chemical stability and higher strength. These materials are well-known clay-based products that successfully used at indoor and outdoor of buildings The applicable range of feldspars depends on the kind and amount of fluxing oxides, other feldspatic minerals and non-fluxing crystals. The addition of feldspars in composition of clay-based ceramics is function of firing temperature and water absorption of final product The type of pores in ceramic materials was divided to open and closed pores. An open pore is cavity or channel that communicates with surface of ceramic body. Closed pores are located inside of the ceramic body and are completely isolated from the external surface. The summation of open and closed porosity gives the value of total porosity Sintering in presence of liquid phase is the heat treatment applied to certain type of materials to develop a dense microstructure and to achieve suitable physical-mechanical properties. The term of compacted microstructure denotes dense body that usually follows by decreasing total porosity of ceramic body The reported models describe the sintering process in presence of liquid phase by viscous flow. In developing the semi-theoretical models, the densification rate was assumed to be controlled by surface tension, viscosity and average pore size during sintering process In sintering process of porcelain stoneware body the total porosity continuously changes owing to variations in viscosity and pore size distribution. Since the variations in these parameters are very complex, the use of only theoretical models proposed in the literature is not applicable to estimate the total porosity In this part of study a mathematical model is derived for densification of porcelain stoneware body by using capillary pressure and creeping flow. According previously investigation carried out by Jazayeri et al. An industrial porcelain stoneware composition containing a blend of natural illitic–kaolinitic clay, potassium and sodium feldspars were used in experiments as reference body, STD. The reference body composition contains 10 Total porosity–soaking time plots shown in The obtained results show that total porosity decreases as soaking time rises, expect for temperature and soaking times that specimen undergoes over firing followed by expansion of air inside the occluded pores. The decrease in total porosity is result of diffusing liquid phase into the open pores due to capillary pressure. As the sintering progresses, the closed pores grow and open pores are transformed into the closed pores. Finally, the total porosity increases due to expansion of air into the closed pores, leading to an expansion in specimen dimensions. It is obvious that there is a clear increase in densification rate with increase in temperature. To obtain the parameters of Eq. The model given by Eq. From the parameters of the non-linear correlations, the constants of This range of porosity was selected because it covers all of the minimum porosity values for reference and modified compositions in studied conditions. The value of activation energy approximately remains constant for each composition in the domain of porosity. It is also observed that the value of this parameter increases, reaching to maximum value in presence 5.0 The densification of a porcelain stoneware body is governed by the viscosity of the liquid glassy phase formed at high temperature which is controlled by the Na  The values of activation energy of C The following equation which relates the total porosity of reference and modified porcelain stoneware compositions to temperature and soaking time was obtained by taking into account Eq. The values of total porosity computed by Eq. According to data shown in where Sintering of porcelain stoneware body is typical example of densification process proceeding through liquid phase formation. Since the surface tension/viscosity ratio controls total porosity during the sintering process, addition of 5.0 The authors wish to thank Mr. D. Naldi and Mr. S. Degli Esposti for their contributions during the course of research. We would also like to thank Iranian Industries and Mines Ministry for supporting this investigation.