Fetuin-A is a liver-derived plasma protein involved in calcified matrix metabolism. Fetuin-A mediates the formation and stabilization of calciprotein particles (CPPs), soluble colloids made of fetuin-A, further serum proteins, and calcium phosphate mineral. CPP formation ensures mineral solubilization and rapid clearance from circulation by macrophages of the mononuclear phagocyte system, thus preventing pathological calcification. Accordingly, low levels of free serum fetuin-A and high serum CPPs are associated with pathological calcification in patients suffering from chronic kidney disease.Fetuin-A is a major liver-derived plasma protein. Fetuin-A proteins exist in all vertebrates studied ( Fetuin-A is specifically enriched in mineralized tissue, where it accumulates by strong binding to hydroxyapatite ( The existence of protein-mineral complexes in serum was confirmed by several laboratories. Price and colleagues identified a fetuin-A–containing high-molecular-weight complex called fetuin-mineral complex (FMC) in the serum of rats treated with high doses of etidronate that shut down bone mineralization ( A recent animal study on the fate of CPPs demonstrated that intravenously injected CPPs are efficiently cleared by macrophages of the monocytic phagocyte system in mice ( These findings may help explain why atherosclerotic plaque calcification is particularly evident in CKD patients who have a perturbed mineral homeostasis. To clarify the role of fetuin-A in vivo, fetuin-A–deficient mice on C57BL/6 (B6) genetic background and on the calcification-sensitive DBA/2 (D2) genetic background were generated. D2 fetuin-A–deficient mice suffer from severe spontaneous soft tissue calcification. The exacerbated calcification phenotype caused a decreased breeding performance as well as increased mortality of KO mice in comparison with wild-type littermates. Calcified lesions affected almost all major organs. The severe calcification and kidney damage caused secondary hyperparathyroidism and osteoporosis ( In humans, low fetuin-A serum levels are associated with calcification diseases. A variety of clinical studies demonstrated that low fetuin-A concentrations are associated with vascular calcification and cardiovascular mortality in patients on dialysis ( Fetuin-A plays an important role in mineralized matrix metabolism. Fetuin-A–stabilized CPPs mediate clearance of excess calcium phosphate from the circulation and thus prevent unwanted calcification. Impaired CPP formation in fetuin-A–deficient mice or individuals with low serum fetuin-A levels as well as inefficient clearance of CPPs is associated with ectopic calcification. Interestingly, clearance of CPPs is mediated by SR, which also contributes to clearance of LDL particles and lipid debris, suggesting competitive lipid and mineral clearance particularly in atherosclerosis. CPP clearance by macrophages may drive these cells into the calcifying myeloic cell type that was recently described in several publications (