Bioleaching of spent lithium ion secondary batteries, containing LiCoO2, was attempted in this investigation. The present study was carried out using chemolithotrophic and acidophilic bacteria Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans, which utilized elemental sulfur and ferrous ion as the energy source to produce metabolites like sulfuric acids and ferric ion in the leaching medium. These metabolites helped dissolve metals from spent batteries. Bio-dissolution of cobalt was found to be faster than lithium. The effect of initial Fe(II) concentration, initial pH and solid/liquid (w/v) ratio during bioleaching of spent battery wastes were studied in detail. Higher Fe(II) concentration showed a decrease in dissolution due co-precipitation of Fe(III) with the metals in the residues. The higher solid/liquid ratio (w/v) also affected the metal dissolution by arresting the cell growth due to increased metal concentration in the waste sample. An EDXA mapping was carried out to compare the solubility of both cobalt and lithium, and the slow dissolution rate was clearly found from the figures.Production of spent lithium ion secondary batteries (LIBs) is increasing world-wide and 10% of market share is in Korea. The spent lithium ion batteries contain 5–15 A key microorganism is the iron and sulfur oxidizing bacterium, All the reagents used in the experiment are of analytical grade. A pure culture of The growth cultures of Generally lithium ion batteries (LIBs) consist of some heavy metals like cobalt, nickel, lithium and some other organic chemicals, and the compositions also vary slightly with different manufacturers. In the present study, cathode waste materials of LIBs, previously separated by the manufacturers, were collected. The material was ground by milling and sieved to obtain a mesh size of <150 Bioleaching studies were carried out in 300-mL conical flasks. About 90 The pH of each experiment was measured periodically throughout the experimental period using a glass electrode (Thermo Electro Corporation, Orion 720+). The leached solutions (1.5 An initial series of experiments was carried out to study the behavior of the microbial strain in the LIB wastes containing no energy source such as sulfide or sulfur or iron for the microbial growth. The preliminary results are presented in During bacterial attack, the cells metabolize elemental sulfur to H All metal sulfides leaching by The acidity or pH of the medium usually controls bacterial growth, and bacterial catalytic action is significant only up to pH ∼3.5 ( Bacterial dissolution of metals from battery wastes at different solid/liquid ( The slow dissolution of lithium in the experiment is the issue to consider. To prove the slower solubility of lithium than that of cobalt, EDX (energy dispersive X-ray analysis) mapping of the leach residues after leaching was carried out ( Results of present work indicated that it is possible to dissolve metals from spent cathode material of LIBs by the use of acidophilic bacteria. These cells are able to grow in the medium containing elemental sulfur and iron as their energy source. Results revealed that a culture of The authors are thankful to the MOST (Ministry of Science and Technology), Korea, for the financial assistance. First author (D.M.) is thankful to KRF (Korea Research Foundation) for supporting the fellowship.