Understanding the subsurface heat transmission together with thermal-hydro (T-H) coupling process in fractured rock mass is essential to the heat mining from enhanced geothermal systems (EGS). A three dimensional numerical model based on a unified pipe-network method (UPM) is developed for modeling this coupling process by explicitly introducing fracture networks embedded into porous media. Both fractures and rock matrix are discretized as connected pipe networks by a self-developed mesh generational tool in the discontinuum based method. A local thermal non-equilibrium (LTNE) model is introduced to separate the fluid and solid temperatures. Two energy balance equations are incorporated and connected by the heat transfer term. The proposed method is verified by comparing with the analytical solution and performing convergence tests. A case study is carried out by introducing randomly distributed fractures into a three dimensional rock mass. Sensitivity analyses are conduced to investigate the influence of the solid-fluid interface heat transfer coefficient, pressure differential and fracture aperture on temperature distribution in a highly fractured porous medium.Hot dry rocks (HDR) generally buried within 3–10 km depth contain enormous heat resources The heat development in EGS is a complex process involving with hot water seepage, thermal transmission, chemical reaction and even mechanical effects Numerical methods are comparatively more flexible and convenient, and thus are commonly implemented into simulating the multiphysical coupling process in fractured porous media. Continuum based methods are possible ways to model fluid flow and heat transmission in discrete fractures which are implicitly homogenized within porous media. Jiang et al. Some discrete models are based on the concept of discrete fracture networks (DFNs) where large numbers of fractures with a wide range of sizes are explicitly embedded into continuous media. Two-dimensional discrete models are commonly employed in the simulation of the thermal development in fractured hot dry rocks. Sun et al. Moreover, most of these three dimensional approaches neglect the effect of heat transfer between solid and fluid phases and use only one energy balance equation based on the local thermal equilibrium (LTE) theory. Identical temperature in porous material is assumed to indicate the instantaneous local temperature equilibrium. This assumption simplifies the numerical formulation and improves computational efficiency. However, studies show that the local thermal equilibrium is not established if rapid heating or cooling happens in underground formation with numerous fractures and fissures The present study aims to simulate the three dimensional hydro-thermal coupling process in highly fractured geothermal reservoir based on the LTNE model. A unified pipe-network method (UPM) is employed for its convenience to deal with both matrix and fractures in the framework of discrete fracture networks. The discretized fracture pipes are explicitly embedded into matrix pipes. Fluid temperature and solid temperature are assigned to each node and solved according to two energy balance equations. The influence of seepage field on temperature distribution is established by including the convective effects existing in the fluid energy equation. Flow pattern changes with fluid properties which are affected by the fluid temperature. This T-H coupled model is verified against an analytical solution. Convergence tests are carried out for the LTNE based mathematical model by considering one rectangular fracture embedded in a porous domain. The effects of fracture aperture, heat transfer coefficient and production pressure differential on the heat extraction process in highly fractured formation are analyzed. In the current mathematical model, we assume that only single phase (fluid) exists in the hot fractured reservoir. The fluid density does not change with temperature. The fluid flow in both rock matrix and fractures obeys the Darcy’s law. Mechanical and chemical effects are not considered in following simulations. The thermal dispersion, and radiation effects are also ignored. Based on the above assumptions, governing equations involved in this T-H coupled process are introduced. The fluid flow in both fractures and matrix can be described by a mass balance equation: Two sets of energy balance equations are introduced for rock matrix based on the LTNE model. Both heat convection and conduction are considered in the fluid phase, and the energy conservation is written as: The heat conduction term is not taken into account within fractures, since the thermal convection effect is dominant in these high permeable regions with the continuous injection of fluid To define the relationship between temperature and fluid properties, the change of water density is not obvious in a non-boiling system below 200 °C The thermal-hydro coupling mechanism is established considering that heat convection intensity is influenced by the flow velocity and the seepage field is varied with the fluid viscosity affected by the temperature field. In the three dimensional unified pipe network system, both of matrix and fractures are discretized as pipes with different equivalent parameters. To be more specific, the equivalent hydraulic parameter can be derived for fluid flow in pipes, while the equivalent thermal parameter can be derived for heat transmission in these discrete segments. UPM based fluid flow discretizing process has been carried out and tested by Ren et al. The distribution of both fluid temperature and solid temperature is approximated by the FEM-based linear shape function. In each matrix element (tetrahedron element composed by nodes Thus, the temperature gradient for fluid and solid in the matrix element can be calculated as: Thus, the discretized form for the heat conduction term in pipe In order to qualify the numerical stability, a hybrid differencing scheme based on the combination of upwind and central differencing schemes is introduced Similarly, the discretizing process for heat conduction and convection in fractures can be derived as: Matrix pipes and fracture pipes are merged together since they share the same nodes at the interface. The superposition form for this merging process in heat transmission can be represented as: The full implicit time scheme is used in the above two governing equations combining with the discrete form for fluid flow derived in Ren et al. Two cases are represented to verify the reliability of UPM based thermal-hydro coupling simulation in this section. Thermal convection and thermal conduction effects are verified by comparing with the results obtained from analytical solution. Convergence tests are carried out to analyze the feasibility of the T-H coupled LTNE model with one fracture embedded in a porous domain. A cube shaped model is used in both cases for simulation. And a self-developed mesh generator This case aims to verify the proposed model in the application of transient heat convection and conduction process in the unfractured porous medium. The analytical solution for three dimensional heat transmission in the porous medium (shown in In this case, both matrix and an explicitly embedded fracture are considered in the LTNE framework. A rectangular fracture (8 m × 4 m) in a cube with dimensions of 10 m × 10 m × 10 m is parallel with the fluid injecting direction, as shown in Since it is difficult to find an analytical solution for this T-H coupled discontinuous model, convergence tests are carried out to analyze its robustness and feasibility. A central line segment Total grid number obtained in the discretizing process, on the other hand, can also influence the accuracy of simulating results. We choose six grid numbers in this heat transmission modeling. Results shown in  Fracture networks are generated in this case, and the capability of current UPM model to simulate the T-H coupled heat extraction process in a porous medium with large numbers of fractures is tested and analyzed. The rock mass is still a cube identical to the case in Section The total simulation time is 120 days. Parameters involved in this case are list in  Sensitivity analyses are carried out with respect to the solid-fluid interface heat transfer coefficient, the pressure differential and the fracture aperture. The averaged overall fluid temperature and solid temperature as well as the outlet fluid temperature The case incorporated with LTE model is also simulated.  The effect of fracture aperture on the temperature distribution is shown in A three dimensional numerical model based on the unified pipe-network method (UPM) is developed for modeling the thermal-hydro (T-H) coupling process in EGS. Different from traditional local thermal equilibrium (LTE) theory considered in discontinuum based simulations, the local thermal non-equilibrium (LTNE) model is introduced to separate the fluid and solid temperatures. Two energy balance equations are incorporated and connected by the heat transfer term. Combining with the governing equation for fluid flow, the three dimensional T-H coupled solution for a fractured porous medium can be solved in the UPM framework where fractures and matrix are discretized and simplified as equivalent pipes. The advantage of the UPM is the convenience of assembling both discrete fractures and the matrix by the superposition process of equivalent pipe networks with varying fluid flow and thermal properties. The proposed model is verified by comparing with the analytical solution and performing convergence tests in respect of different time steps and total grid numbers. A case study is carried out by introducing randomly distributed fractures into a three dimensional rock mass. The solid temperature and the fluid temperature are different in the domain, especially in the regain near fractures. Lower fluid temperature is remarkably observed in fractures with high connectivities, while the distribution of solid temperature is comparatively more continuous in different simulation time, which conforms to the practical situation and demonstrates the necessity to incorporate the LTNE model into the T-H coupled simulation. Results obtained from a series of sensitivity analyses indicate that both increase the pressure differential and fracture aperture will accelerate the decrement the overall temperature as well as the outlet fluid temperature in the system. Also, larger average temperature difference between fluid and solid phases can be observed if the solid-fluid interface heat transfer coefficient is lower. The intensified heat transfer effect contributed by the large value of In the current study, the model is limited to thermal-hydro coupled simulation without considering the mechanical and chemical effects. Further, it is not applicable in the situation with boiling effects where two phases (water and steam) should be taken into consideration. Thus, future work will be devoted to developing a multiphysical coupled 3D model with two-phase flow. This research was supported by the