Purpose: The objective of this study was to assess the variability of cruciate avulsion fractures. Type of study: Retrospective observational study. Methods: Standardized radiographs and computed tomography (CT) examinations were performed in 40 patients (31 male, 9 female; age range, 10 to 77 years) with cruciate avulsion fractures. Results: The average age of patients with anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) avulsion fractures was 21.5 years and that of patients with posterior cruciate ligament (PCL) avulsion fractures was 42.9 years. Two basic patterns of avulsion fracture emerged. ACL fractures were either partial (62%) (with avulsion of anteromedial bundle) or extended (38%) and were comminuted in 25%. PCL fractures were either complete (47%) or extended (53%) and were comminuted in 50%. CT helped delineate fracture margins, comminution and extent. Conclusions: Although there is considerable variability in fracture type, 2 basic patterns of ACL and PCL avulsion fractures exist. CT helps delineate these features as a prelude to surgical fixation. Level of Evidence: Level III.Injury to the cruciate ligaments of the knee typically involves a tear of the collagenous fibers of the ligament. The choice of a treatment technique for surgical fixation as well as outcome is largely dependent on the type of fracture present; in particular, the size, displacement, comminution, and orientation of the avulsed fragment, as well as the integrity of the attached cruciate ligament. The aim of this study was to review the radiographic and computed tomography (CT) findings of cruciate avulsion fractures to document the variability of avulsion fractures with respect to size, comminution, degree of extension, displacement, and orientation. Radiographs and CT examinations in 40 patients (31 male and 9 female; mean age, 29.3 years; age range, 10 to 77 years) with cruciate avulsion fractures of the tibia were retrospectively reviewed. Subjects were consecutive patients presenting to a single university teaching hospital with a broad referral base, comprising both adult and pediatric orthopaedics, over a 56-month period from February 1998 to August 2002. The avulsion fractures were apparent radiographically in all cases. Only patients with isolated cruciate avulsion fractures were included, those with concomitant tibial plateau fractures being excluded. In 37 patients (93%), the fractures were acute, presenting as a tense painful knee swelling in all cases. In 3 patients (7%), all of whom presented a nontense painful knee swelling, the fractures were deemed to be chronic both clinically and radiographically. Conventional anteroposterior and lateral radiographs were obtained of the injured knee at presentation. Two readers, without knowledge of the CT findings, reviewed the radiographs. Seven features of each fragment were assessed, namely the (1) visibility, (2) size, (3) degree of comminution, (4) degree of displacement, (5) completeness, (6) presence of extension, and (7) orientation. Visibility was defined as the ability to delineate all borders (anterior, posterior, lateral, medial superior, inferior) of the avulsed fragment on either the anteroposterior or lateral radiograph. Size was defined as the measured length, depth, and width of the avulsed fracture fragment. Measurements were made on the radiographs with a rule calibrated in millimeters. Comminution was defined as the delineation of more than 1 fracture fragment. If the comminuted fragments were separated, the size of the largest fragment was measured. If the comminuted fragments were not separated, the size of the entire fragment was measured. Displacement was defined as the degree and type of separation of the fracture fragment from the tibia graded according to the system devised by Meyers and McKeever All patients underwent CT examination of the injured knee within 24 hours of presentation. CT examinations were performed on a HiSpeed Advantage scanner (General Electric Medical Systems, Milwaukee, WI). An identical CT protocol was used for each patient. The knee was examined in an extended position following removal of any supporting backslab. The scan plane extended from the superior aspect of the patella to the inferior aspect of the anterior tibial tubercle. The field-of view was 13 cm, pitch 1.0, and collimation 3 mm with reconstruction at 1-mm intervals on a standard algorithm. Image data were analyzed on a CT workstation (Sun Microsystems, Palo Alto, CA) at the time of examination. A single examiner performed all CT reconstructions. Axial, coronal, and sagittal planes, in addition to oblique sagittal and coronal planes separately aligned with the cruciate ligaments, were viewed on bone (2,000 HU width, 35 HU level) and soft tissue (250 HU width, 35 HU level) window settings ( Two readers reviewed the CT examinations with knowledge of the radiographic findings. On bone window settings, the visibility, size, degree of comminution, degree of displacement, extension, and orientation of each fracture fragment was assessed (applying similar criteria to the radiographic assessment). Measurements were made using electronic calipers on the CT workstation. On soft-tissue window settings, the continuity of the cruciate ligament to the avulsion fracture and the integrity of the ligament were assessed. The cruciate ligament was deemed to be intact if it was of normal caliber and was continuous with sharp noninterrupted margins. Cruciate ligament integrity was assessed on coronal and oblique sagittal planes ( The documented findings at subsequent arthroscopy or open surgery, whenever undertaken, were compared with the preoperative CT findings. Twenty-one of the 40 patients (53%) had anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) tibial avulsion fractures and 19 of the 40 patients (47%) had posterior cruciate ligament (PCL) tibial avulsion fractures. The average age of the 21 ACL avulsion fracture patients (16 male, 5 female) was 21.5 years (range, 10 to 59 years). Nine of 21 ACL avulsion fractures (43%) occurred in skeletally immature patients. The ACL avulsion fractures occurred as a result of a road traffic accident in 10 patients, sports injury in 7, blunt trauma in 2, and a fall in 2. The average age of the 19 PCL avulsion fracture patients (16 male, 3 female) was 42.9 years (range, 18 to 77 years), significantly older than that of ACL avulsion fractures ( Two patterns of ACL avulsion fracture were present, either incomplete or extended. Thirteen of 21 patients (62%) had incomplete avulsion (i.e., not incorporating all of the ACL insertional area) ( Eight of 21 patients (38%) had extended avulsion fractures (i.e., extending beyond the confines of the ACL insertional area) and were complete in all cases ( Two patterns of PCL avulsion fracture were present, either complete (47%) or complete-extended (53%). The entire PCL insertion area was avulsed in all of the 19 patients with PCL avulsion fractures. The visibility, degree of comminution, degree of displacement, the presence of extension, and completeness of PCL avulsion fractures on radiography and CT is shown in The size of the ACL and PCL avulsion fractures on CT is shown in Eleven of the 21 patients (52%) with ACL avulsion fractures underwent arthroscopy or open surgery. Five of the 11 patients had a complete avulsion fracture of the insertion with an otherwise intact ACL on preoperative CT, and these findings were confirmed arthroscopically in all cases. Six of the 11 patients had an avulsion fracture involving part of the insertion site with an otherwise intact ligament on preoperative CT. Of these 6 patients, a partial avulsion fracture with an otherwise intact ACL was confirmed in 3 cases. In 2 of the cases, a partial fracture of the insertion site was confirmed, but the remaining ACL insertion was stripped from its tibial insertion resulting effectively in a complete ACL tear ( Six of the 19 patients (32%) with PCL avulsion fractures underwent arthroscopy or open surgery. A complete PCL avulsion fracture with an otherwise intact PCL was confirmed in all of these patients. The main purpose of this study was to assess the variability of cruciate avulsion fractures. The tibial insertion sites of the ACL and PCL have been well-defined anatomically ACL avulsion fractures in particular showed considerable variation in fracture size, extent, and comminution. Two basic patterns did emerge. ACL avulsion fractures tended to be either incomplete or complete-extended and were comminuted in about 25% of cases. The vast majority of incomplete avulsions involved the anteromedial bundle. On occasion, when there is incomplete bony avulsion of the ACL insertion, the ligamentous portion of the nonavulsed insertion may be stripped from the tibial surface, resulting effectively in a complete ACL tear. Such was the case in 2 partial ACL avulsion fractures undergoing arthroscopy in this series. Although the bony avulsion involved only a portion of the tibial insertion, the ACL was found to completely torn at arthroscopy ( Incomplete avulsion was not a feature of PCL avulsion fractures. All PCL avulsion fractures fully incorporated the PCL insertion area and half extended beyond the margins of the PCL insertional area ( For treatment of ACL or PCL cruciate avulsion fractures, it is recommended that undisplaced (type I) fractures be treated conservatively, mildly displaced (type II) fractures treated either conservatively or surgically, and displaced (type III) fractures treated surgically. Regarding the benefits of CT over radiography in cruciate avulsion fracture evaluation, it can be argued that although CT improves the visibility and delineation of undisplaced (type I) cruciate avulsion fractures ( The overall confidence with which size, comminution, and extension could be reported was improved after CT when compared with radiography. Kendall et al. The aim of this study was to evaluate the variability of cruciate avulsion fractures. High-resolution CT has advantage over other imaging modalities, in particular magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), in showing bone detail to good effect and allowing ready 3-D image reconstruction. No patients in the present study underwent MRI, the information provided by CT coupled with the clinical findings being considered sufficient to guide further management. The role of MRI in cruciate avulsion fractures has not been studied in detail. This study has 2 main limitations. First, tunnel (intercondylar) views of the knee were not routinely obtained. This reflects the retrospective nature of this study and our propensity to perform CT examination at an early stage. Additional radiographic views may have lead to clearer delineation of the avulsion fractures. Therefore, no firm recommendations regarding the benefits of CT over radiography could be drawn. Second, arthroscopy was not performed in all patients, although as experience increases and the threshold for arthroscopic fixation becomes lower, this situation is likely to change. In conclusion, this study increases our understanding of cruciate avulsion fractures. There are 2 basic patterns of cruciate avulsion fracture. ACL fractures are either partial (62%) (with isolated avulsion of anteromedial bundle) or complete-extended (38%) and are comminuted in about 25% of cases. PCL fractures are either complete (47%) or complete-extended (53%) and are comminuted in about 50% of cases (typically as a sagittal split). CT is recommended for patients with type II or type III fractures as a prelude to operative reduction.