Soil phosphorus (P) tests are designed to indicate plant-available inorganic orthophosphate (Pi), but fail to account for Pi that may become available through organic phosphorus (Po) mineralization. This P source may be especially important in soils with low concentrations of solution and labile Pi. We assessed gross Po mineralization and immobilization using labeling with 33P in four calcareous Alfisols with varying concentrations of Olsen soil test P that were collected from forage fields of dairy farms in Ontario, Canada. Rapid microbial 33P uptake during incubation was found for the soils with the lowest available Pi as indicated by both Olsen soil test P and water-extractable Pi. The tracer incorporation into microbial P after 8 days ranged from 7 to 44% of applied 33P and was negatively related to water-extractable Pi following a power-type relationship. As concentrations of microbial P were similar in all soils, this suggests faster turnover of P in the microbial biomass at water-extractable Pi below 0.1 mg P kg−1 soil. Daily gross Po mineralization rates ranged from 0.2 to 2.8 mg P kg−1 soil d−1 and contributed 7–56% of the isotopically-exchangeable P in 8 days. Based on these findings, microbial processes have the potential to make a significant contribution to forage P nutrition.A thorough understanding of processes that govern phosphorus (P) availability in soils is important as too little available orthophosphate (P Determination of the contribution of P Organic P mineralization is difficult to measure due to the high reactivity of dissolved phosphate anions, which are often rapidly sorbed to soil surfaces following their release from organic matter ( In addition to gross P  Soils from four different forage fields from southwestern Ontario dairy farms were used in this experiment. The soil samples had been collected as part of a larger study ( In this study, soils from two organic (soils 1 and 2) and two conventional (soils 3 and 4) dairy farms were selected in order to provide a gradient of P The experiment consisted of two parts: a short-term (100 min) isotopic exchange kinetics (IEK) experiment and a longer 7-d incubation experiment. The IEK experiment allowed the establishment of isotopic dilution over time as a result of physico-chemical processes. The longer incubation experiment with Before both experiments, the frozen soils were thawed at 4 °C and then pre-incubated in the dark at 22 °C for 28 d with gravimetric water content maintained at a level suitable for microbial activity (0.20–0.24 g H The IEK experiments were conducted in triplicate using unlabeled soil and were conducted in batches on day 5 and day 6 of the incubation experiment for each of the two sets of soils. The details of IEK methodology have been described elsewhere ( From the IEK experiment, the following parameters were determined: 1) Contrary to the common assumption that P dynamics during the short term batch experiment are controlled by physico-chemical processes only, The temporal development of radioactive P remaining in a soil-solution system at steady state is described by In parallel with the short-term IEK experiment, a 7-d incubation experiment was conducted. A seven day incubation was selected as recommended by To label each sample, the equivalent of 190 g oven-dry soil was weighed into a bowl, five mL of a The labeled soil was sampled (weighed and extracted) on day 0 (∼7 h after labeling) and on day 7. Samples were analysed for In a pre-test, different methods were compared for measuring soil microbial P. The method of In this study, we chose to use the water extraction with hexanol fumigation because it allowed us to use the The radioactivity was measured in the filtrate of the non-fumigated and fumigated samples as described earlier. The release of For the incubation experiment, The quantity of P in a soil pool that has been derived from a labeled P source can be calculated from the specific activities of the pool and the source, and the amount of P in the pool ( During the incubation experiment respiration was determined by trapping CO Statistical analyses were performed using the statistical software program SAS ver. 9.2 for Windows ( Water-extractable P Soil respiration during the last week of the pre-incubation was similar to that during the week of the incubation experiment (data not shown), indicating that the respiration rate had stabilized during pre-incubation and was not increased again by soil mixing during labeling. Mean CO The proportion of the added The SA of the P For all 16 samples, measured There were no significant differences found among soils for cumulative or daily gross P Overall, the soils in this study were found to have relatively low The relationships between IEK parameters and soil The percentage of the added Soil 1 with the lowest The proportion of label recovered in the P The soils in the present study were collected from alfalfa-grass forage fields and some of the legume-derived organic matter may have helped to support rapid microbial P uptake. For example, The relationship between the amount of The observed dramatic increase in microbial P uptake could be explained by a biological response of soil microbes to low As discussed earlier, the relationship observed between However, it is interesting that despite the indication of an increased rate of microbial P turnover in soil 1 with the lowest Pw concentrations, we do not see differences in respiration rates among the soils. Thus, it is possible that high-affinity phosphate transport systems were upregulated ( The significance of a rapid uptake of P by the microbial biomass under low available P Gross P Gross P Overall, regression analysis revealed that gross P Although not significant, a weak negative relationship between P One day after soil labeling, net P In a recent review, Bünemann et al. (2015) discuss how very low P In this study, for the first time soil microbial P fluxes were explored across a gradient of water-extractable P The landowners that agreed to let us sample their fields and provide farm management history data are kindly acknowledged for their participation. This project was funded by and supported by an The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at