Capacious diaphyses and poor bone stock in revision arthroplasty can lead to fracture and poor component fixation. Impaction bone grafting can be performed in salvage reconstructions in cases with extensive circumferential bone loss. We present a consecutive series of patients who underwent proximal or distal femoral reconstructions in combination with impaction bone grafting. The average age was 62 years, and the mean follow-up was 36 months (range, 24-84). No revisions were performed for mechanical failure, and radiographs revealed no evidence of implant loosening. No patient complained of end-of-stem thigh pain. There were 3 failures: 1 for periprosthetic fracture, 1 for instability, and 1 for infection. Impaction bone grafting can be used in combination with proximal and distal femoral arthroplasty to successfully manage cases with extensive bone loss after failed hip and knee arthroplasty. The procedure reconstitutes necessary bone stock, improves stress shielding, and provides immediate fixation in capacious canals.Severe bone loss of the proximal or distal femur from infection, periprosthetic fracture, osteolysis, or multiple revisions after total hip or knee arthroplasty presents a unique challenge Certain fracture patterns, severe osteopenia, bone loss, and unfavorable canal geometry surrounding the femoral isthmus may preclude the use of traditional uncemented, long, fully porous-coated or modular tapered femoral components that may otherwise provide satisfactory results in revision arthroplasty Impaction grafting has proven to be an effective tool in revision arthroplasty, as an adjunct to address significant bone voids. The use of this technique can compensate for capacious femoral canals and poor bone stock that can make patients more susceptible to fractures, poor fixation, and lack of in-growth. Although femoral endoprosthetic arthroplasty and IG techniques are well studied, to our knowledge, there has been no prior report on the combined use of these 2 revision techniques. Therefore, the purpose of this study is to evaluate the results of IG when performed in conjunction with endoprosthetic arthroplasties of the proximal and distal femur. Our hypothesis was that, with the combined use of IG and femoral arthroplasty, the implant fixation is immediate and results in theoretical increased healing of bone, improved bone stock, reduced stress shielding, reduced stress risers, and reduced thigh pain. This series examines the clinical outcomes, radiographic data, and any complications associated with this complex technique. Between 2001 and 2007, 12 PFA and 3 DFA combined with impaction bone grafting were performed in 15 patients. This represented a consecutive series from a single fellowship-trained arthroplasty surgeon. There were 10 women and 5 men in the cohort, with an average age of 62 years (range, 42-82 years). The average body mass index was 31 kg/m All patients had bone loss, osteolysis, or fracture patterns that precluded the use of standard revision implants, and the decision was made to perform PFA or DFA. Preoperatively, the femoral bone loss surrounding the failed THA were classified as 7 type IV, 3 type III-B, and 2 type II-A defects according to the system of Della Valle and Paprosky The endoprostheses implanted were commercially available. There were 5 Zimmer MOST PFAs (Zimmer, Warsaw, Ind), 7 Stryker Global Modular Replacement System (GMRS) PFAs (Stryker, Mahwah, NJ), 1 Zimmer MOST DFA, and 2 Stryker GMRS DFAs. The stems ranged from 11 to 16 mm in width and 100 to 190 mm in length. All stems were smooth cylindrical cemented stems fixed with antibiotic impregnated cement. The intercalary segments (modular segments between the stem component and the hip or knee articulating prosthesis) used to reconstruct segmental defects ranged in length from 30 to 80 mm. Five reconstructions used mesh (1 of the 3 DFA patients and 4 of the 12 PFA reconstructions), whereas 4 femurs were augmented with strut allograft. Postoperatively, all patients were allowed immediate full weight-bearing and treated with aspirin for venous thromboembolism prophylaxis. The patients were evaluated at regular intervals postoperatively: 2 weeks, 3 months, 1 year, and yearly thereafter. Clinical outcomes were evaluated using a 5-point Likert scale for the 3 subscales of the Western Ontario and McMaster Universities Arthritis Index (WOMAC) scoring system Preoperative planning is critical. Templating is performed to estimate the appropriate size and length of the femoral arthroplasty component necessary to reconstruct the proximal/distal aspect of the bone resection margin. Planning also estimates bone graft volume and anticipates regions of necessary grafting and potential canal deformities (ie, bow) with the aid of radiographs ( Ample allograft bone should be available. In our experience, a minimum of 250 cc of corticocancellous allograft chips should be available for any case. The size and shape have been described previously by Sloof et al Depending on the procedure, the hip (posterolateral approach) or knee (medial parapatellar approach) is exposed. Prior incisions are lengthened as needed to resect the failed hardware or unreconstructable bone in preparation for megaprosthesis implantation. After removal of the unstable components and existing cement, the canal is assessed. A flexible guidewire may be passed to safely confirm the canal trajectory. Femoral preparation and impaction begin with the removal of the intramedullary membrane using canal scrapers and standard reamers. The appropriate length and diameter of the femoral component are determined through templating and confirmed intraoperatively with an x-ray after trial reduction. Next, a cannulated cement restrictor is placed 2 cm distal to the anticipated tip of the femoral component. Using a large bone tamp, allograft bone is impacted against the cement restrictor to prepare the distal mantle for the prosthesis, creating a tube through which the eventual implant will be enveloped. Circumferential wire mesh may provide the advantage of containment of corticocancellous allograft and cement. In general, the wire mesh should span at least 2 cortical diameters above and below the resection margin site. Cannulated long, smooth, tapered reamers are then used to circumferentially pack corticocancellous allograft chips in areas of bone loss and comminution throughout the length of the femoral shaft while maintaining a centralized canal ( No patients were lost to follow-up, and the average follow-up was 36 months (range, 24-84 months). The average bone graft volume used for the entire group was 123 cc (range, 60-180 cc). All 3 of the DFA patients received 180 cc of impacted allograft per case. The PFA patients received an average of 115 cc of allograft per case (range, 60-180 cc). The average total WOMAC score for this group was 19.5 (range, 12-28). The average scores for individual WOMAC subscales were as follows: 3.1 for the pain subscale (range, 2-6), 1.6 for the stiffness subscale (range, 0-3), and 14.7 for the physical function scale (range, 9-22). No patient reported end-of-stem pain. No patients required revisions for mechanical failure. One PFA patient sustained a periprosthetic fracture after a mechanical fall 18 months after surgery. Satisfactory allograft incorporation to host bone was confirmed at the time of reoperation, and she was converted to a total femur arthroplasty. Another PFA patient experienced a dislocation and underwent revision with placement of a constrained liner, with no subsequent dislocation events. Finally, a PFA patient had a superficial wound infection that resolved with a short course of oral antibiotics. None of the 3 DFA patients experienced any postoperative complications. The most recent radiographic evaluation (range, 24-84 months) for all patients revealed stable constructs with no evidence of loosening. When comparing implant position on serial anteroposterior and lateral views of the hip or knee, there was no evidence of implant loosening, migration, or subsidence ( Bone loss after failed total hip or knee arthroplasty can pose significant challenges at the time of revision surgery. Severe bone loss extending beyond the metaphysis in the proximal or distal femur can be difficult to reconstruct with traditional methods of revision surgery Today, there are many available stem options to achieve canal fixation. Cemented stems allow for immediate fixation, but capacious canals with little metaphyseal support and sclerotic smooth endosteum from prior surgeries can lead to loosening due to poor bone-cement interdigitation. In contrast, cementless press-fit stems potentially allows for eventual biologic fixation, but poor bone stock, osteopenia, and canal deformities (femoral bow or remodeling) can result in fractures and end-of-stem thigh pain. This study looks at the use of impaction bone grafting in combination with femoral endoprosthetic arthroplasties in cases with severe femoral circumferential bone loss. Our results show that IG can be successfully combined with proximal and distal femoral arthroplasties in cases with severe bone loss. At a mean follow-up of 36 months, survivorship was 80% for revision for any reason. There were no aseptic failures and no failures related to the IG technique. These results are consistent to those previously reported in the literature. Sewell et al Impaction grafting is a useful technique for addressing bone loss in revision arthroplasty. This technique was originally introduced as a means to restore acetabular and femoral deficits These properties are particularly advantageous in cases with severe bone loss requiring either a PFA or DFA. First, the femoral diaphysis is often osteopenic, capacious, and with potential defects from osteolysis or cement removal. Consequently, we believe that IG technique allows for a more conservative and less aggressive preparation of canals, which are often osteoporotic and/or compromised. Second, IG allows for reconstitution of bone stock and the use of smaller diameter cemented stems that are more flexible and forgiving in the setting of bone deformities (ie, femoral bowing or bone remodeling). Impaction grafting provides a new interface for enhanced cement fixation, especially in situations where cementless, scratch-fit fixation might fail. This secure fixation from cement allows for immediate weight-bearing and minimizes the risk of intraoperative fracture. Finally, this technique minimizes mechanical problems associated with stiff, large, diaphyseal filling stems traditionally used in revision total hip arthroplasty. Stress shielding, implant fracture (ie, cantilever bending or risk of distal stem breakage due to a “flagpole effect” of stem/canal width mismatch), and end-of-stem thigh pain can result from uneven distribution of stresses from a distally fixed rigid implant. In this series, no patients reported end-of-stem thigh pain. We did not see significant component migration or subsidence, which has been seen in other studies We recognize that there are other methods of reconstruction for cases with severe femoral bone loss that compromises the femoral isthmus. Uncemented, modular, Wagner-type stems designed for distal fixation can be used in these instances There are several limitations to this study. First, this is a small, short-term retrospective study and therefore has the shortcomings of data collection and recall bias. Second, despite the relative rare indications for this complex technique/procedure, longer follow-up or comparisons to other revision techniques may offer insight into the durability and utility of this procedure. Finally, because of the rare indications for this procedure in a single-surgeon cohort, we still cannot answer the following questions: (1) Must the operating surgeon always use cement with PFA/DFA into areas of bone grafting? and (2) Do cylindrical stems adequately prevent rotation in previously capacious, previously instrumented femoral canals? Finally, each of these techniques—femoral arthroplasty and IG—is an advanced reconstructive technique with a necessary learning curve and need for adequate infrastructure and readily available equipment, which makes generalizability a potential concern. Although further study is clearly needed on these issues, we believe that IG can potentially address the problems of bone loss, initial implant stability, and long-term prosthetic fixation. In conclusion, IG, in combination with PFA/DFA in patients with massive bone loss, is a viable technique for achieving reliable functional and clinical results at short-term follow-up. The procedure reconstitutes bone stock, minimizes end-of-stem pain, improves stress shielding, and provides immediate fixation of long-stem implants in osteoporotic, capacious diaphyseal canals. Conflict of Interest Statement