Introduction
                  The purpose of this study was to investigate the radiographic and functional outcome of orthogonal plating (two plates at right angles) via a single volar approach for fixation of intra-articular distal radius fractures with an associated radial column fracture.
               
                  Methods
                  In a retrospective, chart-based review, we identified 14 consecutive patients with an intra-articular distal radial fracture who had been treated with locked volar plate fixation and an additional radial column plate. Radial column plates were LCP Distal Radius Plates 2.4; volar plates were LCP Distal Radius Plates 2.4 (n
                     =13) or LCP T-plate (n
                     =1). These patients were operated on using the extended volar flexor carpi radialis (FCR) approach as described by Orbay. Radiographic measurements, healing rates, time to union, complications, range of motion, the Gartland and Werley score, and the QuickDASH questionnaire were done in order to evaluate the radiographic and functional outcomes of this technique.
               
                  Results
                  Thirteen of the 14 fractures healed within 7 weeks after surgery. Two implant removals were done. One patient had malposition of the fracture and carpal tunnel symptoms, which required a second surgery. No other complications (e.g., first dorsal compartment problems, radial plate prominence problems and radial sensory nerve problems) were observed. The average length of follow-up was 30 months (range, 12.8 months to 5.4 years). Radiographic results after healing were radial inclination 20°, radial length 11.4mm, tilt 6° volar, ulnar variance −0.5mm, articular gap 0.1mm and step-off 0.1mm. Wrist range of motion was flexion–extension arc 93°, ulnar–radial deviation arc 49° and pronation–supination arc 152°. Nine patients scored ‘excellent’ on the Gartland and Werley score, while the remaining five patients scored ‘good’. The average QuickDASH score was 13.4.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Additional fixation of a radial column process in an intra-articular distal radius fracture via the extended FCR approach using a standard volar plate and radial LCP resulted in good/excellent radiographic and functional outcome.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  Therapeutic IV.Most displaced fractures of the distal radius with intra-articular extension and comminution currently undergo operative treatment. Although the surgical technique used remains controversial, there is consensus that restoration of anatomy is required for the best chance of a functional outcome. In pathomechanical terms, the distal radius has been described as a three-column model, in which the radial styloid (lateral column) stabilises the wrist by acting as a bony buttress and attachment for the extrinsic carpal ligaments. The goals for operative reduction and fixation of distal radius fractures should be (1) anatomic alignment, (2) stable fixation, (3) early motion, (4) full functional recovery and (5) no complications. Surgical options for open reduction-internal fixation (ORIF) are via a dorsal and/or a volar approach. The dorsal approach has been used traditionally, but, recently, there is a tendency towards the volar approach. Numerous devices are currently available for internal fixation of distal radius fractures. However, evidence is still lacking to guide the clinical use of these devices, and one can presume that some of the ‘advances’ are implant- and industry-driven. Locked volar plating has provided good to excellent results in numerous clinical reports, The purpose of this study was to investigate the radiographic and functional outcome of orthogonal fixation of complex distal radius fractures with an associated radial column fracture using a single volar approach. This study was approved by our institutional review board. We identified all patients aged 18 years or greater with a distal radius fracture treated with locked volar plate fixation, from December 2004 to September 2011, from a single surgeon (PK, trauma fellowship trained) computer database. During this period, 96 consecutive patients were treated by this surgeon with the LCP Distal Radius Plate 2.4 system (Synthes BV, Zeist, the Netherlands). Within this group, 14 patients (18%) received an additional fragment specific radial column fixation (LCP Distal Radius Plate 2.4, straight, Synthes BV, Zeist, the Netherlands). These 14 patients form the cohort in this study. Indication for additional radial column plating was a fractured radial column process with insufficient fixation of the process with locked volar plating alone. The decision for additional radial column fixation was taken intra-operatively. Twelve distal radius fractures were classified as C3 according to the AO Müller classification, and two were classified as C2 fractures. Patients were positioned supine on the operating table with their arm in abduction and supination on the arm table. A non-sterile tourniquet was used. Surgical approach started with the Henry approach providing safe access to the volar aspect of the distal radius between the radial artery and the flexor carpi radialis tendon. The pronator quadratus muscle was released along the radial side of the distal radius and reflected ulnarly. When reduction and/or fixation of the radial column fragment seemed to warrant additional exposure, the approach was extended according to Orbay. The radial column was reduced first based on the metaphyseal radial cortex. A smooth 1.6-mm K-wire was directed from the bare spot of the radial styloid obliquely across the fracture exiting the radial shaft in the interosseous space. The volar fracture fragments were then reduced and temporarily fixed with small K-wires, and reduction was checked fluoroscopically. Once reduction seemed appropriate, the volar plate was applied. The volar plates used were the LCP Distal Radius Plate 2.4 ( Measurements were obtained by both authors using standard tools included in the radiographic viewer on the computer (e.g., the ruler and goniometer). We obtained the following radiographic measurements on plain radiographs, or on a computed tomography (CT) scan if available: radial inclination (the angle between the longitudinal axis of the radius and a line between the tip of the radial styloid and the ulnar aspect of the articular surface of the distal radius; normal range 21–25°), radial length (the distance between one line perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of the radius passing through the distal tip of the radial styloid and a second line that intersects the distal ulnar articular surface of the radius (tip of the sigmoid notch); normal range 10–13 Patients were checked for early and late complications at 2 weeks, 6 weeks, 3 months and more than 1 year (final follow-up). Every follow-up was performed by the senior author or a resident supervised by the senior author and included range of motion, a neurovascular examination, palpation of the scar and an examination for signs of infection or arthritis. A specific test for first dorsal compartment problems (e.g., Finkelstein test) was not documented in the chart. The Gartland and Werley score was calculated after the latest follow-up. The average length of clinical follow-up (including range of motion, complications and QuickDASH) was 30 months (range, 12.8 months to 5.4 years). In 13 of the 14 patients, fracture consolidation was noted within 7 weeks post-surgery. Median time from surgery to consolidation was 6.3 weeks (range, 5.6–13.9 weeks). One patient was initially treated with external fixation, but after 9 weeks a large metaphyseal gap remained and there were no signs of consolidation on CT scan. He then underwent revision of fixation with use of the orthogonal plating technique as described above as well as bone grafting 10 weeks after initial surgery. After this revision, he healed within 6 weeks. The average preoperative articular gap was 4.6  See One patient was noted to have a malposition of the fracture for which a revision was done with the addition of a (third) dorsal plate. He also complained about numbness and tingling in the median nerve distribution for which he was evaluated clinically (no electromyography (EMG)) by a neurologist. During the revision osteosynthesis of his wrist (3 weeks after the initial internal fixation), he also underwent a carpal tunnel release. His nerve symptoms improved postoperatively. After 18 months, the patient underwent a proximal row carpectomy and capitate prosthesis procedure, performed by a plastic surgeon. There were no infections. Two patients underwent hardware removal. One patient complained of a painful wrist and went for a second opinion where hardware removal was done. Her radiographs at that time showed a healed fracture in good alignment and we were not of the opinion that her pain was due to the hardware. The second patient had stated before the surgery that he would want to have the hardware removed, as he was afraid it would limit his work as a dentist. At the time of removal, he admitted to not having any limitations due to the hardware, but still wanted to proceed with the hardware removal. None of our patients complained of irritation of the first dorsal extensor compartment.  The purpose of this study was to investigate the radiographic and functional outcome of orthogonal plating (two plates at right angles) via a single volar approach for fixation of intra-articular distal radius fractures with an associated radial column fracture. Operative reduction and internal fixation of intra-articular distal radius fractures with a (comminuted) radial styloid process can be difficult. With the availability of the 2.4 distal radius locking set with a specific radial column plate, we started to use this plate for this specific fracture pattern. Although this radial column plate was seemingly designed to be placed via a dorsoradial approach we recognised the potential advantage of using this plate in combination with a volar plate via the volar-based Orbay approach as it requires only one incision to fix both the intermediate and the radial column. We recognise the potential problems of the orthogonal plating: (1) interference of screws, (2) impingement of the radial styloid plate on the first dorsal extensor compartment (tendons and nerve), and thought to evaluate these with respect to clinical outcome. Clinically, our 14 patients tolerated the orthogonal fixation well, without De Quervain-like symptoms or tenderness over the radial column plate. Hardware was removed in two patients, one symptomatic and one asymptomatic. The other two complications were in one patient: a malreduction (needing revision adding a dorsal plate) and a carpal tunnel syndrome (for which release was done in the same surgery). The ‘physician-based’ outcome scores (range of motion, radiographic measurements and Gartland and Werley score) were complemented by the excellent and good results of the validated patient-based QuickDASH score. Limited biomechanical data are currently available for the orthogonal construct described in this article. Blythe et al. tested four plate configurations, two of which included a radial column plate in a cadaver model. They showed no increased stability after addition of the radial styloid plate. However, their model was an extra-articular dorsally comminuted fracture pattern tested in compression, not resembling the fracture pattern in our patient group. Grindel et al. did test the TriMed system with a volar locking plate and a radial styloid plate as buttress, creating a combined construct of volar fixed angle and fragment-specific fixation. They showed that addition of the radial styloid plate was 76% stronger than locked volar plating alone, and reduced motion on both the radial (30% less) and the ulnar (40% less) side. Taylor et al. tested an intra-articular cadaver model with both an orthogonal fragment-specific TriMed construct including a radial styloid plate, and an ulnar pin plate, or a volar locking plate with smooth subchondral pegs (Hand Innovations LLC). Our patients are consistent with other studies. Tang et al. described a technique with volar and radial plating in eight cases with good clinical and radiographic outcome, and no hardware removal or tendon irritation. Finally, one study suggested that the orthogonal fixation using the TriMed system does not cause tendon irritation due to the radial styloid plate. Our study has some shortcomings. First, we used plain radiographs to measure radiographic outcome and a postoperative CT scan was only available for six (43%) patients (these patients were included in a non-related study). Although plain radiographs are historically used for the measurements needed, it is possible that radiographic outcome would have been worse with the use of more precise CT measurements. Second, this study is a retrospective analysis of a consecutive series. There is no control group. As plating systems and approaches have been modified over time in our department, we do not feel it is justified to include a retrospective historic control as a comparison. It is possible that some patients would have had a similar or better outcome without the application of the radial column plate. For those patients, the second plate could be considered overtreatment. However, we did not see any complications specific to the approach or the radial column plate. Similar to others we did not address what degree of displacement and comminution benefits from the radial column plate augmentation. Although large sample sizes are difficult to obtain, future research is needed to compare the double plating technique described in this article with a volar plate alone in a randomised fashion. Until then no definite conclusion can be drawn in favour of this technique. Locked volar plating can be difficult when an intra-articular distal radius fracture includes a radial column fracture. In our hands the extended FCR approach followed by reduction and orthogonal fixed angle fracture fixation for this fracture type has proven to have excellent to good outcomes, with negligible morbidity, and obviated the need for a second dorsal or dorsolateral approach. The authors declare that no conflict of interest exists.