This study aimed to introduce a comprehensive process for separating and recovering antimony from a complex stibnite concentrate. Antimony is first leached through a chlorination–oxidation procedure to obtain SbCl3 solution. Antimony is then recovered in the forms of cubic crystal Sb2O3 (99.9%), high-purity cathode antimony (99.98%), crude cathode antimony (99.7%), high-purity SbOCl (99.9%), and crude antimony (>99%) through the following processes: hydrolysis, membrane electrowinning, hydrolysis–low temperature smelting, and hydrolysis–washing.China is the largest producer of antimony in the world ( The commercial route to the extraction of antimony from its sulfide mineral stibnite in Xikuangshan involves a pyrochemical process (1150 The pyrochemical process usually requires a high-grade concentrate and is unsuitable for treating low-grade, complex antimony-bearing mineral. The reason is the formation of a stable antimonate of impurity elements that renders subsequent processing difficult. Consequently, the hydrometallurgical processing of low-grade, complex stibnite concentrates for the extraction of antimony without emitting SO However, the difficulty of realizing industrial production and other insurmountable problems is hindering the establishment of an efficient hydrometallurgical process at the industrial scale. Thus far, only a new chlorine–hydrolysis process has been commercially used by the Hunan Chenzhou Mining Group Co., Ltd. (Hunan Province, China). Chloridation–oxidation leaching rapidly proceeds and produces solid elemental sulfur. These features are more advantageous than the classical pyrometallurgical method that releases gaseous SO In this study, a comprehensive hydrometallurgical process for the separation and recovery of antimony from a complex stibnite concentrate was introduced ( Stibnite concentrate, supplied by Xikuangshan ShanXing Antimony Co., Ltd. (Lengshuijiang, China) in powder form, was physically and chemically characterized. Dry-screen analysis of this stibnite concentrate revealed that almost all concentrate samples were 100 mesh (100% through 100 mesh, 147  Antimony is first leached through a chloridation–oxidation procedure to obtain SbCl During preliminary experiments, various leaching conditions were examined, and the most suitable conditions for antimony extraction were determined at 85 To prepare crude cathode antimony, the antimony-enriched leach solution was directly subjected to membrane electrowinning. In the electrowinning tests, two-compartment antimony electrowinning cells (85 The membrane was fitted in a 5 The optimum conditions for the electrowinning of antimony from chloride solution by a membrane-electrowinning method are as follows: antimony, 77.39 At the cathode: At the anode: A high-quality antimony plate and an anolyte were obtained ( To prepare high-purity cathode antimony, the antimony-enriched leach solution needs to be purified before subjected to membrane electrowinning. The most suitable purification conditions were obtained at 45 The purified solution was then directly subjected to membrane electrowinning without upgrading, and electrowinning was carried out according to the aforementioned optimized conditions (Sb Antimony is first leached through a chloridation–oxidation procedure to obtain SbCl Then solution 1 or solution 2 was subjected to hydrolysis, and the optimum conditions for the hydrolysis were fixed as follows: temperature, 35 The resultant SbOCl powder impurity content was analyzed by ICP-AES, and the analysis results are listed in The resultant SbOCl was subsequently subjected to low-temperature reductive smelting. In a typical procedure, Na Consequently, antimony metal and a melt mainly containing sodium carbonate and resultant sodium chloride were obtained. After liquid antimony was discharged from the bottom of a rotary kiln, the melt (mainly Na SbOCl was obtained according to the optimized hydrolysis experimental conditions (temperature, 35 The optimum conditions for the washing procedure were fixed as follows: temperature, 35 SbOCl was obtained according to the optimized hydrolysis experimental conditions (temperature, 35 The optimum conditions for neutralization and crystal transformation were based on previous studies. For neutralization, the conditions were fixed as follows: temperature, 35 A comprehensive procedure for the separation and recovery of antimony from a complex stibnite concentrate was introduced. In this process, antimony can be recovered in the forms of cubic crystal Sb Project (