The three-point bending test was performed on cemented tailing backfill prepared with different offset notches by a loading system with high-speed camera. And the effect of heated temperature on CTB fracture behavior has been investigated. These results indicate that the influence of pre-existing notch and temperature on CTB fracture feature is obvious. The peak load increases linearly with the increasing of the offset ratio when the depth-height ratio of notch is fixed at the same value, while the fracture peak loading decreases sharply with the increase of the notch depth when the offset ratios are the same level. The fracture toughness decreases by 63.5% as the heated temperature rises from 20 °C to 120 °C. The fracture toughness is directly proportional to the porosity of CTB. The increasing of porosity leads to the decrease of the fracture toughness mainly due to the decomposition of hydration products and the coarsening of the pore structure of CTBs. The crack propagates along the interface among tailing particles, resulting in a rough and jagged edge propagation path. The rack propagation pattern of CTB samples contains transgranular fracture and intergranular fracture. The intergranular fracture is clearly predominant during crack propagation. The rack propagation and failure pattern of CTB specimens from numerical modeling are conformed to the failure pattern of samples obtained by experimental testing. PFC is an effective numerical analysis method for exploring the fracture mechanism of micro-cracking in CTB.The introduction of underhand cut and fill mining (UCFM) in 1980s made hard and fractured rock mining in hazardous ground conditions safer. Over the past decades, UCFM method has been widely used all around world in view of the advantages of effective ground control, environmental surface disposal of mine solid waste and high ore recovery A key issue in underhand cut and fill mining stope cut is the overall stability of the overlying backfill, and the quality of backfill roof is required to develop enough strength to protect miners working under it The mechanical behaviors of overlying CTB in UCFM stoping are significantly affected by stope geometry design, consistent fill quality, loading conditions, seismic effects (blasting vibration and mining disturbance), and support placement as well as other factors The tailings in this present study were obtained from an iron mine, located in Hefei city, Anhui Province, southeast of China. Ordinary Portland cement is used as a binder. The composition of the used tailing was shown in The tailings, binder and water were mixed and homogenized to produce the designed CTB mixtures. In this process, the ratio of cement to tailing is 1:4 and the solid content is 75% by weight. The samples were removed from the mold after 24 h, and then sealed and cured in a chamber maintained at approximately 90% humidity and 20 ± 1 °C for periods of 7 days. The size of rectangle sample with an offset-notch are shown in CTB samples were heated in a high temperature furnace, and the temperature inside the furnace was raised at a rate of 3–4 °C/ min and kept for 3 h until it reached the assigned value, then naturally cooled down to the room temperature (20 °C). The samples with different notch offset ratios were tested under the room temperature. All three-point bending tests were performed at a rate of 5 × 10 The fracture toughness K Where The fracture parameters of CTB specimens with different notches are obtained as shown in To quantify the effect of notch offset on the fracture loading of CTB accurately, the general relationship between the fracture peak loading and the offset ratio, depth of the notch can be fitted as following, irrespectively: As we all known, the temperature is an important factor affecting the fracture strength of CTB in deep mine, to investigate the effect of temperature on pore structure and fracture strength of CTB, the CTB samples with a 10 mm deep notch were subjected to 40 °C, 60 °C, 80 °C, 100 °C and 120 °C thermal treatment, irrespectively, before conducting three-point bending testing. The main results of the effect of thermal treatment on the pore structure of CTBs are presented in The analysis of the aforementioned results of the influence of the thermal treatment on the fracture strength ( A typical loading-time curve of CTB with a pre-existing notch under three-point bending testing is shown in For C0-10 sample with a non-offset notch, when the loading increases to 36 kN, a crack appears along the vertical direction, and multi-deviated phenomena at the crack tips are shown in To better show the effect of different offset on the behavior of crack propagation at the three-point bending stress state, deviated angle In this section, the rack propagation process and pattern were respectively described. It was confirmed that the rack propagation pattern of CTB samples contains transgranular fracture and intergranular fracture. And the intergranular fracture is clearly predominant way during crack propagation, showing the crack propagation pattern of the CTB is tensile fracture under three-point bending, which is opposite to the rock failure behavior In this section, the discrete element method (particle flow code: PFC 2D) is used to simulate the crack propagation and mode of CTB samples prepared with different pre-existing notch locations under three points bending test. The PFC is suitable for presenting grain-scale microstructural characters by taking tailing grain into CTB consideration as a discrete particle In this study, three-point bending testing were performed on the CTB specimens with different offsets notch (different offset ratio and depth-height ratio) and thermal treatments (at 40 °C, 60 °C, 80 °C, 100° and 120 °C) under a high-speed camera-loading system. The effect of notch on crack propagation and pattern were respectively discussed. Main conclusions obtained in the study are as following: It is obvious to see the effect of offset and thermal on the crack propagation and fracture characteristic of CTB under three-point bending. The peak load increases linearly with the increasing of the offset ratio when the depth-height ratio of the samples is fixed at the same value, while the fracture peak loading exponent decreases sharply with increase of the notch depth, when the offset ratios are the same level. The relationship between fracture peak loading and offset ratio follows a linear law. Increasing the heated temperature up to 120 °C leads to an obvious coarsening of the pore structure of the CTBs. The fracture toughness decreases by 63.5% when the heated temperature rises from 20 °C to 120 °C. There is a relationship between the porosity and fracture strength evolution of CTB after heated by thermal treatment. The fracture toughness is directly proportional to the porosity rise. The increasing of porosity leads to the decrease of the fracture toughness due mainly to the decomposition of hydration products and the coarsening of the pore structure of CTBs. The crack offset can affect the crack propagation and fracture path, with an increasing of offset ratio, the deviated angle increases. The crack propagates along the interface among tailing particles, resulting in a rough and jagged edge propagation path. The rack propagation pattern of CTB samples contains transgranular fracture and intergranular fracture. And the intergranular fracture is clearly predominant way during crack propagation, The crack propagation velocity profiles are visualized directly during simulation at pre-peak, peak and post-peak stages. The rack propagation and failure pattern of CTB specimens from numerical modeling are conformed to the failure pattern of samples with different offsets by experimental testing. PFC is an effective numerical analysis method for exploring the fracture mechanism of micro-cracking in CTB. The first author would like to acknowledge China Scholarship Council as financial support for my visiting work at University of Ottawa. This work was supported by the