The non-magnetic 8-mesh undersize material obtained by crushing, magnetic separation and sieving of spent zinc-carbon batteries assayed 23.9% Mn, 14.9% Zn, and 4% Fe. Reductive acid leaching of this material at a solid/liquid ratio of 1:10, and 60 °C with 2 mol dm−
                     
                     3 H2SO4 and 0.39 mol H2O2 extracted 97.9% Mn, 98.0% Zn and 55.2% Fe after 60 min. The leach liquor composition was then adjusted to a Mn:Zn:Fe molar ratio of 1:1:4 suitable for producing MnZnFe4O8 ferrite powder by adding Mn(II), Zn(II) and Fe(II) sulfates. The effect of pH in the range pH 5–12 on the precipitation of Mn–Zn ferrite powder was investigated over 60 min using O2 gas flow rate of 1.3 dm3 min−1 at 80 °C. The precipitated Mn–Zn ferrite at pH 12 were 20 nm particles that had a spinel structure. The saturation magnetizations of Mn–Zn ferrite powder (Mn1−
                        x
                     Zn
                        x
                     Fe2O4) were determined to be 39–91 emu/g with various zinc contents (x
                     =0.2–0.8).The recovery of industrially useful materials and metals from various secondary sources has been an important issue in Korea since its natural resources are limited and its need for the strategic metals are on the rise. The domestic annual demand for manganese metal is approximately 700,000 ton, which are consumed in the manufacture of batteries, nonferrous alloys, and steel making. Zinc metal is used as plating material, coating material, and alloying element. In 2005 alone, 1,150,000 ton of zinc ore were imported, whereas only 30 tons of zinc ore were excavated domestically and domestic market of Mn–Zn ferrite is worth nearly US$320 M. More than a billion spent batteries are generated as wastes annually in Korea. To solve environmental problems and to conserve natural resources, recycling technology for the waste batteries is being developed ( Since 1996, all alkaline–manganese and zinc–carbon batteries manufactured in Korea have not contained any added mercury because mercury amalgamated with zinc has been replaced with first lead and lead–indium and next with gallium and aluminum–gallium. Therefore, it is expected that the landfill disposal of alkaline–manganese and zinc–carbon batteries does not directly pose a significant health or environmental risk. Since cobalt, manganese, zinc, and nickel as strategic metals are accumulating domestically; the recycling industry could be stimulated by recovering metal values from spent batteries; thereby solving potential environmental problems. Recycling processes for spent zinc–carbon and alkaline–manganese batteries should be developed to achieve environmental conservation as well as the effective utility of resources. In the present work, experiments were carried out to synthesize high purity Mn–Zn ferrite powder (MnZnFe  The production of Mn–Zn ferrite powder from the 8-mesh undersize included two stages: (i) reductive acid leaching, and (ii) oxidative alkaline co-precipitation ( To synthesize Mn–Zn ferrite powder, a 50 cm The precipitate was filtered and dried for 3 h at 200 °C. The chemical composition of the ferrite powder was determined by AAS (Spectra AA-400, Varian); and the morphology was examined using a scanning electron microscope (JSM-6380LA, JEOL) and a transmission electron microscope (JSM-6380LA, JEOL, Japan). The preferred crystal orientation and magnetic property of the ferrite were determined using a X-ray diffractometer (RTC-300, Rigaku Co.) with Cu K-α radiation and vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM, LDJ P600). The extractions of Zn, Mn and Fe (Eqs. Leaching reactions:  The leach liquor was used as a starting solution for the preparation of ferrite powder after adjusting the Mn(II): Zn(II): Fe(II) molar ratio to 1:1:4 as described in the experimental procedure.  The slopes of zinc and manganese precipitation curves are close to − Precipitation reactions (0  As shown in Mn–Zn ferrite is an important soft ferrite with high magnetic permeability, low core loss, high saturation magnetization and is used in electronic applications such as transformers, noise filters, deflection yokes, choke coils, magnetic amplifiers, etc. The Mn–Zn ferrites require higher performance and smaller size. Therefore, it needs higher saturation magnetization through ion substitutions  In this study, reductive sulfuric acid leaching with H Leaching with 2 mol dm Mn–Zn ferrite nanoparticles were successfully synthesized from the leach liquor at 80 °C by sparging with 1.3 dm The synthesized Mn–Zn ferrite powder had a particle size 20 nm with a spinel structure. Magnetization of Mn–Zn ferrite was evaluated with a vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM). Saturation magnetization ranged from 39 to 91 emu/g depending on zinc content. This study was supported by a grant operated by the Resource Recycling R&D Center (RRDC), a 21C Frontier R&D Program of the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology of Korea. The authors would like to thank RRDC for the financial support. Continuous support from the Parker Centre and Murdoch University is also gratefully acknowledged.