In terms of transforming the energetic usage to the material usage of low-rank coals, the production of lump coke is a promising perspective. Therefore, two essential steps are necessary: Firstly, the processing and agglomeration of the non-caking coal is highly important, since they do not offer any baking capacity and thus the reachable quality of the coke is mainly set by the briquette quality. Secondly, to obtain high quality cokes the briquettes need to be coked using a well-adapted heating regime to ensure the gentle degassing of volatile matter with a minimum weakening of the briquette structure. The brown coal high temperature technology (BHT technology) developed in 1952 by Rammler and Bilkenroth was a milestone in coal conversion for brown coal but the coke strength was limited at that time. In current systematic studies, the lump coke quality of Lusatian brown coal and Indonesian brown coal was investigated varying the processing, briquetting and heating regime in laboratory scale. Those investigations should lead to a new processing and agglomeration technology to create lump coke from non-caking coals. The experiments varying the processing parameters of the coal showed that the briquetting of pre-granulated coal or pellets from a modified flat die press achieve the highest increase in briquette and coke quality. In the second step, the heating regime during pyrolysis was investigated. The results show, that the highest coke quality may be achieved using the Vollmaier regime. However, a single-stage heating regime with a heating rate of 2.85Kmin−1 shows promising results as well.Brown coal high temperature coke dry dry and ash free Indonesian brown coal (formerly) Department of Briquetting Lusatian brown coal steam ratio % carbon grain size mm upper diameter of press channels in the die lower diameter of the press channels in the die mm grain size fraction mm gross heating value kJ hydrogen lower heating value kJ mass of dry coal for briquetting g total mass of briquettes in the IfB drum g mass of briquettes on the 30 nitrogen oxygen briquetting pressure MPa grain size distribution % abrasion resistance, residue on the 30 mm sieve % gross density g sulphur briquette/coke compressive strength MPa dwell time h drying temperature °C briquetting temperature °C pyrolysis temperature °C heating rate K velocity of the piston for the determination of the compression resistance mm Lower ranked coals, as brown coals, lignite or sub-bituminous coals, are mainly used for power and heat production. Regarding the transformation of the energetic utilisation of coal to a material utilisation of even lower ranked coals the coking of the coal enables the production of new materials for various applications In contrast to so-called coking coals, low-rank coals do not exhibit any caking capacity. Thus, if lump coke shall be produced from low-rank coals, e.g. brown coal, this is only possible by a gentle pyrolysis procedure up to 1000 To improve the coke quality produced from non-caking coals, four groups of influencing parameters may be identified: the raw material properties, the processing parameters, the briquetting parameters and the coking parameters. The quality of the raw material, varying in the coal rank as well as in the micro-petrographic properties, is very important since the choice of the following parameters is highly dependent on the raw material base. Comparing the results of various authors In the group of the processing parameters, especially the influence of comminution and the drying technology on the physical and chemical coal properties need to be determined. Numerous works studied the processing of coal: It is comminuted to more or less fine powder before or after drying. Clarke et al., Mollah et al., Nomura and Plancher et al. used the coal with a grain size under 3 For the coking process, the selection of a suitable heating regime is most important. Coals with high volatile matter need very gentle heating rates for degassing to support deformation of the briquette/coke substance. For higher ranked coals, higher heating rates are suitable since the volatile matter decreases. For German brown coal, Vollmaier investigated the influence of the heating rate for different temperature ranges and end temperatures during pyrolysis. The result was the previously mentioned gentle heating regime which was also transferred to industrial scale using a vertical chamber oven As literature shows, mostly the influence of coal blend, type and amount of binder, chemical coal treatment as well as the variation of briquetting parameters, curing and heating rate during pyrolysis (with minimum heating rate of 2.5 A promising alternative could be a new mechanical processing of the coal before briquetting. As mentioned before the traditional approach by Rammler and Bilkenroth could not reach the requirements for blast furnace utilisation. To improve the coke, quality new processing regimes for the coal were developed in which the coal was fine comminuted in wet state to break a high amount of the primary particles of the coal followed by briquetting and coking. Besides this, the influence of the heating regime was investigated for a German and Indonesian brown coal starting from the regime created by Vollmaier. As literature shows even higher heating rates were successfully tested even by using brown coal and lignite In this work in a first step, the influence of the coal processing on the briquette and coke quality was investigated using new processing approaches. In a second step, the coke quality was determined at 320 For the present investigations two typical brown coals of different provenience were taken: A Lusatian brown coal (LBC) with an ash content of 5.98 % (d) and a moisture content of 56,5 % and an Indonesian brown coal (IBC) with an ash content of 2.96 % (d) and a moisture content of 54.3 % were used. The ultimate analyses of both coals as well as the lower and gross calorific value are given in Investigating the influence of the processing parameters three different approaches were used ( In the first approach the coal was processed according to BHT procedure using pre-comminuted coal after the jaw crusher and hammer mill (Δd Using approach 2, the coal does not necessarily need to be pre-comminuted but for better comparability pre-comminuted coal like in approach 1 was used. The coal was fine comminuted in wet state in a modified flat die press (A. Kahl, type 14-175) and granulated in a high-shear mixer (Eirich, type R02) according to The third approach directly uses the semi-pellets out of the modified flat die press for briquetting after drying in the laboratory drying cabinet analogue to approach 1. The coking of the briquettes took place in the laboratory retort using the Vollmaier regime. Using comprehensive tests, the influence of the press channel diameter in the flat die on the briquette and coke quality was investigated. The best results showed the press channel diameter of d For the first investigations of the influence of the heating regime, the coal was processed according to approach 1 and coked using varying heating rates. The Vollmaier heating regime should be the initial point of the investigation (No. 3). To get information about the quality of the coke during the coking process the coking was interrupted at 320 To evaluate the influence of the processing approach the  Before briquetting, the grain size distribution was analysed by sieving analysis. The comminution in the fine impact mill (approach 1) causes a fine grain size distribution for both coals. For the LBC 90 % of the particles are finer than 1 Using the differently processed coal, briquetting was carried out at the hydraulic stamp press. One charge of the briquettes was coked in the laboratory retort the other charge was used for determination of the briquette quality.  For the LBC the briquette gross density is nearly in the same range for all processing approaches. Only the usage of coal granules causes a slight increase in briquette gross density. Due to the granulation in the mixer and the shrinkage during the drying process, a pre-compaction takes place before briquetting resulting in a higher briquette gross density. This effect is even more obvious for the IBC. If the coal granules are briquetted the briquette gross density increases from 1.207 The determined differences in gross density should also have an impact on the compressive strength of the briquettes and cokes. Using approach 1 briquettes with a compressive strength of ≈30 As a third quality parameter, the abrasion resistance is shown in The LBC and IBC briquettes processed according to approach 1 both offer an abrasion resistance of 95 %. If approach 2 is used the briquette abrasion resistance increases to 98 % (LBC) and 96 % (IBC). Hence, the same effect as it was detected for the briquette compressive strength may be determined. The coke abrasion resistance shows a similar trend: Using the first approach the LBC coke abrasion resistance is slightly lower in comparison to the briquette abrasion resistance. This disadvantage could be eliminated using the processing according to approach 2. Due to the better comminution and pre-agglomeration, the shrinkage behaviour of the cokes is improved and thus the strength of the coke increases. For the IBC the coke abrasion resistance matches the results of the compressive strength as well: The better shrinkage behaviour of the coal offers a high abrasion resistance of 98 % even using approach 1. If approach 2 is used the coke abrasion resistance could be slightly increased. If the results are compared with the abrasion resistance of the commercial lump coke, it is obvious that if approach 2 is used for coal processing the cokes of both coals could match the abrasion resistance of a commercial lump coke. The coke reactivity and strength after reaction was determined for cokes produced with approach 1 and 3 using Lusatian brown coal. The coke samples were split as mentioned in section In general, the coke reactivity is on a high level. If the original cokes are comminuted to the required grain size the CRI using processing approach 1 increases as the surface area rises due to the crushing. The same tendency can be determined on a very low level even for processing approach 3. However, comparing the CRI of the original cokes no influence of the processing approach could be determined. The original cokes of approach 3 offer a higher strength after reaction than those of approach 1, but a comminution to the grain size of 22.4/19 The new processing approaches 2 and 3 allow a strong increasing of the coke quality. In a second step, the influence of the pyrolysis heating rate was investigated. In the first step, the coking was finished at 320 To produce lump coke from low-rank coals, e.g. brown coals, the intensive processing of the coal as well as the creation of high-quality briquettes are indispensable steps before coking of the coals. Due to the high loading by intense comminution and pre-agglomeration of the coal during processing, the coal might be structurally modified and offers better lump coke creation property. Using the dried “semi-pellets” (approach 3), the coke compressive strength of the LBC lump coke is 3.7 times higher in comparison to the cokes using the BHT technology. The application of granules offers a compressive strength 2.7 times higher for LBC and 1.6 times higher for IBC. The abrasion resistance of cokes using the new processing approaches is comparable to commercial lump coke. The reactivity of the produced coke from LBC is on a high level and an additional processing approach would be needed, which is under investigations at the moment. The chemical treatment of the coal could be a promising perspective to reduce the coke reactivity as well as the utilisation of coking additives. A second possibility to influence the coke quality may be the variation of the heating rate in the coking process. Once Vollmaier developed a special heating regime for the lump coke production using Lusatian brown coal, which guarantees a suitable coking for the two investigated coals as well. Hence, first investigations on the coking behaviour of the brown coal briquettes showed that a higher heating rate in the first stage of the heating regime should be investigated in depth. As previously shown the creation of high strength lump cokes using brown coal is possible by using the new processing approaches in laboratory scale in the next step the reactivity of the coke needs to be adapted to the possible field of application. If other coals should be used for the creation of high strength, coke the new approaches are the basis for further investigations but the different processing, briquetting and coking parameters need to be adapted experimentally.