In a first stage atmospheric leach in a typical Sherritt Ni–Cu matte leach process, a Ni–Cu–Fe–S Peirce Smith converter matte is contacted with recycled copper spent electrolyte (an aqueous copper sulphate/sulphuric acid solution) at 85°C with the purpose of dissolving nickel, while simultaneously removing copper from solution. In the PGM industry, copper removal is also important because it serves as a leading indicator in the removal of Ir, Rh, and Ru from the spent electrolyte. The matte mainly consists of heazlewoodite, chalcocite/djurleite, a Ni–Cu alloy phase and inert spinel minerals (magnetite and trevorite). Nickel is leached from the matte by two mechanisms: (i) leaching by sulphuric acid and oxygen; and (ii) an anaerobic metal exchange reaction (cementation and metathesis) between cupric ions in solution and nickel in the matte, which is also responsible for the removal of copper from solution.
                  This study investigates the oxidative and non-oxidative leaching of converter matte in a laboratory batch reactor, with attention specifically being given to the effects of initial copper and acid concentrations and their effects on leaching kinetics. Experimental conditions were varied based on a 2
                        N
                      experimental design. The availability of oxygen for acid-leaching reactions was found to be the most important factor influencing copper removal and nickel extraction. A 63% nickel extraction could be achieved during oxidative tests vs. 22% in a non-oxidative test. This also indicates that cementation did not take place to a significant degree and that nickel leaching mostly took place via leaching by acid and oxygen. It is suspected that the low degree of copper removal can be attributed to the solids/reactants ratio was employed in tests. The initial copper and acid concentrations did not have a significant effect on the rate of nickel extraction or the total amount of nickel extracted. The rate of copper removal was not significantly influenced by the initial copper concentration, but copper removal was affected by the initial acid concentration. In oxidative tests with high initial acid concentrations, the rate at which copper was leached from the matte was faster than the rate of cementation. The results suggest that operating under high initial acid conditions could interfere with copper removal with no significant benefit in terms of nickel extraction. The results allow the regression of rate expressions.In the recovery of platinum-group metals (PGMs) from the Bushveld Igneous Complex in South Africa, base metals are often recovered as by-products. This is also the case at the Lonmin Marikana refinery, located near Rustenburg, where ores from both the Merensky and UG2 reefs are processed to produce PGM’s. Nickel and copper are the most important by-products. Flotation concentrate from the mine undergoes smelting, followed by Pierce Smith converting, with the purpose of lowering iron and sulphur concentrations. A high purity Ni–Cu–S matte is produced which also contains the bulk of the PGMs. Typically, the most significant phases in converter matte are heazlewoodite (Ni The first stage leach in the Marikana Base Metals Refinery (BMR) is an oxidative leach at atmospheric pressure. Leaching takes place in five continuously stirred tank reactors (CSTR’s) in series. In the current circuit configuration, oxygen is sparged to the first three tanks. The atmospheric leach has the dual purpose of liberating nickel from the matte, while simultaneously rejecting copper from solution via cementation and/or metathesis reactions, where copper from solution is exchanged with nickel from the alloy and nickel-sulphide phases in the matte. Plant experience and metal accounting show that the PGMs will deport similarly to copper during the 1st stage atmospheric leach. Currently, the exact precipitation mechanism of PGMs to form part of the 1st stage residue, is poorly understood. Precipitation of Rh, Ru and Ir can either be through electrochemical cementation/reduction or through hydrolyses as the pH increases throughout the train of five leach tanks. From the atmospheric leaching section, the liquid product is further processed to produce NiSO Previous research on the leaching behaviour of Ni–Cu–S mattes in a sulphuric acid leach was conducted by This paper reports the results from a well controlled experimental campaign to investigate the leaching of converter matte at atmospheric pressure. The roles of copper and acid concentrations on reaction kinetics, both under oxidative and non-oxidative conditions are investigated in detail. The non-oxidising leach is investigated to isolate the effect of the metathesis and cementation reactions. The understanding gained in these effects will serve as basis for the development of kinetic rate expressions in future work.  The leaching chemistry of Ni–Cu–S mattes has been described and reviewed by several authors ( Copper and nickel in the matte were found to occur mainly in the sulphide phase, although significant amounts were also found in the Ni–Cu alloy phase, as shown in   Metathesis (Reactions  From the proposed mechanism, it follows that interaction might occur between copper and sulphuric acid during the leach and that the rate of cementation might be influenced by acid availability. In the higher pH ranges (4.5–6), copper hydrolysis takes place, accompanied by the formation of basic cupric sulphate (antlerite) ( Iron was found to be present in the matte in the form of pentlandite ((NiFe) Although present in relatively small concentrations, iron has been reported to play an important role as catalyst and oxygen carrier to enhance the rates of leaching reactions ( Reduction to the ferrous state ceases at pH values above 2–2.5 ( Spent electrolyte and granulated converter matte from the Lonmin Marikana BMR were used in this study. Spent electrolyte was diluted with water to obtain the desired initial concentrations and used as base for all tests. In the high copper and high acid tests, CuSO The matte was milled for 4 The chemical composition of the matte is shown in Heazlewoodite was found to be the most abundant phase, constituting 53.8% of the matte. Nickel was also present in the form of godlevskite and pentlandite, a nickel–iron sulphide phase. Iron is present in magnetite and troilite with minimal relative abundances of 1.2% and 0.9% respectively. Magnetite is characteristically considered to be unreactive during leaching. Copper is predominantly present in chalcocite phases. A small amount was present in a cuprite phase, but was considered insignificant in leaching. A scanning electron microscope induced backscattered image at 20 Experiments were conducted in a 5 The laboratory reactor was geometrically similar to reactors at Lonmin Marikana, to simulate hydrodynamic conditions. The stirring rate was scaled in order to obtain equal solids suspension in the laboratory reactor. A comparison of the laboratory and plant reactor geometries is given in After filling the reactor with the initial leach solution, stirring was started and the temperature was increased to 85 A pipette was used to periodically take 15 The final pulp was filtered in a pressure filter and the filter cake washed with distilled water. The solid residue was dried at approximately 45 Liquid samples were analysed for Cu, Ni, Co and Fe concentration, using inductively coupled plasma (Varian Radial ICP-AES). XRF analyses of solid samples were performed with a Panalytical AXIOS 2.4 Leaching experiments were conducted with diluted spent electrolyte from the Lonmin Marikana BMR. The approach in the experiments was to vary the initial acid concentration, the initial copper concentration and the gas fed to the reactor, while all other variables were kept constant. Fixed test conditions are given in The solids/liquids ratio was determined so that the combined molar quantity of dissolved copper and acid in the leach solution always exceeded the moles of nickel in the matte, making complete rejection of copper and acid impossible. This approach was followed in order to determine how the kinetics of leaching would change as leaching progressed, considering that reactants in solution would not become limiting.  By comparing extractions and the mineralogy of residues from different tests, it can be seen that oxygen availability was the most important factor influencing leaching. When comparing oxidative and non-oxidative tests with identical initial concentrations (Run 1 and 2, Run 3 and 4, Run 5 and 6, respectively), it can be seen that lower nickel and iron extractions were obtained during non-oxidative leaching, due to the suppression of acid–oxygen leaching reactions (Reactions  For Cu sulphides the following sequence was suggested: Chalcocite (Cu Nickel sulphides are similarly becoming metal-depleted as leaching progresses from Heazlewoodite (Ni In the presence of Cu and Fe, lattice substitution may lead to solid solution and variable stoichiometry minerals, e.g. where Ni partially replaces Cu in djurleite. The leaching residues obtained in non-oxidative tests (Run 1, 3 and 5) were very similar to the starting material, with heazlewoodite (Ni When comparing copper removal for Run 1 and 2, Run 3 and 4 and Run 5 and 6 respectively, it can be seen that the amount of copper rejected from solution was higher in oxidative tests, except when the acid concentration was high enough to lead to copper leaching (Run 6 and Run 8). The increased copper removal during oxidative leaching can be attributed to some extent to copper hydrolysis (Reaction The effects of initial acid and copper concentrations will be discussed in more detail under following headings. In general, non-oxidative results were found to be less sensitive to changes in the initial acid concentration than oxidative tests. In both oxidative and non-oxidative tests, the results were relatively insensitive to the initial copper concentration. Results for Run 2 (oxidising leach, initial concentrations: 37 In order to ease discussion of the leaching test, five stages will be identified to highlight specific features of Nickel and iron extraction were fast during the first 15 After 15 Cementation occurred between 15 and 30 In the period from 30 to 120 After 120 Results from Run 2 (37 In the high acid run (Run 6), acid was available for leaching throughout the test and only a slight increase in the pH is visible ( No cementation occurred in high acid runs and very little in low acid runs ( In the current work, it was found that copper was leached out of the matte faster than it was removed from solution in the high acid run (Run 6). In low acid runs, copper was partly removed from solution, but the presence of digenite (Cu  Copper leaching only occurred a few minutes after leaching had started. It is possible that chalcocite was only exposed to leaching after a period of Ni-leaching lead to pore formation in the heazlewoodite matrix.  Results from Run 2 (37     The results obtained in non-oxidative leach tests were very similar from one run to the next, with smaller deviations occurring than in oxidising tests. Results for Run 3 (non-oxidative, 18 Nickel extractions were much smaller in non-oxidative tests (∼20%) than in oxidative tests (∼60%). Nickel was mostly liberated by exchange reactions with copper (Reactions  Copper cementation was initially rapid, but slowed down after 10 Iron was dissolved quickly within the first 15 Results from Run 1 (37 Most reactions involving acid are oxygen dependent and therefore the initial acid concentration had little influence on non-oxidative leaching.  Results from Run 1 (37 Batch leaching tests were conducted to investigate the effect of three variables on the leaching of Ni–Cu–S Peirce Smith converter matte. The initial acid and copper concentrations were varied for respectively oxidative and non-oxidative leaching. The purpose of the work was to improve understanding of controlling mechanisms and to serve as basis for the development of kinetic rate expressions in future work. Major differences were observed between the mechanisms operative during oxidative and non-oxidative leaching, specifically with reference to the utilisation of acid, which was much higher in oxidative runs. Iron and copper hydrolysis only occurred during oxidative leaching, where the pH rose significantly during leaching. Oxidative leaching was found to yield higher nickel extractions than non-oxidative leaching (∼60% and ∼20%, respectively), as well as higher rates of nickel extraction. This indicated that the kinetics of acid leaching were faster than the kinetics of cementation and metathesis reactions. In terms of copper removal via cementation or metathesis, it was originally thought that the availability of oxygen might not have a significant influence, other than the fact that oxygen–acid-leaching reactions would compete for the available nickel in the matte. However, it was found that the key difference between oxidative and non-oxidative leaching was not a change in the rate of the cementation or metathesis reactions, but rather a change in the rate of copper leaching from chalcocite to produce covellite. In oxidative runs with a high initial acid concentration, copper was leached out of the matte to a larger extent than it was removed from solution, with 46% copper extracted from the matte, but even in oxidative experiments with low initial acid concentrations, a large amount of covellite in the residue indicated that copper leaching did take place. In low acid runs, copper removal from solution was largely as a result of hydrolysis. Highly oxidative conditions can therefore lead to increased copper leaching rates and interfere with complete copper removal via cementation or metathesis. During non-oxidative leaching, the extent and rate of copper removal was low despite the fact that copper leaching did not take place, indicating that the cementation rate was low due to another constraint, possibly a combination of effects of the pulp density and stirring rate employed in this work. The initial copper concentration had very little influence on oxidative or non-oxidative leaching. The initial acid concentration strongly influenced the reaction mechanisms operative during oxidative leaching with hydrolysis reactions only occurring when the initial acid concentration was sufficiently low for the pH changes during leaching to be significant. In terms of nickel extraction, the initial acid concentration did not have a significant influence, which suggests that operating at higher acid concentrations might interfere with copper removal, with no benefit in terms of nickel extraction. Future work might include experimental work at higher pulp densities to investigate whether copper removal can be improved, as well as an investigation into mineralogical and physical changes occurring in solids during leaching, to determine whether slow cementation rates might be attributed to changes in the solid phase. The authors would like to thank Lonmin Platinum for providing materials and financing for this work. We would also like to thank the following contributors for their analytical services: Stellenbosch University Geology Department (ICP-AES). Stellenbosch University Soil Science Department (XRF). XRD Analytical Consulting cc (XRD analysis and interpretation).