Previous research into particle motion in the froth zone has focussed on constructing detailed CFD models that describe the behaviour of particle classes with different properties; density, size and hydrophobicity. These models have been reasonably successful in predicting trends in the separation behaviour and how it can be manipulated. Models of separation sub-processes cannot readily be verified experimentally due to the opacity and fragility of froth systems.
                  Positron Emission Particle Tracking (PEPT) can be applied to particles in froth flotation systems to observe the behaviour of individual particles in a mixed particle–liquid–gas system. However, measuring the particle position alone is not adequate as its behaviour is also affected by instantaneous froth events such as bubble coalescence. To link the observed particle behaviour to the froth behaviour requires multi-modal measurements. Video footage of a rising foam column was recorded simultaneously with PEPT data, so that the PEPT tracer trajectory could be explained in terms of foam structure and events. A time weighting function of cubic splines with kernel width 200ms was used to remove the effects of signal noise. An ascending 70μm hydrophilic tracer accelerated within vertical Plateau borders and decelerated in Plateau borders angled away from vertical. The tracer trajectory showed velocity peaks and troughs when it was contained in nodes in a rising foam. When the tracer descended within a foam showing convective roll, coalescence events and subsequent foam deformation directly influenced the tracer trajectory.In minerals processing, froth flotation is used to separate valuable metal minerals from ore. After being liberated from ore, the surfaces of valuable mineral particles are made hydrophobic with chemical reagents in order to attach to rising bubbles to form a froth structure. The presence of the solid particles makes the bubble surfaces opaque, so that the distinctive structure of froth cannot be readily observed. Froth structure is better defined by a system containing gas cells separated by film surfaces called lamellae. It is these lamellae that hold the solids loading and meet at their edges in a channel termed a Plateau border. Four Plateau borders meet at a node, to form a network through which liquid and particles may travel throughout the froth. The thin films that make up the froth are also fragile, further compounding the problem of observation. The need to completely understand froth structure and corresponding particle motion has driven two decades of research into Computational Fluid Dynamics, “CFD”. This has provided fundamental physical models of solids motion within froths: Several particle tracking methods have been applied previously to understand particle motion in structures found in flotation froths. Particle Tracking Velocimetry, or PTV, was used to measure the settling of hydrophilic particles in a two dimensional foam column ( Positron Emission Particle Tracking, or PEPT, was developed at the University of Birmingham ( PEPT was recently applied to a flotation froth by  A photograph of the experimental set-up is shown in Two hydrophilic tracers were prepared by staff at the University of Birmingham and used separately: a 2.5 A time weighting function with cublic splines of varying kernel width was applied to the PEPT data to interpolate and smooth the discrete set of PEPT data points into a continuous function. When the PEPT data was overlaid on the corresponding image set, a kernel width of 200 The error in combining the PEPT trajectory and an image set has three components: a triangulation error; a resolution error from tracking the particle through image analysis, and an error from calibrating the PEPT and image reference frames with three reference points. The experimental data included in  The foam vertical velocity profile across the column width, near the base of the column, is shown in  The large dimensions of Tracer 1 were selected in order to test the accuracy of the technique developed by   The vertical tracer velocity with time is shown in At 0.48 A focus section of the descent of Tracer 2 can be seen in For the focus section of the tracer descent, the vertical velocity of Tracer 2 with time is shown in  This experimental technique has shown that it is possible to track particles within a foam column with PEPT, and correlate their motion to specific foam structure features. Experiments with a large tracer, of 2.5 The motion of a 70 The velocity of a 70 This study was performed in the Rio Tinto Centre for Advanced Mineral Recovery at Imperial College London. The authors gratefully acknowledge the EPSRC for their financial support of this project.