Renewable harvesting of clean energy using the benefits of multi-metallic catalytic materials of high entropy alloy (HEA, equimolar Cu–Ag–Au–Pt–Pd) from formic acid with minimum energy input has been achieved in the present investigation. The synergistic effect of pristine elements in the multi-metallic HEA drives the electro-oxidation reaction towards non-carbonaceous pathway. The atomistic based simulations based on DFT rationalize the distinct lowering of the d-band center for the individual atoms in the HEA as compared to the pristine counterparts. Further this catalytic activity of the HEA has also been extended to methanol electro-oxidation to show the unique capability of the novel catalyst. The nanostructured HEA, prepared using a combination of casting and cryomilling techniques can further be utilized as the fuel cell anode in the direct formic acid/methanol fuel cells (DFFE).The multi-principal multicomponent alloys, popularly known as High Entropy Alloys (HEAs), containing five or more number of elements (equimolar or closely-equimolar ratio) have heralded a new area of materials design. It opens up vast compositional space and provides access to unique functional properties. The mixing of different elements has widely been utilized as an effective means to improve various properties, especially physical, chemical and electronic [ In current work, five catalytically active metals; Cu, Ag, Au, Pt, and Pd are mixed in an equimolar ratio to develop a high entropy alloy (HEA) ( The elements granules (Cu, Ag, Au, Pt, Pd) were purchased from Alfa Aesar, USA, with the purity 99.95 at% and used for preparation of high entropy alloys (Cu–Ag–Au–Pt–Pd) ingot. This was prepared in the high purity argon atmosphere utilizing arc melting. Further, ingot was homogenized at 1000 °C for 12 h to acquire large grains and strong chemical homogeneity. These ingots were pulverized in a liquid nitrogen cooled (at-160 ± 10 °C) cryomill [ The morphology, size of the HEA nanoparticles have been characterized using Transmission electron microscope (FEI TITAN and Technai G The conventional three-electrode system (CHI408C electrochemical workstation) has been used for electrochemical studies. The working electrode was made by mixing 100 mg of catalyst and binder (200 μL of 5% Nafion solution). The isopropanol was added to it to make thin slurry, which is deposited on a glassy carbon electrode (GCE). Platinum electrode/wire was used as the counter electrode, and Ag/AgCl electrode was used as the reference electrode. Supporting electrolyte solutions are KNO First principles calculations were performed using density functional theory (DFT) as implemented in the Vienna ab-initio simulation (VASP 5.4.1) package [   The electrocatalytic performance of HEAs is assessed by the electro-oxidation of methanol ( Potentiostatic study (Chronoamperometry) is carried out in an air-tight cell containing methanol (500 μl) and 0.5 M KNO In the same way, the catalytic activity on formic acid is also demonstrated ( The formic acid oxidation even at unbiased 0.0 V ( It is worth noticing that in both methanol and formic acid electro-oxidation, the carbonaceous products are not in the stoichiometric balance with hydrogen. This is possibly due to some other side reactions causing the undetected liquid products. In literature, the PtRu alloy has been employed to enhance the activity of methanol and formic acid oxidation. It is stated that the presence of Ru enhances the OH adsorption and enhances the oxidation of CO to CO Based on the above experimental observations, it is difficult to assign the catalytic role of individual constituent's elements in the multi-component HEAs. Therefore, to gain an insight of the process, we have performed DFT calculations. The electro-oxidation of formic acid is chosen as a representative model reaction for the simulation. The catalytic activity of the HEAs is compared with all its pristine components. The optimized lattice parameters of Pt are, a = b = c = 3.92 Å, which is in excellent agreement with previous reports. The most stable (111) facets in FCC metals were chosen for calculations. The same supercell size was used for all the (111) facets of pristine metals – Pt, Pd, Ag, Au, and Cu as well as for HEAs. Special quasirandom structure (SQS) of the Cu–Ag–Au–Pt–Pd alloy (HEA) was generated from 5 × 3 × 1 supercell of Pt (111) surface using the “mcsqs” code employed in Alloy Theoretic Automated Toolkit (ATAT) [ Subsequently, the formic acid (HCOOH) decomposition was performed on pristine Pt (111) and HEA surface. The adsorption of the key intermediate (formate (HCOO∗)) along with the reactant (HCOOH) and product (CO Based on experimental and theoretical understanding, we attribute the superior catalytic performance of HEAs (Cu–Ag–Au–Pt–Pd alloy) to the synergism between the metals, i.e. cocktail effect. The remarkable electrocatalytic activity of HEAs in biased and unbiased conditions (zero potential) for methanol and formic acid electrocatalysis and their apparent surface poisoning tolerance towards carbonaceous species are superior to the Pt nanoparticles. Instantaneous production of high amount of hydrogen gas at unbiased condition makes HEAs a superior active catalyst for formic acid electrolysis. In conclusion, we demonstrated an easily scalable processing technique to produce compositionally controlled nanocrystalline equiatomic Cu–Ag–Au–Pd–Pt, HEAs. The macroscopic and microscopic techniques have been utilized to reveal the atomic distribution in the homogenous mixed HEAs. The synergistic effect of individual metallic component results in higher catalytic activity towards formic acid and methanol electro-oxidation. The unique instant catalytic activity is shown by dissociating formic acid into CO N.K.K. synthesized and characterized the HEA material. S.N. carried out electrocatalysis. R.K. carried out DFT calculations. NKK, and K.D.M. performed the transmission microscopy experiments. K.G.P.  performed the APT measurements . K·B, S·S, C·S.T and A.K·S supervised the work. All the authors contributed to the data analysis and writing and gave approval for the final submission. The authors declare no competing financial interest. Author would like to thank Department of Science and Technology India. S.S. and S.N. acknowledges The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at