A phenomenological model, termed the “dynamic hindered-settling model”, has been developed to represent the separation in a hindered-settling column. The model is based on the convection–diffusion equation as applied to hindered-settling conditions. The key features of the model development include the derivation of equations for the finite-difference solution scheme for material balance, the integration of the modified form of Concha and Almendra’s hindered-settling equation to calculate settling velocities of particles, the development of a system to account for the continuous input/output of solids, and the addition of time-step functions to account for the underflow control valve action of a hindered-settling column. A Fortran program was written to solve the model. Simulations were carried out to evaluate column performance as a function of design and operating variables and material properties. The results, which are presented as product size distributions or fractional recovery curves, demonstrate that the dynamic hindered-settling model can be used to predict hindered-settling column separations.Gravity concentration is used to separate materials based on differences in physical properties, particularly density, size, and shape by gravity or centrifugal force and one or more other forces induced by viscosity and buoyancy. The separation takes place due to the differential settling velocities of individual particles. One method of enhancing the effect of density while reducing that of particle size is to separate under hindered-settling conditions. Hindered settling occurs when the settling rate of a particle in a liquid suspension is affected by the presence of particles nearby ( The hindered-settling column takes advantage of the hindered-settling phenomenon for separating particles. A hindered-settling column such as the Linatex Hydrosizer Currently, hindered-settling columns are widely used in sand and gravel operations for size classification. However, because it is a highly cost effective method that combines relatively low capital, installation, and operating costs with simple, fully automated operation, its use is growing ( The separation mechanisms that are involved in the operation of a hindered-settling column are complex and inter-dependent, and sometimes, finding an optimum operating condition proves to be a great challenge for a plant operator. Hence, there is a need to develop a mathematical model that can integrate all design and operating parameters of a hindered-settling column and predict the separation for a given condition with reasonable accuracy. Several mathematical models describing particle separations in hindered-settling column-type separators are available. Most of these models have narrow applications because of their empirical nature or limitations in particle size distributions (e.g., binary mixture). The “dynamic population balance model” of In the current study, a unique approach was applied in developing what is now referred to as “the dynamic hindered-settling model”, which is a complete model that integrates all the critical design and operating parameters of the hindered-settling column and describes the separation process exactly as it happens ( Experiments were performed in a laboratory hindered-settling column to validate the dynamic hindered-settling model. The solid material is fed through the top opening of the column. The upward current of water is created by introducing water through a distributor (teeter plate) directly above the conical section. The upward current of teeter water counters the downward-settling velocities of solids. If the particles going into the column have a settling velocity that is less than that of the upward water velocity, these particles will be carried away to the overflow stream. Hence, the teeter water rate is one of the important variables in controlling the “cut point” of separation. The remaining solids in the column build a high-density, fluidized bed until a desired height or bed thickness is achieved. The bed height is measured using a differential pressure sensor. Once the desired bed height is reached, an automatic PID controller maintains the build up of the bed by either opening or closing the pneumatically actuated pinch valve and discharging the excess amount of solid particles. This material constitutes the amount of solids and liquid going into the underflow product fraction. The control system is essential in keeping the equilibrium balance inside the column between incoming feed material and outgoing products, as well as maintaining a proper fluidized bed density. Only particles having sufficient mass can pass through the bed and report to the underflow stream. Thus, an autogenous medium is achieved by the fluidized particle bed and is essential in facilitating a separation based on differences in particle density. The set point of the controller determines the equilibrium pressure (i.e., bed height) inside the column. Once the equilibrium “set point” is reached, a steady-state condition is maintained by releasing high-density and/or coarse particles to the underflow product stream through the control valve. Raising the set point increases the maximum solids concentration in the column and in turn, controls the thickness and height of the bed. Other important design and operating variables include column height, solids feed location, and solids feed rate. Consider a particle system having a continuous size and density distribution, which is divided into According to the volume balance, the space vacated by departing particles or occupied by incoming particles must be accounted for by the liquid medium, because this flow of particles occurs within the open liquid area, which implies that if volume To solve Eqs. The finite-difference solution scheme as applied to hindered-settling column separations is shown in Eq. Imaginary elements UF (element number 0) and OF (element number The bed height is an important operating variable that must be incorporated into the model. In the hindered-settling column tested, the bed height was managed by the “set point” of the controller, which was directly linked to a pressure sensor and a control valve. The set point was calibrated from the pressure gradient of height If the overall pressure, The model simulation can be evaluated at any duration of time by determining the fraction of particles entering element 0 versus element When the calculated fractional recovery values are presented as a fractional recovery (partition) curve, it is easier to evaluate and quantify the separation. The partition curve represents the probability that feed material of a given particle size and density, would report to the product stream. For a size classification process, the fraction of feed size Model simulations were carried out to evaluate column performance as a function of design and operating variables. For selected tests, the simulation results were compared with experimental results obtained from testing of a laboratory hindered-settling column. The experimental work was performed by The solids used for this study were limestone particles, which had a density of 2.73 g/cm The experimental results were compared with the simulation results in a previous paper ( Evaluating changes in the product size distributions is another way of characterizing separations in the hindered-settling column. This method would be particularly useful in instances when the goal of column operation is to obtain overflow and/or underflow products with desired size distributions, as is normally the case in plant operations.   The effect of size distribution of feed solids is shown in Density separation of a hypothetical “coal” was simulated using the dynamic hindered-settling model. The density distribution of the coal is given in The simulated partition curves for various coal sizes are given in For the particle size of 651 μm, the effects of teeter water rate ( The dynamic hindered-settling model was successfully developed using a finite-difference solution scheme, a modified Concha and Almendra’s hindered-settling equation, a continuous system of solids input/output, and a time-step function for replicating the underflow control valve action. This is a complete model that integrates all critical design and operating parameters of the hindered-settling column, which closely matches the actual separation process. The model can effectively predict the size separation of limestone particles. The separation is greatly affected by design and operating conditions, including teeter water rate, column height, bed height, solids feed rate, and solids feed location. In particular, the separation can be adjusted and fine-tuned by means of teeter water rate and set point. Also, a variation in material properties such as the fluctuation of water temperature affects the separation. Hence, the operator should be aware of these factors and adjust for them accordingly. The dynamic hindered-settling model can be used as an analytical tool to help operators with such tasks by evaluating the separation under different design and operating conditions.