Ion exchange recovery of nickel from the system Mn(NO3)2–H2O was studied on aminocarboxylic amphoteric ion exchangers AMF-1T, AMF-2T, AMF-2M, ANKB-35 as well as on carboxylic cation exchanger KB-2T by means of sorption–desorption method and by IR-spectroscopy. The ion exchanger AMF-2T possesses the best selectivity to Ni(II) ions, therefore the nickel separation and the pure Mn(NO3)2 salt production are possible under dynamic conditions.Manganese nitrate solutions as well as manganese sulphate solutions can be used for the synthesis of chemical manganese dioxide (CMD) The content of non-ferrous metal ions depends on the composition of manganese concentrates and does not exceed (1–6)×10 The separation of manganese and nickel ions has been carried out on iminodiacetate ion exchanger Wofatit MC-50 The chelating imidazole resins were investigated for ion exchange separation of non-ferrous metals and manganese The aminocarboxylic amphoteric ion exchangers AMF-1T, AMF-2T, AMF-2M, ANKB-35 as well as carboxylic cation exchanger KB-2T were taken for investigation. These commercial products were synthesized by TOKEM (Kemerovo, Russia). Their characteristics are given in the The ion exchangers investigated have macronetwork or macroporous structure. Divinylbenzene or long-chained cross-linking agent (divinyl–ester of diethyleneglycol or tetravinyl–ester of pentaerythritol) were used for their synthesis. Before use the resins were loaded with sodium ions. The Ni Before sorption, the resins were swollen for 4 h in 0.2 M NaNO The initial Ni(NO After the sorption, the resins and solutions were separated and the pH values were measured in the equilibrium solutions. Then the exchangers were washed with distilled water and after that the Ni The static exchange capacity (amount of the ions sorbed in mmol/g of the resin) as well as distribution and separation ratio were calculated from analysis data. The distribution ratio The IR-spectra were registered on spectrometer Specord M80 (Germany) using tableting with KBr (0.3 mg of the resin to 200 mg of KBr). All experiments were repeated 3 or 4 times. The relative error was ±6%. The Mn The optimum pH values for nickel sorption were determined ( With the increase in pH up to 5.0 the ion exchangers investigated move into the deprotonated state ( IR-spectra 1 and 2 define the amphoteric ion exchanger AMF-2T in the H The data obtained showed that AMF-1T and AMF-2T in dilute acidic solutions are more selective to nickel, whereas cation exchanger KB-2T is more selective to manganese (II) ( The resin saturation with Ni This process is represented in The kinetics curve of Ni Ni(II) ions are eluted from AMF-2T in the Ni The kinetics curves shown in The aminocarboxylic amphoteric ion exchangers as well as carboxylic cation exchanger were investigated for nickel recovery from manganese nitrate solutions. The appropriate conditions for the selective Ni(II) recovery were created at pH∼3.5–5.5 on macronetwork sorbent AMF-2T. Pure Mn(NO