This paper presents a method for the experimental measurement of the lateral wheel-rail contact force based on Artificial Neural Networks (ANN). It is intended to demonstrate how an Artificial Intelligence (AI) method proves to be a valid alternative to other approaches based on sophisticated mathematical models when it is applied to the wheel-rail contact force measurement problem. This manuscript addresses the problem from a computational and experimental approach. The artificial intelligence algorithm has been experimentally tested in a real scenario using a 1:10 instrumented scaled railway vehicle equipped with a dynamometric wheelset running on a 5-inch-wide track. The obtained results show that the ANN approach is an easy and computationally efficient method to measure the applied lateral force on the instrumented wheel that requires the use of fewer sensors.Artificial intelligence has been one of the most active research areas in the field of engineering over the past few decades, especially the use of Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) applied to the solution of complex problems. Artificial neural networks are computational algorithms inspired by the anatomy of the human brain and the way it works. The brain is a complex and fully non-linear, parallel computer that is faster than any other machine. The power of an ANN lies in its parallel processing and learning capabilities and its ability to find solutions it was not trained to find. Since their appearance in computational science, ANNs have been widely applied to different subjects such as computational vision, systems control, and voice recognition Railway engineering research is an example of a field that has been traditionally based on the use of sophisticated computational models to analyse the interaction of the vehicle’s dynamic response with the track to solve problems such as the calculation of the wheel-rail contact points, the adhesion coefficient, or the estimation of the wheel-rail contact forces. However, it can be observed in the scientific literature how artificial intelligence has had an increasing presence in railway engineering over the last decade. Recent studies demonstrate that different machine learning approaches show promising results and can be used as alternatives to classical computational methods. In Falomi et al. There are several parameters that are crucial for the vehicle’s dynamic response such as the wheel-rail contact forces, the angle of attack between the wheel and the rail, and the adhesion coefficient, but these parameters are difficult to measure online. In Track maintenance is another important issue in railway engineering. Large track irregularities can jeopardize the safety of the rolling stock. In the work of Sadedhi Artificial neural networks can also be applied to the rail wear measuring problem. As it is well known, rail wear is directly related to track maintenance cost, ride comfort, and prevention of derailment. In the railway industry, rail wear is normally measured using sophisticated computer vision systems or expensive LIDAR laser scanners. As an alternative, in the work of Shebani The railway industry has always had a great interest in the wheel-rail contact forces since they strongly determine the dynamic behaviour of the vehicle. Every railway manufacturer and operating company wants to know the value of the contact forces in order for their vehicles to achieve the highest level of safety. However, as mentioned before, the measurement of wheel-rail contact forces is not an easy task. Traditional methods found in the literature use sophisticated multibody models Artificial neural networks have also been applied to other subjects in railway engineering. One example is the work presented by Mingyang Yu et al. In this framework, this paper is primarily intended to demonstrate how efficient using artificial intelligence can be to the solve problems that the railway industry has addressed by more extended mechanical engineering methods such as multi-body modelling, contact theory, etc. To that end, two different algorithms for the experimental measurement of the wheel-rail lateral contact force are compared in this study. The first algorithm proposed is a classical method based on a harmonic elimination technique that has been previously applied to the measurement of tyre-road contact forces This paper is organized as follows. The first method proposed for the measurement of the lateral contact force is based on a harmonic elimination technique. The algorithm presented in this section is an application of an algorithm developed for the measurement of the tyre-road contact forces. A full description of the aforementioned method can be found in The harmonic cancellation method used for the measurement of wheel-rail contact forces requires that there is an instrumented railway wheel equipped with strain gauges. Those sensors must be placed at equally spaced angular positions in one or more of the measuring circumferences. The more sensors that are used, the more harmonics can be cancelled and therefore, a more precise measurement can be achieved. The harmonic cancellation technique removes the effect of the rotation on the strain sensors’ measurements. Due to the reduced wheel radius of the wheelset used in this paper (see Assuming that there is a combination of longitudinal, lateral, and vertical forces applied on the wheel tread resulting in a force The continuous rotation of the instrumented wheelset while in motion results in the measured radial strain showing a harmonic pattern. Thus, it can be written as a Fourier series expansion of infinite terms:  Considering that, a very precise measurement can be obtained using only the first The terms of the coefficient matrix can be easily obtained through the Fourier series expansion when the normalized deformed shape of the wheel when isolated longitudinal, lateral, and vertical loads are applied on it is known. These normalized deformed shapes have been determined using a Finite Element Model (FEM) of the wheel developed in ANSYS®. Then, using the optimization procedure explained in Finally, when the instantaneous measurement of the six strain bridges and the angular position of the wheel are known, the applied lateral force on the wheel, An ANN is a mathematical algorithm that attempts to reproduce the way the human brain solves arbitrary problems. In the same way that humans use their previous experiences to solve new problems or challenging situations, an ANN takes solved problems as examples on which to build an intelligent system that is capable of making decisions or carrying out classification tasks. Since their first appearance around 1943, ANNs have been constantly evolving. Nowadays, the most up-to-date model of an ANN is the Spiking Neural Network (SNN) that includes differential equations in its definition. As explained in the work of Perez et al. A neural network consists of cells, also called neurons, and links. These cells are the computational part of the network that is in charge of the reasoning and generation of the activation signals. Links connect the different neurons and transmit the information along the network. Links are affected by the weight, In this paper, a multilayer ANN with multiple inputs and a single output for the lateral contact force estimation has been used. The network definition and training process have been carried out using the As previously mentioned, the ANN must be trained using an input data set whose output results are known in advance. This is known as supervised training. In this case, the training data have been obtained using the FEM of the instrumented wheel (see The training process of the ANN is not a trivial task. The success of the training and the correct final performance of the network partly depend on the programmer’s experience. The Back-Propagation (BP) algorithm is the most commonly used method for training the network. This algorithm changes the weights and biases of the net based on the Mean Squared Error (MSE) of the network’s outputs with respect to the reference solution. In this paper, different BP network architectures and training functions have been tested in order to find the fastest and most precise network to estimate the lateral contact force applied on the instrumented wheel. To that end, an arbitrary training data set similar to the one shown in  The influence of network architecture on its performance has also been analysed. In an attempt to demonstrate the potential of the ANN for the lateral contact force estimation, a Finally, the performance of the proposed ANN has been compared to a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN). This kind of NN has feedback connections that allow the network to learn the time-variable characteristics of the data set. In this particular case, the new proposed RNN also includes, in addition to the measured radial strain, force estimations of previous time steps as inputs. Additionally, the RNN has been trained considering the angular position of the wheelset measured by the encoder and also trained by leaving this parameter out. The RNN has a Given the results presented in the previous subsection, it can be concluded that an ANN with a The synthesised input data set shown in In the previous section, the ANN method used to measure the lateral contact force has been tested using synthesised data drawn from the FEM. Its performance has been compared with the conventional harmonics cancellation approach showing an excellent agreement between both methods. However, this paper is intended to go one step further and demonstrate how the ANN also works in a real scenario. To do that, several experiments have been carried out using an instrumented scaled vehicle running on a scaled track. On the left of Together with the scaled track, the second element necessary to carry out the experiments is the instrumented 1: 10 scaled vehicle that is shown in  As previously stated, the main goal of this paper is to demonstrate the real capabilities of an ANN for the lateral contact force estimation on a railway vehicle. To that end, a set of six experiments have been conducted on the scaled track facilities at the University of Seville using the scaled vehicle presented in the previous section. In these experiments, the vehicle moved in both directions of the track. This is an important point because, as explained in Three of the six experiments have been conducted with the vehicle moving at 1.5 m/s, 2.0 m/s, and 2.5 m/s in the forward direction of the track (from point A to point B on The velocity profile during the experiment is depicted in At this point, it can be noted that neither the ANN nor the harmonic cancellation method show a perfect agreement such as was obtained with the theoretical experiments presented in Similar conclusions can be drawn from the experiments done with the vehicle moving in the backward direction of the track (from point B to point A on In this paper, an ANN-based algorithm has been presented for the experimental measurement of wheel-rail contact forces. The algorithm uses the radial strains measured in the wheel-web of an instrumented wheel as inputs. This algorithm is intended to be a valid alternative to a harmonic cancellation method Given the obtained results from this research, it can be concluded that an ANN is a valid solution for the experimental measurement of wheel-rail lateral contact forces. As the main scientific contribution, the ANN has proven to be a fast and reliable alternative, even using a reduced number of inputs, when compared to the harmonic cancellation method. This latter approach requires an encoder sensor for the measurement of the instantaneous angular position of the wheel with respect to the point of contact. However, the ANN is able to satisfactorily estimate the lateral force using strain measurements exclusively even considering a variable forward velocity of the vehicle. In such a way, the ANN demonstrates that it is not dependent on the wheelset’s forward velocity. In this paper, the experimental results obtained with the ANN and the classical method have also been compared with the simulated force drawn from a computational model of the vehicle. It can be observed how both experimental approaches show a good agreement in magnitude and frequency content with the simulated data drawn from the multibody model. In conclusion, the use of ANNs can be considered as a reliable and accurate method to measure lateral contact forces with a reduced number of inputs and in an efficient computational manner. Since the dynamics of railway vehicles has been traditionally based on non-linear and computationally non-efficient multibody simulation models, the use of ANNs might be a solution for an onboard evaluation of lateral contact forces with real-time capabilities. The method presented in this paper can be extended to a full-scaled vehicle. It’s possible, in such an application, that even better results could be obtained due to the fact that the measured strains in the real vehicle will be larger thus reducing the noise power ratio of the measurement. In addition, provided that a larger number of sensors can be installed on the real wheel-web, the ANN could also be used to measure the applied vertical load. Having a reliable and computationally efficient artificial intelligence method for the analysis of the wheel-rail interaction represents a great step forward for railway engineering. From this perspective, other problems of great interest for the railway industry such as the online measurement of contact points, vehicle’s stability, irregularity identification, the wear of the wheel and rail profiles, corrugation, etc., could be addressed more efficiently as opposed to using traditional mechanical engineering methods that are sophisticated yet sometimes inefficient, although accurate and effective. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This research was supported by the