The Raglan concentrator (Xstrata Nickel) does not employ frother. It was considered this might be the result of the high salt content in the process water (ca. 30000ppm). Two-phase (solution–air) and three-phase (slurry–air) tests were undertaken in a laboratory column to quantify the effect of inorganic ions present in the water (a range of polyvalent ions). The measurements focused on gas dispersion (bubble size and gas holdup) and froth overflow rate. The results were compared to a typical frother (MIBC) system. The two-phase tests revealed reduced bubble size, increased gas holdup and limited froth formation in salt solutions. The gas holdup correlated with ionic strength. At an ionic strength ca. 0.4 (=0.4M NaCl) the increase in gas holdup was comparable to ca.10ppm MIBC. In three-phase tests on a sulphide ore, bubble size and froth overflow rate were again comparable between 0.4M NaCl and 10ppm MIBC. The observations help explain why the Raglan plant can operate without frother addition.Several flotation plants around the world use process water with high inorganic salt content. This arises from a combination of soluble components of the ore, increasing use of recycle water and the use of sea or well water in some locations. Extreme examples include the Mt Keith operation in Western Australia with salt concentrations around 60 Generally, the action of frothers is believed to result from retarding coalescence ( Researchers have attempted to determine a transition concentration at which salts inhibit bubble coalescence ( The major ions present in Raglan process water are Na Both the two- and three-phase tests employed a column with the general features shown in The column in this case was 7.6 Solutions were prepared using Montréal tap water with varying concentrations of the following salts: NaCl (Windsor Select Plus), CaCl Once pressure signals became constant (i.e., steady state, taking 5–10 These were conducted at the COREM pilot plant facility (Québec City). A modular column (10.16 The ore, ground to 85%–85 To complement the overflow data, images of the top of the froth were recorded and bubble size measured in the pulp below the froth using the Bubble Viewer. Bubble size was used as the gas dispersion measure in this case as using pressure to estimate gas holdup is no longer accurate unless slurry density is continuously monitored. Gas holdup is an indirect measure of bubble size, increasing as bubble size decreases (for a given air flow rate). This reflects that smaller bubbles rise at lower velocities and thus gas residence time (holdup) in the column increases. Bubble size is dictated by sparger characteristics, airflow rate and the system chemistry. Bubble size distribution was measured at three sodium chloride concentrations (0.05, 0.1 and 0.25 As a result of this demonstrated relationship between gas holdup and bubble size and the fact that the former is easier to measure on-line, gas holdup is used in the remaining two-phase tests.  The valence effect is incorporated by introducing the ionic strength ( The summation is taken over all ionic species in solution.  It is argued that the higher the charge on the ionic species the more coalescence is inhibited. As salt type (among those tested) does not appear to be a factor, NaCl was selected as representative for this part of the work. Being monovalent, ionic strength is numerically equal to the concentration in mol/L (M). While it is evident that MIBC is capable of greater increases in gas holdup the results for NaCl cover a similar range. A water sample from Raglan showed an ionic strength of ca. 0.4 (vertical line on The three-phase tests were conducted to access froth properties but they also gave some further insight into gas dispersion.  The combination of gas dispersion and froth overflow results in both the two- and three-phase systems provides the evidence that salts present in the Raglan water can substitute for frother. The important similarity between frother and salts is the ability to produce fine bubbles. Any plant with process water of ionic strength at least 0.4 should consider the probable impact on bubble size. Two-phase results show increasing gas holdup with increasing concentration of NaCl, CaCl The funding was under a Collaborative Research and Development grant from Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) with industrial sponsorship from (giving the names at the onset of the sponsorship, 2001): Inco, Teck-Cominco, Noranda, Falconbridge, COREM and SGS-Lakefield (joined 2003). In particular, the authors would also like to acknowledge COREM under project R-116 for additional financial support. Constructive discussions with Colin Hardie and Carmine Ciriello (Raglan operation) are also gratefully acknowledged.