Selective separation of gold(III) ions from acidic aqueous solutions, using MIBK as carrier and LK-80 as emulsifier, has been investigated. The extraction results from model solution containing Au3+, Pd2+, Pt4+, Cu2+ and Fe3+, showed that only the Au3+ ions transported across the liquid membrane and nearly all of other ions remained in the external solution without change in their concentration. Mathematical modeling of the system shows a good compatibility with experimental results for gold(III) ions transport. For other ions, the partition coefficient of the ions and membrane phase is nearly equal to zero. Then these ions form complexes with the carrier without stripping and remain unchanged in the system.carrier concentration in the membrane phase (vol.%) solute concentration in the external phase (kmol/m internal reagent concentration (kmol/m complex concentration in the membrane phase (kmol/m concentration of emulsifier in the emulsion phase (wt.%) effective diffusivity of the complex in the membrane phase (m diffusivity of the complex in the membrane phase (m reaction rate constant (m/s) reaction rate constant (1/s) stirring speed (rad/s) radial coordinate in the emulsion globules (m) radius of the emulsion globules (m) volume ratio of emulsion phase to external phase, dimensionless radius of internal droplets (m) Volume ratio of membrane phase to internal phase, dimensionless time (s) external phase volume (m internal phase volume (m membrane phase volume (m distribution coefficient for the solute between the external phase and the membrane phase at equilibrium, dimensionless distribution coefficient for the solute between the membrane phase and the internal phase at equilibrium, dimensionless volume ratio of the internal phase to emulsion phase, dimensionless Gold is a metal that together with its use in jewelry also has a wide use in various industries due to its unique chemical and physical properties The recovery of gold and other precious metals from secondary grade sources such as electronic scrap, spent catalyst and metal concentrates is by an initial treatment with aqua regia. Under such conditions, gold is oxidized to gold(III) and forms chloro-complexes, the predominant species AuCl An area of current technological interest is the use of double emulsions to extract species or to control mass transfer rates for the release of solutes. The use of liquid surfactant membranes is a developing technique for the separation and concentration of metal ions from aqueous solutions. The first step in developing a liquid surfactant membrane system, which often involves studies of the selectivity of the carrier, being used to transfer cations from the external aqueous phase across the organic membrane and into the internal aqueous phase of an emulsion droplet. Such investigations may involve two-phase solvent extraction systems or, perhaps better, three phase (aqueous phase–organic phase–aqueous phase, but no emulsion) bulk liquid membrane systems to determine the complexing agent selectivity Many attempts have been done for extraction of gold(III) from acidic aqueous media. Nearly all of them are based on liquid–liquid extraction system. Due to highly expensive selective solvents for gold, gold extraction using liquid–liquid extraction is not economical. A brief comparison of liquid–liquid extraction and liquid pertraction has been done pertraction provides maximum driving force so that the use of multistage and counter-current processes is not required; since the organic liquid is a short-term mediator only, its extraction capacity is of no essential significance. As a result, a great variety of insoluble, inert and harmless organic liquids can be used as an intermediate liquid, containing only a small amount of carrier. As carrier, new, highly selective and also solid extractants can be synthesized. In the case of conventional solvent extraction technique for the recovery of gold from hydrochloric acid solutions, several studies have been performed using various types of extractants such as basic extractants like amines, solvating extractants such as neutral organophosphorus compounds and other extractants containing S as the donor atom The liquid surfactant membrane technique, which involves emulsions and a complex aqueous phase–organic phase–aqueous phase system, has some advantages and disadvantages when compared with widely used solid membranes (diaphragms). Liquid membranes with carriers thus offer these three sizable advantages over conventional polymeric membranes: The fluxes are high because diffusivities in liquids are typically orders of magnitude higher than are diffusivities in polymers. Very clean separations are possible. The separations achievable with polymeric membranes are typically much less complete. Ions can be chemically pumped “uphill”. Large contact areas between aqueous and organic phases result in high transport rates through the organic layer (membrane). The possibility for recovery and reuse of the organic membrane components is promising. The use of solid membranes often exhibits rather poor physical properties. The most important disadvantages of the liquid surfactant membrane technique are the extensive investigations required to establish the composition of the organic solution which forms the liquid membrane, the determination of the other operating parameters, and the careful maintenance of these parameters during the metal ion separation process. Most of the studies for gold(III) extraction have been performed using pure solutes, which are not applicable for industrial purposes. Separation of a given species from a complex mixture of other species is of special importance in industry and analytical chemistry and separation science. Often, various interfering compounds must be removed and/or the compounds of interest must be enriched before detection is possible In our pervious works, extractions of gold(III) ions from pure aqueous solutions have been investigated completely In the present work, methyl iso-butyl ketone (MIBK) has been used as a selective carrier for gold(III) extraction, liquid paraffin as membrane phase and sodium sulfite with sodium hydroxide as internal phase reagent. The emulsifier used in this study named LK-80 that is a natural and biodegradable emulsifier that does not suffers from restrictions involved with many industrial polyamine base emulsifiers such as toxicity, expense and monopolistic suppliers. All experiments were performed at constant temperature of 25 The stirrer for the emulsion preparation was made from stainless steel and coated with LDPE to minimize contamination of emulsion. It had six pitch blades with 45° angle and 63 Sampling were done at predetermined time intervals by disposable sanitary syringes and centrifuged by a laboratory centrifuge in order to separate emulsion phase from external phase. To determine the concentration of metal ions in the external phase, an atomic absorption spectrophotometer of Unicam model 939 was used. pH measurements were carried out by Teb Azma pH meter. Sodium hydroxide (NaOH), sodium sulfite (Na Liquid paraffin with density of 0.82–0.84 Stock gold chloride, platinum chloride and palladium chloride solutions were prepared by dissolution of the pure metals in a mixture of hydrochloric acid and nitric acid with a defined volumetric ratio (aqua regia). The solutions, which completely dried by evaporation, were then dissolved in a mixture of hydrochloric acid and distilled water with defined proportion. Distilled water was used throughout. Emulsions were prepared by mixing the liquid paraffin and the emulsifier under moderate heating. Then, the internal phase was added to the mixture and mixed for 10 The external phases were prepared by diluting of the stock solutions with distilled water to 500 The mechanism of gold(III) extraction from aqueous chloride solution by MIBK and stripping stages were found to be as follows Ionization: Complexation and extraction: Stripping: According to the above reaction, Au It was found that the optimum conditions for maximum gold(III) extraction in this system based on Taguchi analysis are as follows The extraction experiment with ion mixture was performed under above conditions. A concentrated solution of all mention ions has been prepared under experimental procedure.  Among the various models have been proposed for description of ELM systems, the model that considers diffusion and simultaneous chemical reaction, has better compatibility with the system. In this model it is assumed that the solute A diffuses from the external phase into the interface of the emulsion globules where it reacts with carrier C to form a complex P. then the complex P diffuses into the internal phase where it reacts with the internal reagent B to release solute A and carrier C. Thereby A is separated from the external phase. The reactions may be expressed as follows: In addition to the assumptions for mass transfer resistance model, since the carrier is consumed on the outer interface of the membrane and regenerated on the inner interface, the concentration of the carrier on the interface is constant. Therefore, a pseudo-first-order forward reaction is assumed: (− Globules: External phase: Details of the model and parameters used for the system were accepted from our recent work Extraction experiment has been performed for selective gold(III) ions from an aqueous ion mixture chloride. Experimental results showed that MIBK is a selective carrier for gold(III) in this system. It is important that MIBK is a carrier for many metal ions such as palladium and platinum but one of the important advantage of ELM to liquid–liquid extraction is that even with non selective carriers, selective separation of a solute is possible only by proper selection of internal phase reagent and extraction condition. Little depreciation in other metal ion concentrations during the extraction process is due to this effect. By other words, MIBK is able to form complexes with other metal ions present in the external phase and these complexes are oil soluble. This makes the membrane phase saturated and lessens the rate of gold(III) extraction because the concentration of available MIBK for complex formation with gold ions decreases. This effect will not decrease the selectivity for gold(III) separation because the concentration of these metal ions remained constant which shows that stripping of these ions by internal phase reagents were not occurred. This process can be used for selective separation of gold from aqueous mixtures of metal ions successfully for industrial applications. The model applied for description of the system showed a good compatibility with experimental results even in the presence of other ions.