Nickel and cobalt were eluted from iminodiacetic acid functionalized ion exchange resin by ammoniacal eluents. The highest recovery of nickel and cobalt was achieved using a mixture of aqueous ammonia, ammonium sulphate, and magnesium sulphate. The use of ammonium sulphate yielded a higher extent of nickel desorption than the use of ammonium carbonate. The presence of a divalent metal salt such as magnesium sulphate, calcium sulphate, or manganese sulphate was found to increase the extent of nickel desorption. Magnesium was found to be most suitable for this purpose. Nickel and cobalt on the resin are displaced by magnesium during this process. The selectivity of this elution process varies by metal. Aluminium and iron show little or no affinity for ammoniacal elution. Calcium and manganese desorb to a limited extent. The kinetics of nickel desorption in aqueous ammonia–ammonium sulphate–magnesium sulphate solution are slower than that of sulphuric acid elution. When resin loaded with magnesium is contacted with aqueous nickel sulphate, nickel sulphate will displace magnesium on the resin. This reaction occurs on a similar time scale as that of protonated resin.The hydrometallurgical processing of nickel laterite ore begins with a leach stage to dissolve valuable nickel and cobalt, precipitation of impurity metals, followed by separation of liquor from unwanted solids using counter current decantation. Counter current decantation (CCD) is a slow and inefficient process resulting in the need for large tanks. Depending on the morphology and settling characteristics of the precipitate, a significant portion of the leached nickel and cobalt can be lost to the pulp underflow through solution entrainment, co-precipitation, and sorption processes on the high surface area solids. For a site producing 40,000 tonnes per annum nickel and 2500 tonnes per annum cobalt yearly loss of 5% of these value metals translates to $40 million USD, given current LME spot prices of $16,000 USD/t nickel and $23,500 USD/t cobalt (November 2012). Scavenging of otherwise lost nickel and cobalt value through the use of ion exchange resin and resin-in-pulp loading from CCD pulp underflow has been proposed by previous researchers ( The process of resin-in-pulp scavenging is to contact large bead ion exchange resin with tailings pulp to preferentially load the valued metals onto the resin. Following this, the resin is sieved away from the pulp and rinsed, and finally the metals are recovered in a purified and concentrated solution after being eluted from the resin by contacting with appropriate solution. Typically for cation exchange resin, sulphuric acid is used ( Previous researchers have investigated potential resins for this process and have concluded that large bead resin functionalized with iminodiacetic acid (IDA) is the most appropriate for scavenging nickel and cobalt from laterite tailings ( Several characteristics of the IDA resin make integration of the resin-in-pulp unit into existing nickel laterite flow sheets challenging. First, the nature of laterite CCD underflow pulp is such that the concentration of unwanted impurities such as magnesium, manganese, aluminium, iron, and chromium is orders of magnitude higher than that of nickel and cobalt base metal value. Despite the fact that IDA resin preferentially loads nickel and cobalt, loaded IDA resin from RIP scavenging circuits is typically only 30–50% loaded with nickel and cobalt ( Demonstrating the technical feasibility of other possibilities for elution and integration of metal value would improve the commercial viability of resin-in-pulp scavenging. One possibility is to take advantage of nickel and cobalt's affinity for ammonia relative to impurity metals by eluting RIP loaded resin into solution containing aqueous ammonia. As many nickel refineries use ammonia based processing, eluate produced in this matter could be compatible with existing downstream refining processes ( The aim of this research is to determine the technical feasibility of ammoniacal elution of nickel and cobalt from IDA resin. The experimental program was designed to address the following questions: Can nickel and cobalt be effectively eluted from IDA resin with ammonia based solutions? What is the extent of the elution reaction as a function of eluent composition? What is the behaviour of impurities such as iron, aluminium, chromium, manganese, calcium, and magnesium in such a system? How does ammonia eluted resin behave during subsequent RIP loading? In this study Lewatit MonoPlus TP 207 XL resin was used, hereafter referred to as TP 207 XL. TP 207 XL is a monosize macroporous iminodiacetic resin with a backbone of divinylbenzene-styrene. TP 207 XL is a variant designed specifically for resin-in-pulp, with a mean bead diameter of 790 micrometers in the wet sodium form. The selectivity of the resin is roughly in the following order but can vary depending on how the selectivity experiment is conducted, the pH, and ion concentration ( This resin uses the same functionalization as Dow Amberlite IRC748 and Purolite S930. While the manufacturing methods and resin structure of TP 207 XL are different, for the purposes of this paper the properties of their chemical functional groups are identical. In order to study elution chemistry, samples of TP 207 XL were loaded from synthetic solutions of nickel and cobalt. A known volume of tapped wet settled resin in the protonated form was contacted with 10 times the volume of resin of solution containing 5 Resin was contacted with solution in batch flasks for several experiments. In each one, the loaded resin composition was determined by quantitatively eluting 2 to 5 The resin-in-pulp loading procedure that follows was used for both industrial tailings and synthetic pulp. The pulp was heated to the desired temperature followed by addition of wet filtered TP 207 XL resin to the reactor. Resin was contacted with pulp for 3 For the column experiments, resin was placed in a water jacketed glass column 15 Eluent was made with 98% w/w purity sulphuric acid H First the effect of the presence of sulphate versus carbonate was investigated by contacting various amounts of synthetic nickel loaded TP 207 XL resin with solution composed of aqueous ammonia and ammonium as ammonium sulphate or ammonium carbonate. The solution–resin mixture was then allowed to equilibrate through shaking in batch flasks for 24 To determine the optimal composition of the eluent, solutions containing various amounts of ammonia and ammonium sulphate were equilibrated with synthetic nickel loaded resin. The results of these batch experiments are presented in The iminodiacetic acid functional group does not bond strongly to univalent cations, including the ammonium cation ( It was found that all three of the divalent metal ions increased the extent of the nickel desorption reaction. However, it was found that the presence of manganese leads to formation of fine black precipitate, likely manganese dioxide (MnO In order to determine the relative rate of reaction of metal desorption in ammoniacal solutions compared to acidic solutions, several batch tests were run whereby synthetic nickel loaded TP 207 XL was contacted with acidic and ammoniacal solutions as per the procedure outlined in To investigate the elution behaviour of the system described in In order to test the selectivity of this method of elution, several samples of loaded resin were eluted in columns using the aqueous ammonia–ammonium sulphate–magnesium sulphate solution described previously. The composition of the four loaded resins used is described in Each resin was packed into a column and eluted with solutions of 63 The composition of the resin after elution is shown in In these columns experiments, the behaviour of impurity elements varied. Aluminium and iron showed very little affinity for the ammonia based eluent, which is unsurprising due to their low solubility at the pH of the ammonia solutions (10.4–10.8). As a result, across all bed volumes of all 4 column tests, aluminium concentration was always less than 10 Magnesium concentration in the eluate was the inverse of nickel concentration in the eluate, indicating that nickel on the resin is displaced by magnesium. In all four column experiments the concentration of magnesium in the eluate was lowest in the first bed volume of eluate, ranging from 109 and 110 In each of the four columns, the amount of nickel, cobalt, manganese, calcium, aluminium and iron removed from the resin was compared to the amount of magnesium loaded onto the resin through the elution process. On the basis of moles of equivalent charge, the ratio of metals eluted to magnesium loaded for J1–J4 was 1.85, 0.78, 0.86, and 0.33 respectively. This indicates that for J1 more metal was eluted than magnesium was left on the resin, while the reverse is true for J2–J4. The selectivity of the elution process can be considered by comparing the ratio of moles of charge equivalence per liter resin of nickel and cobalt (as cobaltous) versus calcium, aluminium, iron, manganese, and magnesium. These values are presented in After elution, the TP 207 XL resin is largely loaded with magnesium. In order to investigate the reloading behaviour of TP 207 XL resin once it has been eluted with aqueous ammonia–ammonium sulphate–magnesium sulphate, a 30 Through this contact 95% of nickel and 74% of cobalt was loaded onto the resin. The 1 to 1.5 It has been determined that nickel and cobalt can be effectively eluted from iminodiacetic acid functionalized ion exchange resin by ammoniacal solutions. The highest recovery of nickel and cobalt was achieved using a mixture of aqueous ammonia, ammonium sulphate, and magnesium sulphate. Each of these three components is necessary for this elution technique — ammonia to complex the desorbed nickel and cobalt, magnesium sulphate to act as a more favourable counter-ion for exchange, and ammonium sulphate to maintain the pH such that an appreciable amount of magnesium sulphate salts will dissolve in the starting solution. Magnesium sulphate was found to be more suitable for this purpose than calcium sulphate or manganese sulphate due to their limited solubility. The presence of ammonium carbonate as opposed to ammonium sulphate was found to lead to a lower overall extent of the nickel desorption reaction. Through this elution process, nickel on the resin is largely displaced by magnesium, indicated by the increase of magnesium on the eluted resin. The selectivity of this elution process varies by metal. Aluminium and iron are not readily eluted from resin with ammonia based eluents. Manganese and calcium desorb to a limited extent, with calcium desorption being consistent throughout elution and manganese desorption coming largely after the nickel peak. Counter current column elution and careful control of which bed volumes of eluate to recycle to more elution and which to send on for recovery of nickel and cobalt would be necessary to prevent large amounts of magnesium, calcium and manganese from contaminating the final eluate. The kinetics of the nickel desorption reaction in aqueous ammonia–ammonium sulphate–magnesium sulphate solution are slower than that of sulphuric acid elution, but not drastically so. Reloading resin with nickel from the magnesium form is effective and occurs on a similar time scale as that of protonated resin. The loss of residual nickel and cobalt to tailings streams represents a large inefficiency in many existing laterite operations. Resin-in-pulp scavenging of value metal using iminodiacetic acid functionalized ion exchange resin has been proposed and demonstrated by previous researchers. Typically sulphuric acid elution is suggested to quantitatively elute resin. Through ammoniacal elution nickel and cobalt can be removed from resin with high selectivity from iron and aluminium and with moderate selectivity from manganese and calcium. As many nickel refineries use ammonia based process chemistry in the production of nickel and cobalt metal, ammoniacal elution offers potential to connect resin-in-pulp scavenging with ammonia based unit operations. The authors would like to acknowledge Lanxess ION for providing resin samples and the