Slurry waste is a byproduct generated from the slicing process of multi-crystalline silicon ingots. This waste can be used as a secondary resource to recover high purity silicon which has a great economic value. From management perspective, the ever increasing generation of kerf slurry waste loss leads to significant challenges to the photovoltaic industry due to the current low use of slurry waste for silicon recovery. Slurry waste, in most cases, contains silicon, silicon carbide, metal fragments and mineral-oil-based or glycol-based slurry vehicle. As a result of the global scarcity of high purity silicon supply, the high purity silicon content in slurry has increasingly attracted interest for research. This paper presents a critical overview of the current techniques employed for high purity silicon recovery from kerf slurry waste. Hydrometallurgy is continuously a matter of study and research. However, in this review paper several new techniques about the process of high purity silicon recovery from slurry waste are introduced. The purpose of the information presented is to improve the development of a clean and effective recovery process of high purity silicon from slurry waste.The photovoltaic (PV) industry has grown over the past decade at a remarkable rate For the year 2014, GTM Research expected to reach the range of 40 to 50 gigawatts (GW) for worldwide installations. In addition, this expectation has motivated PV module suppliers to increase their manufacturing capacity for the same year. The same consequence is likely for producers of polysilicon, wafers and cells.). Therefore, the year 2014 is considered the start of a new growth phase for the PV industry Furthermore, the mono-crystalline and multi-crystalline silicon wafer-based technologies accounted for about 90% of the total production in 2013. The share of multi-crystalline technology is now about 55% of total production. Material usage for silicon cells has been reduced advantageously during the last 10 years because of higher efficiencies and thinner wafers The wafers used by the photovoltaic industry are mostly produced by multi-wire slurry sawing. Multi-wire sawing is the main slicing technique of the photovoltaic industry at the present time. It consists on slicing ingots with a wire using slurry poured on the wire web and running at high speed (10–15 Over 90% of the solar cells produced worldwide are based on crystalline silicon wafers. For meeting the annual growth target in the Si-based PV industry, the sufficient silicon availability is a must. Hence, considerable efforts, for developing high purity silicon recovery processes from kerf slurry waste, are of great importance Another point of attention is to increase the recycling of high purity silicon from disposed slurry waste. Unfortunately, low amount of this material is recycled in despite of its high cost and high demand (for the solar cells based industry for example). This review compares the relative efficiency and bottlenecks of potential technologies, expediting identification of the major knowledge gaps and future research requirements with regard to the high purity silicon recovery from kerf slurry waste The production of pure silicon is costly but needed the photovoltaic industry therefore developing new processes are of high interest. Some alternatives are the traditional Siemens chemical process and upgrading metallurgical grade silicon materials and silicon scrap. The processes applied in order to purify metallurgical grade silicon to solar grade silicon are divided into two categories. The first category, called the chemical route, is related to the purification of silicon by means of the Siemens process, consisting of decomposing trichlorosilane (Eqs. The purification and upgrade of metallurgical-grade silicon is a very effective approach with regard to production expenses of SoG-Si. Metallurgical grade silicon (MG-Si) is the raw material for pure silicon production. Commercially, its production involves the reduction of silicon oxide (quartz) with carbon in submerged arc furnaces ( MG-Si usually contains 99.0 A key process for the metallurgical route is the directional solidification step due to the difficulty to remove impurities such as Boron and phosphorus which implies the use and research of other metallurgical techniques in order to obtain high-quality silicon Siemens process is process where polycrystalline silicon is heated up at very high temperatures. It requires hydrogen and produces more hydrogen-chloride as by product. For every one mole of Si converted to polysilicon, three to four moles are converted to tetrachlorosilane (TET) Wafer and cell producers receive the silicon in chunk or granular form, then need to shape it into a form that can be sliced. The shape can be an ingot, block, ribbon, or sheet. The product can also be monocrystalline (single crystal) or multicrystalline (polycrystalline). The Czochralski (CZ) and float zone methods produce monocrystalline ingots, while directional solidification/casting, ribbon, and sheet techniques produce multicrystalline structures Czochralski method growing starts with melting the silicon in a crucible. Then a rod with a silicon seed is dipped into the molten silicon and as it is drawn up, a monocrystalline silicon crystal is grows on the seed crystal. Float zone ingot formation is used for producing even more pure wafers. A float zone ingot has fewer impurities than a CZ ingot; it is particularly lower in oxygen which can decrease the efficiency of a cell. As with CZ crystal pulling, a seed crystal is exposed to molten silicon. But instead of being dipped into a crucible with a silicon melt, a heating coil passes along an ingot, effectively separating the newly crystallized monocrystalline ingot from the input silicon. Crystallization occurs between the solid molten regions referred to as the “float zone” ( Multicrystalline blocks are formed via directional solidification. While this process takes less time than monocrystalline production, efficiencies are lower due to the variable silicon crystal sizes, dislocations, and impurities. With directional solidification, the silicon remains in the crucible after heating. Once the silicon is melted the entire crucible is moved down, away from the heating element and the silicon cools down into the solidification temperature. Thin wafers containing silicon are a material source for solar panel production. The production of this material implies the slicing of monocrystalline (MC) and polycrystalline (PC) solid ingots using an abrasive wire. From this slicing process, more than 40% of silicon is slurry waste derived from the kerf loss. The cutting slurry is compounded of SiC particles (abrasives) and polymeric lubricant (carrying fluid). The MC-Si ingots are cut off as scraps removing the top highly contaminated layer which contains iron, aluminum, SiC, and Si Xing et al. The solid powders used in this investigation consist of 39%.6 The carbon tetrachloride, chloroform, and chloroepoxy propane, represent the largest value of νSiC/νSi (25.7, 24.0, and 20.8), which is beneficial to the separation of Si and SiC particles. In the double-layer organic solvent system chloroepoxy propane has a lower density and a larger polarity, is chosen as the upper solvent (solvent 1), where most of Si particles is suspend. The Carbon tetrachloride has a larger density and a lower polarity, thereby is selected as the bottom solvent (solvent 2). Most of SiC particles gradually sink to the interface between the two solvents. As long as SiC particles reach the interface, they will quickly go to the vessel bottom. Afterward, solvent 1 with micron Si powders can be collected from valve 1, and solvent 2 with SiC micro powders can be gathered from valve 2. Thus, the successful separation between Si and SiC particles can be realized using the double-layer organic solvents sedimentation process. Si-rich silicon powders and SiC-rich powders are obtained from two solvents using vacuum filtration followed by 3–4 times alcohol and deionized water washing. Si-rich powders are then pressed into pellets, placed in an alumina crucible, and heated to above 1500 Hsu et al. The phase-transfer separation procedure is illustrated in The magnified picture a) shown in The recovery process included the effects of several parameters, such as: oil phase; pH value of water phase; oil/water volume ratio; solid concentration; agitation, and, the purity and recovery of the Si product at specific operating conditions. As a result, the purity of Si over 95 The hydrocyclone process can be used to separate considerably larger SiC particles. Sergiienko et al. In this study, it was proposed that polyethylene glycol (PEG) solution and iron fragments were removed by using filter press and high gradient magnetic separator, respectively. Sawing waste, obtained after the sequential treatment of cutting slurry in two decanters, was applied as the starting material and later employing a polyurethane hydrocyclone assembly device ( As first step for this experiment, SiC powder (10 The centrifugation process is a process applied for recovering silicon powder from kerf loss slurry waste which helps to diminish the shortage of Silicon for the developing PV industry. The feasibility of this process has been demonstrated by Lin et al. The recovery process for Si powder consists mainly of four steps: (i) acetone washing, (ii) acid washing, (iii) centrifugation, and (iv) HF washing Acetone washing, to remove ethylene glycol; Acid washing, to dissolve metal fragments; Centrifugation, to separate SiC and Si particles; and, HF washing, to remove boron and calcium from the glass fragments generated by the sawing. For separating Si and SiC particles, a centrifuge with a rotating radius was used. The specific gravity of the heavy-liquid fell between that of Si and SiC acting in a counter-direction. The authors claimed that the upper layer cake should be silicon and noticed that smaller particles of SiC were easily trapped in the cake ( Settling the solid volume concentration at 6.5%, the heavy-liquid density at 2.35 Li et al. As first step for this experiment, ratios of Cu to Si in all samples are smaller than 10 to avoid possible decompositions of SiC. All samples have a total mass of 20 For the characterization of the samples methods such as Rigaku X-ray diffraction (XRD), Zeiss EVO scanning electron microscopy (SEM) coupled with X-ray dispersion spectroscopy (EDS) and C–S analyzer (Horiba EMIA-820V, Japan) were used. The Si recovered was determined comparing the Si contained in a Cu–Si alloy powder sample to the Si contained in the original ingot from where the sample was taken off. To separate Si from Cu–Si alloy, electrolysis or acid leaching are two applicable methods. The outcome from this experiment revealed that high purity silicon can be effectively recovered by the Cu–Si alloying method therefore being an approach with great potential to recycle Si from cutting slurries in the benefit of the photovoltaic industry. The SEM image of the microstructure showed that the alloy ingot was composed of two phases (A and B) ( The XRD patterns showed that the surface of alloy ingot were mainly composed of SiC, Cu Powders were obtained ( A faster thermal method than the high-temperature treatment technique has been proposed by Yang et al. The recovery of valuable high purity silicon by the different methods and techniques and their further investigation and improvement represents substantial achievements for the recycling of kerf slurry waste. Therefore, it allows economical savings the PV market by the reduction in the cost per watt. The industrial manufacture has an extensive know-how but also a challenge to future costs in order to ensure continuous growth of the crystalline silicon solar cells industry. Research and development of innovative and feasible approaches for producing low-cost polysilicon feedstock through solar grade Si separation processes are an ongoing need in the near future.