Flotation has been used in industry for more than a half century as the primary technique for upgrading phosphate. While the flotation of phosphate was inefficient when oleic acid was used alone as a collector, therefore a mixed collector of oleic acid (HOl), linoleic acid (LA) and linolenic acid (LNA) was employed to improve the recovery of phosphate flotation. The batch flotation results showed that the optimal composition of the mixed collector was 54wt.% HOl, 36wt.% LA and 10wt.% LNA. Additionally, the effect of pH on the mixed collector application was studied while considering the surface tension, contact angle and micro-flotation. The results showed that the mixed collector should be used at a pH of 9.5. Above a pH of 9.5, the adsorption of fatty acids dimers on the apatite surface hindered phosphate flotation. The influence of the mixed collector assembly on apatite flotation was also investigated. It was demonstrated that due to its low critical micelle concentration, a sufficiently hydrophobic apatite surface could be generated at a collector concentration of 60mg/L. In addition, zeta potential experiments suggested that collector adsorption was governed by chemisorption. FTIR and XPS spectra studies further indicated that the chemical reaction involved the carboxyl groups of fatty acids and Ca species at the apatite surface for each fatty acid in the mixed collector.Phosphorous is one of the most common elements on Earth and is essential for life in all organisms ( Phosphate ore is the primary natural resource from which phosphorous is extracted. While apatite is the most prevalent phosphate, other gauge minerals commonly found in phosphate ore are dolomite, calcite and silicates. Increasing global demand for food has increased consumption of phosphate ore to an alarming rate over the past few decades; the year of 2005 boasted a world phosphate production of 148 Mt, which was more than twice the production of 1965 ( To meet the requirement of phosphoric acid production, phosphate ore should be enriched to near 30% P Despite successful and economic recovery of phosphate via flotation, its efficiency using fatty acids as collectors is still not satisfactory. Oleic acid is the most common and traditionally used collector for apatite flotation. One concern in the use of oleic acid is its tendency to adsorb onto a slime surface. A large slime surface area also favours the adsorption of oleic acid ( To mitigate the disadvantages of oleic acid mentioned above, many new collectors have been developed. It was reported that a hydroxamic acid–alcohol collector was an efficient and selective collector for phosphate flotation and was suitable for coarse feed ( Another approach to enhance the performance of oleic acid is using synergic reagents. Synergists could improve the adsorption of oleate ions at the liquid/air interface and to the phosphate surface ( In phosphate plants today, vegetable oils are the dominant collectors that are replacing oleic acid due to their low costs and high efficiencies at normal temperature. Vegetable oils, including corn oil, soybean oil and rice bran oil, have been successfully used as collectors for apatite flotation in Brazil ( Thus, the optimal composition of a mixed fatty acid collector must be determined for phosphate flotation. In addition, the flotation behaviour of this type of mixed collector also must be investigated in detail. Therefore, HOl, LA and LNA were selected as components for a mixed collector in this study. The suitable fraction for each component was first determined directly with the flotation tests using run-of-mine phosphate ore. Fundamental surface chemistry experiments were conducted to reveal the adsorption state of the mixed collector on the apatite surface. The adsorption mechanism for the mixed collector was also determined using FTIR and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). AR-grade oleic acid (HOl), linoleic acid (LA) and linolenic acid (LNA) were purchased from TCI of Japan. The vegetable oils used were all provided by the Institute of Multipurpose Utilization of Mineral Resources, China. The phosphate ore sample for the batch flotation tests was obtained from the Wenfu Phosphate Company located in Guizhou Province, China. A chemical composition analysis showed that the ore contained 25.50% P The apatite (Ca A 1.5 L flotation cell was prepared for the flotation tests. For each test, 500 The Du Noüy ring method was used to measure the surface tension of the collector solutions. In the solution preparation, the glassware was cleaned with chromic acid and rinsed with ample DI water. The platinum ring first was flushed with acetone, followed by methanol and DI water. After removing the remaining water, the ring was flame treated to remove any organic contamination. Before each measurement, the surface tension of the DI water was tested as a control. In each test, a 20 The contact angle on the apatite surface was measured with the sessile drop method using a GBX 3S tensiometer. An apatite crystal was dry polished first with 500 grit and then 1000 grit and 4000 grit Al A 125 1 A zeta potential analysis was conducted with a Zetasizer Helix instrument from Malvern. 0.1 The FTIR spectra of the apatite before and after collector adsorption were recorded in the range from 400 to 4000 X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) experiments were conducted with a PHI 5000 Versa Probe II equipped with an Al target. Apatite samples (−45 In this section, the flotation capacities of the HOl, LA and their mixtures were first evaluated with batch flotation tests; the results are shown in After a single stage of flotation, the effect of changing the collector blend showed little effect on concentrate grade, which was shown to be 25%. However, the phosphate recovery was higher when the fraction of LA was increased. When using pure LA, P The suitable fraction of LNA in the mixed collector was also investigated. Due to the low content of LNA in most vegetable oils, the fraction limit of LNA in the mixed collector was established to be 30 In this regard, the optimal composition of the mixed collector for phosphate flotation was determined by two series of flotation tests to be 54 The flotation capacities of the vegetable oils and the mixed collector were all evaluated, as shown in As expected, the distinctions in flotation recovery resulted from the content differences of these collectors ( The lowest recovery was observed using the rice oil. In the rice oil, hexadecanoic acid was a major component, while the contents of HOl and LNA were low. Therefore, the flotation results indicated that hexadecanoic acid was not as efficient as HOl or LNA for phosphate flotation. The flotation results demonstrated that the mixed collector exhibited a superior capacity for phosphate flotation, and a vegetable oil with a similar composition to that of the mixed collector could act as a reasonable phosphate collector. Surface tension and contact angle experiments were conducted to analyse the influence of pH on the reagent adsorption at the air/liquid interface as well as the solid/liquid interface. It was shown in The contact angle results should be considered with respect to the species distribution of the fatty acids in solution. However, only the thermodynamic data of HOl was reported in detail ( Similarly, HOl, LA and LNA molecules were the dominant species in the acidic solution, which allows these fatty acids molecules to physically adsorb onto the apatite surface ( The contact angle results were further supported by the micro-flotation tests. In a basic solution, the P At a pH of 9.5, the assembly and adsorption states of the mixed collector at the mineral surface were further detailed, which provided important information about the interface controlling during the phosphate flotation. As indicated in The influence of the assembly state of the collectors on apatite flotation was further investigated with the contact angle results ( The above analysis of the contact angle results was further supported by the TOC experiments with the mixed collector. The significant decrease in the TOC content at a concentration of 90 As shown in In terms of the apatite samples in the collector solutions, all of the zeta potentials shifted towards more negative values than the results in the DI water. The fatty acid ions could not physically adsorb onto the negative apatite surface due to electrostatic repulsion. It was expected that chemisorption was achieved by the fatty acids ions on the apatite surface. The zeta potential variations below 90 At a pH of 11.5, the fatty acid dimers adsorbed onto the apatite surface, which further decreased the zeta potential; the fatty acid micelles could occur in the solutions and adsorb onto the apatite surface at 90 The assembly and adsorption states of the mixed collector at the apatite surface were described in detail by the above measurements of the surface properties. Here we investigated the adsorption mechanism for the mixed collector system by using FTIR techniques. The corresponding peaks of P Conversely, The disappearance of the peak at 1710 The XPS technique can determine the chemical states of elements, which is valuable to analyse the adsorption phenomena on a mineral surface during flotation ( The fitted results of the Ca The changes in the binding energy of Ca The primary conclusions of this study are listed as follows: The ideal composition of a mixed collector was determined by batch flotation tests to be 54 A reasonable pH for the application of the mixed collector was determined to be a pH of 9.5 by the contact angle and micro-flotation experiments. Above a pH of 9.5, the fatty acid dimers could adsorb onto the apatite surface, decreasing the hydrophobicity of the apatite surface. The CMC for the mixed collector was 70 The zeta potential experiments implied that chemical adsorption was achieved on the apatite surface. The FTIR analysis showed that the carboxyl groups of the fatty acids participated in the chemical reaction. The XPS analysis further corroborated the results of the zeta potential and FTIR spectra tests. For each fatty acid in the mixed collector, the reaction involved the carboxyl groups of tatty acids and the Ca species on the apatite surface, as shown by the changes in the binding energy for Ca The financial support provided by the