Among all the process parameters of solid-state anaerobic digestion (SS-AD), total solid content (TS), inoculation (S/X ratio) and size of the organic solid particles can be optimized to improve methane yield and process stability. To evaluate the effects of each parameter and their interactions on methane production, a three level Box-Behnken experimental design was implemented in SS-AD batch tests degrading wheat straw by adjusting: TS content from 15% to 25%, S/X ratio (in volatile solids) between 28 and 47 and particle size with a mean diameter ranging from 0.1 to 1.4mm. A dynamic analysis of the methane production indicates that the S/X ratio has only an effect during the start-up phase of the SS-AD. During the growing phase, TS content becomes the main parameter governing the methane production and its strong interaction with the particle size suggests the important role of water compartmentation on SS-AD.Anaerobic digestion (AD) of solid wastes, such as agricultural residues or organic fraction of municipal solid waste, is a process in constant development at industrial scale because of its capacity to degrade organic matter simultaneously into a valuable biogas composed of methane (CH Because of a lack of scientific knowledge, SS-AD processes are not optimized and performances could therefore be improved. The methane yield and stability of industrial digesters are usually dependent of the empirical knowledge of the operators. Dry anaerobic digesters are mainly handled in batch mode or continuous plug-flow mode depending on the origin and quantity of the substrate. Several process parameters can be optimized to operate SS-AD: TS content, A main parameter that drives SS-AD is the water content (i.e., TS content) ( Inoculation phase is an important step affecting SS-AD, both in batch and continuous mode (digestate recycling). Inoculation is usually characterized by the substrate ( The reduction of the particle size represents an interesting pretreatment of solids for biological transformations since it is not necessary to add water or chemical substances, and the relative technical simplicity ( The influence of operating parameters on AD is often studied separately and contradictory results found in the literature may be attributed to the interdependency (interaction) of these parameters. To our knowledge, the simultaneous effect of TS content, Wheat straw ( The inoculum was sampled from a mesophilic SS-AD pilot treating organic fractions of municipal solid waste. A liquid phase was extracted by centrifugation (3000 Biogas production was quantified periodically by pressure measurements. A digital Manometer LEO 2 (Keller®) associated with a needle provides a measurement with a resolution of 1 At the end of the experiment, TS content was measured by drying samples at 105 The three factors ( This model is composed of several coefficients    In The final VFA accumulation ( In the range of the tested conditions, fine fraction showed not only a high tendency of AD failure for low inoculation but also the highest potential of CH The methane production has been followed periodically during the whole experiments. An analysis of the experimental design for this entire period provides a dynamical analysis of the parameters influencing SS-AD. During the first 40 The growing phase (day 40 to day 140) corresponds to the differentiation between favorable and unfavorable conditions, which is reinforced during the growing phase. The model quality increases with time since the p-value becomes significant after 40 The stabilization phase occurred from day 140 to the end of the experiment. During this whole phase, the model is highly significant ( This study provides novel information about the interaction and the dynamic behavior of the dry AD. As indicated by the responses of the experimental design, the The authors would like to acknowledge the University of Montpellier 2 for JC Motte PhD financial support. They also thank D. Jackowiak for his help in the choice of the experimental design and Nathalie Lanson-Thompson for English proofreading.