Four dense Scandinavian limestones were analyzed to determine their mechanical properties. The generation of dust (−10μm) and fines (−90μm) during a closed circuit vertical roller mill comminution process was correlated with the calcite crystal size distributions of each limestone. Thin sections were analyzed and by means of stereology the calcite crystal size distributions for each limestone was measured. The dust generation of limestones is governed by a surface abrasive mechanism (R
                     2
                     =0.99) and the production of fines is governed by the mechanical strength of limestones (R
                     2
                     =0.99). The overall limestone degradation mechanism is predominantly controlled by the calcite cleavage planes which reduce the power consumption during the comminution process. This study is the first step in determining the influence of limestone texture on the wear rates in heterogenous raw mixes used in closed circuit comminution equipment.During a heterogeneous closed circuit comminution process, the wear rates can reach magnitudes which severely affect the mill performance. A cement raw mix mostly consists of a hard mineral such as quartz and soft carbonates, mostly calcite, the latter constituting approx. 75%. Due to the closed circuit comminution process, the abrasive accumulates on the grinding table increasing the abrasion of the wear parts. The grindability of a limestone can be explained as being the amount of fines produced at a certain sieve size from one single or a series of comminution events. Previous studies show that the grindability of limestones determines the wear rate ( Very limited research is available on correlations between limestone petrography and mechanical properties. However, igneous rocks used for building materials or aggregates have been studied with the aim of predicting rock mechanical properties based on image analysis   Most researchers correlate the petrography with a macro mechanical strength property. Macro mechanical strength properties are determined by crushing such as the uniaxial compressive strength test ( From a wear point of view, the mechanical properties of limestones are interesting when ground simultaneously with abrasive particles. Even though a pure limestone itself is too soft to cause any wear on hard abrasion resistant surfaces, its grindability affects the wear rates when ground together with an abrasive mineral ( In general, the most dense limestones consist of calcite crystals which have undergone metamorphosis. In addition, the structure of limestones is further complicated due to the solubility of CaCO Porosity Cleavage properties Crystal size Lithification Micro cracks High porosities will reduce the energy consumption during comminution. A pore will act as a flaw within the limestone and thus weaken the mechanical strength. The strength is a function of the number, average size and geometrical form of porosities Calcite has three cleavage planes, whereas feldspar and quartz have two and zero cleavage planes, respectively. It is believed that a mineral will fracture along its cleavage planes and thus, calcite crystals are statistically very vulnerable ( Most dense limestones originate from the lithification of loose sediments and the calcite crystal size is believed to have a strong influence on the comminution behavior Lithification is a diagenetic process and includes compaction, cementation and recrystallization. Some limestones may have undergone insignificant diagenesis, such as the Cretaceous chalk from the North Sea area. Other limestones have been subjected to strong diagenetic transformation. This type will be very hard and dense with no pores. Often these limestones are classified as marbles. The strength of the limestone is closely related to the degree of recrystallization. A tight bond between two crystals is presumably a strong ionic bond often superimposed by a mechanical interlocking. Fracture will always follow the path of least resistance, thus, during a comminution process there is a competition between degree of cementation and the weakness caused by the crystal cleavage directions ( If present, micro cracks will act as flaws in the limestones. Their presence develop either due to the properties of some types of limestones or due to the geological history and/or the blasting in the quarry. In the size distribution of the VRM new feed, micro cracks have not been observed as being present in the four types of limestones examined in this study. Thus this property has not been considered in this study. The limestone size reduction process is sensitive to the type of comminution methods and whether the process is in an open circuit or closed circuit mode. In the cement industry, the VRM is employed in the closed circuit mode and the limestone is size reduced by three mechanisms ( Abrasion Shear Compression Contrary to e.g. quartz, the limestone surface is easily abraded when in contact with other particles. Thus, when handling and processing limestone, dust is generated and the dust generation can be determined by means of an air separator ( The shear mechanism is of insignificant order and only dominates in areas of low grinding pressures ( During compressive size reduction, the degree of cementation and calcite CSD will affect the fragmenting process. Four general limestone size reduction modes exist: Low degree of lithification and fine grained texture (e.g. chalk): the compressive force is used to separate the grains from each other and turn them into loose material (intercrystalline fracture). If further size reduction is needed, the force is used to produce calcite cleavage fragments. This type of limestone shows a high porosity and will generate large amount of fines. High degree of lithification and microcrystalline texture (e.g. micrite): during compressive action, a crack propagates from the surface following a cleavage plane (intracrystalline fracture). When the crack reaches the next crystal boundary it will follow another cleavage plane in the adjacent crystal: If the next cleavage plane is a straight extension of the former, the crack will propagate with no additional energy requirement. If the next cleavage plane follows another direction, the crack will propagate requiring additional energy. This type of limestone has a low porosity and produces a large amount of dust when crushed. Low degree of lithification and large coarse texture (e.g. sandy marble): the compressive force is used to disintegrate the individual calcite crystals (intercrystalline fracture). This type of limestone has a high porosity and produces a small amount of dust when crushed. High degree of lithification and coarse crystals (e.g. dense marbles): this type of limestone is easily fragmented (intracrystalline fracture), it has a low porosity and produces sharp-edged fragments with very small amounts of dust. Laser diffraction is a widely accepted method for fine particle size analysis where all particles are assumed to be spheres ( In this study, four very pure limestones quarried in Scandinavia only differing with respect to textures were chosen for the experiments ( Dust generation Production of fines. This property is quantified by examining the fines in the VRM table sample. In this study fines are characterized as particles being approx. − Estimation of wear rate. The wear rate is examined by analyzing the results from the image analysis and correlating with the measured VRM wear rates. These properties will be discussed further in Image analysis was accomplished with the purpose of correlating the limestone textural properties with their influence on a closed circuit VRM grinding process. The limestone samples were split and crushed to − Using the JMicrovision image analysis software, a manual image analysis has been carried out ( The results from the image analysis (area, perimeter, diameter etc.) were treated with the Saltykov stereological area analysis with the aim of measuring calcite CSDs of each limestone ( Approx. 500 Four vertical roller mill (VRM) tests were carried out in order to correlate the image analysis with the test results. A laboratory scale VRM operating in a closed circuit mode was used for correlating the microscopic textural analysis with the physical properties of the limestones ( An important property of the limestone is the PSD of the material in contact with the wear parts. Thus, after each test, the material on the grinding table (table sample) was sieved. The coarse fraction was machine sieved for 10 The density of the four limestones is approx. the same as for pure calcite and the percentage of impurities is very low ( The limestones are very different and represent a large variety in the textural properties ( The Verdal limestone is classified as a sparstone with an average calcite crystal size of 120 The Visnes limestone is classified as a sparstone but with an average calcite crystal size of approx. 5 The Orsa limestone is characterized as a fossiliferous micrite. The texture appears to be a mixture of both macrocrystalline ( The Storugn limestone is characterized as fossiliferous micrite. The texture consists of macrocrystalline ( When using the image analysis software applied to the thin sections and further processing the data by means of stereology (Saltykov method), the result are calcite CSDs for each analyzed limestone ( When inspecting Unimodal calcite CSDs. The Visnes and Verdal limestones follow this type of distribution and are easy to interpret. Bimodal calcite CSDs. The Orsa and Storugn limestones follow this type of distribution and make the interpretation more difficult. The bimodal distribution explains the intermixture of two different unimodal distributions: When inspecting the Orsa and Storugn limestones it is readily seen that the texture is partly fine lime mud (micrite) and partly coarse inclusions originating from fossils ( The unimodal size distribution can conveniently be simplified by introducing the d(10%), d(50%) and d(90%) fractiles ( When defining the dust generated (− When defining the fines (− The Verdal limestone has a median calcite crystal size approx. equal to the final particle product size, thus the result will be a liberation of single calcite crystals ( The − As a measure of micro strength, the power consumption of the four limestones has been correlated with generation of dust (− After each of the four VRM experiments, the wear rates were measured to determine the influence of different limestone types on the wear rates ( As with the power consumption correlations, the wear rates cannot be correlated to the Extensive studies have been carried out on the assessment of igneous rocks and various researchers highlight the noticeable difficulties when using microscope methods to quantify the textures used in correlations models. The limestones belong to the sedimentary group of rocks which are even more complicated in their texture due to the diagenetic processes which they undergo. Furthermore, the majority of limestones show a high concentration of fossils which originate from animals or plants very different in nature. Limestones will generate dust (− During a compressive comminution process, fines (− The calcite CSDs were correlated to the power consumption and wear rates in a closed circuit VRM process but with non-informative results. However, as a rule of thumb, the microcrystalline limestones need more energy for the size reduction than macrocrystalline limestones. The strength of a limestone is not just related to the crystal sizes. It is believed that the lithification, crystal boundary impurities, mechanical interlocking of calcite crystals and amount of micro cracks plays a vital role in determining limestone physical properties. Thus the discrepancies encountered when correlating the wear rate with the calcite CSD might well be a result of several non-identified parameters. It needs to be stressed that most limestones have a more complicated composition and texture as the samples treated in this study: The majority of industrial limestones are mixtures of several lithologies, contain substantial amounts of impurities and may not behave according to the correlations found in this study. The authors would to thank senior laboratory technician Mr Erik Schou for his improvements on laboratory testing methods and procedures.