In this study the heat transfer coefficient, h, at the metal–chill (mould) interface for A356 alloy is measured. Different sprue heights are used to study the effect of the pressure on the heat transfer at the metal–chill interface. Two preheated metallic chills, H13 Steel and Gray Iron are placed at the mould separately. Finally the h–t curves are plotted and two different typical curves are recommended for h variations for the H13 Steel and the Gray Iron interfaces. It is indicated that h value is stable for the steel and unstable for the Gray Iron chills during solidification.The construction of a casting is determined by its thermal history during solidification that is in turn controlled by the rate of heat transfer from the casting to the mould. To expect the thermal history of a casting that in fact is the main goal of simulation of the castings, the rate of heat transfer from the metal to the mould should be computed. This rate is influenced by the gap formation between the mould and the casting. The gap space can occupy by air; hydrogen, steam and any gases may produced by coatings. Conductivity of these gases is very less than a metal but about equal to the sand. Therefore in permanent mould casting the role of this gap in metal–mould heat transfer is more important while may neglect in sand casting According to the above researches there is a lack of information in two fields about the effect of the pressure on the metal-reheated mould heat transfer. First the variations of At the present work, for evaluating h at the metal–chill interface, a chill of AISI H13 steel (or 4Cr5MoSiV1) and a Gray Iron chill, with equivalent carbon 4.3 wt.%, were placed on the top surface of the cylindrical insulating mould, separately. The AISI H13 steel is the most common hot work steel for Low Pressure Die Casting (LPDC) moulds. In order to alter the pressure at the interface two different sprue heights 100 and 500 mm were used. An electric heater was placed around the chill due to preheating; also one of cross-section of the chill, which contact with liquid alloy was coated by refractory slurry. Refractory slurry with 60 bums and 1.84 g/cm Then melt of A356 aluminum alloy is cast in the mould cavity. A data acquisition system was used to record temperature data. Temperature data were downloaded to a computer utilizing a PLC-32bit card of 10 kHz, 12 channels, HG818L-Advantech. Each measurement of temperature was duplicated for reliability purposes. Then, the temperatures were used in an arithmetic inverse method to calculate Heat flow through the cylindrical casting due to unidirectional heat flow can be approximated as one-dimensional problem, which its governing equation is as follow: In Eq. where Finite difference form of Eq. In Eq. where A is unit area, In the first case, the coated H13 steel chill, variations of the Two reasons can be present for initial stability: first; the high mould preheating temperature in this research and second the low conductivity of the H13steel chill respect to the Gray Iron. Additionally the effect of the gap formation on the However, in the second case, the coated Gray Iron chill, behavior of In  1. The virtual heat transfer coefficient model presented in this investigation can be link to a heat transfer codes, which simulates temperature, thermal stress and thermal strain for the low and high-pressure die casting processes during solidification. 2. At the metal–ferrous chill interface, there is one stable peak in the 3. In the low pressure die casting for the H13 steel dies, preheating temperature near 500°C could disappear the heat transfer coefficient oscillations, and exist of refractory coating at metal–mould interface could shifted the