The main purpose of this work is to investigate different levels of damage that occur on rubber–textile conveyor belts. The conveyor belt damage depends on the heterogeneity of the transported material, transporting conditions and on attributes of the conveyor belt itself. The conveyor belts that are used in this study were divided into three categories: new, worn and renovated. In total, 67 test specimens were examined. The logistic regression method was selected in order to analyze individual levels of conveyor belt damage. Using this method, two differently shaped impact drop hammer tips (spherical and pyramidal) were applied and analyzed. Impact height of the drop hammer and the type of conveyor belt were treated as the independent variables. The output variable was selected as the one that best differentiated between significant and insignificant belt damage. The result of the work enables to estimate the odds of formation of the significant conveyor belt damage for the individual variables. A surprising result, which is obtained from the performed tests and model analyses, is a fact that application of a new, unused conveyor belt, leads actually to increased odds of the belt׳s significant damage.Transportation of material by means of belt conveyors is a typical transport method applied in various technological processes that are typical for mining and processing of mineral raw materials. The belt conveyors are exposed to the various impacts that are causing a process of their damage and degradation. Lihua The belt transport is analysed in various publications. Aldrich et al. It is possible to apply a large scale of methods based on simulation or experimental methods. Otrebski A very effective method, specified for investigation of the belt conveyors, is application of the non-destructive testing (NDT). The non-destructive testing of conveyor belting has become a common practice throughout the world. Langebrake et al. A selection of the suitable conveyor belt is one of very important conditions for a reliable operation of the belt conveyors. Andrejiová et al. Many research problems require analysis and prediction of the output categorical variable or simulation of influence of various input independent variables on the observed output variable. The logistic regression is one of suitable statistical tools, which is specified for estimation of a certain phenomena probability (output variable) according to the known specific facts (input variables) that are able to influence a phenomenon occurrence. There is implemented in this article a logistic regression method as a suitable tool for determination of such model, which describes relation among the severity of conveyor belt damage and the input variables (the type of conveyor belt, the impact height). This method also allows prediction of situations that can be occurred during transport of bulk solids predominately by means of the belt conveyors. The resistance of conveyor belts to puncturing is defined as the ability of the conveyor belt to absorb the whole energy of material impact, which is generated in the moment of material striking into the belt, i.e. it is the ability of the conveyor belt to absorb the impact energy by the deformation work of the conveyor belt without the destruction of it. If the impact energy is greater than the absorption ability of the conveyor belt, then a significant damage of the belt is occurring. Such serious damage is visible on the upper cover of the belt predominately in the form of transversal and longitudinal grooves, punctures or cracks that are able to cause damage to the belt inner structure, as well. This fact is referred to rubber–textile and steel–cord conveyor belts. The main purpose of this research was to analyse possibilities of a significant damage occurrence in the case of various conveyor belt samples as a result of material impact in the bulk material transfer points, which are situated within a belt conveyor transport system. The individual conveyor belt samples were extracted from three categories of the same type of conveyor belt: from a new, worn and renovated rubber–textile conveyor belt. The tests of the individual samples were performed by means of experimental testing equipment, which is specified for testing of the conveyor belt resistance to puncturing. The experiment was realised by means of the testing equipment, which is illustrated in The basic parameters of the experiment are in Two types of impactors were applied during the tests: one impactor was equipped with a pyramidal shape and the second with a spherical shape ( The tests were performed using a conveyor belt supporting system, i.e. system with the idler housing, which was arranged in such way that a stroke of the drop hammer with impactor was targeted between the supporting idlers (diameter of the idlers—92 The dimensions of the extracted test specimen were 1400×150 The test specimen was fixed into the hydraulically actuated jaws. Other hydraulic equipment was used for stretching of the belt with a force value, which equals 1/10 of the belt strength given by the manufacturer. The drop hammer with the required weight was lifted into the necessary impact height by means of a tackling system and from this height it was released for a free-fall onto the test specimen. All the compared conveyor belt samples originated from the same manufacturer and they had the same inner construction of the belt. The The The The more detailed algorithm of the performed tests is presented in An algorithm of the performed test was chosen after a primary preparing of the test device and test specimen. The test specimens, which were prepared from the worn conveyor belt, were tested as the first and this worn conveyor belt was used afterwards as reference framework for processing of all the next results. Each of the test specimens was impacted only once by the drop hammer equipped with the corresponding impactor (pyramid, sphere) and a new specimen was prepared for every new test. The falling height The individual test specimens were evaluated using 4 classification degrees. Examples of the possible damages of the test specimens are visible in The first degree “ The second degree “ The third degree “ The fourth degree “ Using a statistical analysis of occurrences for the individual damage degrees after impact of the drop hammer into the test specimens, as well as according to the generalized Fisher exact test, it was verified that a statistically relevant dependence existed between the kind of conveyor belt and the damage degree for both types of impactor shape ( The individual types of damage were divided into two categories according to their significance, in order to perform the required analysis:   The The logistic regression model (similarly to a linear regression) is a specific calculation tool, which is used for a description of relations among the output variable, i.e. the dependent variable Logarithm of this odds is called logit, whereas it is valid The simple logistic model form is If The model with From there is: In the case that the independent input variable is categorial with The main purpose of such an analysis, which applies the logistic regression method, is to find the most suitable model, which will be able to describe mutual relations among the categorial output variable and one or more categorial or continuous predictor variables. In our case there is investigated an occurrence of the conveyor belt significant damage (the variable DAMAGE, signed. The value of variable The equation of the considered model is The impact height of the drop hammer was varied from 0.8 to 2.6 The result showed that In order It is a fact from the logistic regression model that if the value of the continuous variable The coefficient of the variable The odds that in the new conveyor belt occurs a significant damage is exp(2.98)=19.69-times higher in comparison with the worn conveyor belts. The other variable  The logistic model with the spherical impactor was obtained analogically. The impact height of the drop hammer was changing from 1.8 to 2.6 The result showed that In order The odds ratio of a significant damage occurrence of the conveyor belt, using a change of the impact height by the difference 0.10−m (whereas the values of other variables remain unchanged), is 4.62. The odds that in the new conveyor belt occurs a significant damage is exp(0.99)=2.69-times higher in comparison with the worn conveyor belts. The odds of a significant damage of the renovated conveyor belt after an impact of the drop hammer is exp(2.44)=11.47-times higher compared to the worn conveyor belts. The classification table confirms that 93.4% of all cases were classified correctly ( According to the results obtained from measurement No. I (pyramidal impactor), it is possible to say that the renovated conveyor belt has the highest resistance to the puncture and to the significant damage. The worn conveyor belt was the second in order and the last position belongs to the new conveyor belt. The case of the According to the results obtained from the measurement No. II (spherical impactor) it follows a fact that the worn conveyor belt has the highest resistance to the puncture and to the significant damage. The new conveyor belt was the second in order and the last position belongs to the renovated conveyor belt. In the case of the The wear-out process caused a reduction of the material, i.e. reduction of a thickness of the upper and bottom cover of the conveyor belt, whereas the material characteristics of both covers were changed during the conveyor belt operation. The rubber hardness became higher during the aging process and this fact is probably a reason for the higher resistance of this belt. Another possible reason is a changing of the physical-mechanical properties of the belt inner structure due to a longitudinal and transversal loading, as well as due to a dynamical loading of the conveyor belt during operation. The renovation process was performed only on the upper cover of the conveyor belt. The thickness of the renovated cover layer is higher than it was in the case of a new belt. The bottom cover was also worn, but it remained without a renovation. This fact caused an anomalous situation when the upper cover remained undamaged and the bottom cover was penetrated at the same time. The time interval between the new belt manufacturing and the belt wear or renovation is relatively long. Despite of a fact that there was applied in all cases the same type of the conveyor belt made by the same manufacturer, the production technology and composition of the applied material can be different. This fact probably influenced the above-mentioned results obtained from the performed experiments. A final summarisation of the results, obtained from the measurements and from the logistic model analysis, is presented in This work is a part of these projects VEGA 1/0922/12 Research of effect of material characteristics and technological parameters of conveyor belts on size of contact forces and resistance to motion in pipe conveyors with experimental and simulation methods, VEGA 1/0085/12 New strategy for effective measurements with coordinate measuring machines with multi-sensor systems, VEGA 1/0258/14 Study of input parameter relations for interoperable transport efficiency based on mathematical model application, FR-TI4/310 Increase in a conveyor belt lifetime stressed by shock loads. The article was prepared within the invitation OPVaV-2012/2.2/08-RO named “University Science Park TECHNICOM for Innovation Applications with the Support of Knowledge-Based Technologies”- code ITMS 26220220182.