Carbon (C)-rich, solid products from pyrolysis (pyrochars) and hydrothermal carbonization (HTC, hydrochars) are expected to reduce the bioavailability and bioaccessibility of pesticides as side effect of soil addition. To compare effects of different feedstocks (digestate, miscanthus, woodchips) and production processes (pyrolysis at 750°C, HTC at 200°C and 250°C), 14C-labeled isoproturon (IPU) was applied at 0.75kgha−
                     1 to loamy sand amended either with 0.5% or 5% pyrochars or hydrochars, which was then incubated for 50d. Mineralization of IPU was measured as 14C–CO2 released from soil-char composites. Pore-water and methanol extractable 14C-IPU was quantified as well as non-extractable 14C-residues (NER). Furthermore, C mineralization of pyrochars, hydrochars and feedstocks was studied to assess the relationship between IPU bioaccessibility and char decomposability.
                  In pure soil, 8.1% of applied IPU was mineralized after 50d. This was reduced more strongly in pyrochar treatments (81±6% reduction) than in hydrochar treatments (56±25% reduction). Different feedstocks had no significantly different effect when 5% char was added, but their effect was significant and dependent on the production process in 0.5% amendments. Pesticide binding can occur by surface sorption as well as by diffusion and subsequent occlusion in micropores. The latter can be expected to result in high amounts of NER, as it was observed in the pyrochar treatments. Hydrochars were less stable than pyrochars and contained lower amounts of NER. Thus, in hydrochar amended soils, better accessibility of IPU to microbial degradation may be a result of full char decomposition within decades ensuring controlled pesticide degradation.In recent years, the idea of adding carbon (C)-rich solids from pyrolysis of biomass (referred to as pyrochars) to soil with the aim of increasing crop yield and soil C sequestration has gained considerable interest ( Apart from the potential to improve soil fertility and sequester C, as a side effect, pyrochar addition presumably reduces the bioavailability and bioaccessibility of polar and non-polar organic chemicals in soils and sediments ( In this study we tested the effect of carbonization products on the bioaccessibility of the water soluble phenylurea herbicide isoproturon [3-(4-isopropylphenyl)-1,1-dimethyl-urea] in soil (water solubility In contrast to pyrolysis, hydrothermal carbonization (HTC) is an energy-saving carbonization process that converts organic residues with water contents of 50–90 The main objective of this study was to comparatively assess IPU mineralization in pyrochar versus hydrochar amended soil. We assumed that (i) pyrochars as well as hydrochars significantly reduce IPU mineralization in soil and that (ii) production process and feedstock material type have significant effects on the bioaccessibility of IPU. Further, we expected that (iii) IPU mineralization is directly related to the sorption of IPU. Lastly, we hypothesized that (iv) the bioaccessibility of IPU depends on the degradability of pyrochars and hydrochars. A soil with slow and constant co-metabolic IPU mineralization dynamics was selected for the experiments to avoid intensive microbial growth reactions after herbicide application, which would occur when already adapted catabolic organisms proliferate ( For the carbonization three different feedstock materials (corn digestate, miscanthus, and woodchips of poplar and willow) had been used. Pyrochars (pyro750) were produced by pyrolysis at the standard operating temperature of the Pyreg technology of 750 For pesticide mineralization experiments uniformly Pesticide mineralization experiments were carried out in quadruplicates with pure soil (=control) and soil amended either with 0.5% or 5% (dry weight, dw) hydrochar or pyrochar addition. For C mineralization experiments, treatments with pyrochars, hydrochars, and feedstocks at 0.5% or 5% addition were used in triplicates. Under the assumption that materials are distributed over a soil depth of 30 All pesticide and C mineralization experiments were conducted under identical test conditions at 20 After amending chars to soil and rewetting, subsequent CO At the end of the experiments, soil char composites underwent a pore-water extraction (PWE) followed by an accelerated solvent extraction (ASE). For PWE, sample aliquots were centrifuged at 21 IPU mineralization might be affected indirectly by the soil pH. A low pH can support H-bond formations between the char as sorbent and the pesticide molecule ( Carbon mineralization of hydrochars, pyrochars, and feedstocks in soil was measured by quantifying the CO Three-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with the factors added char amount, production process and feedstock material was used to test for the significance of differences between the treatments and Tukey’s HSD test was used for pairwise comparison of individual means. To achieve normality and variance homogeneity, the arc sine transformation was applied. Correlations were tested using Pearson’s correlation ( The amount of added char, the production process, as well as the feedstock material type of the chars had significant effects on IPU mineralization ( A high sorption capacity of chars likely explains the reduced availability of IPU for mineralization compared to the soil without char addition ( To draw conclusions on the bioaccessibility of IPU from the sorption capacity of chars and IPU mineralization results, the type of bonding has to be considered. It is likely that IPU reacted with oxygen-containing functional groups on the surfaces of hydrochars through reversible H-bonding ( This is in accordance with high amounts of NER in 0.5% and 5% pyrochar amended soil (average of 45 It is conceivable that the efficacy of IPU is associated with its bioaccessibility. In pyrochar amended soils the efficacy may be largely constrained because IPU will probably be occluded in micro-pores in the long-term. It was shown previously for other pesticides (i.e., diuron, atrazine, trifluralin, chlorpyrifos, and carbofuran) that the efficacy was reduced in soil amended with different pyrochars in dependence of the pesticide concentration, the char addition, and the pyrolysis temperature ( From the literature it is known that in acidic soils the sorption of IPU can increase causing its degradation to decrease due to intensive H-bond formation between the sorbent and pesticide molecule ( Interactions between amount of added char, production process, and feedstock material type were found to have significant effects on total C degradability (mineralization of C In addition to the relationship between the degree of carbonization and C degradability, a positive correlation between the degree of carbonization and sorption capacity has been documented ( There is a knowledge gap concerning the mineralization and bioaccessibility of relatively good water soluble pesticides in soil amended with chars that are subjected to surface oxidation (ageing). However, in order to evaluate the long-term impact of char addition on the bioaccessibility of IPU, not only the degradability of chars but also the effects of ageing have to be considered. It has been reported previously that the sorption capacity of pyrochars decreased upon ageing with probably direct consequences on pesticide mineralization ( This study has shown that IPU mineralization is significantly reduced after application of pyrochars and hydrochars to soil at reasonable (0.5%) and high (5%) char additions due to the high sorption capacities of chars. However, the impact of the feedstock material on char properties, and hydrochar properties in particular, is quite relevant for IPU mineralization rates if the added amount of biochar is not higher than realistic for field applications. The low IPU bioaccessibility in pyrochar amended soils can be expected to last for long time periods due to low IPU mineralization, high amounts of NER and high recalcitrance of pyrochars. In contrast, in hydrochar amended soils, all applied IPU will be bioaccessible within years to decades due to the degradation of hydrochars. This allows for controlled pesticide mineralization meanwhile reducing the risk of leaching and pesticide accumulation in hydrochar amended soil.