The objective of the present work was oriented to develop a technological separation process of phosphate, thorium and rare earth element (REE) concentrates from Egyptian monazite. In this respect, monazite digestion was carried out in sulfuric acid media with low or high acid/monazite ratio. These two ratios were designed to explore the acid efficiency for leaching Th and REE) in the presence of high phosphate media (P2O5
                     ≈25%). The original monazite sample (grade 50%) was analyzed by XRF to evaluate the existing elements and their concentrations. A series of experiments was firstly applied to remove various element impurities (such as Na, Ca, and Si) which exist in the monazite sample and create a series of interferences with the main product (REEs). The results are likely promising for removal of the interfering ions specially Na, Ca and Si. These elements usually complicate the separation of the main elements (REEs). A series of experiments was constructed to digest the monazite sample with a low amount of concentrated H2SO4 and to explore the separation possibility of Th from REEs in successive steps at different BaCl2 weights that act as precipitating agent. The results demonstrated that, firstly selective thorium precipitation (99.3%) was obtained at pH0.9. Secondly, the phosphate ions (83.3%) could be successfully separated from the mixed REE cake. Thirdly, separation of light REEs (LREEs) from the mixed cake was then performed by disodium sulfate. The precipitation efficiency of double sulfate for LREEs reached 92, 79 and 82% for Ce, Nd and La respectively. Finally, the remaining REE-phosphate was converted to REE-hydroxide precipitate at pH7 then leached with dilute HCl at pH3 and treated with 3% oxalic acid to precipitate Y and the other HREEs as HREE-oxalate. The results indicated that all Y and other REEs are completely precipitated.Much attention has been paid to rare earth (RE) elements in the manufacture of a lot of functional materials such as high intensity magnets and electrical assemblies. Of the 200 best known minerals containing rare earth elements, only three contain significant amounts – bastnaesite, monazite and xenotime – monazite being the second most important and abundant source of rare earths ( Monazite is a rare earth phosphate containing thorium and uranium as associated metals ( Several technological methods are used for industrial processing of monazite. The decomposition of rare earth elements from monazite has been conducted in several methods. Commercially, these methods include the acid leaching in sulfuric or hydrochloric acid, alkaline leaching in sodium hydroxide, sintering with sodium phosphate or sodium hydroxide at high temperatures ( The recovery of mixed rare earths and the removal of thorium and uranium from monazite are accomplished through a variety of methods after chemically attacking the mineral with sulfuric acid or sodium hydroxide ( Monazite can be attacked by strong acid (usually sulfuric acid), which essentially transforms the metal phosphate ion to di-hydrogen phosphate salt and phosphoric acid and leaves the metal ions as water soluble salts ( Thorium is of particular interest because of its potential usefulness as a fertile material for breeder reactors. Within this context, the present contribution is directed to separate thorium, phosphate and REE concentrate from Egyptian monazite by a modified acidic leaching. The monazite used in this work was obtained from the Nuclear Materials Authority, Egypt. All chemicals and reagents used were analytical reagent grade and their solutions were prepared with distilled water. All rare earth elements were obtained from Sigma Aldrich (99.9%). The pH of the solutions was readjusted using 0.1 The present paper was classified into two main parts to represent two different amounts of sulfuric acid (low or high acid/monazite ratio). This classification was designed to explore the acid efficiency for leaching U, Th and rare earth elements (REEs) in the presence of high phosphate media (P A series of experiments was applied to remove various element impurities (such as Na, K, Ca, Mg, and Si) that exist in the monazite sample and create a series of interferences with the main product (REEs). The effect of HCl concentration was tested by washing 2 Firstly, monazite was digested at high monazite/acid ratio (1:3). This ratio was selected mainly based on our previously published work ( A series of experiments was constructed to remove different radionuclide (U-series and Th-series) from the original solution. In this respect, different BaCl To separate U ions from both Th and REEs, the pH of the rest solution of the original filtrate (50 Secondly, another trial to digest the monazite sample with low acid/monazite ratio has been performed to explore the separation possibility of radionuclides from REEs in successive steps of different batch processes. In this respect, 20 The slurry was washed by 50 Thorium separation from the filtrate was performed by adding 100 Another trial to digest monazite sample with a low H Four washing experiments for the residue were carried out using hot H An experimental trial was performed to precipitate thorium selectively from REEs. In this respect, 300 For the separation of light REEs, the previous 4 portions that have different pH's were collected together and totally adjusted at pH The filtrate light REE separation was readjusted at pH The filtrate after leaching process by HCl was treated with 3% oxalic acid then filtrated and measured. Firstly, the analytical results of the monazite sample by XRF are shown in Washing experiments were applied to remove various element impurities (such as Na, Ca, and Si) that exist in monazite sample and create a series of interferences with the main product (REEs). The effect of HCl concentration, temperature and shaking time were investigated. According to the data in The data presented in The effects of shaking time on the removal efficiency are presented in The monazite sample was digested at high monazite/acid ratio (1:3) according to our previously published work ( Removal of different radionuclide (U-series and Th-series) from the original digested solution was performed by co-precipitation of radionuclide during the interaction between Ba ions with the excess sulfuric acid to form BaSO The radioactivity measurements of the filtrate after precipitation with BaCl The separation of U ions from both Th and REEs was investigated by readjusting the pH of the original filtrate at pH The residue after precipitation at pH XRF analysis of the precipitate at pH The uranyl ion is yellow and stable in acid solution. At pH Therefore, another trial for monazite digestion will be tested in the following section. Other trials to digest the monazite sample with low H As shown in Trials to separate thorium from the filtrate after monazite digestion was performed by adding 100 Other trials to digest monazite sample with low H Comparing the results of the original sample in At low acid: monazite ratio the digestion is not efficient for U and lanthanides, while it is highly efficient for phosphorus and Th. Thus it is possible to leach 99.9% of both phosphate ions and Th ions. This means that most of the REEs and U are still undigested and present in the residue. An experimental trial was performed to precipitate thorium selectively from REEs. In this respect, the original filtrate was divided into 4 portions (75 It could be observed that at pH However, the digestion reactions proceed according to the following equations: Ammonium hydroxide is preferable as a neutralizing agent because a smaller amount of rare earths is co-precipitated with thorium. The precipitated thorium is not pure thorium hydroxide. According to the following equation, some side reaction will occur to produce mixed thorium–phosphate/hydroxide precipitate. There is no sharp pH value to precipitate thorium and phosphorus individually. The separation of light REEs (LREEs) from the mixed cake was performed by disodium sulfate. Precipitation of LRRs with anhydrous sodium sulfate (after removal of thorium) proceeds according to the following equation ( Based on the data in This step was carried to convert the remaining REEs in the filtrate from REEs-phosphate to REEs-hydroxide therefore, a dark brown precipitate was formed. This dark brown color is mainly attributed to the presence of iron. As shown in The filtrate after leaching process by HCl was treated with 3% oxalic acid then filtrated and measured. This step was mainly oriented to precipitate Y and the other heavy REEs (HREEs) as HREEs-oxalate. The data showed that all Y and other REEs are completely precipitated.  Sulfuric acid provides sufficient choice for digestion of low grades of monazite sands. The first washing step of monazite by HCl is preliminarily efficient for removal of the interfering ions specially Na, Ca and Si. These elements usually complicate the separation of the main elements (Th and REEs). Fortunately, at low acid:monazite ratio the leaching is not efficient for lanthanides, while it is highly efficient for Th and phosphate. Thus it is possible to leach 99.9% of both phosphate ions and Th ions while, most of REEs and U are still undigested. The remaining REEs in the filtrate were converted from REE-phosphate to REE-hydroxide, leached by HCl then treated with 3% oxalic acid. These steps were mainly oriented to precipitate Y and the other heavy REEs (HREEs) as HREEs-oxalate. The obtained results showed that all LREEs and Y are highly precipitated with efficiency higher than 98%, while a great portion of phosphorus (83.3%) is not precipitated which could be considered as a good separation step for the remaining phosphorus. This project was supported financially by the