This work investigates the importance of experimental design on the accuracy and precision of estimates of the agglomeration, growth and nucleation kinetics for the gibbsite system. The work is motivated by the need to explain the differences in crystallisation kinetics parameters reported in the literature for this system. Experiments were conducted to estimate the kinetics under the same process conditions (e.g. temperature, hydrodynamics and composition) from three different crystalliser configurations, i.e. (1) batch; (2) semi-batch at constant composition with representative solids removal and (3) semi-batch at constant composition with classified solids removal. The differential method of Bramley, Hounslow, and Ryall (J. Colloid Interface Sci. 183 (1996) 155) modified for semi-batch crystallisation, was used to estimate the kinetics from each set of experimental data. Some differences in the kinetics estimates between the different configurations were observed. Dynamic simulation showed that each set of estimated kinetics was adequate for describing the experimental CSD's. The uncertainties in the agglomeration and growth rate estimates, obtained by Monte Carlo simulations, were large enough to explain the observed differences. The differences in the nucleation source term were attributed to differences in suspension density between the experiments. A sensitivity analysis found that operating conditions have a greater impact on the uncertainties in the estimated kinetics than the crystalliser configuration.Considerable research effort has been put into gibbsite precipitation because of its central role in the commercially important Bayer process for producing alumina. A key area of interest has been to develop an improved understanding of the mechanisms of agglomeration, growth and nucleation because they are critical to the product crystal size distribution (CSD), an important quality parameter. Unfortunately, different research groups are reporting different crystallisation kinetics parameters for this system. For example, the reported activation energies for gibbsite growth from eight experimental studies ranged from 53 to The objective of the current work is to investigate the effect of laboratory experimental design on the accuracy and precision of the crystallisation kinetics estimates. Three different configurations of the same crystalliser vessel (i.e. batch and two modes of semi-batch operation) were used to estimate the kinetics of agglomeration, growth and nucleation at the same supersaturation and temperature. A modification of the The quality of the kinetics estimates will be evaluated by comparing the experimental CSD's with the CSD's predicted using the estimates. A Monte Carlo simulation is used to explore which of the crystalliser configurations will lead to kinetics estimates with the lowest uncertainty, the purpose being to identify a preferred laboratory crystalliser configuration for gibbsite kinetics studies. Gibbsite was crystallised from caustic aluminate solutions by cooling and seeding with gibbsite crystals. Three different crystalliser configurations were used: batch, semi-batch at constant composition with representative solids removal (CCRSR), and semi-batch at constant composition with classified solids removal (CCCSR). The same 4-l stainless-steel crystalliser, fitted with a draft tube and an The caustic aluminate solution was prepared by digesting technical grade gibbsite in an aqueous sodium hydroxide solution. All runs were conducted at a nominal total caustic concentration (i.e. combined aluminate and free hydroxide) of In the constant composition experiments, the aluminate species concentration, A, was In the CCRSR and the CCCSR, solids were removed from overflow while the fresh liquor was fed to the crystalliser, at the same regulated flow rate. The crystalliser working volume remained essentially constant because the solids content was very low and the density change in the liquor due to precipitation was negligible. For the CCRSR, representative solids removal from overflow was demonstrated by the observed good match between the overflow CSD with that sampled from the crystalliser. Tracer studies on the same system, reported by The supersaturation time dependence for each crystalliser configuration is shown in The total crystal mass in the batch system is consistently higher than in the constant composition configurations because of solids removal in the latter. As expected, m is lower in the CCRSR system than in the CCCSR system because larger crystals are also being removed from the crystalliser in the former system, compared to only fine crystals being removed from the latter. The slope of the curve for the batch configuration in     The batch system results show that the kinetics estimates are strongly correlated with supersaturation: the kinetics rates are fast initially and then decrease steeply as the supersaturation decreases. The evolution of the experimental CSD in  The observed differences for the source term, Given that gibbsite crystal growth is independent of crystal size and suspension density ( The hypothesis that the observed deviations in the estimates between the different crystalliser configurations is due to uncertainty in the estimates is tested in the following sections by dynamic simulation of the crystallisers to check the match between the experimental CSD and the predicted using the estimated kinetics, and hence checking their validity; Monte Carlo simulation to estimate the uncertainties in the kinetics estimates. The transient CSDs were simulated by a discretized population balance model ( The CSD predicted at Above, we hypothesize that the observed discrepancies in the kinetics estimates between different crystalliser configurations may be explained by the uncertainties associated with the kinetics estimates. A Monte Carlo approach was used to determine the uncertainties in the kinetics estimates. The experimental CSD data, i.e.   The influence of the three crystalliser configurations on the uncertainties in the kinetics estimates was investigated by applying a Monte Carlo method to simulated CSDs. The CSD were obtained by integrating  Both constant composition cases were simulated at three different values of Δ In the case of batch simulation, the supersaturation balance, stated for an isothermal case by The Monte Carlo simulation generated 1000 replicates of the simulated CSD data using a standard deviation of 10% for The uncertainties in the rate constants ( Crystallisation experiments were performed in three differently configured crystallisers but with the same hydrodynamics, seed, supersaturation and temperature. Estimates of the agglomeration kernel (  The authors gratefully acknowledge the support from the Australian Governments Cooperative Research Centre (CRC) program, through the AJ Parker CRC for Hydrometallurgy. The authors would like to thank Dianne Bedell and David Rossiter for their contributions to the experimental work.