Femoral osteolysis associated with contralateral hip degenerative changes is a risk factor for ipsilateral periprosthetic femoral fracture. We report 5 comminuted proximal shaft fractures around loose femoral implants occurring in patients with both symptomatic femoral lysis and a painful hip on the other side. Our evolving strategy involves timely revision surgery once this pattern is recognized. Once fracture has occurred, emergent revision requires extensive medical evaluation, availability of long-stem revision implants, and appropriate instrumentation and allografts for fracture fixation.Progressive pelvic and femoral osteolysis is a significant and enduring problem in total hip arthroplasty. Routine screening is essential for early diagnosis and prophylactic care. Osteolysis is often described as a silent disease, and even its detection is clinically and radiographically challenging Under current guidelines Five patients (2 men, 3 women) with periprosthetic femoral osteolysis and severe contralateral hip arthritis sustained ipsilateral comminuted periprosthetic femur fractures. Ages ranged from 35 to 92 years. All complained of progressive pain in both hips. All 5 demonstrated poor mobility and were limited household ambulators. One patient required a cane, 3 required a walker, and 1 required a wheelchair. Elective revision surgery had been recommended to each patient, but all 5 had either refused or deferred surgery. A minor fall in the home was the immediate cause of each fracture. Each patient had multiple medical comorbidities. Before surgery, 2 patients required emergent cardiac catheterization, and 1 required placement of an inferior vena cava filter. Four patients had a Vancouver type B3 fracture, and 1 had a type B2 The acetabular metal shell was well fixed in 3 patients, but the polyethylene liner in all 5 patients demonstrated gross evidence of asymmetrical wear. In 2 patients, a constrained liner of a different manufacturer was cemented into the well-fixed shell. In the third patient with a well-fixed shell, the liner was changed from a 28-mm conventional polyethylene to a 32-mm highly cross-linked polyethylene. The other 2 patients had loose acetabular components which required socket revision using jumbo cementless hemispherical cups. The femoral side was reconstructed in each patient with a cementless distally fixed long stem ranging in length from 250 to 305 mm ( Patients were protected with limited weight bearing on a walker or 2 crutches until fracture healing and implant stabilization. Four of the fractures demonstrated healed fractures with stable implants by 3 months. One hip demonstrated stem subsidence of 2 cm at 6 weeks, but stabilized by 3 months with no further migration. Patients were available for follow-up after a minimum of 6 months. Two patients underwent elective contralateral primary total hip arthroplasty after 6 weeks and have returned to active community ambulation ( Patients with femoral osteolysis around a total hip arthroplasty and with associated degenerative joint disease in the contralateral hip are at risk for periprosthetic femoral fracture. These patients are clearly distinct from those with a normal contralateral hip. Recognizing this pattern with timely intervention may prevent the occurrence of a potentially catastrophic revision situation. In patients with periprosthetic femoral osteolysis and without contralateral hip disease, we agree that expectant treatment may be appropriate. These patients are strong enough and functional enough with a well-functioning contralateral hip to prevent increased loading on the lytic femur. However, patients with severe contralateral degenerative changes and significant hip pain will often be unable to do so. Their functional limitation can be so severe that even greater weight is pathologically shifted to the lytic side. With balance and gait further compromised, the risk of falling is also greatly increased. Based on these 5 patients, we recommend timely elective hip surgery. Ideally, we recommend treatment of the contralateral degenerative side with early total hip arthroplasty. Primary total hip arthroplasty in this situation is likely to be routine and allow accelerated recovery with early progression to full weight bearing. Once recovery is complete, the patient may then undergo elective revision of the osteolytic side. With a well-functioning hip arthroplasty on the contralateral side, the patient can more easily comply with postoperative restrictions after hip revision. For patients in whom fracture has already occurred around the hip arthroplasty, we have observed significant lysis and comminution beyond what was judged to be present on the initial injury films. The femoral stem is loose and requires revision. Stability of the femoral component is obtained with long-stem cementless distal fixation because of the osteolytic and fractured proximal bone Failure of routine screening and a failure to communicate the urgency of timely intervention can lead to catastrophic results. Admittedly, these periprosthetic fractures may have been avoided. Appropriate elective surgery addressing both hips will also allow for optimization of medical comorbidities. The patients profiled here are usually elderly or debilitated with significant comorbidities. Ideally, all of these patients would have had work-up and coordinated treatment of outstanding medical issues electively.