Extracting strategic metals from currently unused materials is an exciting research topic. Combining the quest for new applications of materials currently going to landfill with a smart way of managing secondary resources, this paper explores the application of an automated mineralogy system. With respect to rising demands for commodities, secondary resource investigation is coupled with a study of responses of stabilised fly ash to metal extraction techniques. Thus, the evolution of particles to different treatment steps is analysed and processes evaluated. Ash-based secondary resources are notoriously difficult to analyse, as particle sizes are small and high contents of amorphous material render classic mineralogy analyses difficult.In 2016, lignite-based electricity production accounted for 23.1% of the gross energy generation in Germany ( As increased awareness of limited resources and interest in recycling (or extracting potentially useful material from waste/secondary resources) arises, the question arose, whether this material has more to offer. Numerous studies (e.g. Similar to fly ash, stabilisates contain a high amount of amorphous components. This renders XRD (X-ray diffractometry) analyses tricky, as amorphous phases may influence the signals. X-ray fluorescence (XRF) and XRD was applied for assessments of potentially extractable materials ( Thermal ash processing aims at reducing the amorphous fraction with a simultaneous specific metal enrichment, facilitated by phase transformation on particle surfaces and recrystallization processes. For optimal crystallization behaviour, 40 g of stabilisate were placed in a corundum crucible and heated in a muffle furnace to 1000 °C. After 1 hr, the ash was cooled down to room temperature and mineral phase analyses were carried out by XRD and SEM. Leaching experiments were conducted with native and thermally pre-treated ash using supercritical carbon dioxide ( An automated mineralogy analysis was carried out at Geometallurgy lab, Freiberg. Powder samples of stabilisate, HCl-treated stabilisate (digestion residue), sc-CO Stabilisate from A total of 64 EDX-spectra were identified (list in From untreated to heated material, the magnesium-rich spectrum disappears. This material is barely visible in plots of the full components, as it only accounts for 0.45% of the total initial sample (grouped among “other” in Most notably, a new particle morphology evolved during sc-CO Digestion of the material leads to an extraction of, broadly speaking, all phases except silicate material: quartz, aluminosilicates (such as feldspars) and other silicate compounds. Residue studies confirm, however, that there are subtle differences. Applying acid only, without prior thermal treatment, leads to a much larger amount of aluminosilicates in the residue compared to a combination of treatment steps. Applying sc-CO Treatment of stabilisate results in extraction of different compositional phases. As expected, the most potent extraction technique is HCl digestion, while the other processes were chosen to improve digestion results ( Keeping the inhomogeneous nature of the material in mind, compositional shifts from untreated to heated/heated and The following is reported from software-based, MLA analysis, and not a physical screening. The general trend is a reduction in particle sizes. At a d While Particle size distribution curves fall roughly into three patterns – (1) distributions similar to the original material (gap graded, larger variety in sizes at the coarse end), (2) distributions with a variety of grain sizes, no gaps and (3) distributions moving towards a well-graded sample population, less variety in grain sizes ( Stabilisate > Stab Type (1) Thermal treatment leads to a general reduction of all grain sizes. This means, there is more variety of sizes within the larger particle sizes in samples Stab Type (2) Type (3) Particle changes triggered by acid treatment are the most powerful when acting on tempered material – at least, particle sizes are extremely reduced and distributions much closer to uniform grading than in untreated material. Particle morphologies change as a response to different treatment processes. MLA allows for studying individual, polished particles – thus, cross-sections of the particles reveal their internal structure. Images may be accessed as BSE (back-scattered electron) images, or as classified, false colour images where every hue corresponds with an EDX spectrum. Images here are portions of the sample, showing both BSE and GXMAP versions. In BSE images, lighter colours correspond to heavier elements, black is background epoxy resins. The interpreted, GXMAP image does not contain a full key, as this is meant to illustrate particle morphologies and general texture of the material only. Only the initial material and the changes after Originally, ( After tempering ( The most striking shift in particle morphology occurs between native stabilisate and Considering material associations, there were no significant (>5%) changes except for aluminosilicate-dominant material. Here, ternary Wherever more than one treatment step was applied, the amount of ternary ternary ternary ternary A reduction in liberated grains is not interpreted as no breakdown/particle formation but rather as a recovery success: the formerly present liberated grains are not part of the residue anymore. The breakdown table visualises how different compositional groups respond to treatment combinations ( As the material is inhomogeneous, and different compositional parts respond differently to chemical treatment, it follows: Quartz liberation works well with acid digestion and all other combination treatments. It is slightly wanting for a treatment combination without acid digestion. Other silicates experience medium liberation in acid digestion and combinations thereof, with the exception of the triple process residue. Both in the triple process residue and in the tempered and Aluminosilicates compounds respond well to tempering and In absolutes, quartz ternary Another automated operation the MLA software permits is an angularity measurement. The initial material is highly amorphous, chemical treatments and pre-treatments are applied to improve recovery of target phases. Often, it is more desirable to transfer material to crystalline phases. Newly formed crystalline phases should be more angular. At the same time, a presumption was that angular material would be more acid accessible, thus, residue of acid treatment would be more rounded. This is not the case, material composition has a much higher impact on acid accessibility in fly ashes than particle morphology. As described by Average angularity of the particles in this sample set varies between 40 and 56. In grains of these samples, low angularity values (below 1) also correspond with low aspect ratios (1 or close to 1). Applying this tool, average angularity of particles decreases in the following order: Stab The native material lies close to the middle of this sequence, treatment processes of tempering and digestion, Tempering on its own lead to more angular particles than the original material, due to crystallisation processes in material reorganisation. These new crystal phases result, overall, in particles with higher degree of angularity. Next more angular is the result of tempering, The study of particle morphologies is interesting, as inhomogeneous materials such as stabilisate may not respond to treatment steps uniformly. In order to evaluate the success of every treatment step, several samples were studied. Treatment steps on their own or in combination have different effects on the individual components of the material. By reviewing different steps, this work shows that a tailor-made process for every target is necessary. Applying several treatment steps allow for the extraction of the full Fe-content of the material, recovery of Al-rich material is also practicable. Remaining residues are always rich in silica-dominant amorphous material, for which a use as a raw material for zeolite synthesis is proposed. By removing impurities, such as Fe, first, the residue may yield a cleaner, more consistent zeolitic product. Removing these components from the material first reduces the need for product purification after zeolite synthesis. Impurities such as iron oxides, calcite, aragonite, gypsum, mullite and trace elements may not only result in tainted zeolite products, but may also delay the whole process of zeolitisation. Purification processes before zeolitisation are therefore favoured over purification processes after synthesis. To allow for this, the material needs to be known and elemental associations for unwanted elements need to be investigated. The authors wish to thank the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: