This Special Issue of the International Journal of Refractory Metals and Hard Materials (IJRMHM) is a peer-reviewed collection of papers presented at the 10th International Conference on the Science of Hard Materials (ICSHM10). The ICSHM conference series have taken place over the period 1981–2014: Moran, 1981; Rhodes, 1984; Nassau, 1987; Madeira, 1991; Maui, 1995; Lanzarote, 1998; Ixtapa, 2001; San Juan, 2004; Montego Bay, 2008; and the 10th in Cancun, Mexico, March 10–14, 2014. Similar to the previous conferences, the main objective of ICSHM10 was to provide an interdisciplinary forum for presentation, discussion and exchange of modeling, experimental and applied concepts that contribute in the advancement of the field of Hard Materials. The successful achievement of these objectives at ICSHM10 can be assessed on the following basis: Regarding attendance, an audience of more than 100 delegates (from over 25 countries) participated, and included a large representation of industry delegates and PhD students. From scientific and technical viewpoints, the 85 contributions presented (most of which appear in this Special Issue) demonstrated the ever increasing synergy between science and technology to catalyze and attain products of superior quality and enhanced performance; for example tools and devices of hard materials, via innovative microstructural design at different length scales: bulk/film, monolithic/composite, functionally graded, surface modified, and micro/nano-structures. This was achieved through a balanced, comprehensive and quality technical program which addressed a broad range of subjects such as: History behind hardmetals; fundamental concepts; microstructure–property correlations; processing issues; advanced characterization; simulation, modeling and thermodynamics; cemented carbides, ceramics, superhard materials and coatings. From an application perspective, ICSHM10's presentations also reflected the growing abundance and novel uses of hard materials not only within consolidated sectors such as metalworking, mining, oil/gas drilling, construction, process and machine building industries, but also into high-tech and emerging technologies in the electronics, transport and energy sectors, among others. The facts that more than one quarter of the attendees came from industry and about one third of the contributions were the result of joint collaborations among industry, research institutes and academia clearly highlight the close and tight relationship between science and technology in ICSHM events. Finally, from a social viewpoint, the unique position of Cancun in the Mexican Caribbean as a gateway to the Riviera Maya provided the participants with endless opportunities for personal exchange as well as for great recreational and cultural activities. ICSHM10 success was a combined result of strong support from all the delegates (particularly those that chaired technical sessions), the contributing authors (notably those presenting keynote talks), the reviewers, the members of ICSHM10 Scientific Committee (especially Prof. Emilio Jiménez-Piqué who also actively worked as ICSHM10's Secretary) and the IJRMHM/Elsevier's publishing staff. Papers published in this Special Issue were peer-reviewed and accepted based on their merit and significance; thus, the conference proceedings should provide an excellent reference and stimulus for exploring collaborations and interactions between researchers and technologists, besides being an updated framework for breakthrough ideas for research and development in this field. As ICSHM10's organizers, we are indebted and thankfully acknowledge the financial assistance provided by the industrial sponsors: Last but not least, as ambassadors of the ICSHM's research community, we would like to offer our most sincere appreciation and recognition to Dr. Hugo Ortner for his outstanding effort in assembling this Special Issue. Indeed, this appreciation goes well beyond ICSHM10 back to the publication of several previous ICSHM's Proceedings as IJRMHM's Special Issues. Dr. Ortner has not only always been a full-supporter of these Conferences, but has also been an integral part in helping to maintain the high-quality of contributions included in ICSHM's Proceedings. Thank you Hugo!