Selective separation of smithsonite from gangue, especially calcite, remains a difficult problem in practice due to the fact that selectivity of depressants currently used is not good. In this study, fenugreek gum (FGM) was used as a new depressant to separate smithsonite from calcite when using cationic collector octadecylamine acetate (ODA). Flotation results show that FGM can excellently separate smithsonite from calcite. The selective interaction mechanism of FGM was disclosed by zeta potential measurements, adsorption amount measurements and FTIR studies. The results of adsorption amount measurements indicate that FGM adsorbs much more on calcite than smithsonite and the interaction of FGM with calcite lowers the adsorbed amount of ODA on calcite surface. The zeta potential measurements results show that FGM hardly interferes with the surface charge of smithsonite but has conspicuous influence on that of calcite. The FTIR studies confirm the chemisorption of FGM on calcite surface and weak adsorption on smithsonite surface, possibly caused by electrostatic interaction or hydrogen bond.With the development of society, zinc is widely used in the galvanizing industry, pigment industry, rubber industry, textile and pharmaceutical industry. However, with the depletion of zinc sulfide resources, the demand for zinc oxide becomes more and more intense [ Flotation is still a preferred technique to separate smithsonite from calcite so far [ Depressants, aiming at achieving flotation separation of minerals by excluding from gangue minerals, are widely used in flotation to improve the flotation selectivity [ Fenugreek gum (FGM) is derived from the endosperm of the seeds, which is widely used in the chemical industry, plant extraction, health care products, food and cosmetics [ In this paper, fenugreek gum (FGM) was selected as a new depressant to investigate if it can selectively separate smithsonite from calcite using cationic collector octadecylamine acetate (ODA). Single mineral flotation was implemented in order to test the inhibition effect of FGM, and artificial mixed minerals flotation was conducted to verify the results of single mineral flotation. The depression mechanism was revealed by zeta potential measurements, FTIR studies, and adsorption amount measurements. Pure smithsonite and pure calcite were collected in Yunan Province, China and Hunan Province, China, respectively. The samples were crushed, ground and screened in order to get the desired sample. −74 + 38 μm fractions were prepared for the flotation tests and −38 μm samples for adsorption amount measurements. In addition, part of the sample was further turned into −2 μm by grinding in an agate mortar and screening to meet the particle size requirements of the zeta potential measurements and FTIR. Elemental analyses ( The fenugreek gum (FGM, molar molecular weight: 300 000) was obtained from Zhengzhou Jiuting Chemical Industry Co., Ltd, China. The molecular structure unit of FGM is shown in Flotation experiment was conducted with an XFG flotation machine (spindle speed 1992 r/min), as depicted in previous publications [ For artificial mixed minerals flotation experiments, mixed binary minerals were acquired by smithsonite and calcite with a weight ratio of 1:1. Mixed binary mineral flotation was implemented the same as that of single mineral flotation apart from the feeds. The concentrates and tailings were assayed for Zn. The reagents were configured to a certain concentration with the volumetric flask. The flotation tests repeated three times, the data averaged. Adsorption amount measurements were carried out with a TOC-LCPH Analyzer from Japan. 2 g of mineral sample was added into a beaker containing 35 mL DI water with a magnetic stirrer at a speed of 1992 r/min at 25 ℃. Then, the slurry suspension was treated with Na   The zeta potential tests were implemented with a Coulter Delsa440sx measuring instrument. First, 30 mg of the −2 μm sample powder was mixed in 40 mL 1 × 10 FTIR studies were implemented with a FT-IR spectrometer IRTracer-100 from Japan using diffuse reflection method with 30 scans at a resolution of 2 cm Single mineral flotation tests were implemented and the results are shown in   Mixed binary minerals test was conducted with 1 × 10  To uncover the effect of FGM on the adsorbed amount of ODA on calcite, the adsorbed amount of ODA on calcite under different added amount of FGM were measured as shown in Zeta potential measurements was implemented as shown in Based on above ion-exchange reaction equation, the interaction between Na In the absence of Na In order to deeply investigate the adsorption mechanism of the FGM onto the mineral surfaces, the FTIR spectra of the two minerals treated with desired reagents were implemented under the same condition in this work. The results are presented in  FT-IR spectra of FGM and calcite treated with desired reagents are presented in Based on the above analyses, the selective inhibition mechanism of FGM is shown in As shown in  The separation of smithsonite from calcite can be achieved using a new depressant FGM in sulfidation-amination flotation. Through analyzing the adsorption, zeta potential and FTIR spectra measurements results, it is concluded that the adsorption of FGM on smithsonite surface is much less than that on calcite surface and the pre-adsorption of FGM lowers the adsorption of ODA on the calcite surface. This strong effect is put down to strong chemisorption of FGM on calcite surface and a probable weak adsorption caused by electrostatic interaction or hydrogen bond onto smithsonite surface, which explains the flotation results. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.