Life-threatening bleeding is uncommon following blunt facial trauma. There have been few reports in the literature describing its optimal management and a clear approach to treatment is yet to be defined.
                  Reported strategies for control of facial haemorrhage include oro-nasal packing, external carotid artery ligation, transantral ligation of the internal maxillary artery, maxillary reduction and angiographic embolisation. Advances in angiography and selective vessel embolisation have made this the treatment of choice in cases of bleeding following penetrating facial injury. Its use in the management of bleeding following blunt facial trauma is unclear.
                  The combined experience of the facial trauma teams at Harborview Hospital, Seattle, USA and Liverpool Hospital, Sydney, Australia yielded four cases of severe life-threatening haemorrhage following blunt trauma that underwent angiography. The roles of various management strategies were evaluated to generate a preferred management pathway in treating severe bleeding following blunt facial trauma.Life-threatening haemorrhage following facial trauma is uncommon with the reported incidence ranging from 1.25 to 11% in clinical series. In the trauma setting, particularly with uncontrolled facial bleeding compromising airway, breathing and circulation, a simple management plan to control the haemorrhage effectively and efficiently needs to be defined. Previous case reports and series have failed to provide a consensus management strategy for the treatment of life-threatening haemorrhage following blunt facial trauma. Traditionally, the approach to controlling facial bleeding has been to employ oro-nasal packing after securing the airway. Temporary reduction of the fractures in the emergency room may also be attempted. Persisting bleeding is then managed in the operating theatre with either transantral ligation of the internal maxillary artery (IMA) or ligation of the external carotid artery (ECA). The combined experience of the facial trauma units at Harborview Hospital, Seattle, USA and Liverpool Hospital, Sydney, Australia yielded four cases of life-threatening haemorrhage following blunt trauma undergoing angiographic embolisation. The roles of various management strategies were evaluated to generate a preferred management pathway in treating severe bleeding following blunt facial trauma. Liverpool Hospital: all patients were selected from prospectively maintained trauma databases between 1995 and 2001. In this period there were 13 834 trauma admissions; 1131 with severe facial injury following blunt facial trauma were identified. Of these, only one patient had life-threatening haemorrhage proceeding to angiographic embolisation. Harborview Medical Center (HMC) is the level 1 trauma centre for five states in the Northwest United States. From 1985 to 2000 there were 62 366 total trauma admissions at HMC. Of these 7147 were admitted to the medical centre with craniofacial trauma. Dr Joe Eskridge, Professor of Neuroradiology of the University of Washington was responsible for all emergency embolisation procedures on trauma patients since 1987. From a total of 3529 embolisation procedures performed since 1987, 28 were performed for penetrating craniofacial trauma and three for blunt craniofacial trauma. A 37-year-old man presented with severe epistaxis following alleged assault. Clinical and radiographical examination confirmed the presence of maxillary (Lefort II), right malar, right zygomatic arch, right orbital wall, and nasal fractures. Initial control of the patient's bleeding in the emergency department was achieved by oro-nasal packing. Recurrent major epistaxis occurred 4 Approximately 12 The patient remained stable and nasal packs were removed two days later. He was extubated on day 7. On day 9 he had another episode of epistaxis requiring reintubation and return to the operating room for nasal packing. At this time, a decision was made not to fix the facial fractures as they were only minimally displaced and the bleeding had stopped easily with nasal packing. Packs were removed on day 14 and he had no further bleedings. One month later this patient was found to have a 3-cm diameter palatal fistula at the junction of the soft and hard palate. This was thought to have arisen from a combination of aggressive nasal packing and arterial embolisation resulting in ischaemic pressure necrosis. A pharyngeal flap was used to repair the defect without any complication. A 25-year-old man was the restrained driver in a high speed car accident resulting in a right ankle fracture, cervical-spine injury, and multiple facial fractures with soft tissue injury. On clinical exam he had massive facial swelling, an unstable midface with obvious parasymphyseal mandible fracture, and a ruptured right globe. Fine cut (1 After CT evaluation the patient was taken emergently to the operating room where he underwent tracheostomy, right eye enucleation, maxillo-mandibular interdental fixation (MMF) with rigid fixation of the mandible fracture and soft tissue closure. The maxillary fractures were not internally fixed due to patient instability. Oral and posterior nasal packing was performed for persistent bleeding. Estimated blood loss was 4 From the operating room the patient was taken straight to the angiography suite because of persistent oro-nasal bleeding, where active extravasation of contrast at the distal right internal maxillary artery was visualised. Both internal maxillary arteries were embolised to prevent future collateralisation of flow. The patient had no further bleeding episodes after embolisation. Six days later he was brought back to the operating room for open treatment of his remaining facial fractures including cranial bone grafting with obliteration of his frontal sinus, MMF and removal of his oral and nasal packings. Repeat CT scan of the mandible revealed left and right condylar neck fractures. On day 13 he was taken back to the operating room for open reduction internal fixation of the right condylar neck fracture and revision of the MMF. He was transferred from the hospital on day 18 in a stable condition. An 80-year-old edentulous woman pedestrian was struck by a car at an estimated 50 The trauma team did not feel the patient was stable enough to undergo a facial CT scan. The patient was taken immediately to the operating room where she underwent a laparotomy with repair of a liver laceration, placement of a pelvic external fixature, posterior nasal compression with Foley catheters, and packing of the pharynx and oral cavity. Due to persistent haemodynamic instability requiring multiple transfusions and persistent facial bleeding she was then taken straight to the angiography suite where she had embolisation of multiple pelvic bleeders as well as successful bilateral coil embolisation of external carotid arteries. She remained coagulopathic and haemodynamically unstable. Due to the constellation of injuries and poor prognosis, the decision was made with the family to discontinue resuscitation. She died approximately 3 A 38-year-old man crashed his motorcycle into a tree at high speed suffering massive facial injuries. He was brought to the emergency room intubated with vigorous bleeding from clinically unstable fractures of the maxilla and mandible. A fine cut facial CT scan showed right Lefort I, II, III, and left Lefort I, II severely comminuted maxillary fractures with loss of maxillary dentition. The mandible had a right medially displaced condylar neck fracture, and an ascending ramus fracture. There were no intracranial or spinal injuries. Posterior nasal and oropharyngeal packing were placed in the emergency room. He was taken to the operating room emergently for a tracheostomy, and for a bronchoscopy to remove teeth in the pulmonary airway. The patient remained haemodynamically stable, having received 2 units of blood, yet had persistent bleeding through his oropharyngeal packing. His pulmonary status, however, was precarious, and the decision was made to proceed with a cerebral angiogram instead of fixation of his facial fractures. The angiogram demonstrated large extravasation of contrast from the right internal maxillary artery. The bilateral internal maxillary, bilateral facial, and bilateral right transverse facial arteries were embolised to control collateral flow. His bleeding resolved and non-operative treatment was instituted for the patient's neurologic dysfunction and his pulmonary instability secondary to pneumonia and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). By day 4 of admission, the patient was deemed stable enough to undergo rigid fixation of his mandible alone. On day 6 he underwent open reduction and internal fixation of the remainder of his facial fractures with calvarial bone graft to the orbits and maxillary buttresses, as well as MMF. There was bone loss of the anterior maxillary arch due to comminution. Ten months after the patient's injury, the patient underwent free fibular reconstruction of his maxillary arch to allow dental rehabilitation with osseointegrated implants. These four cases represent different blunt craniofacial trauma scenarios in which angiographic embolisation was used to control craniofacial bleeding. Case 1 had recurrent nasal bleeding uncontrollable by conservative means, with minimally displaced facial fractures. Case 2 had severely displaced and comminuted bimaxillary fractures with persistent epistaxis despite temporary fixation of the fractures with maxillo-mandibular fixation. Case 3 was an extremely unstable edentulous elderly patient with abdominal, pelvic and facial bleeding. She did not undergo any fixation of her facial fractures due to instability. Case 4 had severe comminution and bone loss of the maxilla with pulmonary instability and loss of maxillary dentition. These four cases all underwent angiographic embolisation in an attempt to control recurrent bleeding. Case 1 had a complication of palatal necrosis associated with the embolisation and/or the recurrent nasal packing. Case 3 died from her injuries. From retrospective review of these four cases and review of the literature, our purpose was to clarify a concise management pathway for facial bleeding in blunt facial trauma for our two centres. The complex anatomy and the bony skeleton of the midface can render direct ligation of a bleeding point virtually impossible. The internal and external carotid arteries (ICA and ECA) constitute a dual circulation, and are associated with extensive venous networks. The internal maxillary artery (IMA), an interosseous branch of the ECA, and its intraosseous branches are responsible for most life-threatening haemorrhage in midface fracture. Various techniques of haemorrhage control for craniofacial bleeding have been described including oro-nasal packing, ligation of the ECA, transantral ligation of the IMA, ligation of the ethmoidal arteries, maxillary reduction and angiographic embolisation. Oro-nasal packing is a technique whereby epistaxis is controlled by the principle of tamponade. Tight oro-nasal packing controls most bleeding points in complex midface fractures. When Foley catheters are used in conjunction with nasal packing they can also offer a means of temporary traction for fracture reduction in the emergency department. Alternatives to this packing technique are the use of proprietry inflatable devices (e.g. Epistat™, Rapid Rhino™, Rhino Rocket™). These devices operate through the same principles of tamponade. They utilise dual lumens which can variably inflate separate balloons for the anterior and posterior nasal spaces. A significant advantage of these is that they are more rapid to insert than the Foley catheter and gauze packing technique. Accurate reduction and fixation of facial fractures usually effectively controls facial bleeding following blunt trauma. It is important to highlight, however, the importance of splinting the maxilla when nasal packing is used in complex maxillary fractures even if MMF is employed, as packing may actually distract the maxillary fractures and promote haemorrhage. This may be done by formal fracture reduction and fixation, use of McKeeson props to splint against the mandible, or an external fixator. Nasal packs should be removed prior to maxillary splinting to ensure anatomic reduction of the maxilla. Case 2 demonstrates this point where the patient underwent MMF, however, was deemed too unstable to proceed to maxillary fracture fixation and was thus nasally packed and rushed to the angiography suite. This scenario may have contributed to continued haemorrhage. Surgical ligation of the ECA has limited success due to the abundant collateral circulation from the ICA system. The bleeding may also be venous in origin. Transantral ligation of the IMA is also difficult and unreliable due to anatomical distortion in severe fractures and limited visibility in the face of haemorrhage. In recent years, angiographic embolisation has been employed in cases where oro-nasal packing has failed to control haemorrhage. Its advantages include direct visualisation and control of multiple bleeding points, repeatability, and rapidity of deployment. It is our opinion that angiographic embolisation is less efficacious following blunt facial trauma than following focal penetrating injury, as there are often multiple bleeding points and traumatised soft tissue. Techniques of haemorrhage control must take into account the already compromised vascularity of the soft tissues to avoid necrosis; thus selective angiographic embolisation should only be a tool utilised when formal fracture reduction has failed to stop the bleeding. It must be noted, however, that maxillary fracture reduction has little effect on ICA sources of bleeding such as that from ethmoidal arteries in skull base trauma. In these cases, embolisation is the recommended treatment for persistent bleeding. The management pathway we advocate in our patients with blunt facial trauma is shown in If the patient is stable and bleeding has been tamponaded, secondary and tertiary trauma surveys are performed prior to open reduction and internal fixation of the facial fractures. If the patient is unstable and bleeding from the midface cannot be tamponaded, the patient is taken to the operating suite for urgent formal fracture reduction and/or application of maxillo-mandibular fixation on an angiogram table. If these efforts have failed to stop the haemorrhage then selective angiographic embolisation is undertaken in the operating room under image intensifier control. Case 2 represents this use on, however, splinting of the maxof embolizatiilla prior to nasal packing in this setting must be reinforced. Case 1 deviates from this algorithm, and was treated with packing followed by embolisation when the bleeding persisted, instead of fracture reduction. If the patient is unstable and cannot undergo formal fracture reduction, but at the same time cannot undergo emergency temporary fixation with MMF because of lack of occlusal stability, then embolisation is indicated if a focal bleeding source is suspected. Cases 3 and 4 represent this use of angiographic embolisation. The need for angiographic embolisation for bleeding following blunt facial trauma is rare as demonstrated by this retrospective review of our two large trauma centres. At Liverpool hospital, one embolisation was performed in 1131 blunt facial trauma patients, at Harborview Medical Center, three embolisations were performed for 7147 blunt facial trauma patients. This emphasises that oro-nasal packing and fracture reduction should control the vast majority of bleeding following blunt craniofacial injury. Angiographic embolisation, however, remains a valuable tool in the treatment of persistent craniofacial bleeding when it is used appropriately as part of a systematic algorithm by an experienced interventional radiologist.