A recent article in this journal by Calvo et al. (2017) uses the Hubbert peak model to identify mineral commodities most threatened by resource depletion. It finds the global production of gold and antimony has already peaked. For 12 other commodities, peak production is expected within the next 50 years, raising further concerns about depletion. Wellmer and Scholz (2017a) challenge the conclusion that gold production has reached a Hubbert peak. They argue that with higher prices production will again rise. Calvo et al. (2018) reply that gold resources are limited and increasingly difficult to exploit.
                  This article—a third party review of this exchange—questions three critical assumptions of the Hubbert model—that resource availability shapes production trends, that ultimately recoverable resources can be reliably estimated, and that mineral commodity production follows a bell shape curve. It argues that commodity prices provide a better alternative to the Hubbert model and other methodologies using ultimately recoverable resources or other physical measures of scarcity. This means, to assess the availability of mineral commodities 50 or 500 years in the future, one needs some indication of the extent to which new technology will offset the cost-increasing effects of depletion.
                  Given the inherent difficulties of forecasting technological change, assessing reliably the future threat of resource depletion is often impossible. There are, though, exceptions: mineral commodities whose available resources can provide for continued production over many years with little increase in costs even without cost-reducing technology change.In their recent article in this journal, In a comment,  This exchange raises an important question: Does the Hubbert model offer a useful approach to identify those mineral commodities whose future availability is most threaten by depletion? This article explores this question. The sections that follow describe the Hubbert peak model, highlight its shortcomings, and finally consider a better alternative. M. King Hubbert was a geologist and geophysicist with an interest in assessing the long-run availability of petroleum and other energy resources in the United States and the world as a whole. During the 1950s and 1960s he wrote several influential articles ( To estimate the time at which production will peak requires estimating a bell-shaped curve—Hubbert used the probability density function of the logistic distribution curve—(a) whose area under the curve reflects the quantity of ultimately recoverable resources and (b) that best fits the historical production data. Using this approach, Hubbert’s rationale for a bell-shape production curve is in part empirical and in part logical. In examining the production curves for coal, crude oil, and natural gas for the State of Texas, the United States, and the world as a whole, he notes ( He continues by pointing out that the production of a finite resource cannot for long continue to grow exponentially. The physical limits of resource availability simply prevent this, causing production at some point to peak and then decline. Hubbert recognizes that the shape of the curve may vary and not follow perfectly a bell shape, but he and his followers consider the bell shape to be a reasonable proxy for the production path of mineral commodities given the constraints imposed over time by declining resource availability. The Hubbert model rests on three important assumptions. First, resource availability largely governs production trends over the long run. Second, ultimately recoverable resources (URR) for any mineral commodity are a given quantity—that is, a fixed stock—that can be accurately estimated. The Hubbert model is a special case of the general theory of production. The latter assumes that the production of any good or service is determined by the intersection of its supply and demand curves. As shown in Typically, the general theory assumes demand (Q Other factors—for example, technological change, government activities, or shifts in consumer preferences—may be added to this list or even be used in place of income, own price, or the price of substitutes. While a change in the commodity’s price reflects a move up or down a stationary demand curve, a change in any of the other determinants causes the demand curve to shift. An increase in the price of a substitute, for example, will shift a commodity’s demand curve to the right, which if none of the other determinants of demand change will increase both the output (production) and the price of the commodity. Similarly, we typically assume supply (Q When the market is in equilibrium, we know that the quantity demanded equals the quantity supplied. This equilibrium determines production. The Hubbert model, as noted, is a special case of this general model of production. It assumes that in the case of mineral commodities the supply equation (Eq. All the other determinants of supply, such as the cost of labor and energy, are of negligible importance compared to declining resource availability. Demand, in turn, is constrained by the availability supply (presumably by rising price). In short, after an initial period of rapid growth, production is entirely or almost entirely governed by resource availability. All the other variables that might possibly influence supply and demand (and hence production) are sufficiently insignificant that they can be ignored. Over the short run, a period of say up to 10 years, we know that this assumption is seldom valid. Strikes, cartels, mine accidents, inadequate investment in new capacity, and other determinants of supply and demand can and do cause production and prices to fluctuate greatly. But, the Hubbert model is focused on the long run. How valid is it to assume that resource availability largely determines supply and in turn production over the long run? While long-run trends in labor, energy, and other input costs can be important, a plausible case can be made that changes in resource availability due not just to depletion but also new technology largely drive shifts in the long-run supply curve for many mineral commodities. What is more questionable is the presumption that shifts in the long-run demand curve have little influence on production. We know that this is not always the case. For example, government restrictions on the use of lead and mercury, motivated by health concerns, have negatively impacted the production of both. According to Indeed, the peak in U.S. petroleum production outside Alaska around 1970 that Hubbert so famously predicted was likely as much or more the result of a reduction in the demand for domestic petroleum (thanks to the growing availability of cheaper foreign oil) than of declining domestic resources. Had it not been for imports, the U.S. oil price would have been higher and domestic production greater. Production would presumably have peaked at a later, perhaps much later, date. Moreover, government price controls can cause production to fall even in the absence of shifts in the supply and demand curves. As noted earlier, To recapitulate, production declines can occur because (a) the supply curve shifts inward due to declining resources availability, (b) the supply curve shifts inward for other reasons, (c) the demand curve shifts inward, or (d) government controls keep prices below their market clearing level. Only in the first of these four cases do production declines reflect growing resource scarcity. In order to estimate URR, the Hubbert model requires a reasonably accurate estimate of the amount of a mineral commodity that can be produced profitably in the future. This, however, is a moving target. As we have seen in recent years with hydraulic fracturing, new technology can over time develop potentially new sources of supply, thereby adding to URR and offsetting partially or totally the reductions caused by production. Similarly, new discoveries aided perhaps by new exploration techniques may add to URR. Alternatively, new technology can make substitute commodities more competitive, thereby reducing URR. In recent years, coal has presumably suffered this fate due to new technologies for producing natural gas and renewable energy. Since technological change is extremely difficult to forecast, especially over the longer term, it is far from clear that reliable estimates of URR are possible. We can highlight this point by exploring the shortcomings of some of the approaches taken by existing studies to approximate remaining resources and URR: Reserves estimate the quantity of a mineral commodity found in deposits that are both known (discovered) and profitable to exploit given existing technology, prevailing prices, and other current conditions. It is well known that reserves are a poor measure of remaining resources as new discoveries and technology add to reserves over time. However, some studies, for example, the influential book Resources include reserves plus potentially feasible reserves (that is, resources that could become reserves due to new discoveries and new technology in the future). The U.S. Geological Survey and other organizations publish estimates of resources for many mineral commodities. A number of studies, including Given the definition of resources, this would seem at first blush to be a reasonable assumption. Like reserves, however, estimates of resources vary over time as new technology and other developments alter our estimates of potentially feasible reserves. Table 1 in Crustal abundance, or what is sometimes called the resource base ( In short, various measures are available to estimate remaining resources and URR. Which measure one uses matters. For example, at current rates of copper production, reserves would last about 40 years, resources a little over 300 years, and crustal abundance some 84 million years ( For the reasons discussed earlier, the Hubbert model assumes that the production of a mineral commodity follows a bell shape curve over its economic life. For at least two reasons, however, this assumption seems questionable. First, new technology can greatly alter estimates of URR, causing significant changes in production trends. Again, oil production in the United States provides a good example. Hubbert correctly predicted the peak in production that occurred in the early 1970s and for some time it appeared U.S. production was indeed following the assumed bell shape pattern. The introduction and widespread use of hydraulic fracturing in the country over the past couple of decades, however, has reversed the downward trend. Today production is as high as its peak in the early 1970s. Supporters of the Hubbert model contend that the bell shape trend continues to be valid but applies only to conventional oil. But, this argument renders the Hubbert model useless in anticipating future shortages that matter. Why do we care if conventional oil becomes scarce if there are ample supplies of unconventional oil? In his comments on an earlier version of this article, F.-W. Wellmer noted: “We can observe the same line of argument with the supporters of Peak Phosphorus. They have to realize that the postulated peak in the 2030s is unrealistic, but now they try to save their line of argumentation by proposing a peak of high grade P or peak P from deposits with low deleterious elements. But who cares when we have the technology to deal with lower grade deposits and with deleterious elements?” Second, given the vagaries in the demand for mineral commodities, production is unlikely to follow a bell shape pattern when (as is normally the case) both demand and supply determine output. For many years molybdenum was used largely in military equipment requiring specialty steels. Its production boomed during World War I. It then collapsed following the war, only to rise once again with the start of World War II. These fluctuations in output had nothing to do with resource availability. Nor did they produce a bell shape pattern of production. The assumption that production follows a bell shaped curve coupled with the rapid growth in the production of many mineral commodities since 1950 produces estimates of future production that often exceed current consumption by many multiples, far beyond what seems reasonable given evolving trends in global population, per capita income, and material intensity of use. Others, including Interestingly, Two conflicting distortions, however, call into question this result. First, as highlighted above, crustal abundance greatly overestimates URR. But, second, production is unlikely to grow at an exponential rate over decades or centuries as the bell shape curve presumes in this case. If the huge estimates for URR derived from crustal abundance were valid, future production would be constrained much more by demand than by resource availability and supply considerations. These three assumptions of the Hubbert model undermine its usefulness. In particular, because it assumes production peaks are always the result of declining resource availability, because it typically assumes remaining resources and URR are fixed at levels that are too low, and because it assumes production follows a bell shape pattern, this approach to forecasting future shortages of mineral commodities exaggerates the threat from resource depletion and often predicts shortages that are unlikely to occur over the foreseeable future. To their credit, This raises an interesting issue: When does it make sense to use a variety of approaches to answer a question or to address a policy issue? When does it make sense to use only the best approach? And, if all the available methodologies suffer from shortcomings, when is it best to use none of them? Here, where the central question is how to identify those mineral commodities whose future availability is most threatened by resource depletion, a strong case can be made to use either the best approach or none at all. The best approach, I believe, is what We will never physically run out of oil or other mineral commodities. If depletion threatens their long-run availability, it will do so by pushing production costs and prices ever higher. This would reduce and eventually eliminate demand. At this point, there would still be minerals in the ground, they would simply be too costly to exploit. This view of depletion suggests that economic measures of availability (or scarcity) are more appropriate than the more common physical measures. The latter assume that the remaining resources from which a mineral commodity is extracted are fixed stocks. By assessing the magnitude of these stocks and then estimating current and future production, one can determine how long the available stocks will last. Of the five different methodologies that Economic measures in contrast focus on the sacrifice—or what are often called the opportunity costs—that society has to incur to obtain additional amounts of a mineral commodity. Real (inflation adjusted) prices are commonly used for this purpose. So, silver is scarcer than zinc, since the price of silver is much higher than that for zinc. And, over the past century the availability of copper has remained more or less the same, since the long-run trend in real copper prices despite its short-run volatility has been relatively flat. In short, economic measures focuses on how commodity prices are moving to assess availability, rather than on how production or how remaining resources are changing. In While economic measures of availability, as discussed below, are not free of problems, physical measures can be completely misleading. To see this, we can return to the discussion in the last section. If new technology over time makes renewable sources of energy cheaper and so more competitive than fossil fuels, the remaining resources of fossil fuels will fall. In addition, their production will peak and decline sooner than otherwise. Nevertheless, this demand-driven (rather than supply-driven) development actually is positive for society. The result is lower energy prices and thus greater energy availability than would have otherwise prevailed, along with a diminished concern over the depletion of non-renewable fossil fuel resources. Economic measures of scarcity, it is also worth noting, take fully into account the differences among mineral resources—the size and depth of deposits, the nature of their mineralization, proximity to ports and other infrastructure, and so on—that greatly impact production costs. Physical measures of scarcity separate mineral occurrences into those that are and are not remaining resources. Remaining resources are typically assumed to be more or less homogeneous, though In short, the economic view of depletion does not rest on the three questionable assumptions that underpin the Hubbert model. It takes fully into account all the determinants of supply and demand—not just resource availability—that govern commodity production and prices. And, it does not presume that production follows a bell shape curve whose peak depends on questionable estimates of URR. One rather positive and comforting implications of the economic model of depletion is that depletion-induced future shortages of mineral commodities are no longer inevitable. While depletion tends to drive production costs up over time, new technology and new discoveries can offset or even more than offset this upward pressure on prices and availability. Existing data on current and past mineral commodity prices are abundant. The available studies of this information identify many commodities, such as copper and zinc, whose long-run trends in real prices have remained more or less constant over the past century or two. Of course, we have no guarantee that this favorable situation will continue into the future. If we knew the real prices for mineral commodities a decade or a century from now, we could easily determine those commodities that depletion will most threaten. But, unfortunately, we don’t. Moreover, given the inherent difficulties of forecasting future technological developments, particularly over the long run, reliable forecasts of future mineral commodity prices are problematic. Many might say impossible. Indeed, as the following quote shows, this was the view that I held for many years ( So, despite all that we have learned about the long-run availability of mineral commodities, the central question remains unanswered. We simply do not know whether or not coming generations face a future of mineral commodity shortages. Those who argue otherwise ask the rest of us to share their faith, or lack of faith, in technology. This is why the debate continues. More recently, however, efforts to circumvent this problem have emerged. They rely upon what is called the cumulative availability curve. This curve, illustrated in The curve rises monotonically with price, as shown in Future prices and hence the future availability for any given mineral commodity depend on (1) the shape of its cumulative availability curve, (2) how quickly society moves up the curve, and (3) shifts in the curve over time. Shifts in the curve occur when technology or any of the other current conditions held constant change. How quickly society moves up the curve depends upon cumulative production and its determinants (population growth, increases in per capita income, and changes in consumer preferences and other factors altering the intensity of material use). Finally, the shape of the curve is largely governed by geological conditions, particularly the nature and incidence of mineral occurrences. The first two considerations—how quickly society moves up the curve and shifts in the curve—depend on advances in technology and other future developments that are impossible to predict with much accuracy. The shape of the curve, however, can often be reliably estimated as it depends on geological developments that took place in the distant past. Moreover, the shape of the curve by itself can provide useful insights regarding the future threat of depletion. If the curve rises gradually, as illustrated in High quality, low cost mineral occurrences are rare and difficult to find, but marginal deposits—those that are just or almost economic to exploit—are far more common. As a result, we might normally expect the cumulative availability curve to have a rather benign shape, similar to that in Estimating cumulative availability curves is time consuming and costly. Such efforts require extensive information on the size and production costs of subeconomic deposits. Mining companies and others have largely ignored such deposits, as they are not profitable to exploit at current prices. Nevertheless, there are studies that attempt to estimate cumulative availability curves, including those dating back to the 1970s, when the U.S. Bureau of Mines was actively working in this area ( The opportunity cost approach does suffer from a few shortcomings of its own. There is also an asymmetry in the opportunity cost approach. A benign cumulative availability curve can with some certainty indicate that depletion will not be a serious problem. However, a less benign curve, one that rises steeply, is not a reliable indicator of significant future problems. New technologies and new discoveries may over time shift the curve downward sufficiently to offset the movement up the curve. Or, new developments may reduce demand, such as electric cars that do not need catalytic converts and the platinum and palladium that they contain. The advantages of the opportunity cost approach compared to the Hubbert peak model, however, are great. It focuses on production costs and prices, which are better measures of scarcity. So, it takes into account that mineral resources vary greatly in quality and cost. It recognizes that when the real price of a mineral commodity is falling it is becoming more available and less scarce even if the commodity’s production is declining. And, the opposite is true as well: when real prices are rising, the commodity is becoming more scarce regardless of how production is trending. In addition, the economic view of depletion does not depend on unreliable estimates of URR. And, finally, it does not presume that production after an initial rapid period of growth follows a bell-shaped curve governed largely by remaining resource availability. In this respect, it is consistent with the general theory of production and so can reflect the influence of all variables determining a mineral commodity’s supply and demand. Finally, a brief comment on gold. According to the However, in assessing the threat that depletion poses to the future availability of gold, it is not trends in production, but rather trends in price that are relevant. The critical question is: will the future see the real price of gold rise sufficiently to suffocate demand in many current end uses? Unfortunately, recent trends in the real price of gold are too volatile to provide much help in answering this question. What would be helpful is a cumulative availability curve showing how much gold is recoverable at various prices from the available resources given today’s technology and other current conditions. To my knowledge, such a curve does not yet exist. If it did and possessed a benign shape, we could conclude depletion was unlikely to soon be a problem. On the other hand, the curve might show that substantial quantities of gold were recoverable under existing conditions only at far higher prices. In this case, given the uncertainty surrounding future technological developments, we would have to conclude that reliable assessments of depletion’s threat to the future availability of gold were simply not feasible, at least at this time.