This paper compares the plant performances of various synthetic gypsums used as set regulators in cement. The decision about the suitability of a specific gypsum was based on measurements and comparisons of the specific areas (Blaine), initial setting time (min), final setting time (h), SO3 content and compressive strength of the OPC clinker mixed with it. The results from the trials run with synthetic gypsum that was wet milled and treated with milk of lime showed no significant difference in compressive strengths at all ages, but a delay of approximately 35% in initial and 50% in final setting times occurred. Gypsum from a Tioxide plant can be successfully used as set retarders for OPC cement if the handling problems can be solved. In this case, no significant difference in either initial or final setting times or the compressive strengths, were observed. The ultrasonically treated phosphogypsum displayed a large variability of 50% or more in final and initial setting times, as well as compressive strengths at all ages, and is unsuccessful in rendering the gypsum usable as a set retarder for OPC cement.A large quantity of natural gypsum is used by the cement industry as a set retarder for Portland cement. It is added to the clinker at the cement grinding stage, usually at a level of 3–5%, depending on its purity. The use of phosphogypsum and other synthetic gypsums to replace natural gypsum as a set retarder for cement is limited mainly due to varying moisture content and impurities, which can interfere with the workability of the cement. Natural gypsum deposits in South Africa are located a great distance away from most of the cement production plants. Because of high transport costs, this results in a great increase in the landed price of the gypsum. It would therefore be advantageous if phosphogypsum and other synthetic gypsums produced in proximity to a number of cement plants could be utilised instead of natural gypsum to control the setting time of the cement. Furthermore, it would simultaneously alleviate some waste disposal problems and reduce environmental pollution. The problems that could be caused in cement hydration due to the impurities present in synthetic gypsum, and in particular phosphogypsum, have been described by a number of investigators Two of the critical factors influencing cement setting time and strength development behaviour are the Blaine specific area and the sulphate content (% SO Plant trials were conducted according to the following procedure: At least eight samples of each of the gypsums, clinker and cement produced from it were collected before the introduction of the synthetic gypsum into the mill, during the trial with the synthetic gypsum in the mill and in the aftermath of the trial. Statistical analysis of the results obtained from the various tests and analyses resulted in an objective comparison of the performance of the synthetic gypsum as opposed to that of natural gypsum in cement. It also gave a clear and unbiased indication of the success of the treatment of the synthetic gypsum and the trial itself. A closed-circuit mill was used in all plant trials. The trials conducted concerned in the first instance the production of an ordinary Portland cement (OPC), with treated synthetic gypsum that was wet milled together with a milk of lime solution. The synthetic gypsum was obtained from a fertilizer producer, in this case producer no. 1. A complete description of the treatment process can be found in earlier reports Sulphate contents were determined with a Siemens X-ray fluorescence (XRF) spectrometer, whereas strength and setting time tests, as well as Blaine surface area measurements, were conducted in the normal manner as described in the relevant standard specifications Initial laboratory tests with this material have been described in a separate report After several laboratory trials, it was decided to conduct plant trials with the phosphogypsum from fertiliser producer no. 2, namely, Omnia. In both these cases, the phosphogypsum was treated with a patented ultrasonic process. It essentially consists of a piece of machinery with two plates about 1 cm apart from each other through which the phosphogypsum moved while an ultrasonic frequency was applied across the plates. According to sonochemistry theory The first plant trial conducted with the ultrasonically produced material was conducted in the same cement plant and on the same mill as those described previously for the treated material from fertiliser producer no. 1. First, a 4-h baseline test was performed, using the natural gypsum that is normally added in the cement milling process. This was followed by the production trial using the ultrasonically treated phosphogypsum, which lasted for a total of 17 h. The baseline test proceeded without any serious problems and the various samples of interest were collected every 30 min. Upon introduction of the treated gypsum through the mill feed chute, the process was given about 30 min to stabilise before the performance trials commenced. The treated gypsum had a darker cream colour and was much finer than the natural material. From visual observations, it seemed as though the treated gypsum had higher moisture content than the natural material. This caused the treated gypsum to build up at the mill feed chute, and the material had to be constantly cleared and pushed into the mill. The mill feed chute also did not have the correct inclination angle for the treated gypsum to flow easily, and this contributed to the buildup experienced. All these effects would have resulted in an uneven addition of gypsum to the cement and therefore effect the quality of the final product. To solve the feed problems experienced, one or more of the following options can be considered: The material should be dry so that it can flow more easily. The feed system can be changed to eliminate buildups. The treated material can be blended with the natural gypsum to decrease the overall moisture content before feeding the composite material into the mill. The treated material can be blended with clinker and then fed into the mill. Unfortunately, the product elevator broke a bucket during the trial and this caused the system to trip. Repairs had to be done before the trial could proceed again. This resulted in the trial being done in two parts. Samples of the relevant materials were collected every hour during the trial. The results obtained are summarised in Analysis of the results showed that there were considerable differences between the setting times (initial and final), the SO The treated phosphogypsum setting times showed a huge variability in the results, where the average for the initial setting time was 255 min and the range was 190 to 325 min. In comparison with the baseline samples, the initial set average was 137 min, with a range of 115 to 155 min. The same variation was found in the final setting times, with the treated phosphogypsum ranging from 4.25 to 6.00 h with an average of 5.38 h in comparison with the baseline samples that ranged from 2.75 to 3.75 h with an average of 3.03 h. The results indicated that the cement with treated phosphogypsum performed in a much poorer manner than the cement containing natural gypsum. Because of the problems experienced during the trial (as described above) and also because some contamination of the treated phosphogypsum was suspected, it was decided to perform another plant trial with this material. In this instance the initial baseline test lasted only 2 h before the actual trial run commenced. The trial with treated phosphogypsum being milled with the clinker lasted a total of 9 h, after which a second baseline test with natural gypsum was run for 5 h. Sample intervals were similar to that of the previous plant trial. The first baseline trial differed from the final one, because rapid hardening cement with a higher surface area was produced. During the trial and the second baseline test, OPC with a lower surface area was produced. One should therefore compare the results obtained during these latter two parts to arrive at fair conclusions about the performance of the manufactured cements. The results obtained on this occasion are given in Despite a repeat of the plant trial, the results still indicated significant differences between the baseline material produced with natural gypsum and those cements made with the treated phosphogypsum. The phosphogypsum-containing cement had longer initial and final setting times than the baseline cement (initial set more than 70 min and final set more than 0.8 h longer). The standard deviation in both initial and final setting time values for the cement with treated phosphogypsum is higher than that of the baseline material. Furthermore, the cement containing treated phosphogypsum had lower compressive strengths at 28 days than the baseline material (on average about 8.8 MPa), and its standard deviation was again substantially higher than in the case of the baseline material. Both the specific surface (100 cm The decision to evaluate this material stemmed from the fact that one of the cement plants in South Africa is currently using it as a set retarder in their plant. A visit paid to Natal Portland Cement (NPC) revealed that the handling equipment on the plant was specially reengineered to handle this material without hassles. Due to the high moisture content of the synthetic gypsum, container bins and feeders were lined with Teflon and fitted with mechanical vibrators to ensure a good flow of the material under plant conditions. As was previously the case, the experimental work comprised both a laboratory and plant phase. In the first phase, the synthetic gypsum was evaluated on a laboratory scale. The characteristics of the synthetic gypsum are summarised in In the laboratory stage of the investigation, the performance of natural and the synthetic gypsum were compared in terms of their effect on the setting time and strength development of an OPC produced with both. The results obtained are given in The results indicate that the sample containing synthetic gypsum compared well to the baseline one with natural gypsum. There was, however, a significant difference in the surface area measurements of the two samples, which will impact favourably on the strength development of the sample containing synthetic gypsum. The results were sufficiently encouraging to embark on a plant trial. A plant trial was subsequently conducted to evaluate the material's handling aspects in the existing plant, the compatibility with the process and its effects on the cement quality produced. From the onset, problems were experienced due to the fine nature and high moisture content of the material. At the start of the tests, the synthetic gypsum was fed into the gypsum feed bin with a grab crane. The material bridged up in the bin and would not flow under normal plant operation. The material had to be trickle fed from the grab crane and a team of three persons was required to ease the material through the chute onto the gypsum-weighing belt. This could potentially result in inconsistent feed of the gypsum and, subsequently, problems with the cement quality. The trial with the synthetic gypsum ran for 7.6 h before there was a switchover to natural gypsum to complete a baseline test. The baseline test after the trial with synthetic gypsum lasted for 5.5 h. During the trial, samples of the gypsum, clinker and final cement were taken hourly, and during the baseline test materials were sampled every half an hour. The results obtained are summarised in  The following can be very clearly deduced from these two figures: All the synthetic gypsums, except the treated AECI/Kynoch one, significantly retard the initial and final setting times of OPC containing them, when compared to natural gypsum. There is an additional lowering of the early-age strengths of all the OPCs containing synthetic gypsums, with the exception of the AECI/Kynoch treated gypsum. The OPC with the treated AECI/Kynoch phosphogypsums showed the least amount of variance in performance among all the OPCs containing synthetic gypsums. The OPC with the treated AECI/Kynoch phosphogypsum showed the closest resemblance in performance to the OPC containing natural gypsum. The gypsum treated by wet milling it with a milk of lime slurry can be substituted for natural gypsum in OPC without compromising the performance of the product. In summary, the plant trials indicate that both the treated gypsum from fertiliser producer no. 1, which has been wet milled with milk of lime, as well as the synthetic gypsum from the Tioxide producer can be used successfully as set retarders for cement and can act as replacements for natural gypsum without compromising the performance of cement. However, from a logistical point of view, the synthetic gypsum from the Tioxide producer is a nightmare to handle without suitable reengineering of parts of the plant. This will necessarily result in increased initial costs before any potential savings of replacing natural gypsum can be realised. On the other hand, the gypsum wet milled with milk of lime would also require a dedicated plant to produce this material, which entails an additional capital outlay. However, once it is produced, it can be handled with normal existing plant equipment without modifications. From the point of view of the quality and performance of the cement, the ultrasonically treated phosphogypsum displays the most variability and least consistency when replacing natural gypsum in cement. There are of course other issues that have not been addressed in this study, for example, the effect of organic admixtures like superplasticisers and set retarders on cements containing synthetic gypsums.