The surface wettability and flotation dynamic characteristics of calcite are of great significance for separating it from other coexisting minerals, and the surface roughness plays an important role in the wettability and floatability of calcite particles. In this paper, the effect of roughness on the wettability, surface energy, and flotation kinetics of calcite were investigated. Results indicated that roughness increased the wettability of the hydrophilic calcite surface, while enhanced the hydrophobicity of the hydrophobic surface. There was a good correlation between the wettability and surface energy of various roughness surfaces. The roughness (λ) of rod milled particles of the same size fraction was about 5% higher than that of ball-milled particles, and that of coarse particles was generally greater than fine. The relationship between particles roughness and flotation rate (k) can be quantitatively characterized well by k = 0.0039λ2–0.0589λ + 2.6097 for ball mill, and k = 0.1251λ + 0.8184 for rod mill.Calcite (CaCO In the flotation processing, methods used to change the mineral surface roughness include change the grinding method, for example, wet grinding and dry grinding [ In this paper, the influence of roughness on the wettability and surface energy of calcite under different collector conditions was studied. On this basis, the surface roughness of ball mill and rod mill products of different sizes, and the corresponding flotation recovery and kinetic characteristics were investigated according to the eq. The calcite sample in this study was obtained from Henan Province, China. Chemical analysis obtained by X-ray fluorescence showed that the content of CaO in the sample was 55.6%, indicating that the purity of calcite sample was over 99%. The mineralogical analysis performed by X-ray diffraction (X'Pert PRO, PANalytical Company, Netherlands) was revealed in Some large calcite samples of suitable size were selected and cut into blocks about 10 mm × 10 mm × 5 mm in size. The samples with different surface roughness were obtained by polishing the calcite blocks with the sandpaper P2000, P1000, P240, and P80, respectively, and marked as surface A, B, C and D. After sandpaper grinding, surface A was further polished with alumina polishing powder of 1.0 μm, 0.3 μm and 0.05 μm and a silk polishing cloth. These calcite blocks with different roughness will be used in the test of surface wettability and surface energy. The calcite samples used for grinding and flotation was crushed to about 2 mm, and then ground by a ball mill and a rod mill respectively. The ground products were screened and classified using the Taylor standard sieve. Four particle sizes of 180–250 μm, 125–180 μm, 75–125 μm, and 45–75 μm products were chosen to be used in the study of flotation kinetics. The collector sodium oleate (NaOL) used in contact angle and flotation tests were analytically pure from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd., China. The Formamide and Diiodomethane used in the surface energy test were also analytical reagents from Aladdin, China. All the water used in the research was deionized (Milli-Q, 18.25 MΩ·cm). A surface measurement instrument (MarSurf M400, Mahr, Germany) ( A HARKE-SPCAX3 contact angle tester (Beijing Hake Test Instrument Factory, China) was used for the wetting characteristics of the surface of the calcite block, and the baseline circle method was used during the test. Before the test, the calcite blocks were immersed in a certain concentration of NaOL solution for 12 h, and then naturally dried for a test. The specific test steps were described in detail in the previous research literature [ In this study, the surface energy of minerals was measured by Owens's three liquid method introduced in detail in the literature [ The calcite flotation kinetics test was carried out on the XFGII hanging cell flotation machine ( The test results of the roughness of calcite polished by different mesh sandpaper were shown in Results of It can be seen from Sodium oleate was considered to be an effective flotation agent for adjusting the wettability of calcite surface and widely used in the fundamental research of flotation of various minerals [ The results in It can be seen from the results in Based on the above results ( For the wettability change of calcite surface after treatment with different concentrations of NaOL, it can be explained by the collector adsorption and water drop wettability diagram as shown in  Based on the above analysis of the influence of roughness on the wettability of calcite in different surface states ( According to Wenzel theory, the solid-liquid interface contact area on the rough surface was larger than its corresponding apparent contact area (contact area of the smooth surface) ( Based on this Wenzel equation, the influence of roughness on wetting behavior of calcite blocks in The Cassie model was further modified for the wetting model of hydrophobic surface ( As the solid surface always tended to reduce the surface energy and keep stable, the solid surface energy determined whether the droplets spread or contract when they contact the surface [ The results of For the hydrophilic calcite surface, the surface roughness increased from 0.13 to 3.21, the surface energy increased from 40.23 J/m The specific surface area obtained by BET and corresponding calculated surface roughness of particles ground by the ball mill and rod mill was listed in Unlike the change in surface area, the surface roughness for both ball and rod mill products decreased when particle size decreases. This was because that the surface roughness depended on both surface area and particle size according to Eq. According to the previous study of wettability, the different surface roughness of particles may lead to different flotation characteristics [ It can be seen from the four-particle flotation results that the flotation kinetics of calcite particles can be well characterized by the first-order kinetics equation, and fitting constant R The flotation kinetic constants of each size fraction of ball and rod mills as well as the limit cumulative recovery calculated by fitting were further compared and analyzed in Compared with ball-milled calcite particles, rod milled calcite particles of the same particle size had larger flotation kinetic constants and theoretical ultimate recovery. At the same time, no matter for ball mill or rod mill products, with the gradual decrease of particle size, the ultimate recovery of flotation decreased in varying degrees, while the flotation kinetic constant decreased significantly. This result had a good correspondence with the result of roughness calculation. The roughness of coarse particles was greater than that of fine, and particles had relative higher recovery and flotation speed. Interfacial reaction rates may be enhanced by the greater specific surface area associated with rough surfaces, while the presence of surface features will generally tend to increase the density of high energy sites relative to a flat surface of the same substance. A similar conclusion reported by Ma et al. [ To further quantitatively describe the relationship between particle roughness and flotation rate of different grinding products, the linear fitting and second-order polynomial fitting were used for the surface roughness of ball and rod grinding particles and their flotation rate constants, and the results were shown in It can be seen from the results in Different roughness of calcite surfaces had significant differences in morphology, which leads to their different surface wettability. Whether it was the natural surface or the surface modified by NaOL, the influence of roughness on the wettability of calcite was consistent. When the surface of calcite was hydrophilic, the increase of surface roughness was conducive to the wettability of water on the surface, while when the surface was hydrophobic, the surface roughness will hinder the wettability of water on the surface, i.e., the surface hydrophobicity will be enhanced. These influence laws could be well explained by the Wenzel model and Cassie model. There was a good correlation between the wettability and surface energy of various roughness surfaces. The roughness of calcite particles by the rod mill was about 5% larger than that by the ball mill, and the roughness of coarse particles was greater than that of fine. The particles with larger roughness (λ) had relatively higher flotation recovery and flotation kinetic constant (k). The relationship between them could be described by k = 0.0039λ The authors declare no conflict of interest. This research was supported by the