A novel combined reagent dodecylamine (DDA)–2-octanol–kerosene was employed to overcome the problems associated with DDA, that is, DDA has a high freezing point and needs to be acidified with hydrochloric or acetic acid when it is used for flotation. The analysis of the basic physical properties of the agent showed that DDA–2-octanol–kerosene had significant advantages in freezing point and dispersibility and its freezing point can be reduced to below 0 °C. From the flotation results of magnetite, it can be seen that DDA–2-octanol–kerosene has a better selectivity. Response Surface Methodology based on a three-level, three-variable Box–Behnken design (BBD) was employed to define the quadratic relationship between the recovery of quartz and the composition of the mixed agent. The results indicated that the recovery of quartz increased with the increase of DDA or 2-octanol dosage, however, kerosene had a marginal positive effect on the recovery of quartz when the amount of kerosene was less than 0.76 times that of DDA and otherwise a negative effect. This study provides a new method and technical support for its industrial application for the reverse flotation of iron ore for the combination of agents in the field of iron ore flotation. And allows for a deeper macro-level understanding of the interaction between the DDA–2-octanol–kerosene ternary mixed agents.Research on iron ore flotation began in 1931. The reverse flotation of iron ore with cationic collectors is widely used in iron ore plants. However, the reverse flotation of iron ore with cationic collectors has the following disadvantages: (1) the collector needs to be acidified, which is inconvenient, and the acidic medium can severely corrode the equipment; (2) the flotation foam is difficult to defoam because of its high viscosity and poor fluidity; and (3) the flotation must be warmed ( The miscible agent improves the flotation selectivity and recovery compared to single agents, while significantly reducing the amine consumption ( DDA is a cationic collector that is often used in the form of dodecylamine hydrochloride or dodecylamine acetate in the reverse flotation of iron ore, and 2-octanol is a frother with a strong foaming ability. The foam produced by 2-octanol can be easily broken and is not sticky, which is beneficial for dehydration. Additionally, non-polar oils can be used to assist in the flotation process, the emulsification of the nonpolar oils plays a significant role in the flotation process. In this study, to avoid the acidification of DDA and maintain its foaming properties, the 2-octanol and kerosene were added to form a miscible agent (DDA–2-octanol–kerosene) based on the DDA. The basic physical properties of miscible agents and their flotation effects on quartz and magnetite were investigated. And a three-level, three-variable BBD was employed for performing the flotation tests and investigating the effect of variations in the solution composition on the recovery of quartz. Additionally, a backward regression analysis was performed to develop empirical models describing the individual and interactive effects of the three agents (DDA, 2-octanol, kerosene) on the recovery of quartz. Quartz minerals were obtained from Fengyang (Anhui Province, PR China). The purity of the quartz was 99.39% according to X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis ( The magnetite sample containing 64.93% Fe and 9.12% SiO Reagent grade kerosene as an auxiliary agent was supplied by Aladdin Reagent. The chemically pure DDA and 2-octanol used as the collector and frother, respectively, were also obtained from Aladdin Reagent. The water used in the flotation tests was tap water with pH 7.8. DDA was dissolved into liquid phase in a 40 °C water bath, and then different proportions of DDA and 2-octanol were stirred with a magnetic stirrer at room temperature until a homogeneous binary miscible agent DDA–2-octanol was obtained; the preparation method of ternary miscible agent DDA–2-octanol–kerosene was the same as that of DDA–2-octanol, and the mixture ratio of the DDA–2-octanol–kerosene was determined by the BBD ( The size distribution of the ore samples and reagents were analyzed by BT-9300HT laser particle size distribution analyzer. The particle size of the ore sample and the agent was measured after stirring for 3 min in 25 °C water (pH 7.8) with and without ultrasonic dispersion, respectively. In order to ensure DDA is liquid phase, the DDA was tested after being heated to liquid phase in a 40 °C water bath, and the aqueous solution for the particle size of DDA test is 30 °C. The freezing point of the miscible agent was measured using a high-pressure differential scanning calorimeter (NETZSCH DSC). The temperature was cooled from 30 to −40 °C at a rate of 3 °C/min with N Flotation tests were performed using an XFDIII 1.5 L flotation machine with a 1.5-L cell. The slurry was agitated using a mechanical impeller with a speed of 1800 r/min. In each experiment, quartz (300 g) was dispersed in the cell with tap water, and the temperature of the pulp was 25 °C. After 2 min of agitation, the miscible agent was introduced into the pulp and stirred for 2 min, at which point the foaming started. For magnetite the flotation procedure was the same as quartz whereas with the feed mass was 450 g. The products in the tank and the froth were collected and weighed after drying, and the recovery of quartz was calculated. The recovery of magnetite was calculated based on the weight and elemental contents of the products obtained. Efficiency of separation reflects a composite index of separation performance. In this paper, the efficiency of separation of flotation magnetite iron ore was calculated by the Eq. Separation efficiency of SiO The selectivity index (SI) is suggested to evaluate the separation efficiency of magnetite, and the calculation expression is shown in Eq. A three-level, three-variable BBD for the quartz flotation test was constructed using Design Expert 8.0 software. The properties of the miscible agent and the flotation effect were highly dependent on the components of the miscible agent. The dosages of DDA, 2-octanol, and kerosene in the miscible agent were thus selected as variables. The factors and the experimental levels for each factor were selected from values obtained in the literature, available resources, and results of preliminary experiments ( As indicated above, a response surface methodology based on a three-level, three-variable BBD was utilized to establish empirical relationships between one response (the recovery of quartz) and three factors (the dosages of DDA, 2-octanol, and kerosene in the flotation). The experimental design consisted of 17 experimental runs, including five replicates at the center point ( In a system involving three significant independent variables ( Analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed for analysis of the data to investigate the interaction between the process variables and the response. The quality of the polynomial model fitting was expressed by the coefficient of determination, R The freezing points of the miscible agents (DDA–2-octanol, DDA–kerosene, and DDA–2-octanol–kerosene) were investigated, and the results are shown in The freezing points of DDA, 2-octanol, and kerosene were 28 °C, −38 °C, and −47 °C, respectively. As shown in Add 1 g of DDA, 2-octanol, and kerosene to DDA (4 g) –2-octanol (2 g), respectively, to obtain the miscible reagents DDA–2-octanol (5:2), DDA–2-octanol (4:3) and DDA–2-octanol–kerosene (4:2:1). The dispersibility of the reagent is characterized by its dispersed particle size in water, and the dispersed particle size of DDA, 2-octanol, kerosene, DDA–2-octanol (4:2), DDA–2-octanol (5:2), DDA–2-octanol (4:3) and DDA–2-octanol–kerosene (4:2:1) in water are shown in Use the median diameter (D50) to order the particle size: DDA–2-octanol (5:2) < DDA–2-octanol–kerosene (4:2:1) < DDA–2-octanol (4:2) < DDA–2-octanol (4:3) < DDA < kerosene < 2-octanol. The lower the proportion of 2-octanol in the agent, the better the dispersibility of the agent. As the dispersibility of DDA is better than that of kerosene, the dispersibility of DDA–2-octanol (5:2) is better than that of DDA–2-octanol–kerosene (4:2:1), however, according to DDA–2-octanol (4:2) was used as the base agent, and DDA, 2-octanol and kerosene were added as auxiliary agents to prepare DDA–2-octanol (5:2), DDA–2-octanol (4:3) and DDA–2-octanol–kerosene (4:2:1). In addition to 60 g/t of the base reagent, 70 g/t of the other three agents was used in the flotation of magnetite. The flotation results are shown in It can be seen from the flotation results of magnetite that compared with DDA–2-octanol (4:2), the collecting performance of was significantly improved after the addition of DDA and 2-octanol, and the grade of iron concentrate was improved to some extent. But the beneficiation efficiency has not been significantly improved, and even the addition of 2-octanol has led to a decrease in the ore beneficiation efficiency of Fe and SiO From the previous basic physical property test and magnetite flotation experiment, it can be seen that the ternary agent DDA–2-octanol–kerosene is a potential valuable reagent. However, due to the lack of data, it is difficult to explain the influence of each component in ternary reagent on flotation. A three-level, three-variable BBD for the quartz flotation test was constructed using Design Expert 8.0 software. According to statistical theory, the BBD for three factors consisted of 17 experiments, as listed in The ANOVA of the quadratic polynomial model are presented in The models can be more efficient with the exclusion one or more variables. The SPSS software was used to perform a backward regression analysis on the experimental data. The terms with the highest partial probability values were removed from the model sequentially until the p-value of the next term satisfied the specified P Out value criterion (p-value < 0.05). The ANOVA of the quadratic polynomial reduced model are given in The degree of fit of the experimental data and the model is evaluated by the values of some parameters. Adj-R  After the insignificant terms were eliminated, a mathematical expression describing the relationships between the amounts of DDA, 2-octanol, and kerosene in the miscible agent and the recovery of quartz was obtained, as follows: Eq. The conditions for the optimal recovery of quartz by Eq. A low-temperature, high-dispersibility DDA–2-octanol–kerosene miscible agent was successfully formulated and its freezing point can be reduced to below 0 °C. A freezing-point analysis of the miscible agent indicated that 2-octanol and kerosene acted as solvents and reduced the freezing point. From the flotation results of magnetite, it can be seen that DDA–2-octanol–kerosene has a better selectivity and beneficiation efficiency although its collecting performance is poor. The SPSS software was used to perform a backward regression analysis to eliminate factors that had little effect on the recovery of quartz and to clarify the relationship between the amounts of the three agents and the recovery of quartz. Both DDA and 2-octanol significantly affected the recovery of quartz, but the effect of DDA was more significant than that of 2-octanol. And effect of kerosene on the recovery of quartz is related to the amount of DDA: when the amount of kerosene is less than 0.76 times the amount of DDA, kerosene also has a positive effect on the quartz recovery; otherwise, it has a negative effect. Thus, the effects of the components on the recovery of quartz decreased in the following order: DDA > 2-octanol > kerosene. DDA–2-octanol–kerosene allows for the use of a method that does not involve acidification when using DDA in the flotation process, and the interaction between the various agents during the flotation was investigated through mathematical analysis. This study provides a new method and technical support for the combination of agents in the field of iron ore flotation.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support provided by the